THE SOCIAL SHAPING OF CLOUD COMPUTING:
AN ETHNOGRAPHY OF INFRASTRUCTURE IN EAST ST. LOUIS, ILLINOIS

BY
COLIN H. RHINESMITH

DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of the
University of Champaign at Urbana-Champaign, 2014

Urbana, Illinois
Doctoral Committee:
Associate Professor Christian Sandvig, Chair
Professor Linda C. Smith
Professor Dan Schiller
Associate Professor Rayvon Fouché

UMI Number: 3673889

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3673889
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract
This study investigates the infrastructural tensions that shaped a cloud computing
software implementation within a community-based organization in East St. Louis, Illinois. A
community-based organization provides nonprofit social welfare services to low-income
residents within a specific geographic location. In East St. Louis, 100 percent of the local school
children are eligible for the free and reduced-price meal program, which is a common measure of
poverty. Previous studies have focused on the impact of computerization on social workers and
welfare organizations. This research instead uses a “social shaping of technology” perspective to
analyze the ways in which broader social, institutional, and technical factors shape information
infrastructure and its consequences. This eleven-month ethnographic study provides an account
of the everyday technology experiences of social workers, managers, and directors in a
community-based organization as they used cloud computing services at work.
Three major findings emerged from the study: (1) The tensions between external
stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs influenced decisions about how the cloud
computing software was configured and implemented; (2) the lack of interoperability between
state-mandated and for-profit cloud computing systems, at times, exacerbated these tensions; and
(3) the agency of a diverse and resilient group of human services professionals played a
significant role in shaping the cloud computing software implementation. In presenting this
sociotechnical analysis of information infrastructure, informed by critical perspectives at the
intersection of race, gender, class, and technology, this research makes a contribution to the field
of library and information science by describing how networked information systems can fail to
meet the needs of community-based organizations that provide state-funded public assistance
programs. I argue that in order to develop successful information infrastructures in human

	  

ii	  

services organizations, cloud computing software platforms need to be flexible enough to both
provide accountability to funders and meet the needs of community-based organizations.

	  

iii	  

This work is dedicated to Vanessa and Lucy, the two ultimate joys in my life.

	  

iv	  

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank my parents, Stephen and Kathleen Rhinesmith, for their incredible
love and unwavering support over the years. I’d also like to thank Stephen and Barbara Wrenn
for believing in me all the way from the east coast. Many thanks to my family members on both
sides, including: Chris R., Sarah, Bowman, Kate, Chase, Brady, Chris W., Matt, and Courtney.
This dissertation would not have been possible without the support of friends in
Champaign-Urbana, including (but not limited to): Miriam, Safiya, Sarah, Aiko, Moira, Sunah,
Jody, Ryan, Kristin, Jason, Stephanie, Johnny, Audrey, and Nathan. I am grateful to all of them
for supporting my family and me during our time in Illinois.
I am thankful for the support from the Information in Society program at GSLIS, which
was funded by a grant from the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) and led by
Linda C. Smith and Dan Schiller. It was truly an honor and a privilege to be involved with this
exceptional group of young LIS scholars.
I would like to thank a number of GSLIS faculty members for their support, guidance,
and encouragement: Alistair Black, Nicole Cooke, Leigh Estabrook, Jon Gant, Les Gasser, Lori
Kendall, and Kathyrn LaBarre. Many thanks also to Sharon Irish for pointing me in the right
intellectual directions over the years.
I am deeply indebted to Martin Wolske for introducing me to East St. Louis. There are no
words to describe how grateful I am to him for our long and engaged conversations and debates
that helped me develop my voice in the field of community informatics.
I am thankful for my colleagues in East St. Louis, Illinois, who welcomed me into their
community. I only hope that I have provided an accurate, helpful, and respectful account of our
time together over this past year.

	  

v	  

Many thanks to my colleagues in the Center for People and Infrastructures, including:
Cheol Gi Bai, Matt Crain, Jennifer Ihm, Julia Lange, Aimee Rickman, Jean-Christophe Plantin,
Darren Stevenson, and Shinjoung Yeo. I am grateful to all of them for their time and
encouragement over these past three years.
I am grateful to my dissertation committee—Christian Sandvig, Linda C. Smith, Dan
Schiller, and Rayvon Fouché—for their patience, support, direction, and belief in this research
project.
My advisor, Christian Sandvig, has been an incredible source of support and inspiration
during these past three years. I am grateful to him for keeping me grounded, focused, and true to
myself. I am also extremely thankful for his insights that helped make this project a better
product in the end.
This dissertation would not be complete without a special thank you to Linda C. Smith
for her amazing support during my doctoral program at GSLIS. There are no words to say how
grateful I am for the guidance, direction, and recommendations that she provided.
Thanks most of all belong to Vanessa Rhinesmith, who stuck with me through an
incredibly challenging and rewarding four years. It’s been a trip—one that certainly would not
have been possible without her. For that, I will always be grateful.

	  

vi	  

Table of Contents	  
Introduction......................................................................................................................................1
Chapter 1: Infrastructure as a Theoretical Framework ..................................................................18
Chapter 2: Ethnography of Infrastructure as a Method .................................................................40
Chapter 3: Remnants of a Dying Industrial Age............................................................................64
Chapter 4: Public and Private Forces.............................................................................................85
Chapter 5: From Paper to the Cloud ............................................................................................105
Chapter 6: Surfacing Invisible Work ...........................................................................................127
Chapter 7: “What It All Means” ..................................................................................................146
Conclusion ...................................................................................................................................162
References....................................................................................................................................172
Appendix A: MESH Organizational Chart ..................................................................................186
Appendix B: Interview Protocol ..................................................................................................187
Appendix C: Consent Form .........................................................................................................190
Appendix D: Teen REACH Survey 1..........................................................................................193
Appendix E: Teen REACH Survey 2 ..........................................................................................194
	  
	  

	  

vii	  

Introduction
We have the emergence of this massive shift of computing….We call it “cloud
computing.” There are other terms for it. But to me, this is the story of our
lifetime. It is the story that will define our careers and what we do, because this is
going to go on for a long time.
–Schmidt (2008).

In 2008, former Google CEO Eric Schmidt used the term cloud computing in a speech at
IBM. Since that day, major newspapers have published scores of articles about the “shift of
computing” described by Schmidt and its impact on people, businesses, and governments. For
example, in 2009, the Wall Street Journal reported that companies across the technology
industry were “jockeying to associate themselves with clouds.” The same article reported that
Merrill Lynch estimated revenues from cloud computing would reach $160 billion in 2011
(Fowler & Worthen, 2009). The New York Times painted a futuristic picture of cloud computing
that illustrated how grandchildren would one day laugh at their grandparents as they talked about
“life before cloud computing” (Meece, 2012). A year later, the Wall Street Journal described
cloud computing as a part of a “New Industrial Revolution,” detailing the ways in which it
“threatens to shatter long-standing business models, upend global trade patterns and revive
American industry” (Koten, 2013). These are just some of the many examples of the mainstream
media’s infatuation with cloud computing since Schmidt’s speech in 2008.
The hype surrounding cloud computing can be characterized as technological
determinism, which has been described as the seemingly inherent power of technology to change
society. Technological determinism is a theory that assumes “technological change is an
independent factor, impacting on society from outside of society, so to speak” (MacKenzie &
	  

	  

1	  	  

Wajcman, 1999, p. 5). The idea is connected to widespread beliefs about the nature of economic
progress, concepts deeply embedded within the fabric of American society. This way of thinking
about technology has incredible force in society. The history of U.S. capitalism, including recent
shifts toward “informationalized capitalism” (Schiller, 2007) that have accelerated social
inequality, has been deeply intertwined with this exaggerated rhetoric, often motivated by
powerful marketing machines that propel its allure (e.g., see Marchand, 1998).
My study interrogates the technological deterministic thinking about cloud computing.
Cloud computing can be understood as the use of remote servers and software applications to
store, retrieve, and edit files on the Internet. The research uses a “social shaping of technology”
perspective as part of its theoretical framework to investigate the broader social, political, and
economic forces that shape cloud computing software and its consequences during
implementation. Fleck (1994) defined implementation as “the process through which technical,
organizational and financial resources are configured together to provide an efficiently operating
system” (p. 640). The purpose of this study is to provide a deeper understanding of the human
actors, including businesses and governments, and the nonhuman actors, such as networked
information systems, that can influence how cloud computing software is configured within a
social welfare organization. In taking this approach, I focus on the ways in which the often
hidden or infrastructural aspects of large-scale computing projects (e.g., see Kling & Scacchi,
1982; Star & Ruhleder, 1996) can benefit some groups, but often at the expense of others.
More concretely, this study examines the technological deterministic views of cloud
computing among workers, managers, and directors at a community-based organization, which I
am calling the Metro East Settlement House (MESH), in East St. Louis, Illinois. See Appendix A
for more information about the organization’s structure, including a list of its fifteen different

	  

	  

2	  	  

community-based programs, and key personnel mentioned in this study. In East St. Louis, 100
percent of the local school children are eligible for the free and reduced-price meal program,
which is a common measure of poverty. Community-based organizations have been defined as
“human service organizations that provide services to residents of the community” (Illinois
Department of Human Services, 2014b). Human services organizations are focused on assisting
children, youth, adults, and seniors in low-income communities to meet their basic needs and
other life challenges.
In contrast to Eubanks’s (2011) study, for example, of the everyday technology
experiences of female recipients of public assistance programs, my study is focused on the
everyday technology experiences of human services providers. I chose to focus my research on
providers and their experiences with cloud computing because I was given the extraordinary
opportunity to work with MESH as volunteer project manager. As I detail in Chapter 3, the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign has had a long-term relationship with residents and
community-based organizations in East St. Louis, Illinois. Through this ongoing community–
university partnership, I was provided with the opportunity to support MESH as a volunteer in
implementing a cloud computing software platform for their organization while using the
fieldwork experience as the basis for this research.
Social informatics scholars have studied the introduction of computers in human services
organizations since the 1970s. For example, in Kling’s (1978) study of automated information
systems in an urban welfare organization, he found that federal agencies and other funders
benefited the most from computerization, but often at the expense of workers, managers, and
welfare recipients. My research seeks to pursue this line of inquiry further by presenting a more
recent ethnographic study of cloud computing in a community-based organization in East St.

	  

	  

3	  	  

Louis. However, there is a gap in the literature on the broader social, institutional, and technical
forces shaping technology, and more specifically cloud computing, in human services
organizations, particularly in U.S. industrial suburbs such as East St. Louis. Before I explain how
my research question addresses this gap, I first define cloud computing as a basis for
understanding my research problem, design, and methodological approach.

What Is Cloud Computing?
“I have no idea what anyone is talking about,” said Oracle Corp. Chief Executive
Larry Ellison, when talking about cloud computing at a financial analyst
conference in September. “It’s really just complete gibberish. What is it?” He
added: “When is this idiocy going to stop?”
–Fowler and Worthen (2009)
The term cloud computing has caused significant confusion since its introduction. Cloud
computing itself refers to “both the applications delivered as services over the Internet and the
hardware and systems software in the data centers that provide those services” (Armbrust et al.,
2010, p. 50). This is not a new concept. Time-sharing, or the sharing of computing resources
among multiple users, emerged during the early 1960s as large mainframe computers began
connecting to networked information. Cusumano (2010) explained that although the idea of
cloud computing is antiquated, software services on the web didn’t appear until the 1990s. These
services “ranged from email to calendars, groupware, online publishing, simple word processing,
and many other common consumer and even business applications” (Cusumano, 2010, p. 28).
Today, cloud computing is often described in terms of three types of services, which are shown
in Table 1. Mosco (2014) explained, “Cloud computing has been defined in many ways, but most
would agree that it is a powerful system for producing, storing, analyzing, and distributing data,

	  

	  

4	  	  

information, applications, and services to organizations and individuals” (p. 6). As Mosco
carefully detailed, this powerful system is creating enormous privacy, security, labor, and
environmental challenges—fundamental concerns in today’s global networked society.

	  

	  

5	  	  

Table 1. Three Types of Cloud Computing Services
Source: Reprinted from National Institute of Standards and Technology (2011, pp. 2–3).
Service

Description

Software as a Service (SaaS)

The capability provided to the consumer is to use the provider’s
applications running on a cloud infrastructure. The applications
are accessible from various client devices through either a thin
client interface, such as a web browser (e.g., web-based email), or
a program interface. The consumer does not manage or control
the underlying cloud infrastructure including network, servers,
operating systems, storage, or even individual application
capabilities, with the possible exception of limited user-specific
application configuration settings.

Platform as a Service (PaaS)

The capability provided to the consumer is to deploy onto the cloud
infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications created
using programming languages, libraries, services, and tools
supported by the provider. The consumer does not manage or
control the underlying cloud infrastructure including network,
servers, operating systems, or storage, but has control over the
deployed applications and possibly configuration settings for the
application-hosting environment.

Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS)

The capability provided to the consumer is to provision processing,
storage, networks, and other fundamental computing resources
where the consumer is able to deploy and run arbitrary software,
which can include operating systems and applications. The
consumer does not manage or control the underlying cloud
infrastructure but has control over operating systems, storage, and
deployed applications, and possibly limited control of select
networking components (e.g., host firewalls).

	  

	  

6	  	  

In short, cloud computing services give multiple users the ability to create, edit, store, and
retrieve files on the Internet via remote servers. Google is perhaps the best-known example of a
cloud computing company, with its popular applications such as Gmail, YouTube, and Google
Drive (formerly Google Docs). Users can access these services regardless of device or location.
Similar services can be offered as subscriptions, for which users pay monthly or yearly fees to
store and retrieve files in the cloud. Understanding cloud computing is more important than ever
because its infrastructural aspects are primarily responsible for the new “era of Big Data” (boyd
& Crawford, 2011). Big data, along with cloud computing, has also been difficult to define.
Mosco (2014) described big data as “the movement to analyze the increasingly vast amounts of
information stored in multiple locations, but mainly online and primarily in the cloud” (p. 177).
This era of distributed computing is motivated by “a deep government and industrial drive
toward gathering and extracting maximal value from data, be it information that will lead to
more targeted advertising, product design, traffic planning or criminal policing” (boyd &
Crawford, 2011, p. 13). As a result, a new digital divide is emerging between those with and
those without the tools, skills, and knowledge to make use, and sense, of such large quantities of
digital information.
In addition to concerns about those with and without the ability to access and use cloud
computing and big data, other questions arise that address longstanding debates within the field
of STS. More concretely, what are the relationships between technology, designers, and users in
the development of technology artifacts, and how do these connections ameliorate or perpetuate
existing social inequalities? Woolgar’s (1991) study of usability trials in the development of
computers might provide a useful starting point. The author used the metaphor “machine as text”
to investigate exactly how designers “configure” users through their reading of designers’

	  

	  

7	  	  

machines, peripherals, and technical documentation. Woolgar argued that a user’s capacity to
engage with computers is largely “structured and defined in relation to the machine” (p. 89).
While the research is useful for engaging with the design and use of cloud computing, it has been
criticized for its one-way orientation toward technology development (Mackay, Carne, BeynonDavies, & Tudhope, 2000). Woolgar’s ethnography of computing serves as a theoretical
foundation for my study. I also consider cloud computing software as a “configurational
technology,” which requires substantial user input and learning based on both local knowledge
and broader institutional contexts (Fleck, 1994). Therefore, I argue that cloud computing further
complicates the technology–designer–user paradigm in STS by introducing additional ad hoc
design choices during the implementation process. Why does this matter in the era of big data?
This study is urgent because I argue that poverty, technology, and social justice are
becoming entangled in an era of big data. Community-based organizations that provide human
services programs have begun to embrace software as a service (SaaS) applications to reduce
paperwork, establish quality assurance, and become more attractive to new funders at a time of
severe cuts to state and federal funding. In the process, several questions arise. For example, how
do for-profit information systems interact with government-mandated information systems? How
can cloud computing be used to promote the missions of community-based organizations? What
are the sociotechnical and legal challenges facing community-based organizations as they seek to
share public data on private cloud computing systems? These are just a few of the many
questions that emerged during my fieldwork.
ETO Implementation at MESH
The object of study for my research is called ETO Impact™ (henceforth, ETO). It is a
SaaS “performance management system” that is often used “to respond to current demands for

	  

	  

8	  	  

getting and showing results, whether in the public, nonprofit, or private sectors” (Julnes, 2009, p.
7). Social Solutions is the company that created this SaaS platform. They offer a range of
software products for small to large organizations. As their website explains, ETO is “the first
software created by case managers for case managers” (Social Solutions, 2013). The ETO
software is an example of a configurational technology that can adapted to meet the needs of
community-based organizations that provide human services programs. In many ways, the
software is similar to content management systems, such as Drupal or Wordpress, that give users
the opportunity to configure the software to respond to specific local requirements.
At the end of 2012, MESH purchased ETO in order to have a centralized data-gathering
platform and reporting system, which private funders had been pushing them to purchase. The
directors at MESH described the ways in which The United Way, and other private
organizations, had for many years encouraged them to adopt a single reporting platform. During
my fieldwork, I discovered that MESH was required to use nine different state and federal
management information systems to gather data on participants, track outcomes, and create
reports for funders. The main problem was that these systems were not connected to one another.
Therefore, reporting was extremely difficult and inefficient at MESH because the organization
was required to print out several reports from each system and then compile them into a single
report for funders. The directors at MESH believed that ETO would be a way to solve this
information management dilemma.
In May 2013, during our early ETO project meetings, directors and IT staff at MESH
expressed their enthusiasm and hopes for ETO. They talked about how ETO would change their
organization and provide positive benefits to staff, managers, directors, and funders alike. These
technological deterministic views of the ETO software were particularly intriguing to me as I set

	  

	  

9	  	  

out to investigate the social shaping of cloud computing and its consequences in East St. Louis.
The directors at MESH also described how they believed ETO would give their organization the
opportunity to influence public policy by providing state legislators in Springfield with a more
holistic picture of the actual community needs that exist across the Metro East region of Illinois.
These were some of the reasons why directors and IT staff wanted the ETO software. I later
discovered that not everyone at MESH shared the directors’ and IT staff members’ excitement
for yet another networked information system. These differing views of technology within the
organization revealed interesting sociotechnical dynamics between workers, managers, directors,
and funders, particularly as we configured and implemented the ETO cloud computing software.
It is also important to point out that my fieldwork focused primarily on only one aspect of
cloud computing because ETO is an example of a SaaS application (see Table 1). However, I call
my study an ethnography of cloud computing to explain how the configuration of ETO as a SaaS
platform revealed a broader “web” (Kling & Scacchi, 1982, p. 7) of sociotechnical arrangements.
In this study, I preferred the concept of infrastructure to describe these relational aspects of the
cloud computing software, including broader social, political, and economic contexts. I also use
the term infrastructure to explain my methodological approach to studying ETO as a type of
cloud computing software. This approach allowed me to study how ETO worked in relationship
to other cloud computing systems that were already in use at MESH. At the same time, I tried to
focus on the broader social, institutional, and technical forces shaping the cloud computing
software implementation at MESH.
Research Question
My study addresses a gap in the literature on the social shaping of cloud computing in
human services by responding to the following research question: How do political, economic,

	  

	  

10	  
	  

historical, and cultural contexts shape cloud computing and its consequences within a
community-based organization in East St. Louis, Illinois? To answer this, I conducted an elevenmonth ethnographic study of networked information systems at MESH. Key perspectives from
social informatics (SI) and science and technology studies (STS), and informed by critical
theoretical perspectives at the intersection of race, gender, class, and technology studies, have
guided my fieldwork and analyses.
In the ethnographic account that follows, I detail three major findings that emerged
during this study: (1) The tensions between external stakeholder demands and internal
organizational needs significantly influenced how the cloud computing software was configured
and implemented; (2) the lack of interoperability between state-mandated and for-profit cloud
computing systems, at times, exacerbated these tensions; and (3) the agency of a diverse and
resilient group of human services professionals played a significant role in shaping the cloud
computing software. In presenting this infrastructural analysis, I describe the social, institutional,
and technical forces shaping cloud computing systems in community-based organizations in U.S.
industrial suburbs where high poverty rates exist.
Significance of the Study
This research makes a contribution to the field of library and information science by
describing how networked information systems can fail to meet the needs of community-based
organizations that provide state-funded public assistance programs. I argue that in order to
develop successful information infrastructures in human services organizations, cloud computing
software platforms need to be flexible enough to both provide accountability to funders and meet
the needs of community-based organizations. I also believe this work makes a contribution by
showing the “invisible work” (Star, 1999, p. 385) of human services professionals who are

	  

	  

11	  
	  

required to enter data into state IT systems. In this study, I found an incredible amount of
inefficiency in this process. I believe my dissertation helps to surface the challenges faced by
organizations, particularly as they balance the expectations of funders with their own internal
information needs.
My study also contributes new knowledge to the field of infrastructure studies by
describing the consequences of what I call a gateway failure, or the absence of a gateway
between subsystems. As a result, human services professionals at MESH were asked to enter the
same data into two different networked information systems, thus decreasing efficiency and
increasing the potential for data entry errors. I hope my research will help to further expand the
space for infrastructure studies research within the field of library and information science by
focusing on the cloud computing needs of community-based organizations in an era of big data. I
also argue that the research is relevant in its approach to examining the social shaping of cloud
computing software in a U.S. industrial suburb, which I believe is an important site to study how
broader social, political, and economic forces uniquely shape information infrastructure in
community-based organizations that administer state-funded public assistance programs.
My study ultimately seeks to provoke discussion among academics, practitioners, and
policymakers about how to address issues of poverty, technology, and social justice in the
information age—three issues I illuminate in my research. I argue that cloud computing in
community-based organizations should be viewed as a site of struggle that can reveal more about
how the information society developed, for whom, and at what cost to the public and the
surrounding environment. In doing so, I hope my analysis will prove to be useful to software
developers, public policymakers, and community-based organizations interested in using cloud
computing to help move people out of poverty.

	  

	  

12	  
	  

Ethnography of Cloud Computing
The community-based organization described here is called the Metro East Settlement
House, or MESH. This is a pseudonym I created in an attempt to protect the privacy of the
organization. In fact, all of the names of people mentioned in this research have been changed to
protect their privacy. The ethnography of cloud computing that follows is based on my fieldwork
as a volunteer project manager with MESH between June 2013 and April 2014. During this time,
I traveled to East St. Louis almost once a week to work with MESH staff, managers, and
directors to configure and implement the ETO software. As a participant–observer, I used this
time to observe the talk and actions of employees to understand how broader social, political,
and economic forces, such as cuts to state and federal funding, influenced decisions about the
cloud computing software. I also interviewed employees and reviewed government and technical
documents related to government information systems and technology policy in the state of
Illinois. I was particularly interested in understanding how these broader structural developments
shaped the ETO software and its consequences.
This study is an example of an ethnography of infrastructure (Star, 1999). I used
ethnographic methods to uncover the invisible, relational aspects of ETO as a large-scale
computing project. I chose to use ethnography because I believe it was the best way to study how
the cloud computing system works, as well as to examine the broader structural aspects that
shape information infrastructure in a community-based organization. My ethnography was
guided by theories from social informatics, STS, political economy of information, as well as
critical theoretical perspectives at the intersection of race, gender, class, and technology studies.
Beyond the cloud, this research is about a larger struggle for those communities, like East
St. Louis, that have been abandoned in transition from an industrial to an information society. In

	  

	  

13	  
	  

this research, I argue that the implementation of cloud computing software, as a configurational
technology (Fleck, 1994), provides an opportunity to study how social welfare organizations in
low-income communities continue to struggle with the sociotechnical expectations of public and
private funders. Ultimately, this is a story about the tensions between those who thirst for big
data and those who live and work with the realities of poverty facing children and their families
in the United States today. As the gap between the rich and the poor continues to widen in our
society, I argue that information scholars have a social responsibility to help find solutions to
problems that are often exacerbated by technological deterministic views about cloud computing
systems. This study attempts to contribute new knowledge in an effort to address this persistent
societal problem.
In Chapter 1, I introduce the concept of infrastructure as a theoretical framework for my
study of cloud computing. I highlight the relationist (Sandvig, 2013) approach to infrastructure
studies, which is concerned with the social, political, and economic forces, such as hidden costs
(Jewett & Kling, 1991), that arise during the implementation of large-scale computing projects. I
also maintain that studies within the “social shaping of technology” literature provide key
conceptual tools for thinking about the configuration of cloud computing software as an
infrastructural development. I call attention to critiques of the social constructivist perspective,
particularly those works that have highlighted the political forces embedded within technology
artifacts (Winner, 1986). Building on these critical perspectives, I return to studies of
infrastructure focused on social justice concerns, particularly issues at the intersection of race,
class, gender, and technology. The purpose is to provide a theoretical basis for understanding the
agency of human services professionals at MESH as they shaped the cloud computing software.

	  

	  

14	  
	  

The goal of the chapter is to establish the idea of cloud computing as an infrastructure, which is
the theoretical perspective grounding my ethnographic approach.
In Chapter 2, I introduce my ethnography of cloud computing as the method used to study
cloud computerization as part of an infrastructural development at MESH. I describe how my
research approach was primarily influenced by Star’s (1999) ethnography of infrastructure,
which offers methodological tools for investigating the “invisible work” underlying large-scale
information infrastructure development. I also introduce my ethnographic approach to
infrastructure, which is informed by studies that have attempted to incorporate political
economic analyses.
In Chapter 3, I introduce the political, economic, and historical conditions shaping East
St. Louis as a U.S. industrial suburb, and how these played a role in shaping the cloud computing
software as an information infrastructure. The chapter describes my entrance into the field, as is
common in most ethnographies. The purpose is to provide additional background and context for
understanding the place where my informants and I met infrastructure during the ETO project.
In Chapter 4, I describe the infrastructural tensions (Jackson, Edwards, Bowker, &
Knobel, 2007) between external stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs during
the ETO software implementation, which I argue ultimately led to the project’s failure. By
failure I mean, very specifically, that the project ran out of money and had to be put on hold until
a later date when more money was available to get the project back up and running. I describe
how pressures from state and private funders pushed MESH to adopt ETO to better track
outcomes and to report to funders on the program’s impact. I describe how external stakeholder
demands were a key factor that shaped the ETO software implementation and its consequences at
MESH.

	  

	  

15	  
	  

In Chapter 5, I argue that the lack of interoperability between state management
information systems and ETO, at times, exacerbated tensions between external demands and
internal needs at MESH, which I detailed in the previous chapter. The concept of “gateways”
(Egyedi, 2000) is used as a theoretical framework to help explain how ETO developed within the
Teen REACH program at MESH. I show how different subsystems (i.e., paper forms,
spreadsheets, state management information systems [MIS], and ETO) embodied separate
political, operational, and technical domains, which did not always promote compatibility
between them. More concretely, I maintain that the ETO project experienced what I call a
gateway failure, or the absence of a gateway between subsystems. As a result, human services
professionals in the Teen REACH program were asked to enter the same data into two different
information systems, thus decreasing efficiency and increasing potential data entry errors.
Chapter 6 begins with a vignette to show how infrastructural tensions became visible
during our software implementation meetings with human services professionals in the Providing
a Sure Start (PASS) and Teen REACH programs. I describe how information systems failed the
parent educators in the PASS program, particularly in accounting for their invisible work with
low-income children and parents in East St. Louis. The second half of the chapter moves to focus
on the ways in which the agency of social workers, managers, and directors at MESH played a
significant role in shaping the cloud computing software.
In Chapter 7, I argue that if state policymakers require data to understand the needs of
community-based organizations that provide state-funded welfare programs, then state IT
systems should be configured in such a way to allow community-based organizations to gather
the data required to show the actual needs that exist in the community. I also maintain that if
public and private funders expect community-based organizations to adopt cloud computing

	  

	  

16	  
	  

systems to provide accountability, then funders should also supply the financial, technical, and
legal assistance to help community-based organizations develop flexible, interoperable, and
equitable information infrastructures. I draw upon Busch’s (2011) framework for creating fair,
equitable, and effective standards in the development of networked information systems. I do
this by elaborating on the sociotechnical struggles between external stakeholder demands and
internal organizational needs at MESH as human services professionals navigated a complex
infrastructural terrain involving both human and nonhuman actors (Latour, 2005). I conclude
with four recommendations for state policymakers, software developers, and community-based
organizations interested in using cloud computing software to help move people out of poverty.
The purpose is to both highlight the existing sociotechnical and legal challenges facing
community-based organizations and to provide alternative paths forward in developing more
flexible and configurable infrastructures.

	  

	  

17	  
	  

CHAPTER ONE

Infrastructure as a Theoretical Framework
Understanding the nature of infrastructural work involves unfolding the political,
ethical, and social choices that have been made throughout its development.
–Bowker, Baker, Millerand, and Ribes (2010, p. 99)

Introduction
This chapter introduces the concept of infrastructure as a way to think about cloud
computing. I do this by reviewing research within social informatics (SI) and science and
technology studies (STS) to construct the theoretical framework for my ethnography of cloud
computing, which I introduce in the next chapter. I begin by reviewing the development of the
relationist (Sandvig, 2013, pp. 86–108) approach to infrastructure studies. This perspective is
concerned with the social, political, and economic forces, such as hidden costs (Jewett & Kling,
1991), that arise during the implementation of large-scale computing projects. I then explain how
key contributions within the “social shaping of technology” literature (Mackay & Gillespie,
1992; MacKenzie & Wajcman, 1999; Williams and Edge, 1996) provide conceptual tools for
thinking about the configuration of cloud computing software as an infrastructural process. Next,
I review critiques of the social constructivist perspective, particularly those works that have
called attention to the political forces embedded within technology artifacts (Winner, 1986).
Building on these critical perspectives, I return to studies of infrastructure focused on social
justice concerns, particularly issues at the intersection of race, class, gender, and technology. The
goal of this chapter is to establish the idea of cloud computing as an infrastructure, which is the
theoretical perspective grounding my ethnographic approach. The purpose is to develop a way of
understanding not only how cloud computing works, but also for whom it works, and how the
	  

	  

18	  
	  

ETO software might have developed another way given a different set of political, economic,
historical, and cultural contexts.

Computerization as an Infrastructural Development
In this section, I describe how the idea of computing as infrastructure developed across
the fields of SI and STS. The development of the relationist approach to infrastructure studies is
rooted in sociotechnical analyses of computerization beginning in the 1970s. As Sandvig (2013)
explained, “In its first decades, computing appeared to be a new kind of engineering drastically
unlike other kinds of engineering, like building bridges or buildings” (p. 94). A “series of
disasters” appeared to follow and characterize early computing projects (Sandvig, 2013, p. 94).
Star and Bowker (2006) explained that failures are critical to infrastructure studies because they
help to show that infrastructure development and its maintenance require work, which is
frequently overlooked. Failure can also reveal the broader structural forces upon which stable
infrastructures are dependent.
Early studies of computerization in organizational settings laid the foundation for what
would later become the field of SI in the United States during the mid-1990s. Kling (2003) first
used the term social informatics to describe the ways in which information technology (IT)
shapes “organizational and social relations,” as well as “the ways in which social forces
influence the use and design of IT” (p. 2656). SI researchers have studied the impacts of
computerization on work for over forty years; they just had not yet called it social informatics.
For example, Kling (1978) looked at the impact of automation on urban welfare organizations.
He found that “the agencies which utilized automated information systems were driven by the
incentives provided by funders rather than by its aid in improving the efficacy of agency

	  

	  

19	  
	  

operations” (p. 491). SI research has shown that the implementation of computers within
organizations often has “unintended effects” (Sawyer & Tapia, 2002, p. 97).
Social informatics scholars laid the foundation for future research, which worked to
advance the notion of computing as an information infrastructure (Bowker & Star, 1998; Bowker
et al., 2010; Hanseth, Montiero, & Hatling, 1996). Two SI studies, in particular, were
foundational to the development of the relationist perspective within infrastructure studies. In the
first, Kling and Scacchi (1982) developed the idea of computing as “webs.” As they explained,
“web models make explicit the salient connections between a focal technology and its social and
political contexts” (p. 3). The concept of infrastructure was foundational to their theorization. As
the authors described:
(i)…The infrastructure for supporting the focal computing resource and the
organizational procedures by which it is organized and sustained are critical
elements. (ii) Each computer-based service is provided through a set of structured
computing resources and organized infrastructure. If this organization of essential
resources is large and complex, computer-based systems are a form of social
organization. Like any organization or institution, it is not necessarily neutral. (iii)
There is no “human factor” which is specially separable from the delivery of
computer-based information services. Much of the development and many of the
routine operations of computer-based technologies hinge on many human
judgments and actions carried out within complex, organized social settings. (p. 8)
This description makes three important points, which are key aspects of the relationist’s
conceptualization of infrastructure. First, the “webs model” (Kling & Scacchi, 1982, p. 7)
provides a way to study the complex organizational contexts that shape computing projects,
which, as Kling and Scacchi described, are inseparable from the technical aspects of
computerization. Second, Kling and Scacchi recognized that computers, as relational systems,

	  

	  

20	  
	  

are not neutral. Rather, politics, economics, and culture are deeply interwoven with technical
forces that influence the design of computing. Third, Kling and Scacchi’s infrastructural view of
computing opens the door to study the related social, institutional, and technical processes that
are often hidden from view during IT implementation. These three aspects encouraged critical
thinking about infrastructure as a relational process that, as a result, can benefit some groups and
not others. This point was also highlighted in Murphy and Pardeck’s (1991) study of the
computerization of human services, in which the authors mentioned that funders often benefit the
most from computerization, but often at the expense of social workers, managers, and welfare
recipients—a point also emphasized in Kling’s (1978) study of computerization in urban welfare
organizations.
Jewett and Kling’s (1991) study of computerization in social science research was
another important SI contribution to the relationist’s understanding of infrastructure. They
argued, “Infrastructure is a useful concept in analyses of computing support—it denotes all the
resources and practices required to help people adequately carry out their work (Kling, 1986;
Kling & Scacchi, 1982)” (p. 247). Along with Kling and Scacchi’s findings, the authors found
that the human and organizational factors shaping computerization may have hidden costs when
revealed (p. 263). The Kling and Scacchi and Jewett and Kling studies describe computerization
as a dynamic sociotechnical process, which often involves a range of contextual elements that
motivate large-scale computing projects.
In the 1990s, STS scholars further concretized infrastructure as “a relation not a set of
things” (Sandvig, 2013, p. 10). In 1996, while Susan Leigh Star was a professor at the Graduate
School of Library and Information at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, she
published a foundational paper in the Journal of Information Systems with Karen Ruhleder based

	  

	  

21	  
	  

on their submission to the 1994 Computer Supported Cooperative Work (CSCW) conference
proceedings. In the paper, Star and Ruhleder (1996) made a major contribution to the
development of infrastructure studies by outlining what they believed were essential
characteristics of infrastructure. They argued that infrastructure must be understood as having
eight dimensions, as detailed in Table 2.

	  

	  

22	  
	  

Table 2. The Eight Dimensions of Infrastructure
Source: Reprinted from Star and Ruhleder (1996, p. 113).

	  

Dimension

Definition

Embeddedness.

Infrastructure is “sunk” into, inside of, other structures, social arrangements
and technologies;

Transparency.

Infrastructure is transparent to use, in the sense that it does not have to be
reinvented each time or assembled for each task, but invisibly supports those
tasks;

Reach or scope.

This may be either spatial or temporal—infrastructure has reach beyond a
single event or one-site practice;

Learned as part of
membership.

The taken-for-grantedness of artifacts and organizational arrangements is a
sine qua non of membership in a community of practice (Lave and Wenger
1991; Star, in press). Strangers and outsiders encounter infrastructure as a
target object to be learned about. New participants acquire a naturalized
familiarity with its objects as they become members;

Links with
conventions of
practice.

Infrastructure both shapes and is shaped by the conventions of a community of
practice, e.g. the ways that cycles of day-night work are affected by and
affect electrical power rates and needs. Generations of typists have learned
the QWERTY keyboard; its limitations are inherited by the computer
keyboard and thence by the design of today's computer furniture (Becker
1982);

Embodiment of
standards.

Modified by scope and often by conflicting conventions, infrastructure takes
on transparency by plugging into other infrastructures and tools in a
standardized fashion;

Built on an installed
base

Infrastructure does not grow de novo: it wrestles with the “inertia of the
installed base” and inherits strengths and limitations from that base. Optical
fibers run along old railroad lines; new systems are designed for backwardcompatibility; and failing to account for these constraints may be fatal or
distorting to new development processes (Monteiro et al., 1994);

Becomes visible
upon breakdown.

The normally invisible quality of working infrastructure becomes visible when
it breaks; the server is down, the bridge washes out, there is a power
blackout. Even when there are back-up mechanisms or procedures, their
existence further highlights the now-visible infrastructure.

	  

23	  
	  

Star and Ruhleder (1996) explained that infrastructure is formed by the configuration of
these eight dimensions. This perspective is relational because it is dependent on what the authors
described as “organized practices.” For example, the authors explain that within a given cultural
context, “the cook considers the water system a piece of working infrastructure integral to
making dinner” (p. 113). In the context of computing, organized practices might include the
ways in which a software developer considers “gadgets, servers, cards, and plugs” (MacKenzie,
2003, pp. 367–368) as pieces of infrastructure that support software development projects.
Recognizing that conflicts often arise between multiple participants in the development of largescale computing projects, Star and Ruhleder (1996) argued, “An infrastructure occurs when the
tension between the local and global is resolved” (p. 114). For my study, this perspective has
grounded my observation of the tensions between various actors in the social shaping of cloud
computing software in a community-based organization that provides government- and privatefunded social welfare programs. The social shaping of technology literature provided me with
additional conceptual tools for understanding cloud computing software as an infrastructure
shaped by social, institutional, and technical forces.

The Social Shaping of Technology
In this section, I introduce the social shaping of technology as an area within STS that has
contributed theoretical frameworks for understanding the often hidden social, political, and
economic forces that shape infrastructure and its consequences. STS developed over the
twentieth century to provide scholars and practitioners with theories and methods for
investigating technology change in a variety of settings. Bijker and Pinch (2012) explained that
before the 1980s, the “social studies of technology was not a legitimate field of inquiry. The

	  

	  

24	  
	  

major journal within the STS field, Social Studies of Science, did not publish work on how
technological artifacts were developed and changed” (p. xiv). STS is largely concerned with
technological development as a complex arrangement of sociotechnical factors. Social shaping of
technology studies have included: the evolution of large technical systems, such as electrical
infrastructure; the invention of personal computing; the social shaping of ballistics; the
domestication of technology, such as ovens; reproductive technology; and the development of
race and the Internet as social constructs (e.g., see Mackenzie & Wajcman, 1999). Scholars
working in this tradition often use sociological, anthropological, and historical methods to
explain how a diversity of human and nonhuman actors interact to shape and stabilize technology
artifacts in a range of social settings.
The social shaping of technology literature has largely been described as a response to
“technological determinism” (MacKenzie & Wajcman, 1999; Williams & Edge, 1996), a theory
that assumes “technological change is an independent factor, impacting on society from outside
of society, so to speak” (MacKenzie & Wajcman, 1999, p. 5). The social shaping perspective is
useful for considering how computing as an infrastructure develops, for whom, and at what cost
to the public and its surrounding environment. The literature also recognizes that while society
shapes technology, technology in turn has societal impacts. The literature has been criticized
because of its apparent lack of boundaries and shared questions within the field:
What constitutes social shaping research? What are the differences within SST
[social shaping of technology]? What is the relationship between SST and other
areas of social analysis of technology? [Because of the confusion surrounding
SST’s identity and claims,] “SST” is often taken to be synonymous with one
particular approach—for example the social construction of technology—or more
generally with the sociological study of technology. (Williams & Edge, 1996, p.
866)
	  

	  

25	  
	  

Scholars working within the field recognize that a broad range of sociotechnical arrangements
underlie the development of any technology artifact. As Bijker, Hughes, and Pinch (2012)
explained, this perspective “aims at contributing to a greater understanding of the social
processes involved in technological development while respecting the seamless web character of
technology and society” (p. 4). Thus, the social and technical are mutually constitutive and
cannot be analyzed separately—a concept which has been referred to as “co-production”
(Jasanoff, 2004). These connections often involve political, economic, historical, and cultural
contexts, as well as nonhuman factors, that influence the development of technological artifacts.
Social shaping scholars have also argued that technology develops unevenly over time, often in
unintended directions, which is an assumption shared by social informatics scholars. Ultimately,
this group of scholars is concerned with understanding how technology artifacts, systems, and
heterogeneous networks become embedded (i.e., taken for granted) in everyday life.
Bijker and Pinch (2012) described three perspectives within STS that share an emphasis
on social constructivism, or the process in which technologies are socially constructed within a
complex ecology of actors. In the next section, I review key works of scholarship that provide
ways of thinking about how everyday technologies might have evolved differently under
different social, political, and economic circumstances. I discuss large technical systems (LTS),
actor-network theory (ANT), and the social construction of technology (SCOT) before turning to
critiques of social constructivism. My intention in reviewing this literature is to use it as a
platform from which to develop a broader conceptualization of cloud computing as an
infrastructure.

	  

	  

26	  
	  

Large Technical Systems (LTS)
In Hughes’s (1983) classic work on the history of electrification, he argued that
infrastructural developments are best understood by investigating the social, political, and
economic contexts in which large technical systems (LTS) become enmeshed in society. In this
way, Hughes’s “systems” approach opened up possibilities for considering “the impact of
society, or culture, on the shape of technology,” which “had been virtually ignored” in previous
studies of technology (p. x). His work contributed to the idea of infrastructure as a cultural
artifact. In Bijker et al. (2012), Hughes wrote, “Technological systems contain messy, complex,
problem-solving components. They are both socially constructed and society shaping.… Because
they are socially constructed and adapted in order to function in systems, natural resources, such
as coal mines, also qualify as system artifacts” (p. 45). And, as Sandvig (2013) explained,
Hughes’s work called attention to the “political and social choices in arenas that had previously
seemed only technical and mundane” (p. 98). LTS as a theoretical framework can assist
researchers in considering how the Internet as an infrastructure (Sandvig, 2013, pp. 98–99)
evolves—and perhaps even devolves—over time.
Hughes emphasized the role of economics in shaping technology. He introduced the term
reverse salient to describe the phenomenon whereby a component of an expanding system “does
not march along harmoniously with other components. As the systems evolves toward a goal,
some components fall behind or out of line” (p. 79). His work provided a way of understanding
individual technological artifacts as part of a whole system. The LTS perspective, therefore, can
contribute ways of thinking about computing projects as cultural artifacts, which are shaped by
broader social, political, and economic forces. Other STS scholars have elaborated on Hughes’s

	  

	  

27	  
	  

systems approach by introducing new ways to study a diverse ecology of actors, both human and
nonhuman, in the development of sociotechnical infrastructure.
Actor-Network Theory (ANT)
Latour, Callon, and Law, among others, developed actor-network theory (ANT) as an
attempt to provide scientific rigor to social studies of science and technology. ANT
conceptualized technology as an embodiment of diverse material forms, which Law (1992)
described as a “heterogeneous network.”
The actor-network answer is that it is the end product of a lot of hard work in
which heterogeneous bits and pieces—test tubes, reagents, organisms, skilled
hands, scanning electron microscopes, radiation monitors, other scientists,
articles, computer terminals, and all the rest—that would like to make off on their
own are juxtaposed into a patterned network which overcomes their resistance. In
short, it is a material matter but also a matter of organising and ordering those
materials. (p. 379)
Bijker and Pinch (2012) distinguished ANT from the social construction of technology (SCOT)
by characterizing ANT as the study of technology that considers both human actors and
nonhuman actors, or “actants,” in a series of associations that motivate technological change.
“The fundamental distinction between human actors and the rest of the world is transcended with
the concept of actant, by which both human and nonhuman entities can have agency” (Bijker &
Pinch, 2012, p. xx). Law’s (1991) anthology of ANT perspectives sheds light on how scientific
and technological developments could be explained. In it, Callon (1991) argued that in order to
understand technological change, one must, for example, reconceptualize the role of engineers.
“All groups, actors and intermediaries describe a network: they identify and define other groups,
actors, and intermediaries, together with the relationships that bring these together.” And, he
explained, “For this reason I speak of actor-networks: for an actor is also a network” (p. 142).
	  

	  

28	  
	  

More recently, Sandvig (2013) argued that “infrastructure” is “the new network.” He explained
that infrastructure research represents a vibrant approach to Internet studies much “in the same
way that equally diffuse and inconsistently applied concepts like ‘network’ have in the past” (p.
6). ANT’s view of networks provided me with an important framework for analyzing, for
example, how paper forms, spreadsheets, and management information systems, as well as state
policymakers, software developers, and community-based organizations, played a role in shaping
the cloud computing software as a sociotechnical system.
Social Construction of Technology (SCOT)
Kline and Pinch (1999) explained that social construction of technology (SCOT) is
different from other social constructivist approaches in that it is centrally concerned with the idea
of “relevant social groups,” or those groups of actors involved in the shaping of technology
artifacts that work to stabilize or bring “closure” to technological developments. SCOT scholars
are interested in the design and development of technological artifacts, “which are seen as
embodying social artifacts” (Mackay & Gillespie, 1992, p. 686). MacKenzie and Wajcman
(1999) recognized the theoretical strength of SCOT’s use of interpretive flexibility, which “refers
to the way in which different groups of people involved with a technology…can have very
different understandings of that technology, including different understandings of its physical
characteristics” (p. 21). The SCOT approach is useful to infrastructure studies because of its
interest in understanding how things work. “Bijker and Pinch’s focus is not just on the symbolic
meaning of technologies (which in cases like motorcars or aircraft is subject to obvious social
variation) but includes also variation in criteria for judging whether a technology ‘works’”
(MacKenzie & Wajcman, 1999, p. 21). In addition, Winner (1993) has argued that SCOT can be
quite practical for studying the “dynamics of technological change” by looking “very closely at

	  

	  

29	  
	  

the artifacts and varieties of technical knowledge in question and the social actors whose
activities affect their development” (p. 364). However, the SCOT approach has been contrasted
with sociological perspectives that focus on the role of politics or economics—or race, gender,
and class—in the construction of technology. As Bijker and Pinch (2012) made clear, “to be
sure, conventional sociology and SCOTS do not always make the best bedfellows” (p. xx).
Critiques of Social Constructivism
In this section, I introduce critical responses to the social constructivist frameworks
previously discussed (LTS, ANT, and SCOT) that interrogate the apolitical aspects of
technological developments. Mackay and Gillespie (1992) described this second broad approach
within the social shaping of technology literature as being concerned with how the “wider,
‘socio-economic’ forces (for example, the decision to invest in particular lines of research and
development) affect the nature of technological problems and solutions” (p. 687). Winner (1993)
argued that social constructivists such as Bijker et al. (2012) failed to address four important
considerations: consequences, irrelevant social groups, structure and culture, and what it all
means. He asked: “Who says what are relevant social groups and social interests? What about
groups that have no voice but that, nevertheless, will be affected by the results of technological
change? What of groups that have been suppressed or deliberately excluded?” (1993, p. 369).
Staudenmaier’s (1989) concept of impact constituency provides another way to think about
Winner’s concept of irrelevant social groups. Impact constituency refers to the “people and
institutions that lose because of the design of a new technology” (p. 156). This group could be,
for example, workers who lose their jobs and factories that shutter as a result of computerization.
Staudenmaier’s second group includes “those who share in the costs of a technology without
receiving its benefits.” He uses the example from Detroit where “tax revenues support freeway

	  

	  

30	  
	  

networks at the expense of nonautomotive transit systems,” which in turn can lead to the
destruction of homes and “walking patterns in neighborhoods in which people live” (p. 156).
More recently, scholars have responded to Winner’s (1993) concerns about social
constructivism’s failings in several STS studies. For example, Klein and Kleinman (2002) argued
that social constructivists can benefit from incorporating more “broadly structural concepts” to
provide a method for examining how political economy shapes the “design, development, and
transformation of technology” (p. 29). The authors argued for a reconceptualization of social
constructivism that seeks to investigate both “social structure and technological change” (p. 48).
In another study, Pavone and Arias (2011) looked at how the political economy in Spain shaped
the development of genetic testing technologies. The authors described the ways in which “the
main legislative and institutional changes” (p. 237) affected the implementation phase in the
development of reproductive technologies. This literature builds on earlier science and
technology studies that looked at how the power and capacity of groups and institutions
influenced the development of ICTs. For example, Sætnan (1991) studied the failed ICT
implementation of a production planning system within a hospital in Norway using actornetwork-theory and labor process theory. These three studies point to the ways in which the
tension between structure and culture can provide an important point of departure for studying
how technology develops, for whom, and at what cost to different groups in society.
My work is also located within this critical strand of scholarship that investigates the
ways in which the politics of technology can either “preserve or alter” (Williams & Edge, 1996,
p. 867) existing inequalities at the intersection of race, class, and gender. My research also
considers work that has attempted to combine ethnography with political economic analyses.
These studies, described in more detail in the following section, provided me with ways of

	  

	  

31	  
	  

looking at how the social, political, and economic forces in a low-income industrial suburb such
as East St. Louis shape information infrastructure and its consequences.

Social Justice and Infrastructure Studies
In this final section, I further develop my theoretical framework to include a focus on
social justice concerns. In analyzing the social, political, and economic forces shaping cloud
computing in East St. Louis, I have used theoretical frameworks from infrastructure studies to
guide my thinking about large-scale computing projects. More specifically, I have been
influenced by Star’s (1999) call to “study boring things” (p. 377), not as a mundane approach to
cloud computing but rather as a critical theoretical and methodological approach to information
studies. Influenced by her teacher Anslem Strauss, Star believed that studying understudied
areas, such as infrastructure, “opened up a more ecological understanding of workplaces,
materiality, and interaction, and underpinned a social justice agenda by valorizing previously
neglected people and things” (p. 379). In their 1999 article on computer-supported cooperative
work systems, Star and Strauss explained, “In recent years, there has been such a large-scale shift
in how careers, corporations and the public sector interrelate.… These shifts, viewed broadly,
form the conditions for a new arena where the relationship between visible and invisible work is
challenged” (p. 11). More recently, Star (2007) used the term orphans of infrastructure to refer
to those “individual groups and forms of social and professional practice that fit uneasily or not
at all within the emerging infrastructural paradigm.” Edwards, Jackson, Bowker, and Knobel
(2007) underscored the urgency of this research approach when they wrote, “Being ‘orphaned’
by infrastructure is therefore to be on the receiving end of a significant exercise of exclusionary
power, which post-hoc accommodations may never overcome” (p. 25). The authors point to

	  

	  

32	  
	  

examples of old buildings that have been retro-fitted with ramps and elevators, but fall short of
accommodating people with disabilities (p. 25).
The political economy of information (Mosco & Wasko, 1988; Schiller, 2007; Schiller,
1981, 1996) and feminist theories of technology (Cowan, 1983; Eubanks, 2011; Wajcman, 1991)
have contributed key perspectives for analyzing the social shaping of computerization in East St.
Louis. I will now briefly review a few key works in political economy of information before
returning to studies that have considered the agency of individuals and groups in shaping
information infrastructure and its outcomes.
Political Economy of Information
Critical political economy scholars are concerned with the ways in which “power is used
to shape the production, distribution, and use of information as a commodity” in capitalist
society (Mosco, 1996, p. 3). I use the term critical political economy here to differentiate the
scholars discussed in my study from mainstream economists. As Golding and Murdock (2000)
explained, critical political economy differs in four ways:
First, it is holistic; second, it is historical; third, it is centrally concerned with the
balance between capitalist enterprise and public intervention; and finally—and
perhaps most importantly of all—it goes beyond technical issues of efficiency to
engage with basic moral questions of justice, equity and the public good. (p. 73)
Critical political economic analyses expose the social and institutional aspects of information
systems to draw attention to systems of social control, such as the concentration of media
ownership, which often serve to reinforce existing power structures within a system of global
capitalism. The political economy of information also provides a framework for considering the
“distinction between information as a resource and information as a commodity” (Schiller, 2007,
pp. 7–8) within theories of the information society. As Dan Schiller (2007) explained:

	  

	  

33	  
	  

A resource is something of actual or potential use. That is all. The soil, the sea,
the spectrum are resources. But all resources are not commodities. Only under
particular conditions can they be transformed into commodities. A resource is
anything of use, anytime, anywhere, to anyone; but a commodity bears the stamp
of society and of history in its very core. (p. 8)
Schiller argued that those concerned with the increasing corporatization of information should
follow “the information commodity,” which “has become the prime site of contemporary
expansion—such as it is—within and for the world market system” (p. 16). In this way, the
author explained technological and social change not as a revolution, but rather as part of a
transition to what he calls “informationalized capitalism” (p. xiv), in which “communications
and information have come to infuse the more encompassing process of capitalist development”
(p. xiv). Herbert Schiller (1981) described how ICTs “have made it possible to generate, process,
assemble, store and disseminate enormous quantities of information.… In the drive toward
privatization of information, the principle that ‘information is a commodity’ plays a prominent
role” (p. 48). A critical political economist might focus on how Internet marketing firms use
web-based technologies to commoditize personal information in an effort to advance a
networked information economy.
Magnet’s (2011) study of biometrics in public assistance programs called attention to the
political economy of biometric technology that was claimed to be used to reduce fraud. Magnet
found that most biometric efforts had less to do with reducing fraud and more to do with the
biometric industry’s expansion from scanning criminals to scanning welfare recipients. Her work
raised awareness about the use of biometrics in public assistance programs as an extension of the
belief about welfare recipients as criminals. In her study, Magnet cites Eubanks’s (2006)
research on the use of computers “in the surveillance of welfare receipt,” saying that “welfare

	  

	  

34	  
	  

compels recipients to reveal every part of their personal lives, similar to the prison industrial
complex” (p. 84). The study of computing as an infrastructure can provide ways to investigate
technology as a form of power in society. This conception shares many of the beliefs about the
social shaping of technology previously discussed, but also focuses on the development of
infrastructure as a social justice concern.
Race, Class, Gender, and Infrastructure
Feminist theories of technology (e.g., see Cowan, 1983; Eubanks, 2011; Wajcman, 1991)
further expose how power shapes infrastructure by emphasizing the “significance of everyday
life technologies” (Wajcman, 2010, p. 144). Wajcman, for example, has called attention to the
ways in which gender and technology are mutually shaping. In her critique of social
constructivism, she argued that “women’s systematic absence from the sites of observable
conflict over the direction of technological developments is therefore as indicative of the
mobilisation of gender interests as is the presence of other actors.” She argued that feminist
studies of technology have “clearly demonstrated that the marginalisation of women from the
technological community has a profound influence on the design, technical content and use of
artefacts” (p. 146). I have been particularly influenced by feminist scholars, such as Eubanks
(2007, 2011), who have argued for a reconceptualization of commonly held sociotechnical
beliefs, such as the digital divide.
In her study of technology, poverty, and social justice at the YWCA in upstate New
York, Eubanks (2011) used ethnographic methods to investigate the values, beliefs, and
behaviors of women as they challenged normative assumptions about the digital divide, which
U.S. policymakers have referred to as the gap between the information haves and have nots
(NTIA, 1995, 1998, 1999, 2000). Eubanks found that the women of the YWCA developed

	  

	  

35	  
	  

alternative articulations of the digital divide in response to common misconceptions among
academics, practitioners, policymakers, and activists. As Eubanks (2011) explained, “Seeing
high-tech equity only as broadly shared access to existing technological products ignores other
social values, neglects decision-making processes, sees citizens only as consumers, and ignores
the operation of institutions and social structures” (p. 26). She argued that U.S. digital divide
policy has largely focused on attempts to “‘fit’ marginalized people into the information society”
(p. 35). If academics, practitioners, and policymakers want to achieve a more just society,
Eubanks argued, then a significant shift is needed away from distribution as a policy response
and toward a deeper understanding of the ways in which oppression impacts social, and thus
digital, inequality in the information age.
Scholars have argued that race, class, and gender must be seen as “interlocking categories
of experience that affect all aspects of human life; they simultaneously structure the experiences
of all people in society” (Anderson & Collins, 1995, p. xi). These socially constructed
classifications “become significant when they operate to explicitly disadvantage the victims;
because the privileging of whiteness or maleness is implicit, it is generally not perceived at all”
(Crenshaw, 2000, p. 218). Anderson and Collins (1995) cautioned against seeing race, class, and
gender as part of an “additive model” that studies their effects on the human experience
independently. The additive model views women and people of color as victims, and it fails to
analyze the social structures “that shape the experiences of all groups.” The authors suggest the
“matrix of domination” (Collins, 2000) as a preferred approach that provides a way to study the
“multiple, interlocking levels of domination that stem from the societal configurations of race,
class, and gender relations” (p. xi). Black feminist scholarship has grown to generate interest
among women and men. Themes from Black feminist scholarship have introduced me, as a

	  

	  

36	  
	  

White male information scholar, to multiple ways of knowing about how information systems
can fail to acknowledge “invisible work” (Star, 1999) in human services.
In particular, I describe how networked information systems failed to account for the
everyday experiences of “parent educators” in the Providing a Sure Start program at MESH. My
observations and analyses of this sociotechnical failure are rooted in infrastructure studies and
informed by technofeminism and Black feminist studies. These perspectives opened up
opportunities in my study to observe how the intersections of race, class, and gender surfaced
several unique challenges and opportunities for human services professionals at MESH as they
described their everyday experiences with technology at work. Infrastructure studies also
furnished an intellectual space in which the agency of “impact constituencies” (Staudenmaier,
1989) could be discussed. However, rather than adopting a deficit-based perspective, I argue that
an asset-based approach (Rhinesmith, 2012) to high-tech equity can uncover the ecology of
actors not often mentioned in social constructivist studies, particularly those individuals in lowincome communities left in the wake of the “information revolution” (Wilson, 2004). An assetbased perspective provides a way to study and highlight the agency of so-called nonusers of
technology (Brock, Kvasny, & Hales, 2010; Dailey et al., 2010; Eubanks, 2011; Pinkett, 2003;
Schuler, 1996). Community assets can emerge as an important point of departure for
investigating not only how people adopt technology, but also in understanding how people’s
everyday experiences with technology—both directly and/or indirectly, for example, as negative
externalities—can provide a rich beginning for investigating computerization as an
infrastructural process.
STS scholars have called attention to the ways in which “irrelevant” social groups
(Winner, 1993) or nonusers of technology (Wyatt, 2003) matter in appropriating technology

	  

	  

37	  
	  

(Eglash, 2004). As Sandvig (2012) explained, “Skilled designers are usually the ones who get to
design and modify technology with permission, so most appropriation work involves users or
otherwise non-traditional technology designers” (p. 192). Therefore, power and privilege have
played a direct role in the historical development of technological innovations. Eglash (2004)
explained that the primary importance of stories of technological appropriations “is in terms of
their potential contribution to sociopolitical resistance and social reconfiguration” (p. x).
However, as Sandvig (2012) cautioned, “if not handled delicately,” celebrations of technological
appropriation “can sound fatally patronizing, but handled well [they give] students of technology
and social justice a chance for celebration and optimism in a circumstance where these are rarely
found” (p. 192). Sandvig’s study played a significant role in guiding my ethnographic research.
In his richly described study of indigenous Internet infrastructure, Sandvig (2012)
carefully detailed the ways that user-driven innovation and appropriation supported the
infrastructural developments. Sandvig’s ethnography of infrastructure (Star, 1999) followed the
unfolding of the Tribal Digital Village (TDV) solar wireless Internet distribution network, a
partnership between the University of California–San Diego and the tribal governments of
southern California. Sandvig (2012) described TDV as a success and reported that 100 percent of
residents on the Santa Ysabel Indian Reservation said they used it daily (p. 184). The study is
significant because although the technology implementation was wrought with failures and
complexities, “the tribe themselves were transformed from users to producers: they now selfprovide telecommunications services via TDV. In the process they have pioneered new
configurations and assemblies of equipment and protocol stacks that are innovative among their
peers, and copied” (p. 190). Sandvig’s (2012) ethnography of infrastructure was foundational to

	  

	  

38	  
	  

my study of cloud computerization in East St. Louis because it focuses on the critical role of
indigenous knowledge (Eglash, 2004) in shaping how a particular technology works.
In this section, I have tried to show how critical theoretical perspectives informed my
approach to infrastructure as a theoretical framework for my research. This approach puts social
justice at the center in the design and implementation of computing projects and represents a
critical underlying framework that has guided my ethnography of cloud computing, which is
described in the next chapter.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I introduced the concept of infrastructure to describe my theoretical
approach for my study of cloud computing. I reviewed key works from SI and STS to begin
constructing the theoretical framework for my ethnography of cloud computing, which I
introduce in the next chapter. I then highlighted critical theoretical perspectives from political
economy of information studies and feminist theories of technology to show how the social
shaping of cloud computing in human services should be understood as a site of struggle
between competing interests. The goal was to establish the idea of cloud computing as an
infrastructure, which is the theoretical perspective grounding my ethnographic approach. In the
next chapter, I turn from a view of infrastructure as theory to its application as method within the
field of information studies.

	  

	  

39	  
	  

CHAPTER TWO

Ethnography of Infrastructure as a Method
Finding the invisible work in information systems require[s] looking for these
processes in the traces left behind by coders, designers, and users of systems.
–Star (1999, p. 385)

Introduction
“Where or in what place do infrastructures and individuals meet?” This question was
central to Mackenzie’s (2003) study of software design in rural Australia. The research was
Mackenzie’s attempt to respond to Bowker and Star’s (1999) call to study “how it is that
individuals and communities meet infrastructure” (p. 33). Bowker and Star argued that
information infrastructures disappear when they become stable and usable, thus making it more
difficult to understand how they developed. Therefore, they argued, methodological attention is
needed in the social sciences to understand how “political and semantic conflicts” shape
infrastructural developments (p. 33). Mackenzie focused his observations on the “meeting
between individuals, communities and infrastructure in the context of software that manages
telecommunications infrastructure” (p. 366). He found that the concept of collective imagining,
borrowing from Appadurai (1996), is useful in helping individuals and groups to make
“connections between disparate materials such as telephone lines and computers” (Mackenzie,
2003, p. 367) in the development of software projects. Mackenzie argued that the ethnography of
infrastructure is a significant methodological approach, when viewed in this way, because it can
provide tools to investigate how imagined “detours, torsions, and convoluted trajectories” shape
technology developments (p. 383). This chapter and my research as a whole seek to join this
methodological conversation. I provide additional background and context for understanding
	  

	  

40	  
	  

where the individuals introduced in this and subsequent chapters met infrastructure and how
these meetings shaped the cloud computing software.
I introduce the idea of infrastructure as a method to observe how social, institutional, and
technical forces shaped cloud computerization within a community-based organization in East
St. Louis. My approach is primarily influenced by Star’s (1999) ethnography of infrastructure,
which offers methodological tools for investigating the invisible work underlying large-scale
information infrastructure development. As I described in Chapter 1, my research method is
focused on observing and analyzing the relational aspects, or webs (Kling & Scacchi, 1982), that
shape information technology projects, particularly during the implementation phase. This is
because implementation requires significant decisions to be made about how software is
configured to meet the needs of multiple stakeholders. I also introduce my ethnographic
approach to infrastructure, which is informed by studies that have attempted to incorporate
political economic analyses.
I begin by describing the value of ethnography of infrastructure as a method. Then I
discuss the details of my research design and my analytical approach, which are both informed
by ethnographic work within sociology and cultural anthropology. I describe my approach to
investigating how human services professionals met infrastructure, which was informed by
Bowker and Star’s (1999) and Mackenzie’s (2003) research. As Bowker and Star (1999)
explained, an understanding of infrastructure includes the following points:
•

A historical process of development of many tools, arranged for a wide
variety of uses, and made to work in concert

•

A practical match among routines of work practice, technology, and wider
scale organizational and technical resources

•

A rich set of negotiated compromises ranging from epistemology to data entry
that is both available and transparent to communities of users

	  

	  

41	  
	  

•

A negotiated order in which all of the above, recursively, can function
together” (p. 34)

I argue that in order to understand how the cloud computing software developed in my
study, it is critical to understand the history of East St. Louis as an industrial suburb. I emphasize
this important political economic context as part of my sociohistorical analysis of infrastructure,
which I introduce in the next chapter. The role of place is essential to this approach. As I
previously mentioned, the concept of place was also foundational to Mackenzie’s (2003)
research question. In his study, he explained that the “notion of locality plays a vital role in
situating scientific knowledges, practices, and things” (p. 366). The goal in adopting this
methodological orientation is to understand how place becomes “an active outcome of social
life” (Mackenzie, 2003, p. 367).
Wolcott (1999) emphasized the role of place more broadly in ethnographic research.
“Place, in the sense of venturing someplace else, was important to the early ethnographers
because it virtually assured studying among those different from oneself” (p. 33). Although
ethnographies have evolved over the century from studies of distant cultures, including the
Trobriand people in New Guinea (Malinowski, 1922) and cockfighting in Bali (Geertz, 1973a),
toward more recent Internet studies of massive multiplayer online games (Taylor, 2006) and the
social lives of networked teens (boyd, 2014), place—physical and/or virtual—continues to play a
central role in understanding the underlying infrastructures that both shape and are shaped by
people’s talk and actions in particular locations. How to study the invisible forces that shape
culture and technology together becomes an exciting point of departure for ethnographers of
infrastructure.

	  

	  

42	  
	  

The Value of Ethnography of Infrastructure
Ethnography of infrastructure (Star, 1999) was a valuable method for pursuing my
research question because of its strength in connecting macro-level processes to local
consequences. I begin by discussing how it might be viewed within the context of traditional
ethnographic studies. Then I use the concept of configurational technology (Fleck, 1994) as a
way to describe the ETO software. In particular, I discuss how this perspective facilitated a way
of looking at cloud computing software as an infrastructural process. I conclude by focusing on
the value of ethnography of infrastructure in studying relationships between technology,
designers, and users, and how this affected my research.
Traditionally, ethnography was considered to be the outcome or product of field research
conducted by anthropologists. More recently, researchers in many disciplines have used the
phrase “doing ethnography” as shorthand for “describing how they intend to gather data, without
necessarily suggesting or implying, and certainly without promising, that the outcome of their
efforts will be framed as ethnography” (Wolcott, 1999, p. 41). Ethnography, as both process and
product, has been a popular approach within the field of STS for many years. For example,
Latour and Woolgar’s (1979, 1986) study of knowledge production in laboratory science
embraced ethnography. As the authors explained, the goal of the anthropological observer is to
systematically order and report observations, which is “one of the basic principles of scientific
enquiry” (1986, p. 43). In gaining entry to a new cultural environment, such as a scientific
laboratory, Latour and Woolgar explained that the observer’s role is to “steer a middle path
between the two extreme roles of total newcomer (an unattainable ideal) and that of complete
participant (who in going native is unable usefully to communicate to his community of fellow
observers)” (p. 44). In using participant observation for my study, through my job as a volunteer

	  

	  

43	  
	  

project manager, I knew that my role was to provide an account that would be of interest not
only to social welfare workers, managers, and directors at MESH, but also to those who are not
familiar with the infrastructures that support these services. In addition, my ethnography of
infrastructure was valuable because it led me to develop a way of looking (Wolcott, 1999) at
what some might consider to be the “boring things” (Star, 1999, p. 377) that helped me
understand and articulate not only how cloud computing works, but also the underlying relational
aspects that directed its development and consequences.
I believe that ethnography as a process, using participant observation, interviews, and
archival research—or what Wolcott (1999) referred to as “experiencing, enquiring, and
examining”—was the best approach to guide my inquiry. Rather than searching for universal
law, ethnographers focus on producing descriptive “detailed accounts of the concrete experiences
of life within a particular culture and of the beliefs and social rules that are used as resources
within it” (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1995, p. 10). STS scholars have described this approach as
an extremely valuable method, particularly because “it offers a rich description of how work is
done, its social setting and the understandings of different players” (Williams & Edge, 1996, p.
884). Ethnography also allowed me to engage in writing “thick description” (Geertz, 1973b)
about the “the design of networks and their import” (Star, 1999). In using this approach, I
produced a pile of fieldnotes and memos that I considered to be a data set (Emerson, Fretz, &
Shaw, 1995) for analyzing the infrastructural development of the ETO software.
Studying Configurational Technology
My ethnography, as a product, seeks to tell a story about the social shaping of technology
and its consequences in East St. Louis, as an industrial suburb. Herein, I write about cloud
computing as a configurational technology. Fleck (1994) explained that configurational

	  

	  

44	  
	  

technology requires substantial user input based on both local knowledge and broader
institutional contexts. My ethnographic account focuses on cloud computerization as an
infrastructural process that relied on a number of sociotechnical factors. As Bowker and Star
(1999) explained, “Information infrastructure is a tricky thing to analyze.… The easier they are
to use, the harder they are to see” (p. 33). However, in my research, because the ETO software
was never fully implemented during my fieldwork, its relational aspects of infrastructure were
more visible than they might have been had they become fully “sunk into or inside of other
structures, social arrangements, and technologies” (Star, 1999, p. 381). This leads to my central
point of the value of ethnography of infrastructure. The ethnography of cloud computing presents
an exciting opportunity to study infrastructure because the software had not been fully
developed. Therefore, researching the implementation phase of cloud computing software
allowed me to observe how specific choices in this process represent values that can become
embedded, and in some cases even reproduced, into the cloud computing software as part of its
infrastructure.
Although the cloud computing software that I studied had many options built into it, like
most configurational technology, it also had built-in constraints. More concretely, I asked myself
repeatedly throughout the study: What is the relationship between technology, designers, and
users in the development of ETO, and how do these connections ameliorate or perpetuate
existing social inequalities?
Woolgar’s (1991) study of usability trials in the development of computers provided my
ethnography of infrastructure with a useful starting point. The author used the metaphor
“machine as text” to investigate exactly how designers “configure” users through their reading of
designers’ machines, peripherals, and technical documentation. Woolgar argued that a user’s

	  

	  

45	  
	  

capacity to engage with computers is largely “structured and defined in relation to the machine”
(p. 89). While the research is useful for engaging with the design and use of cloud computing, it
has been criticized for its one-way orientation toward technology development (Mackay et al.,
2000). Woolgar’s ethnography of computing serves as a key theoretical and methodological
foundation for this chapter. Therefore, I argue that cloud computing further complicates the
technology–designer–user paradigm in STS by introducing additional ad hoc design choices
during the implementation process.
My ethnography of cloud computing was sensitive to the configurational aspects of the
system, while focusing on the broader social, political, and economic forces that shaped the
cloud computing software at MESH. My approach to the ethnography of infrastructure as a
method was focused not on representing the symbolic aspects of cloud computing, but rather on
describing how it worked (Sandvig, 2013). By using ethnography in this way, I was able to focus
my fieldwork efforts on observing and engaging in conversations about the “hidden costs”
(Jewett & Kling, 1991), such as additional skills, time, funding, and organizational capacity,
needed to successfully implement the ETO software.

The Politics of Ethnography
I now turn to briefly consider the politics of ethnography as a method. My intention is to
describe how an epistemological shift in anthropology opened up possibilities for incorporating
more critical perspectives, such as political economy and feminism, into ethnographic inquiry. I
begin by detailing the shift in thinking about ethnography from an authoritarian regime to an
emancipatory approach. I then introduce two studies, in particular, that have influenced my
approach to ethnography; these studies sought to incorporate political economic analyses within

	  

	  

46	  
	  

ethnographic projects. I conclude by describing how feminist studies of technology and
participatory action research have also shaped my methodological approach to the ethnography
of infrastructure.
Gitlin, Siegel, and Boru (1989) argued, “Ethnography has never been a neutral
undertaking” (p. 239). The authors explained that rather than worrying about debates over
reliability and validity, ethnographers should “strive to put the political moment back in the
methodological debate by considering the potential of ethnography to foster emancipatory
change” (p. 238). Marcus and Fischer (1986) described the “crisis of representation” in the field
of anthropology beginning in the 1960s. Modern ethnographers identified that mid- to late
nineteenth century conceptions of human populations as “savage,” “primitive,” or “exotic” were
problematic (Marcus & Fisher, 1986, pp. 17–18). This group of scholars argued that concepts
such as “power, resistance, institutional practices, and innovation” (Clifford & Marcus, 1986, p.
2) should become the new foundational concerns of ethnographic endeavors. As Clifford and
Marcus (1986) argued,
Ethnography is actively situated between powerful systems of meaning. It poses
its questions at the boundaries of civilizations, cultures, classes, races, and
genders. Ethnography decodes and recodes, telling the grounds of collective order
and diversity, inclusion and exclusion. It describes processes of innovation and
structuration, and is itself part of these processes. (p. 2)
This radical turn in ethnography opened up possibilities for considering critical political
economy and feminist theories in ethnographic studies of technology. There are two studies, in
particular, that used both social shaping of technology and political economic perspectives; these
played an important role in my research.

	  

	  

47	  
	  

Ethnography of ICTs and Political Economy
The first study that influenced how I looked at cloud computerization in East St. Louis is
Miller and Slater’s (2000) ethnography of the Internet in Trinidad. The authors used ethnography
as a research strategy to study and explain how the “Internet Service Providers, the government
and the principal Telecomms company” came together to shape the Internet in Trinidad. In their
study, Miller and Slater found that many of their informants believed the global economic
context played a significant role in helping Trinidad “to diversify its economy away from
dependence on petrochemicals” (p. 120). Political and commercial interests together developed
Trinidad’s Internet infrastructure to advance a liberal economy, and Miller and Slater described
how many informants were caught up in the national rhetoric. As they explained, people believed
“the future of Trinidad depended upon seizing a moment in which Trinidad has finally realized
its competitive advantage in its capacity to provide high-value technological services to the
world” (p. 121). Their chapter on the political economy of the Internet in Trinidad is important
for comprehending the rest of the book, which is focused largely on the culture of Internet use.
The authors argued that Internet use is inseparable from the political economy of the Internet in
Trinidad. Ultimately, Miller and Slater argued that an ethnography of the Internet can provide “a
detailed focus on what Trinidadians find in the Internet, what they make of it, how they can
relate its possibilities to themselves and their futures” and that this would “tell us a great deal
about both the Internet and about Trinidad” (p. 1). This perspective guided how I documented
and analyzed what human services workers and managers discovered in a nonprofit case
management software package and what it might tell us about both the software and about East
St. Louis.

	  

	  

48	  
	  

The second important study that informed my ethnography is Hakken and Andrews’s
(1993) ethnography of technology and labor in Sheffield, England. In their book, the authors
discovered how the global information economy shaped workers’ everyday experiences with
technology. For example, one informant posed “questions about technology in general, and new
information technology in particular, inside this political economic framework rather than
separate from it, a position at which he has arrived after some negative experience with
technology” (p. 134). Hakken and Andrews set out to investigate both the factors shaped by
technology and the factors shaping technology and found that “changes in the world political
economy strongly influenced the course of computerization in Sheffield” (p. 137). The authors
argued that ethnography could reveal how social and institutional processes shape ICTs within a
local social setting. My research also looked at the ways in which the political economies of East
St. Louis and the state of Illinois became visible in the cloud computing experiences of human
services professionals at MESH. The Miller and Slater and Hakken and Andrews ethnographies
provided me with significant guidance both epistemologically as well as methodologically.

Fieldwork
My ethnographic study was designed to help answer my research question: How do
political, economic, historical, and cultural contexts shape cloud computing implementation and
its consequences within a human services organization in East St. Louis, Illinois? In this section,
I provide an overview of my research methodology, including my approaches to participant
observation, interviews, and archival documents, as well as writing fieldnotes. I begin this
section by describing how I gained access to the field.

	  

	  

49	  
	  

Getting In
In order to begin an ethnographic study, the ethnographer needs a “social trail” from
herself to her first informant (Agar, 1980, p. 27). Fortunately, researchers and students from the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science (GSLIS) have worked on a number of
community informatics projects with individuals and community-based organizations in East St.
Louis since 1999. Community informatics has been described as “the application of information
and communications technology (ICT) to enable and empower community processes”
(Guerstein, 2000, p. 11). This work in East St. Louis built on previous community–university
partnerships beginning in the 1980s (Reardon, 1998, 2000). Many of the GSLIS projects have
focused on building public computing centers in churches and community centers. This history
played a significant role in allowing me to gain entrance into the field.
In February 2013, I called the host organization for my ethnographic study, MESH, to
ask them whether there was anything I could do to be helpful while focusing on this work for my
research. At that point, I had absolutely no idea that I would embark on a study of information
infrastructure. And, I feel quite fortunate that I called on that day at that particular time. They
responded by telling me that they had been paying for a SaaS platform that would help them
track the performance of their organization and document community needs and impact.
However, they did not have anyone within their organization who could help them to configure
and implement the ETO cloud computing software.
Social Solutions, the company that owns ETO, described the cloud computing product as
a “nonprofit software solution” to help agencies and nonprofit organizations successfully track
clients and document program impact for funders and other donors. As their website explains:
In addition to meeting the daily case management needs of direct service staff,
ETO Impact is the leading performance management software solution for the
	  

	  

50	  
	  

human services sector. ETO Impact empowers users with the tools they need to
translate data into knowledge about program performance, actively monitor
progress toward outcomes, and continuously improve service delivery. (Social
Solutions, 2013)
The website also explained that ETO can help nonprofit organizations perform the following
tasks: “track and analyze participant demographic data; manage referrals; assess participant
needs and progress; maintain comprehensive history of participant information; monitor
participant attendance” and more (Social Solutions, 2013). Social Solutions gained notoriety
after partnering with the Harlem Children’s Zone (http://www.hcz.org) project in 2006. Within
two years, Social Solutions was listed as one of the top 5,000 fastest growing private companies
in the United States. In a 2011 press release, Social Solutions was described as
the leading provider of performance management software for human services,
connecting efforts to outcomes, people to social services, and service providers
and communities to funders. The company’s Efforts to Outcomes (ETO™)
software goes beyond case management, and enables public, private, and
nonprofit organizations, such as Harlem Children's Zone®, Catholic Charities,
Annie E. Casey Foundation, HUD, and cities such as Boston and Hartford to
collaborate, save time, and improve service quality and effectiveness, and most
importantly, demonstrate impact. (Business Wire, 2011)
Social Solutions has grown to be a significant player in the field of performance management
systems. The company’s focus on designing software solutions to support “data-driven decision
making” has been a successful approach, particularly as big data “has been touted as the solution
to achieving efficient and highly effective government and human services” (Bordone, 2013, p.
38).

	  

	  

51	  
	  

After the directors at MESH invited me to work with them on the ETO project, I asked
them if I could work as a volunteer project manager while also studying the implementation for
my research. We agreed that engaging in this work together would be a mutually beneficial
opportunity: I could provide them with an account of the implementation process and lessons
learned, and I could have access to an organization where I could study the software
implementation. It was an exciting opportunity to engage in fieldwork and to develop new skills
in ethnography while expanding my research experience, which previously focused on
qualitative case study methodology (Rhinesmith, 2012). I looked forward to developing a new
approach using ethnography to investigate the social, political, and economic forces shaping
cloud computing, as an infrastructure, and its consequences in East St. Louis.
Participant Observation
I conducted my participant observation (Emerson & Pollner, 2001) at least three days
every week at the research site in East St. Louis between June 2013 and April 2014. During this
time, I hoped to discover patterns in the ways human services professionals talked about and
engaged in the ETO implementation process. I tried to pay particular attention to the broader
structural contexts that shaped how employees at MESH interacted both with each other and with
the software. I also paid attention to the ways in which issues related to the digital divide, which
is often shaped by persistent poverty (e.g., see Servon, 2002), might influence the behaviors of
workers and managers during the ETO implementation stage.
My fieldwork built on my previous volunteer experiences with MESH. The organization
has worked with the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC), particularly with the
East St. Louis Action Research Project at UIUC (now Action Research Illinois), since the late
1980s. MESH has also collaborated with the UIUC Graduate School of Library and Information

	  

	  

52	  
	  

Science (GSLIS) on a number of community informatics projects since the late 1990s. These
projects primarily involved the design and use of public computing centers in and around East St.
Louis (e.g., see Rhinesmith et al., 2011; Wolske et al., 2013). I was first introduced to MESH in
2011 as a paid research assistant in GSLIS. I began working more intimately with the
organization when I volunteered as a youth media instructor during the late winter and early
spring months in 2012. This work was part of a separate research project that never fully
developed because of limited time and resources. However, these experiences gave me an
important opportunity to obtain access to the research site and to gain additional understandings
of the organization and East St. Louis that were significantly helpful in guiding my work both as
volunteer project manager and researcher. In this way, my fieldwork experiences were part of
what Van Maanen (1988) described as
a long social process of coming to terms with a culture. It is a process that begins
before one enters the field and continues long after one leaves it. The working out
of understandings may be symbolized by fieldnotes, but the intellectual activities
that support such understandings are unlikely to be found in the daily records. (pp.
117–118)
I have tried to be reflexive and transparent about the research process in my approach to
ethnographic fieldwork. I also tried to adhere to Emerson, Fretz, and Shaw’s (2001) approach to
participant observation and fieldnotes, particularly in developing theoretical notes in contrast to
observational notes. Emerson, Fretz, and Shaw (citing Schatzman & Strauss, 1973) explained,
“Theoretical notes represent self-conscious, controlled attempts to derive meaning from any one
of several observational notes.” In this way, the ethnographer “interprets, infers, hypothesizes,
conjectures; he develops new concepts, links these to older ones, or relates any observation to
any other in this presently private effort to create social science” (p. 361). This approach

	  

	  

53	  
	  

involves constant memoing and reflection on fieldnotes throughout the data collection process,
something I describe in the later analysis section.
Writing Fieldnotes
Traditionally, little has been known about how ethnographers write fieldnotes (Emerson
et al., 1995, p. viii; Sanjeck, 1990, p. xi). Anthropologists and sociologists have attempted to
remedy this problem by calling attention to the writing that comes before ethnographies.
Hammersley and Atkinson (1995) explained that fieldnotes are considered “the traditional means
in ethnography for recording observational data. In accordance with the ethnographer’s
commitment to discovery, fieldnotes consist of relatively concrete descriptions of social
processes and their contexts” (p. 175). My process for writing fieldnotes involved taking notes in
my green notebook whenever I had time and it was not distracting to those whom I was
observing. I also kept my audio recorder on hand to record ETO meetings and conversations with
staff, managers, and directors at MESH as often as possible. I carried both of these items with
my laptop in my bike messenger bag. I collected several hours of audio recordings, which were
augmented by my written observations of the culture of computing and work. While I tried to
write down as much as possible in my notebook, I also focused on “what to write down, how to
write it down, and when to write it down” (Hammersley & Atkinson, 1995, p. 176). I tried to
make note of the social interactions that could, at the time or hopefully later, provide multiple
ways of seeing the broader social, political, and economic contexts with which my research was
ultimately concerned.
While I was in East St. Louis conducting my fieldwork, I stayed at a Catholic Worker
House (see Photo 1), which is located in the eastern part of the city and owned by the Catholic
Urban Programs. As their website explains, Catholic Urban Programs is “a federation of five

	  

	  

54	  
	  

faith-based agencies [that] advances the dignity of the human person through compassionate
response to human needs, advocacy for justice, and the empowerment of individuals and families
to reach their full potential” (Catholic Urban Programs, 2014). As I had read in other fieldwork
accounts (Clifford & Marcus, 1986; Sanjeck, 1990), I too spent my evenings after long days of
work in the field back in my “tent,” or in my case it was my room at the Catholic Worker House.
I often wrote as much as I could remember for as long as I could write about the day’s events
before getting too tired and needing to take breaks for dinner or bed.

Photo 1. Catholic Worker House in East St. Louis, Illinois

I used a software application called Journler (http://journler.com) to transfer my
fieldnotes from my notebook to my computer. In Journler, I had two folders: one entitled
“Fieldnotes,” where I entered my fieldnotes by date, and another entitled “Research Journal,”
where I entered contextual information about the project on a more general level. Often these

	  

	  

55	  
	  

contextual notes helped to inform what I observed and what I wrote in future fieldnotes. The
fieldnotes folder contained electronic transcriptions of my many jottings from my observations
on site at MESH. Whenever possible, I also tried to indicate differences between my jottings and
my analytic ideas by using brackets around these analytical notes (e.g., see Lofland, Snow,
Anderson, & Lofland, 2006). I also used my field notebook to make jottings during my
interviews with staff, managers, and director at MESH.
Interviews
My approach to interviewing informants was “conversational” (Denzin, 1989, p. 109), as
is common in ethnographic fieldwork. As Hammersley and Atkinson (1995) explained, “The aim
here is to minimize, as far as possible, the influence of the researcher on what is said, and thus to
facilitate an open expression of the informant’s perspective on the world” (p. 129). This
perspective also assumes that interviewing is such an integral aspect of participant observation
“that it is often subsumed as an aspect of it” (Wolcott, 1999, p. 51). I did have a set of
semistructured questions (see Appendix B) from which my interview questions were derived.
However, my interviews were motivated more by conversations with my informants in
naturalistic settings, such as the office space or in the car while driving to and from meetings at
one of the other locations of MESH. In these cases, our conversations and actions unfolded in
relation to the configuration and implementation of the cloud computing software.
On fewer occasions, I asked my informants to set aside time for an interview. This was
mostly because, as Hammersley and Atkinson (1995) explained, “However skillful a researcher
is in negotiating a role that allows observation of events, some information will not be available
at first hand” (p. 125). In these situations, I asked my informants questions about issues and
things that occurred off-site (e.g., state welfare and technology policy). In this ethnographic

	  

	  

56	  
	  

study of infrastructure, my goal was to gain an understanding of the broader forces shaping the
cloud computing software that were often beyond those directly involved at MESH. In trying to
discern these broader political, economic, and historical aspects, I often had to ask my
informants what they believed were motivating factors in this regard. Regardless of the level of
formality, I tried to follow what Denzin (1989) described as an “interview conversation,” in
which questions are introduced in order to engage informants in the interview process:
The interview should be approached as a conversation. It is a conversation
between two or more persons where the main focus derives from the questions
that make up the interview schedule. It is talk managed around a specific set of
questions. It is a conversation that should not end until the interviewer has
received satisfactory answers to the research questions. (p. 109)
Following this approach, all of my interviews took place on site at the organization during
normal work hours. On occasion, my analyses were drawn from remote conversations with staff
and managers at MESH using Skype or telephone. In all cases, I recorded audio from my
interviews and used a notebook to make notes during my conversations. I also tried to go back to
my informants during the span of my fieldwork in order to follow up on previous conversations
and to ask clarifying questions. However, the bulk of my interviews were conducted in concert
with the participant observation. I asked everyone involved in my research to sign a consent form
(see Appendix C).
Software Manuals and Policy Documents
Archival research, or “examining” (Wolcott, 1999, pp. 58–61), played an important role
in influencing how I approached participant observation and interviews during the cloud
computing implementation. It also helped me to contextualize the tensions I observed between
human and nonhuman actors (Latour, 2005) in the development of the software as a service

	  

	  

57	  
	  

platform. Two sets of data in particular played an important role. The first set included technical
manuals related to the software, both as PDFs and online documents. Social Solutions provided a
number of very useful resources, including the “Quick Start Implementation Guide,” during our
ETO Impact Quick Start process. In addition, the Social Solutions website provides a number of
useful online resources for technical support. These documents were very helpful not only in
helping us to configure and implement the software, but also in understanding the values
embedded into the software as a configurational technology. This is something that I discuss
throughout the ethnography.
The second set of documents that helped guide my fieldwork included state welfare and
technology policy publications available on the Illinois Department of Human Services (DHS)
website (http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx) and also through the Illinois Framework for
Healthcare and Human Services website (http://illinoisframework.org). The DHS website
provided useful documentation related to the eCornerstone software, which is the state-mandated
management information system in the Teen REACH program at MESH. These documents
helped me understand how the software worked and where exactly it created tensions with the
private ETO Impact software. The Illinois Framework website contained critical documentation
that provided additional context that helped me understand why MESH directors were motivated
to purchase the cloud computing software. As I describe in my later account, I first learned about
the Illinois Framework during my interviews with directors at MESH. I had no idea that state
technology policy had such a significant role in shaping decisions not only about using the ETO
software, but also in guiding its configuration and implementation. These documents also helped
to expand my ethnographic study of cloud computing as an infrastructure by considering the role

	  

	  

58	  
	  

of political economic analyses in the studying of information and communication technology, as
previous studies had led me to consider.

Data Analysis
I situate my approach to data analysis in contrast to other qualitative approaches, such as
grounded theory (e.g., see Charmaz, 2001; Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss & Corbin, 1997). The
purpose of this section is to provide a richer understanding of the choices I made as a social
analyst and how I allowed my theoretical framework to guide my analytical approach. I begin by
briefly explaining how I organized my data when I was not in the field.
Data Organization
I created a spreadsheet entitled “Data Archives” to organize and make sense of my data
in a holistic manner. During this process, I created categories for my data archive, which are
shown in Table 3.

	  

	  

59	  
	  

Table 3. Data Classification System
Category

Subcategory

AudioNotes

Individual audio recordings (i.e., memos) organized by date

Cloud Computing
News Articles

Categories include government, industry (general), Google v. Microsoft,
Microsoft, Apple, Amazon, Amazon v. IBM, Cisco v. IBM

ETO

ETO images
ETO press
Social Solutions website

Fieldnotes

Specific Journler entries

Interviews

Employees

Meetings

Meeting audio recordings
Meeting notes (i.e., text documents)
Meeting video recordings

Notepad Scans

(Scans of my notepads from work in the field)

Organizational
Brochures

Leaflets

Program Documents

Teen REACH
Providing a Sure Start

State and Federal
Archival Documents

Department of Children and Family Services
Department of Human Services
Illinois State Board of Education
The Illinois Framework

	  

	  

60	  
	  

The classification system helped me to keep track of my data and keep it organized. It
also allowed me to later consider the depth and breadth of resources that informed my fieldwork
and analysis. In addition, I wrote memos throughout the process as a tool to understand which
concepts and themes reemerged over time. The classification system informed this important part
of my analytical process, which is detailed below.
Journler was also an essential tool not only for writing and collecting my fieldnotes, but
also for tracking and organizing other data and documentation related to the project. One of the
key features of Journler is its ability to import audio, video, and other text documents into the
actual fieldnote entries. This was particularly useful because I used the software tool AudioNote
(http://luminantsoftware.com/iphone/audionote.html) to record my research journal entries,
described previously. These additional software tools helped me to both track and organize the
data collected in my data archives document.
Analysis
As I conducted my fieldwork, I continuously wrote memos based on my fieldnotes. I
used these memos to help me reflect and elaborate on the issues that I discovered. My analysis
followed the description provided by Emerson et al. (1995):
Rather than simply tracing out what the data tell, the fieldworker renders the data
meaningful. Analysis is less a matter of something emerging from the data, or
simply finding what is there; it is more fundamentally a process of creating what
is there by constantly thinking about the import of previously recorded events and
meanings. (p. 168)
Therefore, as an ethnographer, I have been involved in analysis and interpretation throughout the
data collection process. I tried to rely on multiple perspectives to help me develop a deeper
understanding of the behaviors of the “culture-sharing group” (Creswell, 2013, p. 198) within the

	  

	  

61	  
	  

organization. I also used “triangulation” (Stake, 1995, p. 114) to establish patterns and to help
me validate my findings, as well as to increase my own and others’ confidence in my
interpretation. Finally, as I collected and wrote about my findings, I let my theoretical
frameworks guide my analysis and final reporting. As Lofland et al. (2006) explained, “Just as
qualitative fieldwork typically entails researcher immersion in a setting, so analysis of the
accumulated data requires the researcher to immerse her- or himself in the data” (p. 196). This is
the approach that I took with my analysis.
How I Analyzed the Data
I followed Emerson, Fretz, and Shaw’s (1995) approach to processing fieldnotes. As I
mentioned, my analysis was different from the grounded theory approach. Rather than
discovering theory from the data, my approach involved constant analysis, which was both
inductive and deductive, “like someone who is simultaneously creating and solving a puzzle, or
like a carpenter alternately changing the shape of a door and then the shape of the door frame to
obtain a better fit” (p. 144). I argue that this method works well for studying software projects,
which are quite fluid and at times challenging based on the diversity of skills and ever-changing
nature of technology. As Star and Ruhleder (1996) explained, “Trying to develop a large-scale
information infrastructure in this climate is metaphorically like building a ship that you’re on
while designing the navigation system and being in a highly competitive boat race with a
constantly shifting finish line” (p. 112). At the same time, the fieldnotes became a data set that I
systematically analyzed line-by-line using “open coding” (Emerson et al., 1995, p. 150). In open
coding, the ethnographer strives to identify events “described in the notes that could themselves
become the basis of categorization” (p. 152). As the name implies, this process strives to be as
thematically open as possible without introducing any preconceived categories. The goal of this

	  

	  

62	  
	  

process is to connect observations to more general analytic categories and issues related to my
research focus (Emerson et al., 1995, p. 154).
After open coding my fieldnotes, I used initial memos to “identify, develop, and modify
broader analytic themes and arguments” (Emerson et al., 1995, p. 157). I analyzed my interview
transcripts using open coding and initial memos. These memos followed the open coding process
as a step toward thematic development. I also used my research journal entries to elaborate more
generally on both the open coding and the initial memos. This was an opportunity to bring all of
the pieces together and to concretize the most important thematic elements that were later
included in my final ethnography.

Conclusion
Ultimately, my goal in adopting an ethnography of infrastructure approach to studying
cloud computing was to investigate both the unfolding infrastructural developments and the
invisible work embedded in the public and private cloud computing systems. I believe that this
approach is significant because it is deeply concerned with uncovering the ways in which coders,
designers, and users of systems become entangled in a web (Kling & Scacchi, 1982) of mutually
shaping (Wajcman, 2010) forces that are ultimately concerned with hiding from view the
powerful influences that embed values in cloud computing systems. In addition, my hope in
adopting an ethnography of infrastructure approach was to contribute new methodological
possibilities in the study of cloud computing as an infrastructure.

	  

	  

63	  
	  

CHAPTER THREE

Remnants of a Dying Industrial Age∗
In the central city or residential suburb, government is designed by its inhabitants
to provide some measure of quality of life—safety, health, infrastructure, or
development.… In industrial suburbs government was designed as a business tool.
–Theising (2003, p. 7)

Introduction
In this chapter, I describe my entrance into the field, as is common in most ethnographies.
The account herein centers around three observations about East St. Louis that are critical to my
study of how social, political, and economic forces shape cloud technology at MESH. First, East
St. Louis is a U.S. industrial suburb, created by and for industry during the mid- to late
nineteenth century. East St. Louis today has been left behind as our global society has moved
from an industrial to an information-based economic system. Second, MESH is a communitybased organization that provides a range of social and community support programs to lowincome residents. As a community-based organization, MESH has its own mission and vision
about the services that it delivers to the community. The fact was important to my study because
it guided how I observed and analyzed the sociotechnical tensions in the computerization of
human services. Third, MESH’s relationship with the state of Illinois as a human services
provider is an important part of the story about how the ETO software, as an infrastructural
development, evolved and devolved within a short time period. I learned that this relationship
between MESH and the state of Illinois was critical for understanding how nonhuman actors, or
actants, can shape cloud computing software. In describing these three interconnected factors, I
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
∗

	  

Title is named after Rabinow’s (1977) chapter, titled “Remnants of a Dying Colonialism.”

	  

64	  
	  

provide additional background and context for understanding the place where my informants and
I, together, experienced how information infrastructure can develop.
I begin the chapter by introducing East St. Louis to provide a picture of the place where
my informants and I met infrastructure. I argue that in order to understand how cloud computing
developed at the Metro East Settlement House, it’s necessary to understand the history of East
St. Louis as a U.S. industrial suburb. I call attention to the region’s political, economic, and
cultural history with technology as context before introducing MESH’s role in East St. Louis
during its “abandonment” phase (Theising, 2003, p. 11). I review theories of technology and the
state as a context for introducing the various management information systems at MESH, as a
state human services provider. The goal of this chapter is to both describe my experience
entering the field while attempting to provide a rich illustration of the ecology of information
infrastructure at MESH.

East St. Louis as an Industrial Suburb
East St. Louis, Illinois, is located outside of St. Louis, Missouri, in an area known as the
American Bottoms, a flood plain along the Mississippi River that was once home to large
indigenous populations before European settlement. The Cahokia people populated the region
between A.D. 700 to 1400. The Cahokia Mounds are the archaeological remains of their city,
and they are an UNESCO World Heritage Site (UNESCO World Heritage Center, 2014). These
giant flat-topped assemblages were erected as the spiritual centers of this once rich agricultural
region. Significant crop yields supported a strong local economy, allowing other Mississippians
to travel across what we know today as North America and trade with other native cultures. The
Cahokia Mounds are still visible upon entering the area. However, a much different landscape

	  

	  

65	  
	  

dominates the skyline in the Metro East region of Illinois. East St. Louis is located in the Metro
East region, which includes many of the eastern suburbs of St. Louis, Missouri.
It’s difficult not to notice the shells of industrial factories that remain in East St. Louis,
particularly as an outsider entering the metropolitan suburb for the first time. Like the crumbling
ruins of ancient Rome, dilapidated brick buildings with large, shattered smokestacks pepper the
skyline across parts of the city today. Overgrown shrubs, vines, and tree branches crawl up and
through the windowless, roofless factory casings that once belonged to one of the most
prosperous technological engines of U.S. industrial capitalism. These giant machines of
production once prevailed over East St. Louis and the metropolitan area, including Granite City
(named after the Granite City Steel Company), as well as the former cities of Mansanto (later
Sauget), Alcoa (later Alorton), and National City (later Fairmont City, originally named after the
St. Louis National Stockyards Company) (Theising, 2003, pp. 95–121). Today, few of these
industrial campuses continue to exist. Only the “brownfields,” which have been defined as
properties with hazardous substances, pollutants, or contaminants (U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, 2014), remain in these largely forgotten metropolitan suburbs.
My description illustrates one of many images of East St. Louis. Other popular
stereotypes include depictions of violent crime, drug use, prostitution, and social despair. Local
newspapers, radio shows, and television reports serve up a persistent barrage of negative stories
about the residents of East St. Louis. How did East St. Louis, and people’s perceptions of the
city, develop in this way? In order to find answers, it’s necessary to begin by understanding East
St. Louis’s history as a U.S. industrial suburb.
Star and Bowker (2010) explained that sociohistorical analysis is critical to the study of
infrastructure. “Something that was once an object of development and design becomes sunk into

	  

	  

66	  
	  

infrastructure over time. Therefore a historical, archaeological approach to the development of an
infrastructure like the Internet needs complementary sociological, regulatory and technical
studies” (p. 232). This approach was useful in studying the political, economic, historical, and
cultural processes that shaped the opportunities and constraints of cloud computing technologies
at MESH. Sociohistorical analysis, as an investigative method, also opened a door to consider
the evolution/devolution of technology within the context of East St. Louis as an industrial
suburb.
East St. Louis, Illinois, is one of many formerly thriving U.S. industrial suburbs, such as
Gary, Indiana, and Camden, New Jersey, which emerged during the 1800s. The historical
research on U.S. industrial suburbs was relatively meager prior to the 1940s (Lewis, 2004, p. 3).
Much of the literature has discussed the rise of the middle-class suburb after World War II.
“Scholars have dissected the process by which the middle class sought an idyllic rural/urban
world where they could escape the central city’s congestion, noise, and working class, while
having access to both central city-jobs and an urban lifestyle” (p. 3). Although my research is
focused on the post-WWII era, the literature that focuses on the political economy of industrial
suburbanization prior to the 1940s provided my study with a foundation for understanding why
industries first sought to escape the central city.
In their study of the development of North American industrial suburbs, Walker and
Lewis (2004) challenged conventional thinking about the spread of industry during the mid1800s to the mid-1900s. Previous studies described the seemingly natural progression of capital
toward the “peripheral regions,” thus “freeing corporate-owned factories to seek cheap land and
labour far from the city” (p. 6). Walker and Lewis challenged these normative economic
assumptions by calling attention to the role of politics and planning in the rise of industrial

	  

	  

67	  
	  

suburbanization. “Location at the suburban fringe and outlying districts has offered the hope of
combining the manifest benefits of access to the city and its agglomeration economies with a
degree of freedom from the working class, city politics, and contending business interests” (p.
11). The authors detailed the threats facing urban industry from increasing “labour militancy and
political upheaval associated with reform movements” of the Progressive Era. As a result,
political and commercial interests came together to create new places for industry by “installing
professional city managers, planning boards, and public works departments…all of whom were
nominally independent but worked closely with business” (p. 12). Nash (1989) used the term
corporate hegemony to explain this phenomenon in her research.
In her study of a General Electric Company plant in the Berkshires of Massachusetts,
Nash (1989) developed the term corporate hegemony, based on Gramsci’s (1973) work, to
describe the idea that the “survival of industry is accepted as a responsibility of labor and
community leaders as well as management in order to maintain a competitive position in a world
market” (Nash, 1989, pp. 12–13) and that corporate “control rests on persuasion as well as force,
gaining consensus through concessions” (p. 11). Nash detailed the ways in which corporate
hegemony influenced family and community values, serving as “models for relations in
production” (p. 13). For example, she described how competition and technical expertise was
inculcated in the behavior of men, women, and children in almost every aspect of work, school,
and play. Corporate hegemony played a powerful role in sustaining Pittsfield through a century
that witnessed two world wars, major labor unrest, rising unemployment, and increasing rates of
alcoholism and divorce.
Theising (2003) and Hamer (2011) contribute key insights about East St. Louis, as an
industrial suburb, in their scholarship on the rise and fall of the Metro East region of Illinois

	  

	  

68	  
	  

beginning in the 1800s. Theising explained that industrial suburbs like East St. Louis
experienced three phases: “creation, operation, and abandonment” (p. 9). In the first phase,
industry moved to the periphery of urban centers and established the infrastructure needed to
remain connected to the benefits of the city. In the second phase, Theising explained that
industry matured “into a profitable enterprise,” securing its corporate hegemony in the region. In
phase three, industry declined or moved away. As a result, government became “dysfunctional,”
losing its purpose to exist. “When an industrial suburb reaches phase three,” Theising wrote, “an
‘East. St. Louis’ is found” (p. 9). Theising used archival material to carefully detail how machine
politics helped to maintain corporate hegemony in the region before the abandonment phase
started in the 1950s, when “industry leaders began to merge, pack up, and move elsewhere”
(Hamer, 2011, p. 181).
Over the past fifty years, the region has experienced economic devastation due to
“abandonment,” a concept developed by Theising (2003) to describe the final phase of industrial
suburb evolution “determined by the closure, downsizing, or transformation of the business that
controls it” (p. 11). The impacts of heavy industry on the environment and residents in the region
have been severe. For example, in East St. Louis, “contaminants include arsenic, lead, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and other compounds known to cause cancer” (Hamer, 2011, p.
168). In 1994, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency reported that local residents
complained about dust at the old American Zinc Plant site in Fairmont City, five miles northeast
of East St. Louis. After their site investigation, the EPA found “high levels of lead, arsenic,
cadmium and zinc in soil samples” (Environmental Protection Agency, 2012, p. 2).
These political, economic, and historical conditions have created an area in which high
rates of unemployment, drug use, violent crime, and social despair have become commonplace,

	  

	  

69	  
	  

particularly in East St. Louis. In 2014, 100 percent of the children in the local school district in
East St. Louis were eligible for the free and reduced-price meal program, which is often
considered a common measure of poverty (Illinois State Board of Education, 2014). Basic
infrastructures, such as roads, bridges, sewage, and electricity, are often in serious disrepair or
entirely nonexistent. Hamer (2011) provides a richly described portrait of contemporary life in
East St. Louis. Hamer’s scholarship also provides evidence to show why I argue that Theising’s
“phase three” (i.e., abandoned) industrial suburbs, such as East St. Louis, demand sustained
focus and attention from information scholars, practitioners, policymakers, and activists. This
sociohistorical context offers key insights for understanding how information infrastructure
unfolds and who benefits from these developments. Even with these enormous challenges, East
St. Louisans are gloriously resilient, writes Hamer (2011) in her excellent study of work,
families, and everyday life in East St. Louis. The suburb was home to many well-known people,
including Miles Davis, Ike and Tina Turner, and U.S. Senator Dick Durbin. It’s also home to a
number of Olympic athletes, including Jackie Joyner Kersey. In fact, the sign one sees entering
East St. Louis from Missouri says, “East St. Louis: The City of Champions.”

Entering the Field
On my arrival at the Metro East Settlement House, I was struck by its significant size; it
is a large brick building in that is surrounded primarily by smaller houses, many of which are
missing doors, windows and roofs. The building looks like a high school or elementary school
upon first notice, with its broad grey stairs leading up to its red front doorway. Black wrought
iron security bars cover the tall windows on the basement level and the first floor. Large air
conditioners hang out of the building’s tall windows. The busy sounds of cars driving on the

	  

	  

70	  
	  

highway can be heard off in the distance. A large white van with the name “Metro East
Settlement House” written on its side is parked on the street outside MESH’s main
administration building. The location served as the “laboratory” where I helped to configure and
observe the ETO cloud computing software.
Settlement House
MESH began as a settlement house in the early 1900s, much in the same tradition as Jane
Addams’s Hull-House in Chicago. Settlement houses emerged during the Progressive Era as
“both a residence and a community center that aimed to assist migrants and the poor to adjust to
the industrial, urban life” (Hounmenou, 2012, p. 650). These centers were often staffed by
volunteers who moved to low-income areas to work and live with those who relied on the
settlement house’s range of community services. “The premises themselves served as everything
from employment bureau to day-care center, public bath to night school, gymnasium to union
hall, and soup kitchen and salon” (Lasch-Quinn, 1993, p. 2). In East St. Louis, the poor
individuals and families who relied on the settlement house came to the United States largely
from Bohemia and Slovenia in Eastern Europe. They worked for the factories that were created
by the meatpacking, steel, and other industries that dominated the metropolitan St. Louis area
during this time. However, not everyone was welcome inside. “The majority of settlement
houses either excluded blacks, conducted segregated activities, closed down completely, or
followed their former white neighbors out of black neighborhoods” (Lasch-Quinn, 1993, p. 3).
Hounmenou (2012) explained that the failure of the settlement house movement to support
African Americans as they migrated in search of work in the industrial north could be attributed
to two issues: “the difficulty for houses to raise or get funds for specific services needed by
Black migrants and the opposition of White neighbors and settlement house clients to any

	  

	  

71	  
	  

assistance to Blacks” (p. 650). Other scholars have argued that settlement workers “merely
shared their racism of the day” (Lasch-Quinn, 1993, p. 3).
In response to the settlement house movement’s failure to welcome African Americans, a
Black settlement house movement emerged across the country (e.g., see Hounmenou, 2012;
Karger, 1986; Lasch-Quinn, 1993). African American female activists played a leading role in
advancing the Black settlement house movement during the 1920s and 1930s. As Lasch-Quinn
(1993) described, Black and White women joined together to work toward social justice,
interracial organizing, and civil rights:
The interdenominational and egalitarian emphasis of this settlement work among
blacks brought together women of diverse backgrounds to make important
decisions and contributions and discuss and affect policy. This civic
apprenticeship yielded the confidence, leadership skills, awareness, and sense of
efficacy that led to courageous demands for social justice and equal treatment
within their own organizations, and eventually, for some, in society itself. (p. 112)
Inside the settlement houses, African Americans could gain access to social and educational
opportunities in safe spaces where they “could also reflect on their experiences of oppression
among themselves.” And, as Hounmenou (2012) explained, “Black settlement houses not only
allowed strengthening the group identity, but they also provided spaces for the development of
group oppositional consciousness” (p. 651). As the White population moved out of East St.
Louis due to civil unrest during the late 1960s and early 1970s, the Metro East Settlement House
focused its attention on providing government-funded social welfare services to the
predominantly African American individuals and families in need.
In 2012, MESH served close to 30,000 residents in the Metro East region of Illinois. The
population of East St. Louis in 2010 was 27,006, and 98 percent were African American (U.S.

	  

	  

72	  
	  

Census Bureau, 2012). The residents who rely on MESH’s services today are the predominantly
African American individuals and families that live in East St. Louis. As Hamer (2011)
remarked, “The lack of racial diversity is discernable. What was once a majority white
population is now almost 100 percent African American” (p. 36).
In 2013, MESH received the majority of its funding from government grants, individual
donors, and the United Way. The Settlement House is also a member of The United Methodist
Church. The mission of MESH is to help individuals and families move out of poverty. The main
administration building is where I observed and participated in key decisions that were made
about how the cloud computing software should be configured and implemented, while
considering the consequences of this process for all who had a stake in the project.
Community-Based Organization
During my early days of fieldwork in 2013, I learned that MESH provides communitybased services to residents in the Metro East region. However, as Jerold Myers, the vice
president of youth programs at MESH, remarked one day during an ETO meeting, “If you can
find a definition from the state, please let me know!” He was referring to the use of the term
community-based services by the state of Illinois, which classifies MESH as a “communitybased organization.” Jerold Myers is a stout middle-aged African American man with a long
history of involvement with state and federal human services programs. As he explained to me,
in his low, raspy voice, “You probably don’t know this about me Colin, but I got my start with
HUD [the Department of Housing and Urban Development] back in the 1980s. Back then the
state realized they had a lot to learn from HUD and their systems.” A few months after we spoke,
I discovered that the Illinois Department of Human Services (2014b) defined community-based
organizations in the following way: “Human service organizations that provide services to

	  

	  

73	  
	  

residents of the community.” In this study, I use the terms social welfare, community-based
services, and human services somewhat synonymously. The services I refer to throughout my
ethnography of cloud computing can be described as those services provided by a nonprofit
organization to poor, oppressed, and homeless people within a specific geographic location.
Community-based services are truly a lifeline for many families in low-income
communities that have been left behind in transition from an industrial to an information society.
MESH provides the following list of community-based services: early childhood and prevention
services; education and youth development; comprehensive youth services; individual and family
support programs; and services to older adults (see Table 4). MESH employs 195 people for the
fifteen programs that they operate. Nine of these fifteen programs require the use of either state
or federal management information systems (see Appendix A for an organizational chart of
MESH).

Table 4. Metro East Settlement House (MESH) Community-Based Human Services Programs
Early Childhood &
Education & Youth
Prevention Services Development

Comprehensive
Youth Services

Individual & Family
Support Programs

Services to Older
Adults

Child Care Services

AmeriCorps

Comprehensive
Community-Based
Youth Service
System

Comprehensive
Emergency Services

Adult Day Care
Services

Pre-Kindergarten

Teen REACH

Community Youth
Services Program

Teen REACH
Community Center

Homemaker Program

Homeless Youth
Program

Job Training and
Placement Program

Retired Senior &
Volunteer Program
(RSVP)

Providing a Sure Start
(PASS)
Healthy Families of
Illinois

	  

	  

74	  
	  

Community Infrastructure
In Latour and Woolgar’s (1979, 1986) studies of scientific knowledge production at the
Salk Laboratory in California, the authors introduced a fictional character whom they called “the
observer.” This imagined social scientist used literary inscription “as a principle for organizing
his initial observations” about life in the Salk Laboratory and its activities (1986, p. 45). As the
observer entered the laboratory for the first time, the authors described how the observer noted
the different areas of the building and how the physical space itself impacted the lab’s activities.
The observer used literary inscription to make sense of these activities in relation to how
scientific knowledge was produced in the lab.
In their ethnography, Latour and Woolgar (1986) included a map of the laboratory, which
describes a list of the “main flows” in and out of the building. For example, flows included
“energy” into the chemistry area, “animals” into the physiology area, and “chemicals, mail, and
telephone” into the office space. The main flows out of the building included the word
“ARTICLES,” in capital letters. In Figure 1, I describe the physical layout of the first floor of
MESH and some of the programs located there. In doing so, I attempt to characterize some of the
main flows into and out of the building as a way to introduce the relational aspects of the
sociotechnical infrastructure that supported MESH’s community-based services during my time
as a volunteer project manager working on the ETO project.

	  

	  

75	  
	  

	  

dĞŵƉŽƌĂƌǇ
ƐƐŝƐƚĂŶĐĞ
ĨŽƌEĞĞĚǇ
&ĂŵŝůŝĞƐ

ĞůŝŐŝďŝůŝƚǇ
ƌĞƋƵŝƌĞŵĞŶƚƐ

ŽŵŵƵŶŝƚǇĂƌĞWƌŽŐƌĂŵ

ĮƌƐƚŇŽŽƌŚĂůůǁĂǇ

ƌĞĐĞƉƟŽŶĂƌĞĂ

ƉĂƌƟĐŝƉĂŶƚ
ĂƉƉůŝĐĂƟŽŶƐ

ŵĞƌŐĞŶĐǇ
&ĂŵŝůǇ
^ƵƉƉŽƌƚ

ƌĞĨĞƌƌĂůƐ

	  

	  

	  

76	  

Figure 1. Map of MESH’s Administrative Building
This shows the community-based programs and the main flows located on the first floor and described in this chapter. The map
reveals the sociotechnical infrastructure underlying the organization and the types of inputs that were considered during the
configuration of the ETO cloud computing software.

ƌĞƋƵŝƌĞĚ
ĚŽĐƵŵĞŶƚĂƟŽŶ

ǀŽůƵŶƚĞĞƌƐ

Z^sW

ǀŝƐŝƚŽƌ͛ƐůŽƵŶŐĞ

ƉƵďůŝĐͬƉƌŝǀĂƚĞĨƵŶĚŝŶŐ͖
ŵĂŶĂŐĞŵĞŶƚŝŶĨŽƐǇƐƚĞŵƐ

&KK͕^,>dZ͕hd/>/d/^͕
hd/KE͕DW>KzDEd

Upon entering the front door of the building I was often greeted by Cynthia White, the
front desk receptionist, who was usually my first point of contact. She was frequently on the
phone answering questions from residents who called to inquire about MESH’s communitybased services. The first floor of the building is home to the offices of several programs at
MESH, located in the west, east, and south sides of the building. The west side is home to the
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF)
(http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=30358) program, which includes job training and
placement services, and RSVP (http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/senior-corps/rsvp), a
national volunteer program for adults over age 55. The east side of the building includes the
main offices for the Comprehensive Emergency Services, which receives significant financial
support from the United Way.
The entire back half of the building, on the south side, is home to the Community Care
Program (http://www.state.il.us/aging/1athome/ccp.htm) offices, which primarily provide
services to older adults. There are about ten people on the floor who are staff and managers,
including the director of emergency services. The second floor of the building has offices for the
executive staff, including the directors of administration, marketing and development, and youth
services.
In the early days of my fieldwork, I spent a significant portion of my time trying to
comprehend the infrastructure that supports these community-based services. I tried to
understand the relational aspects involving MESH, the state-funding agencies, federally funded
programs, private funding (e.g., United Way), program structures, staffing, and IT services. To
understand the sociotechnical infrastructure that supports MESH as a community-based
organization, and to determine how the ETO software should be configured to connect with this

	  

	  

77	  
	  

infrastructure, I reviewed a number of documents. I looked at program logic models,
organizational brochures, state and federal government websites, and the IT manuals for the state
and federally funded management information systems. This web of connections helped me to
not only understand the invisible work supporting MESH’s infrastructure, but also to understand
the directors’ vision for the ETO cloud computing software.
Jerold Myers, the vice president of youth programs at MESH, explained that while
MESH’s classification as a community-based organization was important for their ability to
receive state funds, it had been difficult for him in the past to find any definition about how the
state classified community-based organizations. I quickly learned during the ETO software
implementation that MESH’s designation as a state human services provider (i.e., a communitybased organization) was a significant factor in making decisions about how to configure the
cloud computing software.
State Human Services Provider
In its first decade of major decline during the 1960s, East St. Louis experienced
increasing White flight and an economic downward spiral as factories closed and industries
moved outward from the metro region in search of cheaper labor and lower production costs.
During this time, social service agencies moved out of East St. Louis because of the growing
escalation of racial tension and violence in the community. Derek Phillips, the executive director
of MESH, described this period to me during one of our meetings in October 2013. As he
explained,
You know, the YMCA, the Boy Scouts, the Girl Scouts, everybody moved up to
Belleville and Fairview Heights, because there was such tensions. I mean we had
people staying there twenty-four hours a day, just to keep [MESH] open. You
know people’s lives were threatened. It was really bad. But then in the 1978, ‘79,

	  

	  

78	  
	  

‘80, there was a whole creation of, I’m not going to say War on Poverty, because
that was a little earlier, but there was a creation of new state-funded programs.
And they wanted an agency with an address in East St. Louis. And we just
happened to be at the right place at the right time. And that’s how we ended up
getting so many state and federal programs.
The concept that MESH is a state human services provider is key to understanding the
organization’s relationship with both technology and its funders.
In the early months of planning for the ETO implementation, I learned that the majority
of MESH’s community-based programs were actually state and federally funded. During this
time, I quickly discovered the significance of this relationship, particularly in relation to the
ecology of information infrastructure. As I explained, MESH is required to use nine different
management information systems to report data to various state and federal agencies that fund
these programs. MESH’s work with the state is fundamental to understanding how the ETO
software developed as an infrastructure. To put it more directly, every aspect of MESH’s
community-based human services programs is dependent on either a state or a federal IT system.
This fact also provides context for understanding larger changes within society that have been
characterized as informatization. The political economy of information provides a framework for
understanding MESH’s location as a community-based human services provider, particularly
between: (1) the state and citizens who rely on public assistance, and (2) the state and private
companies, like Social Solutions, that seek to integrate their cloud computing software platforms
with state management information systems. In the next section, I argue that informatization is
an important concept for understanding the relationship between governments and businesses in
the evolution of cloud computing systems.

	  

	  

79	  
	  

The Informatization of Community-Based Services
Informatization has been described as the use of information and communication
technology (ICT) to further “socioeconomic development as a nation becomes more and more an
information society” (Rogers, 2000, p. 71). Informatization is both a theory of technology and a
defining characteristic of “the information society,” which scholars have argued is a contested
concept, particularly “when its adherents diagnose it in quite different ways” (Webster, 2002, p.
29). Service-related industries (e.g., finance, insurance, and real estate) increasingly relied on
ICTs during the second half of the twentieth century. The information society is often described
as a radical break from the past. However, as Schiller (2007) argued, this “new” era of
information is best understood as a continuity of social and institutional relationships that have
commoditized information “as a resource that is produced for the market by wage labor” within a
global networked economy (p. 21). I use this latter perspective to both provide the context for
investigating cloud computing in a human services organization and as “a way to analyze the
interactions between a technology and its broader contexts” (Hakken & Andrews, 1993, p. 2).
Complicating assumptions of the inherent economic value of information (e.g., see Bell,
1973; Beniger, 1986; Castells, 2000), Schiller (2007) posed an intriguing question: “What if,
however, we suppose that information is not inherently valuable? What if only a profound social
reorganization can permit information to become valuable?” (pp. 7–8). Schiller’s work called on
information scholars to reconsider the historical moments and actors that have influenced major
changes in social structure. In doing so, Schiller questioned the relationship between technology
and society by calling attention to the continuity of political economy, which has reconfigured
information within a system of global capitalism.

	  

	  

80	  
	  

These historical developments serve as the background and context for my study, not
only for understanding how East St. Louis struggled in transition from an industrial to an
information society, but also because they help to explain the social, political, and economic
context in which the ETO for-profit software evolved, and ultimately devolved, over time at
MESH. I argue that the concept of informatization offers a way to consider how these broader
forces continue to shape smaller community-based organizations and their experiences with IT.
This focus on the political economic aspects of information infrastructure also helps to
contextualize the rationalization of human services through the introduction of networked
information systems.

The Computerization of Human Services
The relationship between informatization and community-based human services can be
deeply felt at MESH. The use of networked information systems to quantify and report outcomes
to public and private funders has created challenges for community-based organizations, such as
MESH, who need face-to-face time with those on public assistance in order to understand
broader community needs. “Obviously, some aspects of social intervention do not lend
themselves well to computerization, and these activities are gradually eliminated or conducted in
the traditional fashion” (Murphy & Pardeck, 1991, p. 33). This issue is consistent with the
informatization of services taking place at MESH.
One reason for this development is that as state and federal governments continue to slash
funding for human services, increasing demands are placed upon policymakers—and state
human services providers—to justify public spending for social welfare programs. This has been
ongoing for many years. Informatization manifests itself in the emergence of for-profit solutions,

	  

	  

81	  
	  

such as ETO Impact, through which nonprofit community-based organizations like MESH are
increasingly expected to provide evidence of their impact to funders. The problem, however, is
that public and private funders, and the companies that develop for-profit cloud computing
systems, often benefit the most from informatization, or computerization, but often at the
expense of workers, managers, and welfare recipients (e.g., see Kling, 1978). Murphy and
Pardeck (1991) also argued that many social workers often “reject the notion that practice can be
quantified” (p. 34) through the use of sophisticated performance management systems.
Other concerns about the computerization of human services involve its dehumanizing
effects. “Specifically…the human element may be pushed to the periphery of the intervention
process, as technical requirements are given precedence over less technological considerations”
(Murphy & Pardeck, 1991, p. 107). Eubanks (2011) detailed the ways in which low-income
women at the YWCA in upstate New York described the use of IT in terms of “oppression,
exploitation, and privilege” (p. 42). The women articulated that the digital divide should be
understood as a “product of social structure and institutionalized inequality” (p. 42).
But what about the woman who encounters the back of a computer terminal or a
digitized voice on the phone instead of a caseworker when trying to access public
benefits? Or the woman working on contingent, low-paying, part-time jobs in data
entry and call centers? Or the woman half a world away who assembles the circuit
boards, monitors, and keyboards that bring the information revolution to the
United States? Or the woman whose family dissembles these same devices to
recover precious metals several years later with no protective gear, environmental
controls, or labor laws? (Eubanks, 2011, p. 28)
Eubanks argued that the everyday technology experiences of women at the YWCA provide a
more accurate picture of the relationship between poor people and technology within a system of
global capitalism. Concepts like informatization and reconceptualizations of the digital divide

	  

	  

82	  
	  

provide opportunities not only to understand how social inequality shapes access, but also how
well-intentioned efforts to tackle the digital divide can end up causing more harm to residents in
low-income communities (e.g., see Gangadharan, 2013). The purpose of including this fact is not
to extend a deficit-based perspective in looking at low-income people’s experiences in East St.
Louis. Rather, it should be a motivation for discovering alternative ways of thinking about
infrastructure as a resource to promote digital inclusion and social justice.
MESH’s relationship to the state is significant because it can also provide clues for
answering to the following question: Why was the ETO software never fully developed as an
information infrastructure at MESH? The story contained in the following chapters seeks to
present a more nuanced account than simply saying the project succeeded or failed.
Infrastructure, as both a theoretical and a methodological framework, provides a way to
understand the complex ecology that motivated the software’s sociotechnical development.
Informatization, as a concept, provides theoretical guidance for investigating how cloud
computerization interacts with community-based organizations that provide social support to
parents and children living in poverty.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I introduced my field site by explaining the significance of East St. Louis
as an industrial suburb. I argued that sociohistorical analysis is useful for studying not only how
industrial technology evolved and devolved over time, but also for understanding how
information infrastructure developed during my field research. Ultimately, I tried to show how
technology development is unique in industrial suburbs because of their political economic
history. In addition, I used the term informatization as a framework for considering this

	  

	  

83	  
	  

sociohistorical perspective. My goal was to introduce East St. Louis and its history and evolution
as important background and context for understanding the ethnographic account that follows.	  
	  

	  

	  

84	  
	  

CHAPTER FOUR

Public and Private Forces
Infrastructures in their moments of formation can be sites of intense conflict,
through which the identity and status of relevant stakeholders, the distribution of
benefits and losses, and the general rules of the game are all being worked out
simultaneously.
–Jackson et al. (2007)

Introduction
In this chapter, I describe how the infrastructural tensions (Jackson et al., 2007) between
external stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs were exposed during the ETO
software implementation. I show how state and private funders motivated MESH to adopt ETO
in order to centralize data management, better track outcomes, and report on program impact to
funders. These external stakeholder demands, in particular, were a major force in shaping the
ETO software and its consequences. As a result, I explain how the development of cloud
computing at MESH became embedded with the values and politics of state and private funders.
As Winner (1986) explained, “The adoption of a given technical system unavoidably brings with
it conditions for human relationships that have a distinctive political cast—for example,
centralized or decentralized, egalitarian or inegalitarian, repressive or liberating” (p. 29). State
surveillance of human services professionals using information technology in social welfare
organizations is one example of the political dimensions that can become embedded in
management information systems. More explicit examples are introduced in this chapter to show
how state and private funders shaped the cloud computing software and its consequences at
MESH. I begin with a vignette to show how infrastructural tensions became manifest during the

	  

	  

85	  
	  

implementation process.

External Demands versus Internal Needs
It’s a bright, sunny August morning in East St. Louis, Illinois. A light breeze blows
leaves across the road, and my car dashboard indicates that the outside temperature is 73 degrees.
I drive west for fifteen minutes on St. Clair Avenue on my way to the Metro East Settlement
House. There are few cars on the four-lane road. Up to my right, I notice much heavier traffic on
Route 64 headed west into St. Louis. Billboards hover above me as I pass underneath the
highways that crisscross over East St. Louis. I notice a giant McDonald’s sign with large golden
arches and another T-Mobile display advertising wireless service.
I don’t want to be late. Our ETO project team is meeting this morning. Last week, Curtis
Fanton, the associate director at MESH (see Appendix A for organizational chart), learned that
Shaun Wilson, MESH’s (former) IT director, submitted his resignation after seven years at the
agency to join a software company in St. Louis. Today, our team will meet to determine how
best to move forward with the ETO project. I decide to drive onto Route 64 for one exit, which
allows me to avoid getting stuck at one of the many railroad crossings in East St. Louis.
I pull into the dusty parking lot across from the settlement house and park next to a
fading red pickup truck. I shut my car door and walk up the grey concrete stairs to the front
entrance at MESH, wondering where I’ll be seated today. Yesterday a new employee moved into
“my office,” which another staff member once described to me as “the office for new people. It’s
the one I had when I first started.” After entering the building, I head down the second floor
hallway and into the main conference room. The large round clock hanging on the wall says it’s

	  

	  

86	  
	  

9:00 a.m. I enter the room and get seated in one of the high-backed pleather chairs at the large
oak table.
Black wrought iron security bars cover the windows that lead to the roof. The air
conditioner hums in the background, cooling off the room, while the early August heat rises
outdoors. Curtis is already seated at the table next to Jasper, who will replace Shaun as my main
partner on the ETO project. At the onset of our meeting, I ask Curtis a pivotal question about the
project: “For the program outcomes that we’ll use to configure ETO, do we start by looking at
the stated goals defined by the state or federal government…?” Curtis looks at me through his
narrow-framed glasses and quickly interjects, “Yes.” He continues:
The outcomes for all of our programs are already built. Some of them are
mandated by the state. In addition to that, we have our own outcomes that we put
in place. Like for TANF [Temporary Assistance for Needy Families] job
placement, one of the outcomes is twenty-one individuals should be placed into
employment up to a period of ninety days, with ninety-day retention that pays a
rate of ten dollars an hour or higher. That’s the outcome. The indicator is: we will
hold x amount of hours of job readiness training; we will do x amount of hours of
employer recruitment and etc. All of that is already in place.
Curtis went on to explain that some of the employees at MESH don’t know the impact they and
their programs have on the community. He told us that Theresa Phelps, the TANF program
manager, works with many people in the community to help them gain employment. Even if they
don’t get jobs, Curtis explained, Theresa is directly impacting their lives because these
individuals often gain new job skills that they didn’t have before working with Theresa. “And, if
we track that person at some point they are going to get a job, you know if they are looking. So
she’s impacting a lot more than she’s reporting in DHS.”
This vignette summarizes one of the main tensions in the infrastructural development of

	  

	  

87	  
	  

the ETO software. External stakeholder demands from state and private funders, and internal
organizational needs at MESH, including the desire to capture data beyond state requirements,
represented a significant tension during the infrastructural development of the ETO software.
Jackson et al. (2007) explained that the development of infrastructure almost always involves
winners and losers. Much is at stake in the development of infrastructure. Working, stabilized,
and thus invisible infrastructure can provide social, economic, and political benefits to different
groups in society. The same can be said with information infrastructure.
The vignette illustrates one of the many instances in which directors told us, as the
project management team, to begin by looking at the state-funded program logic models to make
decisions about how to configure ETO. In other words, specific decisions about the software
implementation were made based on the reporting requirements of public and private funders.
Internal organizational needs were often a secondary factor during the implementation process.
The findings presented in this chapter support previous studies, which show how social welfare
organizations were often pressured by funders to adopt automated information systems.

How Public and Private Funders Shape Technology
Social welfare agencies in the United States have experienced intense stresses during the
past five years. This is due in large part to the global financial crisis that followed the housing
market collapse in 2007 and the big bank bailouts of 2008. These economic stresses severely
impacted historic settlement houses, such as the Hull House in Chicago, which recently closed
after 123 years. I observed how the global economic crisis played out during my fieldwork at
MESH. The financial pressures at MESH included chronic yearly cuts to government funding for
public assistance programs, including additional burdens wrought by the “sequester” of 2013

	  

	  

88	  
	  

(The White House, 2014).
These global economic developments have created enormous strains on communitybased organizations, such as MESH, which have seen increasing demands for services while
receiving fewer resources to help individuals and families living in poverty. At the same time,
settlement houses and other community-based organizations that administer public assistance
programs have been expected to adopt sophisticated new computing platforms, like ETO, with
less capacity—while trying to help poor, oppressed, and homeless people survive another day.
The attack on public sector spending continues, as the privatization of public information
increases each year. As Schiller (1981) explained, “In the drive toward privatization of
information, the principle that ‘information is a commodity’ plays a prominent role. Major
efforts to banish the idea that information is a social good have been focused on the national
government” (p. 48). These pressures were visible here last year, when the Illinois State Senate
introduced a proposal to privatize the Department of Commerce and Economic Opportunity
(DCEO) in 2013 (Illinois Public Radio, 2013). The DCEO is not the Department of Human
Services. However, I argue that it calls into question how the privatization of government
services might impact the ways in which public information is collected, stored, processed, and
distributed using for-profit networked information systems. This question is particularly salient
because Amazon and Google have been competing to convince the White House and U.S.
government agencies to move the public’s information into the private sphere (e.g., see Bailey,
2009; Francis, 2011; Hart, 2008; Sakole, 2013). The purpose of this chapter is to highlight the
ways in which these broader political economic developments have been be felt by
organizations, such as MESH, that have been pressured to adopt subscription software platforms,
contributing to the expansion of what Mosco (1988) has called the “pay-per society”:

	  

	  

89	  
	  

The essence of what is happening is this: new technology makes it possible to
measure and monitor more of our electronic communication and information
activities. Business and government see this potential as a major instrument to
increase profit and control. The result is a pay-per society. (p. 5)
I now turn to an account that describes how the executive leadership at MESH talked about their
motivations for purchasing the pay-per cloud computing system. I focus on the ways in which
directors articulated tensions between external stakeholder demands and internal organizational
needs in the development of ETO.
Budgeting for Results
Derek Phillips is the executive director of the Metro East Settlement House. He’s worked
for the organization since the late 1970s, when racial tension in, and White flight from, East St.
Louis was on the rise. In 1950, the population was 82,295. In 2012, the population in the city
was 27,006. Derek is a tall, White man from the south. He uses a firm handshake to greet me on
this early October morning in 2013. We meet to talk about ETO in his office in the MESH Child
Care Center.
We sit at two of the four chairs at his small round conference table. During a pause in our
conversation, I notice a picture hanging on the wall behind Derek. It’s a poster of the photograph
titled “Selma-to-Montgomery March for Voting Rights in 1965” by James Karales. Stacks of
manila folders with papers inside are piled neatly on his desk. There is also a computer monitor
with speakers on his desk, and Derek’s office appears to have one of the organization’s main
computer servers stored in the corner of the room next to where the two of us are seated. Derek is
a kind and gentle, but firm, man. He gesticulates when he speaks, and when we talk specifically
about ETO, he starts to bounce one leg under the table.

	  

	  

90	  
	  

In our meeting, I asked Derek if cuts to state and federal funding influenced his decision
to purchase the software as a service platform. “Now, that’s a pretty interesting question! [His
eyes light up.] Because if this had been a year or two ago, and I knew that we were going to have
these cuts, I’m not sure I would have invested [laughing] in … [laughing]. You know, sadly to
say!” After meeting with Derek, I began to think more deeply about the timing of the ETO
purchase and how it coincided with other developments, such as changes to state and federal
policy during the past few years.
I got into my car and headed back across town to MESH for my meeting with Curtis later
that day. During our conversation, I asked him “when did directors first start experiencing
increased pressure to adopt a centralized reporting platform, like ETO?” Curtis responded, “I
would say about two years ago; two or three years ago. At least within the last two years I know.
It may have even been before that.” The day before my meetings with Derek and Curtis, I spoke
with Patricia Ableton, the director of marketing and development at MESH. Patricia explained
that funding cuts in the past five years forced the organization to rethink how it uses technology.
“What happened was when the state and federal government started slashing programs and some
of the programs got slashed more than half, we had to do a reality check and say, ‘OK. We
cannot run an effective program with this type of budget. There’s no way.’” She went on to
explain that some of the programs at MESH had been cut three to four times, and some have
been cut every year in the past five years. “Just trying to raise the additional dollars to keep those
programs going is a challenge by itself.”
The next day, I decided to ask Derek the same question: “Was there a specific moment
when things changed, in terms of increasing external pressures from state and private funders to
adopt a universal data management system?” Derek thought for a minute and responded, “Yes.

	  

	  

91	  
	  

Specifically, the state has adopted, you know ‘Budgeting by Performance’?” I replied, saying
“Right. The results oriented.…” And Derek quickly interjected, “Right, ‘Budgeting by Results.’
And that’s true for every one of our programs.” On July 1, 2010, Illinois Governor Pat Quinn
introduced a reform measure called “Budgeting for Results” in response to the state’s growing
financial crisis. That same year, the state had a deficit of $13 billion dollars—the third highest
state deficit in the country. The law was described as
an historic spending reform act requiring the state of Illinois to institute a resultsbased budgeting process that will end the automatic funding of programs. By
requiring the State to live within its means and focus on performance, BFR will
transform the way that state officials, legislators—and the public—prioritize,
think about and implement the State’s budget. (Illinois Office of Management and
Budget, 2014)
The legislation requires a statewide reporting system to compare “actual results with the
budgeted results, providing transparency and accountability throughout the process” (States
News Service, 2010). The passage of this bill coincided with the timelines shared by the
directors at MESH with regard to when they noticed that funders began to pressure them to adopt
a centralized data management system.
Power (1997) used the phrase “audit society” to characterize the increasing use of
accountability procedures across public and private sectors during the last half of the twentieth
century, particularly in the United States and the United Kingdom. Power argued that rather than
being concerned with what the auditing practices “really are,” it’s more important to understand
how the “idea of auditing has assumed such a central role in both public and private sector
policy” (p. 7). He explained that profound changes in public administration during the 1990s
came from practices in the private sector.

	  

	  

92	  
	  

It emphasizes cost control, financial transparency, the autonomization of
organizational sub-units, the decentralization of management authority, the
creation of market and quasi-market mechanisms separating purchasing and
providing functions and their linkage via contracts, and the enhancement of
accountability to customers for the quality of service via the creation of
performance indicators. (p. 43)
Power argued that neoliberal ideological commitments, including the need for fiscal restraint,
motivated the audit society. He described this new public administrative approach as a
characteristic of a broader societal change, which now demands accountability in all sectors of
society. Technological advances in the information realm, including management information
systems and performance management systems, are often described as having enhanced
capability and possibility to drive transformations (Power, 1997, p. 7). I argue that this idea
embodies a technological deterministic perspective that propels the audit society, which was a
major focus of my investigation of ETO.
Jerold Myers, the vice president of youth programs, explained to Jasper and me,
“Budgeting for results has people involved from many different agencies.” We met with Jerold
to discuss our challenges with not being able to export data out of state management information
systems and into ETO. We told him that this lack of interoperability was making our work with
ETO very challenging. During our meeting, Jerold explained, “The state is trying to determine a
rate of return.” Patricia, Derek, and Curtis mentioned two other pressures from state and private
funders. The first was from a software development project called “The Illinois Framework,” and
the second came from the United Way, who had urged MESH to adopt a centralized data
management system.

	  

	  

93	  
	  

Illinois Framework for Healthcare and Human Services
In my October 2013 meeting with Curtis, I asked him to describe how the state and
federal funding cuts impacted MESH’s decision to purchase ETO.
[He pauses for a few seconds and lets out a breath.] Actually, actually very little.
What has impacted it, what impacted our decision a few, prior to December 2012,
was the Illinois Framework: The system that Illinois is coming up with that was
supposed to be customized for all grantees. And, that’s been in development for
the last four years and it hasn’t rolled out yet. So, because of that we’ve decided
to go with our own—with ETO. See on the state of Illinois level, there’s various
departments. But all of the departments have different tracking systems, different
data management systems. There’s 200 of them. Yeah, there’s quite a few. And,
knowing that they were trying to put together one system that could be
customized for all Illinois departments and all Illinois providers. And, that’s the
Illinois Framework. It was supposed to roll out in 2013. It’s been in development
since maybe ’10, 2010. And, knowing the challenges that Illinois has with
funding and with Illinois Framework, we decided that it was time for us to just
move on with ETO. In the event that Illinois Framework is ever developed and
implemented, if it’s a good smart direction for us, we’ll just go with that.
The Illinois Framework for Healthcare and Human Services launched in 2010 as an effort “to
adopt a more efficient and comprehensive approach to service delivery.” As the website
explains, “The Framework’s goal is to develop a sustainable foundation of interoperable systems
and information sharing across seven state agencies to enable Illinois to provide greater
coordination in client services” (Illinois Framework for Healthcare and Human Services, 2013).
The timeline on the website shows that they plan to complete the software implementation in
2017. The Illinois Framework should be applauded for its efforts to gather input from
community-based organizations, including directors at MESH, to help inform the software
development. However, questions still remain about whether community-based organizations
	  

	  

94	  
	  

will be able to configure the software to meet local needs.
Curtis’s account is significant for two reasons. First, it shows how the state influenced
MESH’s decision to purchase the ETO software. It could be argued that the state failed MESH
by not providing them with an adequate reporting system to meet their needs. The directors at
MESH saw ETO as an alternative that could give them the centralized reporting capabilities,
while waiting for the state to complete its Illinois Framework program. The narrative above also
reveals the complex arrangement of sociotechnical and political economic factors involved in
negotiations between state funders and community-based service providers. As Eubanks (2011)
argued, technology should be viewed as an “assembly of practices for organizing the world that
encode some norms, values, and ways of life at the expense of others” (p. 25). This is important
because the struggle over computing systems between the state, private funders, and communitybased organizations should be considered within a broad set of perspectives that includes
political beliefs and economic incentives. Just as individual choices are key to understanding the
social shaping of cloud computing and big data, it is equally important to follow the public and
private institutions that benefit from information technology applications, particularly in lowincome communities.
The United Way
For many years, private funders have been interested in seeing their grantees use
performance-management systems to create efficiencies and document program outcomes.
However, these technology expectations have real consequences for smaller nonprofits, such as
MESH and other settlement houses, that are expected to spend significant sums of money on
third-party cloud computing software platforms, particularly when the funds could be spent
providing direct services to clients in need. At the same time, much larger and higher profile

	  

	  

95	  
	  

social service agencies, such as the Harlem Children’s Zone, have implemented similar cloud
computing systems to document their tremendous successes. These developments adversely
impact smaller community-based organizations, like MESH, which are expected to fall in line
with these popular social welfare models. As Curtis explained, “Every year in our site visit
process with the United Way we’re always encouraged to look at our method of data capture and
reporting, because we have several different systems.” Curtis went on to talk about the United
Way’s desire to have all their grantees use “one universal system for data management, data
reporting, and data capture that looks at outcomes, indicators, evaluation assessments, etc.”
Curtis explained, “When we’re in front of funders trying to get proposals approved, a lot of their
comments are focused on a centralized system for data management and outcome reporting.”
In Kling’s (1978) study of urban management information systems (UMIS) in welfare
agencies, he found that the United Way and other private funders “forced the neighborhood
agencies which they supported to report the services they rendered” through the automated
welfare client-recording system (p. 491). In my conversations with directors at MESH, they
shared similar stories about technology from their meetings with existing and potential funders.
Funding cuts and data management centralization were two real factors that shaped cloud
computing at MESH. Derek emphasized during our meeting in October that our ETO project
team should pay attention to state and federal outcomes as we configure the cloud computing
software. Once these have been configured, then MESH should focus on using ETO to capture
efforts that are not currently being captured, as Curtis has been advocating. Derek explained:
I guess I see ETO as a developmental process. So I think we start off and get it up
and running from the easy perspective of taking some basic logic models and
saying “Hey, here’s our inputs. Here’s our outputs. Here’s our activities. Here’s
our short range outcomes. Here’s our vision.” You know, and then go with that.

	  

	  

96	  
	  

Derek described this process of technology integration as part of a culture of learning (Morino,
2011) that was needed to help transform the organizational culture at MESH. This fact is
important because it also helps to shed a light on the complex relationship between directors and
their expectations of managers and staff at MESH. The organization is certainly not a
homogenous group of individuals. During my fieldwork, I discovered differences in opinion
among staff members, managers, and directors about the ETO software. Derek recommended
that our ETO project team focus our efforts on the existing program goals determined by the
state. Eventually, as Derek said, the organization will be able to prioritize data capture beyond
both public and private funding requirements. But for now, he told me, our team should remain
focused on moving the programs away from paper and into the cloud.

Program Logic Models
One physical manifestation of the infrastructural tensions mentioned appeared in the use
(and absence, in some cases) of program logic models to configure the ETO software. A logic
model is a type of program evaluation tool that is often used to help “define and clarify what
should be measured and when” (Frechtling, 2007, p. 1). Logic models are useful as a form of
communication between the program evaluator and the organization in which the program to be
evaluated exists. They can also be used as tools to communicate program expectations with
participants, including staff, managers, and directors. Logic models can help organizations to
visualize and articulate the structure of a particular program. Logic models come in several
forms. Frechtling (2007) explained that logic models often have the following four components:
inputs, activities, outputs, and outcomes (see Table 5).

	  

	  

97	  
	  

Table 5. The Basic Components of a Logic Model
Source: Reprinted from Frechtling (2007, p. 21).
Component

Description

Inputs

The resources that are brought to a project. Typically, resources are defined in
terms of funding sources or in-kind contributions.

Activities

The actions that are undertaken by the project to bring about desired ends.
Some examples of activities are establishing community councils, providing
professional development, or initiating new information campaign.

Outputs

The immediate results of an action; they are services, events, and products
that document implementation of an activity. Outputs are typically
expressed numerically.

Outcomes

Changes that occur showing movement toward achieving ultimate goals and
objectives. Outcomes are desired accomplishments or changes.

These four components come together to form a theory of change. Logic models can be
effective ways for community-based organizations to communicate with funders about how the
organization will evaluate grant-funded programs. Logic models can also provide the evaluative
framework for developing performance-based management systems, such as ETO.
Figures 2 and 3 concretely illustrate how the state-mandated indicators from the DHS
Teen REACH program (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2014d) informed the
development, and subsequent use, of the logic model that shaped the ETO software’s
configuration. Figure 2 is the logic model created by the Illinois Department of Human Services
(2014d). Figure 3 shows the logic model created by program staff in the Teen REACH program
at MESH, which is based on the DHS logic model in Figure 2. As these two logic models reveal,
both are focused around the Teen REACH program’s six core service areas: improve educational
performance; life skills education; parental involvement; recreation, sports, cultural, and artistic

	  

	  

98	  
	  

activities; positive adult mentors; service learning activities (Illinois Department of Human
Services, 2013c). These core service areas also helped Arthur, Curtis, Jasper, and me, as the
project implementation team, to make specific decisions about how to configure the ETO
software to meet the needs of both funders and the organization

	  

	  

99	  
	  

	  

Logic Model
Teen REACH (TR)

•

•

•
•

•

•
•

•
•

•
•
•
•

!

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•

•
•
•

•

•
•
•

Activities
Tutoring, homework time/help
Career and College exploration
Alcohol and substance use/abuse
awareness programming
Sexual activity and pregnancy
prevention programming
Anger management programming
Conflict resolution skill development
Decision-making and problem
solving skill development
Provide opportunities for parent
involvement
Include Parents in the development
of program activities designed to
meet the needs of their child
Child and adolescent development
classes for parents
Communication skill development
for parents
Provide opportunities for positive
family activities
Programming that offers physical
activities and skill development
Nutritional education and healthy
lifestyle choices
Activities that teach sportsmanship
Cultural enrichment activities
Provide positive adult role models
Mentoring opportunities
Service-Learning opportunities
Activities that stress Youth Voice
Civic engagement activities
Job readiness skills
Snacks/meals for program youth
•

•

•

•

•

Strategies
Operate a year round (12 months)
out-of-school time program.
Operate the program during the
highest crime hours of 3:00 to
6:00 pm
Provide a safe environment with
caring adults
Target at-risk youth 11 to 17 years
of age.
Conduct activities in all 6 Core
Service Areas:
1) Improve Educational
Performance
2) Life Skills Education
3) Parental Involvement
4) Recreation, Sports, Cultural
and Artistic activities
5) Positive Adult Mentors
6) Service Learning Activities
•

•

•

•
•
•

Intermediate Outcomes
Increase school attendance
Increased physical activity
Increased healthy nutritional
habits
Increase interactions with a
caring adult
Increase year to year academic
promotion rate
Increase resiliency to high risk
behaviors (as measured by
completing life skills activities)
•

•

•

•

Outcomes
Youth will be safe from
violence
Youth will be safe from
high risk behaviors.
Youth will be safe from
delinquent /criminal
activity
Youth will be graduated
from high school.

	  

	  

100	  

Figure 2. DHS Teen REACH Logic Model Source: Reprinted from Illinois Department of Human Services (2014c).

Funding
50% FTE – TR Coordinator
eCornerstone & data entry
Technical Assistance and
Monitoring
Staff training
Quarterly Performance Measure
Evaluation
Community Resource Assessment
Criminal Background and CANTS
checks on personnel; volunteers
etc.
Local Agency Evaluation (selfdeveloped annual surveys to youth
and parents – to assess objectives
and developmental assets)
Program Standards
Agency Specific Program Policies
and Procedures
Signed linkage agreements with
each school in which youth are
enrolled
Teen REACH policy and
procedures manual.

Inputs

Goal: The goal of the Teen REACH program is to expand the range of choices and opportunities that enable, empower and encourage youth to achieve positive growth and development, improve
expectations and capacities for future success, and avoid and/or reduce risk-taking behavior.
Eligibility: At-risk children and youth ages 6 to 17 with minimum 85% of youth 11-17.

D. Teen REACH (TR) – Logic Model

	  

	  

More than 65% of the families in
the East St. Louis community are
living at or below the poverty level.
Research indicates that poverty is
one of the major factors that
directly contribute to a broad range
of social problems including child
abuse and neglect, drug and alcohol
abuse, and mental illness. High
rates of poverty have also been
linked to low developmental levels
among children, poor health care
among the elderly persons,
increased levels of depression and
mental illness, and even to a direct
increase in the truancy and school
dropout rates among youth. Today
there are thousands of individuals
and families in the greater East St.
Louis community who are living in
poverty and who are struggling ever
day to simply meet the basic needs
of their families. Research by the
Annie E. Casey Foundation has
demonstrated that children succeed
in strong families and families
succeed in strong, organized
neighborhoods.
Household Income
Siblings/Family Size

Low income youth

Service Learning – utilizes a method of teaching and learning that
connects classroom lessons with meaningful service to the community.
Participants build academic skills while strengthening communities
through service. Service learning combines service tasks with structured,
youth driven opportunities that link the task to self-reflection, selfdiscovery, and the acquisition and comprehension of values, skills, and
knowledge content with service tasks

Parental Involvement – includes opportunities for parents and/or
guardians to meet with staff to discuss their children’s activities, and to
participate in events that strengthen parent/child bonds and community
involvement

Life Skills Education – encompasses training and education that promotes
the developments of healthy lifestyles, and encourages abstinence from
risk-taking behaviors in areas such as alcohol and substance use, criminal
activity, violence, and sexual activity

Mentoring – providing opportunities for youth to develop and maintain
positive, sustained relationships with caring adults through mentoring and
other programs that emphasize one on one interactions

Recreation, Sports, Cultural, and Artistic Activities – includes providing
activities and arranging safe outlets for youth to try new skills and develop
new interests, to build new friendships, and gain developmentally relevant
experiences

Academic Assistance Programs – includes time to complete homework,
tutoring in basic skills, and enrichment programs that encourage creativity

	  

101	  

Figure 3. MESH’s Teen REACH Logic Model

Continuous staff development
training

Criminal background checks,
fingerprinting, physicals, and
Tuberculosis tests of all onsite
personnel

Disciplinary Reports

School Progress Reports

Parent Educational Level

Participant Demographics

eCornerstone

Funding

Single parent
households to assist
while parent works
or pursue higher
education.

Youth ages 7 – 17
currently enrolled in
grade or high school

Youth will reduce violent
behavior or serious
conduct behavior

Higher post-secondary
school goals

Lower drop-out rates in •
school
•
•
Lower teen pregnancy •
rates
•
Increased community
•
involvement

Lower suspension rates in
school
•

Decreased risk-taking
behavior

Increased school
attendance

Improved academic
performance

Higher graduation rates

Develop career goals.

Reduce at-risk
behaviors

Provide positive choices

Improve the likelihood
for future success

You will reduce violent
or serious conduct
behavior

Youth will show signs
of improved school
performance

Youth will demonstrate
improved school
attendance

Goals: To expand the range of opportunities and choices that enable, empower, and encourage youth to achieve positive growth and development, improve expectations and capacities for future success, and
avoid and/or reduce risk-taking behavior
Intermediate
Community Need
Target Population
Input
Activities/ Strategies
Outcome
Outcome

Metro East Settlement House
Teen-REACH Logic Model 2013-2014

During my conversation with Patricia Ableton in October 2013, she provided additional
context for understanding the MESH Logic Model for Teen REACH versus the DHS Logic
Model. I began by asking her what role the state logic model played in influencing the Teen
REACH program at MESH, in order to gain a better understanding of how to interpret both logic
models in configuring ETO.
Right. We don’t use it, even though there’s a logic model and a program model
for Teen REACH, but it’s broad. Every Teen REACH program makes their own
manual and logic model, as long as it complies with the state regulations that we
have to report on—because every community is different. And they’re dealing
with different issues. So the logic model or the program manual that we develop
for the Metro East, the East St. Louis area would not fit for, say, Decatur, Illinois.
This point illustrates the unique role that MESH plays as a community-based organization in
responding to local needs. The challenge for Jasper and me, during the ETO project, was to
determine how to preserve the unique attributes of each program (e.g., see “activities” listed in
Figures 2 and 3), while establishing a common set of standards (e.g., see “outcomes” listed in
Figures 2 and 3) upon which ETO could be used to measure the success of each program.
Arthur Frederichs, the Social Solutions project manager, configured the Attendance
TouchPoint during the Quick Start Implementation. This TouchPoint was an essential component
of the software that allowed Teen REACH staff to record youth participation in each of the core
service areas of the Teen REACH program. In addition, Jasper and I created the Academic
Progress TouchPoint, which allowed program staff to record student grades based on how the
eCornerstone software was configured. In other words, Jasper and I relied on the Teen REACH
program staff to help us understand how eCornerstone worked so we could use that information
to configure ETO.

	  

	  

102	  
	  

Infrastructural Tensions in the Audit Society
The two logic models (Figures 2 and 3) show the dynamic interaction between the
expectations of state-funders and the (re)articulation of state-funded programs by communitybased organizations. The point I want to make here is that chronic funding cuts to state-funded
programs like Teen REACH force community-based organizations like MESH to find new ways
to sustain government-designed programs after funding sources have been cut or eliminated all
together. As Jackson et al. (2007) argued, “public investment models have come under some
attack, and there is increasing pressure to constrain spending and/or partner with industry in
ways argued to promote efficiency and innovation.” In this process, community-based
organizations, like MESH, are at times forced to rearticulate the goals of state-funded programs
to align more closely with the stated missions of their own organizations. Logic models,
therefore, become an interesting point of study to investigate how tensions between the goals of
the state and community-based organizations can become embedded in the development of
information systems in the audit society.
Schoech (1999) explained that human services organizations, such as MESH, often face
a wide range of social, political, and economic pressures that can influence how computer
applications are shaped within organizations. Economic influences are powerful and can often
motivate infrastructural tensions, as organizations find themselves caught between the needs of
funders and the needs of those in the community who rely on their services. This tension plays
out in the development of infrastructural tools to measure organizational performance.
The reliance by human services agencies on multiple, changing, and external
funding complicates information collection. One problem is that all funding
sources rarely agree on what information agencies should report. The various
funding sources of an agency may represent many different constituencies, which

	  

	  

103	  
	  

together place conflicting demands on the agency. Meeting client needs
efficiently and ensuring client satisfaction do not always result in funding source
satisfaction and agency survival. (Schoech, 1999, p. 213)
Program logic models served as an important source of archival documentation for analyzing the
infrastructural aspects of the cloud computing software. They also became a contested site during
the ETO project because of the factors I described.
I also observed that some program directors at MESH had difficulty designing logic
models. Some were not able to produce logic models. Out of the fifteen programs at MESH, I
only received nine logic models. I was not able to determine the reasons why before my
fieldwork ended. It might have been because of time and capacity constraints, but it also could
have been for the reasons I tried to describe above. In my conversations with directors at MESH
toward the end of my study, I explained that I believed it was challenging for some employees at
MESH to develop logic models because there were, at times, different expectations about
outcomes (i.e., between state-funded programs and MESH). As I described above, the DHS Teen
REACH program tracks youth until age seventeen. MESH, on the other hand, was interested in
tracking outcomes on these same youth into adulthood. Different expectations for the same
program can create challenges in developing logic models that articulate the needs of both the
state and community-based organizations.

	  

	  

104	  
	  

CHAPTER FIVE

From Paper to the Cloud
I think we’re also moving to a world where we measure much more precisely. But
we as individuals will quite often find this oppressive.
–Inskeep (2013)
Introduction
In this chapter, I argue that the lack of interoperability between state management
information systems (MIS) and the ETO cloud computing software, at times, exacerbated
tensions between external demands and internal needs at MESH, which I detailed in the previous
chapter. The concept of “gateways” (Egyedi, 2000) is used as a theoretical framework to help
explain how ETO developed within the Teen REACH program at MESH. I show how different
subsystems (i.e., paper forms, spreadsheets, state MIS, and ETO) embodied separate political,
operational, and technical domains, which did not always promote compatibility between them.
More concretely, I maintain that the ETO project experienced what I call a gateway failure, or
the absence of a gateway between subsystems. As a result, human services professionals in the
Teen REACH program were asked to enter the same data into two different information systems,
thus decreasing efficiency and increasing potential data entry errors. I begin with a vignette to
introduce the ETO project’s gateway dimensions and the sociotechnical struggles that followed.

“I Don’t Want to Duplicate Efforts”
Arthur Frederichs is a project manager at Social Solutions. He visited MESH during three
days in late June 2013 to lead the Quick Start Implementation, which was part of MESH’s
contract with Social Solutions. The Quick Start package included three days of software

	  

	  

105	  
	  

requirement meetings and an initial software configuration to get MESH up and running in ETO.
The agreement also included individualized customer support following the on-site
implementation. During this brief and intense period, Arthur met with the employees of five
programs at MESH to determine their software requirements. These five programs were decided
upon in advance of the Quick Start Implementation. On the second day, Arthur and I met with
Curtis Fanton, the associate director at MESH; Patricia Ableton, the director of marketing and
development; and Rhonda Smith, the Teen REACH program manager. During the meeting at
MESH, Arthur mentioned, “We can export data out from eCornerstone [the state’s MIS] and put
them into ETO. The big question that I want to see is what these data look like coming in [to
ETO]. I don’t want to duplicate efforts.” Arthur assumed that interoperability existed between
eCornerstone and ETO. He even mentioned the possibility of scheduling automated batch
uploads from eCornerstone into ETO. Two months later we discovered a much different reality.
The issue of compatibility between information systems took center stage on a hot midAugust day in 2013, during one of our ETO project meetings with Rhonda Smith at the Teen
REACH Center in East St. Louis. Jasper Nichols is my main informant at MESH. He is also my
colleague on the ETO software implementation project. Jasper is a tall Caucasian man in his late
50s. His John Lennon glasses sit squarely on his pink nose. He is tall, thin, and talks with a raspy
voice from years of smoking hand-rolled cigarettes. Jasper and I began working together at
MESH in June 2013, after we learned that Shaun Wilson, MESH’s director of information
technology (IT), had accepted a job offer at an IT company. Jasper had been working full time
with the AmeriCorps program in East St. Louis. He was placed at MESH four years ago and has
continued to work with the organization ever since. The AmeriCorps program’s mission is to
serve disadvantaged youth and “to work with parents, teachers, and after school providers to

	  

	  

106	  
	  

improve educational outcomes, reduce childhood obesity, and to increase technological
competence in children” (Corporation for National and Community Service, 2013). The program
assists up to 600 children each year in East St. Louis. The goal of our meeting with Rhonda at
the Teen REACH Center today, two months after the Quick Start Implementation, was to
determine whether it was even possible to export data out of eCornerstone and into the ETO
cloud computing system.
The directors at MESH are interested in using ETO for the Teen REACH program to
report to funders about outcomes beyond state requirements. For example, Patricia Ableton
explained that the Illinois Department of Human Services only requires MESH to track youth in
the Teen REACH program until they are eighteen years old. MESH, on the other hand, is
interested in using ETO to gather longitudinal data to understand how youth progress into
adulthood. The directors at MESH believe these data will help them to show the impact of their
programs to both public and private funders. The first step is to determine whether data from
eCornerstone can be shared with ETO.
After entering the Teen REACH Center (TRC), I walk toward the administrative offices
and hear Jasper already down the hall talking to Alice Willis, the Teen REACH program
coordinator who works at TRC with Rhonda. I notice the large glass window between the main
event space and the computer lab. A green octopus is painted on the window (see Photo 2).
“Miss Alice made that,” Rhonda explains, as we walk together toward Alice’s office to begin
discussing the ETO project. Rhonda has worked at TRC for five years. Previously, she worked in
an administrative capacity for several different local schools in the Metro East region. She is
experienced in working with computers, which was particularly helpful during the ETO

	  

	  

107	  
	  

implementation. I later learned that Rhonda was one of the few staff members at Teen REACH
with the advanced computing skills needed to use the cloud computing software.

Photo 2. Teen REACH Mission Control, the Computer Lab at the Teen REACH Center

After settling into the computer lab, Rhonda explains to Jasper and me that she only
enters the demographic information from the paper intake forms into eCornerstone. She has
never been asked to export the raw data out of eCornerstone. By the end of our meeting with
Rhonda, Jasper and I were not able to determine if it was possible to get this information out of
eCornerstone. Rhonda suggested that we speak with her supervisor, whom she believed had the
administrative privileges needed to access these data. Jasper and I later learned that Arthur’s fear
of duplicating efforts would become a reality.

	  

	  

108	  
	  

The Importance of Gateways in Infrastructural Development
The vignette above illustrates the need for what Egyedi (2000) has referred to as
“gateways” in the development of infrastructure. In her study of early containers used to
transport goods across sea, rail, and road beginning in the 1970s, Egyedi found that the
standardized container was a gateway technology that revolutionized the transportation industry.
“It is a means to organise the flow of goods more effectively. Although it is a technical artefact,
the container is above all an organisational innovation. As an efficiency-enhancing gateway it
plays a pivotal role in the transportation system” (pp. 3–4). Standardization is key to establishing
compatibility among disparate subsystems. Egyedi categorized three types of gateways based on
the scope of interconnection involved (see Table 6).
Table 6. Relationship between the Level of Standardization and the Scope of the Gateway
Solution
Source: Reprinted from Egyedi (2000, p. 4).
Level of Standardization

Scope of Gateway Solution

High (modeled)

Meta-generic

Medium (standardized)

Generic

Low (“improvised”)

Dedicated

Edwards et al. (2007) summarized the three types of gateways in the following description:
Gateways may be dedicated (improvised, or devised specifically for a particular
system); generic (standardized sockets opening one system to interconnection
with others); or meta-generic (“modeled,” i.e. specifying a framework or protocol
for the creation of specific generic standards, without specifying those standards
directly) (p. 15).

	  

	  

109	  
	  

Egyedi explained, “the degree of standardization to which a gateway is submitted determines the
scope of the gateway solution.” (p. 4). Therefore, for the purposes of my study, dedicated
gateways are useful for understanding the low level of standardization that occurred in the
development of ETO in the Teen REACH program.
Gateways can also be used to explain the development of information and
communication technology, including the sociotechnical arrangements upon which they are often
dependent. For example, Edwards et al. (2007) further elaborated on the gateway concept by
describing plug adapters, such as three-pin to two-pin AC power adapters, as everyday gateway
examples. They also introduced the idea of document format converters as gateways in the
information technology realm. Software applications that convert video files from QuickTime
(.MOV) to Windows Media Video (.WMV) are gateways. These solutions are significant
because, as the authors argued, they “represent a key principle in infrastructure development:
plugs and sockets that allow new systems to be joined to an existing framework easily and with
minimal constraint.” Edwards et al. (2007) argued that rather than viewing gateways as
technologies, they should be viewed as “combining a technical solution with a social choice, i.e.
a standard, both of which must be integrated into an existing users’ communities of practice” (p.
16). Our attempts to both discover and develop gateways during the ETO project exposed much
larger issues as Jasper and I attempted to transfer data from a state MIS into a private, for-profit
cloud computing system.

The Teen REACH Program
I now turn to introduce the Teen REACH program and its relationship to MESH in order
to further contextualize the influence of the state in the development of cloud computing

	  

	  

110	  
	  

software. The Illinois Department of Human Services (DHS) established the Teen REACH
program in 1998 to provide services and activities across the state “during non-school hours to
youth ages 6–17, when youth are most likely to get into trouble” (Illinois Department of Human
Services, 2014d). The program serves approximately 30,000 urban, suburban, and rural youth
each year in “schools, park districts, faith-based organizations, YMCAs, and community
agencies” (Center for Prevention Research and Development, 2004). Teen REACH works to
provide children with responsibility, education, achievement, caring, and hope (REACH).
The specific activities involved in the Teen REACH program are aimed at
improving the likelihood for future success, helping to provide positive choices,
helping to reduce at-risk behaviors, and helping to develop career goals. The Teen
REACH Program has six core components. The six core components include
Education and Academic Improvement, Life Skills Education, Recreation and
Sports, Cultural Arts, Mentoring, and Parental Involvement. The staff develops
and implements a monthly curriculum and activity schedule. Academic
Improvement allows time to do homework, while providing tutoring in basic
skills and enrichment programs to encourage creativity. (Metro East Settlement
House, 2013)
Statewide funding for the Teen REACH program increased every year from 1998 to 2001. It then
leveled out between 2001 and 2004, receiving over $19 million annually during this time
(Harvard Family Research Project, 2014). Since 2004, Teen REACH providers across the state
have experienced funding cuts every year. In fiscal year 2011, funding fell to $13,881,200, while
the number of Teen REACH grantees statewide increased (Illinois Department of Human
Services, 2014d).

	  

	  

111	  
	  

Teen REACH at MESH
Teen REACH is one of fifteen programs managed by the Metro East Settlement House in
East St. Louis, as I described earlier. Most of these programs are required by the state or federal
government to use separate management information systems. For example, Teen REACH staff
members are required to use eCornerstone (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2014a) to
track youth attendance and grades, two key indicators mandated by DHS. If you refer back to
Table 4, you can see where the Teen REACH program is located within the matrix of
community-based programs offered by MESH. Patricia Ableton, the director of marketing and
development at MESH, talked about her past experience managing the Teen REACH program
for eight years at four different locations in the Metro East region of Illinois. “What we try to do
is we try to give the kids a well-rounded afternoon or day where they can be exposed to new
things that maybe in their regular life they would not have the opportunity.” Before she became
the director of marketing and development, Patricia’s office was located in the TRC.
TRC is located just over the bridge from St. Louis, not far from the Route 55/70 exit. A
homeless population of predominantly African American men often congregates just outside
TRC’s doors. Many of the youth participants in the Teen REACH program come from the
elementary and middle schools up the street. Jasper and I worked at TRC with Rhonda and Alice
between August and October 2013 to configure and implement ETO software. In order to
understand how ETO developed as an information infrastructure in the Teen REACH program at
MESH, it’s important to begin by explaining what I observed about the use of existing
information and communication technologies, including paper.

	  

	  

112	  
	  

“It Reminds Me of the Paper Application”
In this section, I describe the role of paper at MESH as an anchor for essential social
processes, before turning to a discussion of how standards and gateways influenced the
development of ETO in Teen REACH. The use of paper at MESH represents a key point of
social engagement between Teen REACH staff, parents, and children who enroll in the program.
This is significant because “parental involvement” is one of the six stated goals of the Teen
REACH program (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2014d). Parental involvement is also
the most difficult aspect of the program. In addition, paper also served as a way to keep track of
parents’ contact information. As Rhonda explained:
We always have the [paper] applications around. We have to update it every three
months because their phones change every month. Like if they have the mini
phones, the government phones. You know, they switch them. We need those
numbers in case your kid fractured a finger. We need your numbers. I mean, “we
need to talk to you!” Trying to talk to the parents is not an easy task. Trying to get
the parents to come here to talk to us is very difficult. It’s been one of our biggest
challenges for what three or four years.
The difficulty connecting with parents also appeared as a recognized issue in a pilot evaluation
of the Teen REACH program (Harvard Family Research Project, 2014). While Rhonda and her
staff heavily rely on paper (i.e., intake forms) for parents’ and primary caregivers’ contact
information, it also serves as the primary mode of communication for parents to learn about their
kids in Teen REACH. The paper intake forms include survey questions that Teen REACH
workers ask parents to complete with their kids. The survey asks youth to respond to questions
about their perceived challenges in a number of areas.
During the Quick Start Implementation back in June 2013, Arthur created what Social
Solutions calls a “TouchPoint,” or a module in ETO, where information from these paper forms
	  

	  

113	  
	  

and other analog and digital formats at MESH can be entered into the software. A TouchPoint
can be used to collect data about any point of service in which direct-service workers interface
with clients. Attendance, Referrals, and Surveys are three examples of TouchPoints described in
further detail in Chapter 6.
After logging into ETO at my computer station in the lab, I give Rhonda a tour of the
Participant Contract TouchPoint.
Ethnographer: Here is the Teen REACH Contract created in ETO Impact. Does
this look familiar?
Rhonda: It reminds me of the paper application.
Ethnographer: With the survey, and all of these questions, do you do a follow up
at any point? Do you ask these same questions again?
Rhonda: Yearly, because we have to update the application every year. And, those
questions are on the application. And we do ask the parents to make sure that
all of the fields are filled out. Other than the questions, such as “Do you
receive public assistance or food stamps?” They don’t fill that one out.
Basically what we do is work with both of them when they fill out the
application. The parent and the kid are in there together.
Ethnographer: So you sit with them as they fill out the paper application?
Rhonda: Yes, yes. Because you know a kid would say, “I don’t have a challenge
with any of these things.” And the parent would be like, “Oh yes you do. Yes
you do.” Because kids will say, “No, no, no. I have no challenges.” And the
parent’s sitting there saying, and you look at the paper and there’s quite a few
challenges. But a lot of times the kidsis there when they fill out the
application.
The dialogue above highlights the use of paper intake forms as a key point of social interaction
between Teen REACH staff, parents, and youth in the program. Paper also provides staff

	  

	  

114	  
	  

members with an opportunity to get to know, and stay in touch with, parents of youth in the
program.
The concept of paper as the anchor for essential social processes in Teen REACH is
significant for this study, particularly because I am interested in understanding not only how the
ETO software was shaped, but also what the consequences of this cloud computerization process
were for MESH as a community-based organization. In other words, one might ask: How are
social processes or human services impacted by the introduction of cloud computerization?
Murphy and Pardeck (1991) explained that when computers are introduced into welfare
agencies, “the human element may be pushed to the periphery of the intervention process, as
technical requirements are given precedence over less technological considerations” (p. 106).
Computerization does provide social welfare organizations with a number of benefits, including
the reduction of paperwork, increased quality control, and the ability to use data for assessments
and program evaluations (Kling, 1991). However, in the push to satisfy funders, organizations
like MESH also have to consider the harmful impacts of technology on both workers and the
clients they serve.
In addition to the potential negative aspects of cloud computerization, more concrete
technical issues arose during implementation. For example, Jasper and I had to make a decision
about how to configure ETO to collect demographic data that had been entered separately into
paper, spreadsheets, and state management information systems. We discovered that standards
were necessary to help us make decisions. However, as I describe in the next section,
standardization also exposed certain power dynamics and their consequences in the configuration
of cloud computing software at MESH.

	  

	  

115	  
	  

Standards, Gateways, and Power
Jasper and I had to make decisions about how to best configure ETO to meet the needs of
the Illinois Department of Human Services, private funders such as the United Way, and MESH
itself and its own organizational needs. This is one of the three main themes of this research.
Decisions involving the configuration of ETO to include, or not include, certain types of
demographic information became an important site of struggle where competing interests
between external stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs took center stage. In
this section, I describe how the configuration of ETO provided an opportunity to study the power
of standards and their impact on the cloud computing software implementation.
Standards
Jasper and I discovered that in order to transfer demographic information from paper to
the cloud for the Teen REACH program, we first needed to develop a standard demographic
across all of MESH’s community-based programs. I quickly discovered the weight of this task.
Fortunately, Arthur had already helped us make some of these decisions about “standard” and
“custom” demographics during the Quick Start Implementation back in June 2013. However,
additional demographic questions remained as Jasper and I configured ETO for the Teen
REACH program.
Jasper and I tackled the technical aspects of standardization by downloading the
Participant Demographic spreadsheet template from ETO. The software is very helpful, in this
case, because it can generate an .XLS file, which can be used to enter demographic information
from the Teen REACH paper intake forms into a spreadsheet. This spreadsheet can then be
uploaded into ETO via the software’s “batch upload” function. In order for this batch upload
process to work, the spreadsheet columns need to match the demographic fields in ETO. Jasper

	  

	  

116	  
	  

and I spent hours at TRC comparing the demographic information on the Teen REACH paper
intake form with the demographic fields configured by Arthur during the ETO Quick Start
Implementation (see standard and custom demographics in Table 7). To make things more
complicated, eCornerstone, the state’s management information system, had its own
requirements that we had to consider during the implementation process. Fortunately, the
demographic categories on the paper intake forms and in eCornerstone had already been
determined by MESH and the DHS, respectively. Decisions about which demographic categories
would become the standard in ETO, however, presented a daunting challenge.

	  

	  

117	  
	  

Table 7. Demographic Fields in Paper, eCornerstone, and ETO
Intake Method

Demographics

MESH (Paper)

Name; Date of Birth; Address; City; Zip; Home Phone; School ID#; Parent/Guardian;

Intake

Primary Language; Employed (Y) or (N); Services: (TANF, WIC, DCFS,
Free/Reduced Lunch, None); Place of Employment; Phone; School Name; Teacher;
Phone; Grade; Emergency Contact; Phone; Relationship

eCornerstone

Date of Birth* (mm/dd/yyyy); Gender*; SSN; Mother’s Maiden Name; Participant’s

(State

Marital Status; Race; Ethnic Status; Residential Status; Migrant; Level of Education;

Database)

Education Status; Individualized Education Plan (IEP); Individual Learning Plan (ILP)

Intake

for GEAR UP; GEAR UP Agreement; Household Size; Household Income;
Participant Income; Proof of Income; Employment Status; Occupation Code; Date of
Death (mm/dd/yyyy); Language Preference (primary); Language Preference (other)

ETO Impact

First Name*; Middle Initial; Last Name*; Suffix; Race*; DOB*; Zip Code*; Gender*;

(Private Cloud)

Address 1; Address 2; Email; Home Phone; Cell Phone; Work Phone; Pager;

Standard

Emergency Contact (not living in same house); Emergency Contact Phone; Case

Demographics

Number; Marital Status; SSN

ETO Impact

Assigned Staff ID; Referral Entity; Funding Entity; Education Level; Current Living

(Private Cloud)

Situation; Ownership of Housing; Estimated Total Household Income; Veteran

Custom

Status; Military Status; Type of Assistance Requested; Client Information; Medical

Demographics

Condition; Notes/Comments; Program Name; Program Start Date; Program End
Date; Dismissal Reason

* Indicates required demographic.

	  

	  

118	  
	  

Busch (2011) explained that standards are powerful. While they often “appear to be
neutral, benign, merely technical, obscure, and removed from daily life,” Busch argued that
standards are an extremely important source of social, political, and economic power (p. 28).
This is due in part to their “ability to set the rules that others must follow, or to set the range of
categories from which they may choose” (p. 28). Standards can be applied to both objects and
people. The intensity of the term increases particularly as the phrase “gold standard” has “crept
into common usage as a synonym for ‘the best’” (p. 22). As Busch explained, standards are
powerful because they structure our expectations. This is because “standards, like the world of
nature, are seemingly ‘supposed’ to be the way they are” (p. 32). In addition, Bowker and Star
(1999) argued that standards have “significant inertia that can be very difficult and expensive to
change” (p. 14). For these reasons and more, I found it unsettling to make a decision about what
constituted a standard demographic in ETO.
As I explained, MESH operates fifteen different community-based programs, from child
care to services for older adults. Nine of these programs require separate state or federal
management information systems. Therefore, Jasper and I had to make a decision between
asking workers to collect demographic information in a standardized way and making sure
workers gathered enough demographic information from participants so MESH could use and
compare these data across all fifteen programs. Jasper and I looked to directors and program
managers at MESH for guidance about which demographics were both required by DHS and
most useful to MESH.

	  

	  

119	  
	  

Photo 3. Configuring ETO in the Teen REACH Computer Lab

Arthur, Curtis, Jasper, and I, and program staff in the five programs at MESH, decided to
go with the standard and custom demographics in ETO (see Table 7) for all of MESH’s
programs. The result is a standardized list for all programs to satisfy state and private funders,
while giving managers in each of the programs the freedom to develop their own customized
demographics, as needed. As Jasper and I worked in the computer lab at the TRC to configure
the ETO software (see Photo 3), we discovered an important gateway that allowed us to transfer
standardized information, including demographics, across disparate subsystems.
Gateways
During the ETO implementation at Teen REACH, the Participant Demographic
spreadsheets provided Jasper and I with a gateway to transfer information from paper to the
cloud. ETO required these spreadsheets to be used to gather bulk information about

	  

	  

120	  
	  

demographics and other data. Therefore, spreadsheets served as a dedicated gateway much in the
same way that Egyedi (2001) elaborated on the AC/DC rotary converter that linked electricity
networks. “These gateways link an exclusive and specified number of subsystems.… Here, the
scope of system interconnection is limited” (p. 44). Spreadsheets were dedicated gateways that
linked paper and ETO as subsystems. The degree of standardization was improvised as Rhonda,
Jasper, Alice, and I spent roughly four hours each on one day at TRC entering the demographic
information for 400 Teen REACH participants into four separate spreadsheets. We sat and
worked together in the Teen REACH computer lab transferring data from paper into
spreadsheets, each at a separate computer. It was tedious. We talked to each other as we entered
the data, to provide both technical and emotional support along the way. The next day, we
entered each of the completed spreadsheets into ETO as four separate batch uploads.
In this case, ETO was quite useful in contributing to its infrastructural development
because the software provided a gateway (i.e., Participant Demographic spreadsheets) from
paper to the cloud. This made it possible to transfer information from the Teen REACH paper
intake forms into spreadsheets that could then be uploaded into ETO. The difficulty remained in
trying to gain access to data held captive in eCornerstone. I now turn to describe the ways in
which broader political, operational, and technical issues emerged in trying to establish a
gateway between public and private networked information systems at MESH.

State Information Infrastructure
eCornerstone is the Illinois Department of Human Services’ (DHS) state-mandated
reporting platform for service providers (see Figure 4). The management information system
(MIS) was first introduced in 1997 as “Cornerstone,” with the goal of integrating “community-

	  

	  

121	  
	  

based maternal and child health services provided to Illinois Department of Human Services’
customers and to report their health outcomes” (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2014a).
MESH is required to use eCornerstone for four of their DHS-funded programs. Rhonda is the
main person in the Teen REACH program who uses eCornerstone regularly. She is also the
primary contact between the DHS and the Teen REACH program at MESH. The following
description of eCornerstone is provided on the DHS website:
eCornerstone enables agencies to use and manage data for collaboration with
local partners, and will provide information for RFPs, program evaluation, and
program planning. Not only can eCornerstone agencies accumulate vital
information in an efficient manner, but a reduction in paperwork results in staff
better utilizing their time. In addition, eCornerstone helps avoid duplication of
enrollments and work efforts while offering convenience, as it is easily accessible
from on-site or off-site computers. Finally, the eCornerstone system adapts
readily to change. Input will always be sought from program staff and users on
ways the system can be further enhanced to benefit users. Because of its webbased nature, system modifications are easy to implement and cause minimal
interruption for users. (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2014a)
The fear of duplicating efforts in the development of cloud computing software has been a major
theme of this chapter, as I mentioned in my vignette at the beginning. As such, the following
statement from above warrants further review: “eCornerstone helps avoid duplication of
enrollments and work efforts.” This statement is certainly true situated in the context above.
However, it takes on a different meaning when considering issues of compatibility in the
configuration of ETO.

	  

	  

122	  
	  

Figure 4. Home Page Screen from the “eCornerstone: User Manual” (Illinois Department of
Human Services, 2013)
“POT” Domains
Egyedi’s (2000) discussion of political, operational, and technical (POT) domains
provides a framework for understanding the infrastructural tensions that emerged while working
to find a gateway between eCornerstone and ETO to share information. Egyedi argued that in
order to consider how the standardized container developed in the transportation industry, it was
important to take into account the political and operational issues as well as previously
considered technical issues. These three different “domains” (p. 236), Egyedi argued, provide a
more complete foundation upon which to investigate the tensions involved in the ISO container’s
development.
The political domain includes issues such as regulation and other economic,
environmental, and transportation policies. In order for standardization to occur, “Container

	  

	  

123	  
	  

standards must overcome incompatibilities between different transport policies and other
political and regulatory differences” (Egyedi, 2000, p. 236). In addition, the ISO container
required interconnection between different modes of transportation. Therefore, compatibility
issues in the operational domain had to be addressed. These included the various interests and
priorities of different customers, which resulted in different container requirements. Egyedi
explained that in addition to the political and operational issues, there was also a technical
component in creating physical compatibility between the subsystems of transportation,
including sea, rail, and road (see Figure 5).

3ROLWLFDO
JRYHUQDQFH
V\VWHP

2SHUDWLRQDO
VXEV\VWHP

3ROLWLFDO
JRYHUQDQFH
V\VWHP

*$7(:$<

7HFKQLFDO
VXEV\VWHP

2SHUDWLRQDO
VXEV\VWHP

7HFKQLFDO
VXEV\VWHP

Figure 5. Technological Gateways and Compatibility between the POT Domains in Large
Technical Systems
Source: Figure re-created from Egyedi (2000, p. 236).
Gateway Failure
If spreadsheets provided a gateway from paper to the cloud, then eCornerstone became
what I call a gateway failure. I define this concept as the absence of a gateway between
subsystems. In the case of Teen REACH, the failure occurred between eCornerstone and ETO.

	  

	  

124	  
	  

This could also be described as the lack of compatibility between political, operational, and
technical domains, which the remainder of this chapter analyzes in further detail.
During the Quick Start Implementation, Arthur and Curtis both assumed that it would be
possible to export data out of eCornerstone and into ETO. They even talked about the possibility
of scheduling weekly exports out of eCornerstone and into ETO through automation. This
information transfer process, they proclaimed, would allow MESH to use state-required data to
create more sophisticated reports for funders and MESH than was possible with eCornerstone.
As Curtis mentioned during our team meeting in early August 2013, “The way we envision this
is everything that’s captured on a state mandated portal will be captured in ETO.… ETO will
take this a lot of steps further than the state portals are taking it.” However, as Arthur pointed out
during Quick Start, “the devil is in the details.” Jasper and I later discovered the real truth behind
this statement.
Unfortunately, eCornerstone became a major roadblock. After a month-long process of
trying to determine whether we could export data out of eCornerstone, we discovered that it
wasn’t possible. Instead, double data entry (i.e., into both eCornerstone and ETO) would become
the reality, at least for Teen REACH. In our meetings with Rhonda, we learned that eCornerstone
does not allow community service providers to gain access to raw data in the form of
spreadsheets. Jasper later confirmed this fact after his encounter with Curtis. “It sounds to me
that at some point [Curtis] became pretty convinced that we were going to have to have double
data entry. He sounded like he was certainly prepared to do so.” This realization was a huge
setback for Jasper and me because we realized that not only would we have to figure out another
way to get data out of eCornerstone and into ETO, but we would also have to ask staff to
duplicate efforts in the meantime.

	  

	  

125	  
	  

In a later call with Arthur, he said the directors at MESH would have to ask employees to
duplicate efforts if they wanted to use ETO. If dual entry became the reality, Arthur explained,
then MESH would need strong leadership to help shift expectations. He added, “That does not
mean block out other things that you are doing. But depending on what you are doing, there is a
lot of existing paperwork in the system. It just means, quit using paper.” He admitted there
would be situations in which using ETO in the field would not be possible, particularly during
teacher evaluations and site visits with clients.
The gateway failure between eCornerstone, as a state and federally funded technology,
and ETO, as a private cloud system, created a number of sociotechnical challenges for MESH.
This lack of compatibility not only prevented us from transcending eCornerstone, but we also
had to recreate much of it. In this way, eCornerstone played a significant role as an actant, or
nonhuman actor (Latour, 2005), in the development of ETO. Jasper and I created three
TouchPoints: Attendance, Grades, and Progress Notes, based on these same computing functions
in eCornerstone (Illinois Department of Human Services, 2013). However, unlike actor-network
theory (ANT), the structural factors (i.e., pressure from state, federal, and private funders) played
a more significant role than the actor network associated with ETO’s development. As the
directors at MESH instructed, our primary task was to move data out of the state MIS and into
the cloud computing software. In this process of recreating eCornerstone in ETO, I became
deeply concerned that Jasper and I were reproducing an already oppressive technological system
at MESH.

	  

	  

126	  
	  

CHAPTER SIX

Surfacing Invisible Work∗
The rigid architectures of new technologies for welfare administration do not
allow for contextual information—the lived experience, struggles, purposes, and
motives of women doing the best they can do to survive and raise their children
with dignity.
–Eubanks (2011, p. 83)
What we do isn’t seen. I want my staff to get credit for the work they do.
–Francis Jones, PASS program director (June 26, 2013)

Introduction
In this chapter, I use Star’s (1999) concept of “invisible work” as a way to understand
how state-mandated information systems failed to recognize the work of the parent educators in
the Providing a Sure Start (PASS) program who conducted in-home visits with low-income
children and their parents in East St. Louis. The PASS program provides parent training, child
development, and life skills classes alongside comprehensive case management. In the second
half of the chapter, I introduce the ways in which the agency of a diverse and resilient group of
African American women, including social workers, managers, and directors at MESH, played a
significant role in configuring the ETO software. In emphasizing their everyday experiences with
IT at MESH, and recognizing the intersections of race, gender, and class, I attempt to show how
management information systems can sometimes be considered “nonworking systems” (Star,
1999, p. 386). The women at MESH explained that the ETO software should address these
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
∗

	  

The title is in reference to Star (1999).

	  

127	  
	  

structural inadequacies. In sharing these observations, my goal is not to fetishize their “local
knowledge,” nor do I wish to treat African American women as a singular demographic or
biological category. Rather, my goal is to share my observations of the agency of a
heterogeneous group of human services professionals by emphasizing how their contributions
shaped the cloud computing software.
I begin with a vignette to show how the invisible work of parent educators revealed itself
during one of our ETO software meetings with staff, managers, and directors in the PASS
program. The ethnographic account highlights the ways in which IT can have political
dimensions (Winner, 1986) that benefit some groups at the expense of others. I call attention to
how IT failed to account for the everyday experiences of African American women at MESH,
which ultimately led to a more informed and representative information system that responded to
the technological shortcomings.

“What We Do Isn’t Seen”
On a hot day in late June 2013, Curtis Fanton, the associate director at MESH, and I
pulled into the parking lot of the MESH Child Care Center for our Quick Start Implementation
meeting with social workers and managers in the PASS program. Arthur Frederichs, the project
manager from Social Solutions, and Shaun Wilson, the then IT director at MESH, had already
arrived for our ETO software meeting. The purpose of our meeting today was to talk with the
PASS employees to determine their software requirements for ETO.
Curtis and I opened the door to the Child Care Center and walked inside the building. I
could see the front hallway open up into a large auditorium. This was the gym for the child care
program. Derek Phillips, MESH’s executive director, has an office in the building, which is also

	  

	  

128	  
	  

home to the PASS and Head Start (http://ilheadstart.org) programs. On our way toward the
conference room for our meeting with PASS, Curtis and I met Arthur and Shaun. We walked
together down the main hallway past several administrative offices, including the office of the
director of early childhood education.
The four of us entered the main conference room as eight African American female social
workers and managers from the PASS program joined us for the meeting. A large poster of Paul
Revere holding a metal teapot could be seen on one of the blue walls. On the opposite side of the
room there was a window that looked out into the gym, where the kids in the daycare program
played. It was a large meeting, twelve of us in total.
The room fell quiet as Arthur opened up his laptop. Francis Jones, the (now retired)
program director for PASS, looked at Arthur with a smile and said, “They are just being shy
today. They’ll speak up.” Francis was referring to the seven other women, parent educators and
managers in the PASS program, who were seated around the table. They were her staff.
Arthur started the meeting by introducing himself. He then asked everyone else in the
room to do the same. After all twelve meeting attendees spoke, Arthur asked the women in the
PASS program to answer the following question: “What does success look like in your program?
When you have someone who is successful, how do you know?”
Francis Jones (program manager): We’re looking at children birth to three.
Cynthia Tanner (parent educator): The child is going to look happy, and the
parents will look eager to learn.
Janet Hayes (parent educator): Parents are self-sufficient; utilities are paid; child
is enrolled in school; child can say their ABCs; children can say their names;
there will be a father in place.

	  

	  

129	  
	  

Arthur typed away on his laptop, taking notes as the social workers and managers in the PASS
program continued to talk about what success looked like in working with low-income children
and their parents in East St. Louis.
Arthur then asked the staff to describe the types of demographic information that are
collected during the intake process. Beverly Archer, the program coordinator for PASS,
explained to Arthur that they use Visit Tracker (https://www.visittrackerweb.com) to gather
demographic information. Visit Tracker is another type of SaaS platform, which is similar in
many ways to ETO. Beverly explained that they use Visit Tracker to keep track of participants,
primarily children and their guardians, and to enter data from the Parents as Teachers (PAT)
curriculum. PAT is a nonprofit organization that “develops curricula that support a parent’s role
in promoting school readiness and healthy development of children” (Parents as Teachers, 2014).
PASS requires staff to use the PAT educational materials when they do in-home visits to
children and their parents.
After a lengthy discussion about workflows and forms, Arthur explained, “I’m going to
try to get something functioning [in ETO] in the next few days.” He said that it would be up to
Shaun and me to build out the rest of the software. I turned to look at Shaun, seated to my left,
who had a stressed look on his face. All eyes fell upon us, as Shaun let out a big sigh. Shaun and
I quickly realized the amount of work ahead of us following the Quick Start Implementation.
Arthur’s next question was the most controversial. He asked the eight social workers and
managers in the room to describe what metrics they use to track the success of parents and their
children in the PASS program. Everyone looked to Francis, and a silence fell on the room.
Francis lowered her head slightly. Her eyes, just below her glasses frames, focused like a
laser on Arthur, and with a concerned tone in her voice, she replied:

	  

	  

130	  
	  

It’s difficult to measure success, because every parent is different.… We don’t
want to get test-oriented with our parents.… A child may get up in the morning,
and their parent may make them breakfast.
Francis went on to explain how activities such as these should be considered as measures of
success. Unfortunately, the PAT curriculum, and the Visit Tracker software that records
summaries of PAT reports, does not count these types of successes as part of its design. Francis
told Arthur that, in fact, half of the work that her staff does on a daily basis is not considered a
success because of the way that the PAT program and the Visit Tracker software are designed.
As a result, Francis explained, the parent educators, as well as the PASS program on the whole,
may get a negative score at the end of the year. There are many things that Francis’s staff
members do to provide support and assistance to families that go unrecognized and uncounted
every year by the Visit Tracker software.
Arthur responded by telling Francis that her point was very important. Then, he began to
move on to his next question. After a bit of back and forth between Arthur and the PASS staff, I
jumped into the conversation and asked Arthur: “Shouldn’t we try to take down categories of the
types of assistance that PASS staff provide, that aren’t being recorded, so we can create
categories in the ETO software?” He replied, “Yes, if it’s not too difficult, we should at least ask
the question.” He then turned to the group and asked Francis’s staff to describe the types of
activities they do on a regular basis that don’t currently get recognized in PAT and Visit Tracker.
Transportation as Invisible Work
Francis responded to Arthur first by explaining that transportation is a huge part of the
work for which the women in the PASS program are responsible. Francis explained, “I like to
talk in extremes so people will understand.” She then proceeded to tell Arthur that if a parent
educator arrives at the client’s home and she finds the client has been shot, then the parent
	  

	  

131	  
	  

educator has to take on additional responsibilities than are required by the PAT program—and
those additional tasks are not recorded in the Visit Tracker software. The PAT curriculum is
particularly focused on educational activities and assessments that parent educators are supposed
to use with parents and their children inside the home. Francis was referring to certain activities
that parent educators were often forced to do outside the home. For example, if the parent
educator finds herself in this particular situation, then she will have to call an ambulance. After
the ambulance arrives, she will then have to travel with the client to the hospital, all while trying
to ask questions mandated by the PAT program. Francis explained that situations like these
happen often and require parent educators to engage in tasks that are outside the scope of the
PAT curriculum. This work is significant, yet not recorded by computers.
Another significant use of transportation, as a form of invisible work, occurs when a
parent educator needs to take a client to a doctor’s visit or to other local agencies, with her own
car, to help her clients receive social support. Hamer (2011) shared an important illustration,
which provides context for understanding the reasons why East St. Louisans have a “love–hate
relationship with the automobile”:
When you start considering East St. Louis as an inner-ring suburb, rather than
simply a small-urban collection of inner-city pathologies, the car problems of its
citizens stop looking like the petty nuisances of poverty. Those nuisances magnify
into Shakesperean agonies, torturing East St. Louisans twenty-four/seven in their
daily personal interactions, in their professional options, and in their sense of selfworth and full participation in the opportunities and benefits of national life. (p.
58)
Because there is an overwhelming lack of employment opportunities in East St. Louis and the
Metro East region, residents are often forced to travel long distances, over the Mississippi River
and into St. Louis, to find work. Hamer added, “an institutionally underfunded and inefficient
	  

	  

132	  
	  

public transportation system just reinforces this bitter state of affairs” (p. 59), which can make it
difficult for parents in the PASS program to get to their appointments and access other local
services.
Janet Hayes added that many of her colleagues are often expected to act as interpreters,
speaking in Spanish to local service providers, to help connect a family to emergency assistance
for issues such as “no food, no utility, eviction notice.” The Visit Tracker software does not
measure this category of work. Other parent educators at the table nodded their heads in
agreement. Curtis, with a look of stunned realization on his face, jumped into the conversation
and added, “Wow. That’s a huge part of what we do.” And, the women around the table
responded, “Yes.”
Francis told Arthur that transportation issues had a major impact on the work of parent
educators. As a result, she reported “50 percent of PAT visits were counted a negative.” Francis
paused for a second, then looked firmly at Arthur and said, “What we do isn’t seen. I want my
staff to get credit for the work they do.” A tense silence filled the room once again.
Curtis nodded in agreement with Francis and her staff. He then looked down at his watch
and announced that Arthur, Shaun, and I had to move on to our next ETO program meeting.
Curtis thanked all of the women in the PASS program for their time. Curtis, Arthur, Shaun, and I
packed up our things and headed out of the building and back into the parking lot. It was noon.
The sun beat down during the hot summer day, with a forecasted high of 93 degrees and a 100degree heat index. Curtis and I got back into his car and drove back to MESH for our next Quick
Start Implementation meeting.

	  

	  

133	  
	  

Classifying Work in Infrastructure Development
Bowker and Star (1999) explained that information technology innovations have
consequences for workers, particularly with regard to the type of work practices that are counted
as legitimate. In their study of the development of the Nursing Interventions Classification
(NIC), Bowker and Star focused on the category of “humor” as a work process in the nursing
profession. The category was defined as: “Facilitating the patient to perceive, appreciate, and
express what is funny, amusing, or ludicrous in order to establish relationships, relieve tension,
release anger, facilitate learning, or cope with painful feelings.” The category included fifteen
subelements, including the following three that are first on the list: “Determine the types of
humor appreciated by the patient,” “Determine the patient’s typical response to humor (e.g.,
laughter or smiles),” and “Determine the time of day that patient is most receptive” (p. 236). The
authors argued that humor, something previously considered a personality trait, became a formal
nursing intervention that could be accounted for through its classification.
In the same study, Bowker and Star described how the Iowa group, “who are mainly
teachers of nursing administration and research, made essentially three arguments for the
creation of a nursing classification” (p. 235):
1. Without a standard language to describe nursing interventions, there would be
no way of producing a scientific body of knowledge about nursing.
2. It was a key strategy for defending the professional autonomy of nursing.
3. It was important to be able to talk about nursing in a language that computers
could understand, else nursing work would not be represented at all in the
future. It would risk being even further marginalized than it is at present. (p.
237)

	  

	  

134	  
	  

The first and second points are relevant to both nursing and human services, as both are fields of
scientific study and professional practice. The third point is perhaps most relevant to my study of
cloud computing and human services professionals.
In the case of transportation as a form of invisible work, Francis tried to explain to Arthur
that Visit Tracker, as information infrastructure, failed to recognize the types of work that are
expected of parent educators that fall outside of the PAT curriculum. This example of hidden
work might be described as a work classification system in the way that Bowker and Star (1999)
describe the NIC. While I did not have access to the PAT curriculum during my study, I did gain
access to the PAT logic model
(http://www.parentsasteachers.org/images/stories/documents/LogicModel_Web.pdf). The logic
model provides a list of general categories of activities that are expected of parent educators,
which fall into the following three categories: “Parent-Child Interaction, Development-Centered
Parenting, and Family Well-Being.” In the development-centered partnering category, the topics
include: attachment, discipline, health, nutrition, safety, sleep, transitions/routines, and healthy
births. From Francis’s description of the types of environmental factors that impact parent
educators’ fieldwork, one could only assume that focusing on these developmental topics while
traveling in an ambulance or taking a client to a doctor would be challenging.
The vignette above also demonstrates how information systems at MESH failed to
recognize the work of parent educators in the PASS program. This is primarily because the Visit
Tracker software did not provide an adequate digital space for workers to provide “metrics” on
the everyday realities they faced, particularly as they conducted in-home visits with low-income
children and their parents. The vignette exposes a broader sociotechnical infrastructure at MESH,
which includes transportation, gunshot wounds, hospitals, translation services, and a lack of

	  

	  

135	  
	  

employment opportunities. Hamer’s (2011) study of transportation provides a vivid example of
this infrastructural perspective in her story about Curvis Shore, a thirty-eight-year-old man, after
his car broke down in East St. Louis:
Repairing the troubled vehicle was easier said than done. For a definitive
diagnosis, Curvis would have to remove the parts and have them tested.… And
the car also needed tires, annual taxes and tags, insurance, gasoline, and
certification in the state emissions-standards test. Fixing a starter or ignition
switch had not yet crowned his priority list. Still, the car problem was a severe
inconvenience, sometimes keeping him from getting to work on time or running
his mother’s errands or paying his bills or conducting his love life. (p. 60)
Infrastructure “becomes visible upon breakdown” (Star & Ruhleder, 1996, p. 113). This
relational perspective on transportation provides context for the invisible work of a
heterogeneous and resilient group of African American women and their everyday experiences
with technology at MESH. Francis’s plea to ensure that her staff receives credit for their work is
intimately connected to the sociotechnical infrastructure of East St. Louis as an “abandoned”
(Theising, 2003, p. 11) U.S. industrial suburb. In other words, an infrastructural analysis of this
particular nonworking system not only includes the PAT curriculum and the Visit Tracker
software, but also ambulance rides and translation services, or the activities not recorded by
information technology at MESH.
Information technology failed to address the needs of African American female social
workers and managers at MESH and their work with low-income children and parents in East St.
Louis. In placing emphasis on the failures of management information systems, in particular, I
attempt to move the conversation toward a focus on how technological artifacts do not always
benefit everyone equally. I am not interested in blaming IT. Rather, I seek to call attention to the
“social and economic system in which it is embedded” (Winner, 1986, p. 20). This is why I
	  

	  

136	  
	  

argue that an infrastructural analysis, such as the one presented above, provides a more holistic
account of the unique local tensions that shape the development of large-scale information
systems.
The June 2013 PASS meeting surfaced some of the invisible work of Francis’s staff. In
the months ahead, following the Quick Start Implementation, Jasper and I had additional
meetings with the parent educators and managers in the PASS program to make sure that ETO
was configured to coincide with both the requirements of the PAT curriculum and their own
needs based on their experiences conducting in-home visits. We tried to address the
shortcomings of the Visit Tracker system by asking parent educators for their advice about how
to develop more representative information infrastructure that could be used to measure the
everyday realities of their professional lives. The advantage of the ETO software, as a
configurational technology (Fleck, 1994), is now turned to as an approach toward addressing
some of the technical failures of the existing networked information systems at MESH.

Human Agency and Infrastructure Development
The remainder of this chapter moves from highlighting the ways in which information
infrastructure, as a nonworking system, failed to address the professional needs of the social
workers and managers at MESH and toward a discussion of how many of these same women, as
agents of technological change, played a significant role in making decisions about the ETO
software implementation that helped to surface invisible work in the PASS and Teen REACH
programs. These women shared their unique perspectives, based on their everyday experiences
with technology at work, about how the ETO software implementation could improve the lives
of children and families, as well as their own work situations. I describe how specific examples

	  

	  

137	  
	  

of TouchPoints, or software modules (e.g., see Figure 6), that were configured within the ETO
software were based on the types of activities that previous networked information systems did
not address.

Figure 6. Track Volunteer Time TouchPoint in ETO

I argue that the creation of the TouchPoints, the specific software modules in ETO,
helped to make everyday work practices at MESH visible, much the way that the NIC helped to
classify, and thus legitimize, the nursing profession in Bowker and Star’s (1999) research. In
doing so, I show how the agency of this heterogeneous group of employees at MESH played a
significant role in configuring the ETO software and strengthening the position of human
services professionals at MESH. The purpose is to describe the infrastructural development of
what might be characterized as a more fair and representative information system.
Internal Organizational Needs
In my meetings with directors at MESH, they described the ways in which the ETO
software would benefit the organization. They explained that many of their clients are no longer
eligible to receive state and federal services because of changes to state and federal welfare
policy during the past five years. At the same time, MESH has experienced increasing demand
for services while cuts to funding continued. Derek Phillips, MESH’s executive director, as well
	  

	  

138	  
	  

as Curtis Fanton and Patricia Ableton, each shared their perspectives on how the ETO software
would help the organization to better track program outcomes and respond to emerging standards
from state and federal agencies. The directors also mentioned that while it’s necessary to
configure the software based on the state-mandated reporting requirements, they also recognized
the potential of using ETO to influence public policy by showing state legislators in Springfield
exactly how MESH serves individual and family needs—beyond state requirements—across the
Metro East region of Illinois.
After several meetings led by social workers, managers, and directors in the various
programs at MESH, Curtis, Jasper, and I determined, based on their recommendations, that three
data sets in particular would be critical for capturing the invisible work at MESH. I now turn to
describing three TouchPoints—Referrals, Surveys, and Volunteers—as a way to show how the
agency of human services professionals at MESH played an important role in both configuring
the ETO software and legitimizing their everyday work practices.
Referrals
Patricia and her colleagues in the Teen REACH program, along with staff in the PASS
program, expressed interest in using ETO to manage referrals within and outside the
organization. Patricia told Curtis, Jasper, and me that referrals are a key part of MESH’s
community-based services. As she explained, “That is why the collaboration of partnerships with
different social service agencies, or just other organizations is extremely important.” Arthur
created the Record Referral TouchPoint following our Quick Start meetings back in June 2013.
During one of our meetings with Teen REACH back in September 2013, Jasper and I talked with
Rhonda about how she could use the Referral TouchPoint to refer participants to other programs
and also how she could receive referrals from other departments at MESH.

	  

	  

139	  
	  

Human services professionals in the PASS and Teen REACH programs agreed that the
Record Referral TouchPoint would be a useful tool for recording the invisible work that was not
being recorded by any state-mandated information systems, including eCornerstone. The
organization should now be able to track information about participants in different programs
through the TouchPoint—information that is not required by state or private funders. This
information should also provide important data that can be used to show state legislators and
private funders how MESH responds to the needs of individuals and families living in poverty.
Surveys
Rhonda and Alice also told Jasper and me, during our meetings at the Teen REACH
Center, that it would be helpful to have surveys created in ETO. Rhonda told us that surveys are
required for their Continuation Plan, which is an internal document at MESH used as part of
their grant application process for state funding. Rhonda explained that the plan includes
budgets, parent meetings, advisory council meetings, and other pertinent information related to
the Teen REACH program. Rhonda and Alice asked us to create surveys that they could use with
youth in the program. Rhonda sent us two existing paper surveys (see Appendixes D and E) that
they wanted to see in ETO. I created the surveys in ETO by adding text boxes and drop-down
lists, with yes and no options for responses. After showing Rhonda the surveys, she mentioned
that the digital versions would be useful because staff could use these data for their continuation
reports. In addition, she explained that the surveys should help Teen REACH staff to collect and
analyze data about youth experiences in the program, both for the DHS and for other existing
and potential funders.
MESH employees played an important role in the development of the Teen REACH
surveys in ETO. Results from the surveys will hopefully support their programmatic information

	  

	  

140	  
	  

needs and document impact on youth over time. This information should also help staff,
managers, and directors compare and contrast participant data collected through other
TouchPoints, helping them to make decisions about program structure and allocation of time and
resources. In addition, these data can help Teen REACH staff produce yearly reports based on
pre- and post-surveys from youth in the program. Results from one year can be compared to
other years and provide a method for determining where and how to make programmatic
changes.
Volunteers
During our Quick Start Implementation meeting with the Teen REACH employees in
June 2013, Patricia Ableton explained to Arthur that they did not have a way to track volunteer
hours. “We want to track family assistance. Parent volunteer hours. We are also mandated to do
a certain number of volunteer hours.” She explained that volunteers are also a huge part of the
organization. However, most of the volunteer time is tracked using paper. After the meeting,
Arthur created a Track Volunteer Time TouchPoint in ETO (see Figure 6). It is fairly simple
compared to some of the more elaborate TouchPoints in ETO. From the Dashboard, which is the
user interface in ETO, the user can choose the TouchPoint. The software then asks the user to
select the name of a volunteer.
Arthur created a drop-down menu to include the following five options: present, present
but tardy, present but unacceptable effort, absent, and absent but excused. Staff across all fifteen
programs at MESH should be able to use this TouchPoint, based on the recommendation
provided by Patricia and her staff during the Quick Start Implementation meetings. The Track
Volunteer Time TouchPoint is one of three examples that show how ETO was configured to
track information beyond what was required by the state. The TouchPoint should also help to

	  

	  

141	  
	  

provide MESH and its funders with a more accurate picture of the role that volunteers play in
helping the organization to provide services to the community, particularly in light of the
persistent cuts to state and federal funding.
The Referrals and Surveys TouchPoints created an opportunity for staff at MESH to
record invisible work and store data in a centralized location in ETO. The Volunteer TouchPoint,
on the other hand, raised an interesting question about how to classify work that indirectly
benefits clients who receive community-based services at MESH. In Bowker and Star’s (1999)
study of the NIC, the authors discussed the challenges of classifying direct, indirect, and
administrative care.
Direct care is separated from care that only indirectly benefits patients. Indirect
care includes, for instance, coordinating treatment schedules, discharge planning,
and patient supervision. One step further removed from the bedside is
administrative care, activities for creating a work environment supporting either
direct or indirect care. (p. 245)
Bowker and Star explained that the process of defining administrative tasks as care, in their
study, was controversial. The authors found that the majority of those whom they interviewed
believed that administrative care belonged outside the category of nursing interventions. The
point here is that the differences in opinion led to a gray area in the development of the NIC.
Bowker and Star argued that the example points to a challenge in the “visibility-discretion”
tradeoff for classification designers and users (p. 247).
The Volunteer TouchPoint in this context, therefore, could be considered an example of
administrative work at MESH, or what I would call activities for creating a work environment
supporting either direct or indirect services to residents who receive community-based services at
MESH. Therefore, while the Volunteer TouchPoint does not necessarily apply to the direct-

	  

	  

142	  
	  

service work of parent educators or Teen REACH staff, it should help MESH employees to
document those activities related to the administration and management of volunteers, which
directors at MESH mentioned were such a large part of the support provided to residents who
rely on MESH’s community-based services.

The Devolution of ETO
I close this chapter with a brief description of how the ETO project came to a halt. I draw
upon Fleck’s (1994) concept of “configurational technology” as a way to understand some of the
organizational challenges that MESH faced in implementing a large-scale cloud computing
software application at a time of severe cuts to state and federal funding. I try to show how ETO
presented both opportunities and administrative challenges to MESH because they lacked the
funding and capacity required to serve both external stakeholder and internal organizational
needs. I provide this narrative as a basis for my recommendations in the next chapter.
Fleck (1994) explained that configurational technology requires substantial user input and
learning based on both local knowledge and broader institutional contexts. The author also noted
that, “Not surprisingly, in general the greater the configurational nature of the technology (i.e.
the more it is composed of selections of components to meet local requirements) the greater the
chances of failure” (p. 647). In this chapter, I explained how information technology at MESH
failed parent educators and managers in the PASS program. This was because the Visit Tracker
software failed to account for the invisible work of parent educators who conducted in-home
visits with low-income children and parents in East St. Louis. Transportation surfaced as part of
the invisible work of parent educators, and the need for a more flexible infrastructure to allow
Francis’s staff to document their work in the PASS program was addressed. The directors at

	  

	  

143	  
	  

MESH saw ETO as having the potential to remedy the failures of Visit Tracker. However,
replacing Visit Tracker with ETO proved to be much more complex because of the
sociotechnical relations between the Parents as Teachers program and the Visit Tracker cloud
computing software.
The ETO software has the potential to remedy many of the infrastructural tensions
between external stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs. However, the project
ultimately failed. It’s important for this discussion to be clear about what I mean by failure. I
mean very specifically that the organization ran out of money and could not afford to pay the
monthly SaaS fees. As a result, MESH had to put the ETO project on hold until additional grants
were obtained. This does not mean that the work that was put into the project was unsuccessful.
To the contrary, our project management team learned a great deal about how to create a more
just and fair information system to assist social workers and managers in being able to surface
the invisible work at MESH.
While the ETO project might be considered a failure in relation to Fleck’s definition as a
configurational technology, the software also had the potential to address the failures of the
technical aspects of state-mandated information systems. I would argue that what I am calling
nonconfigurational technology, such as Visit Tracker and eCornerstone, lacks the flexibility
required by information infrastructure over time, as the work required of human services
professionals changes. In the attempt to establish standards, state and private information
systems failed MESH in several ways, as I’ve tried to explain in this study. However, I want to
argue that these sociotechnical failures also introduce several important lessons about how public
policymakers, software developers, and community-based organizations can work together to
ensure flexibility in the future development of interoperable statewide IT systems.

	  

	  

144	  
	  

Conclusion
In the first part of this chapter, I described how information infrastructure failed to
recognize the work of parent educators in the PASS program. I described how Bowker and Star’s
(1999) study of the Nursing Interventions Classifications provided a framework for investigating
how work is legitimized through the use of classification systems. I used this approach to look at
the types of invisible work that were revealed during our software requirement meeting with staff
and managers in the PASS program. I then turned to describe how the agency of human services
professionals at MESH played a significant role in making decisions about how the ETO
software was configured and implemented. I argued that the configuration of the Referrals,
Surveys, and Volunteers TouchPoints provided an opportunity to study how workers not only
helped to make their own work visible, but also the work of support staff, such as volunteers,
who play a vital role in delivering community-based services to residents in East St. Louis. In the
next chapter, I turn from my ethnographic accounts in the past three chapters to a discussion of
the implications of my findings. I introduce recommendations for software developers, public
policymakers, and community-based organizations interested in using cloud computing software
applications to help move people out of poverty. The purpose is to present a framework and
action plan for addressing the challenges I observed facing community-based organizations in
implementing networked information systems as the demand for accountability in state welfare
programs increases on a yearly basis.

	  

	  

145	  
	  

CHAPTER SEVEN

“What It All Means”∗
Ultimately, one has to decide what one is dealing with and why it matters.
–Winner (1993, p. 373)

Introduction
In this chapter, I argue that if state policymakers require data to understand the needs of
community-based organizations that provide state-funded welfare programs, then state IT
systems should be configured in such a way to allow community-based organizations to gather
the data required to show the actual needs that exist in the community. I also maintain that if
public and private funders expect community-based organizations to adopt cloud computing
systems to provide accountability, then funders should also supply the financial, technical, and
legal assistance to help community-based organizations develop flexible, interoperable, and
equitable information infrastructures. In pursuing this path, I am certainly not arguing that
MESH should use such a system to get more money than other social service agencies in
Illinois—they’re all working from the same amount of funding. Rather, I explain that an ETOlike system, created by the state for all community-based organizations across the state, can help
more organizations like MESH gather data and report findings on actual community needs that
can help the state understand those needs more clearly. I believe that a system developed with
these goals in mind can provide organizations with the data needed to inform policymakers in the
way that directors at MESH described in my study.
In presenting this discussion, I draw upon Busch’s (2011) guidelines for building
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
∗

	  

The title of this chapter is in reference to Winner’s (1993) response to social constructivism.

	  

146	  
	  

standards that are “fair, equitable, and effective” (pp. 300–308) as a framework for developing
more response networked information systems. I use this approach as a foundation upon which
to argue for my decision to recommend a more humane state IT system for workers and
managers in community-based organizations such as MESH, rather than recommending that
organizations give their money to private, for-profit cloud computing companies like Social
Solutions. I strongly believe that state-funded IT systems offer a measure of public
accountability and an opportunity for civic engagement that does not exist in quite the same way
with for-profit cloud computing systems.
I conclude this chapter with four recommendations for state policymakers, software
developers, and community-based organizations interested in using cloud computing software to
help move people out of poverty. The guidelines provided by Busch offer key lessons for
discussions about how to create more fair and equitable IT systems for both community-based
organizations and the individuals and families they serve. These recommendations are
particularly intended for state government officials interested in developing IT systems for
community-based organizations that will support, rather than simply monitor, workers in their
efforts to provide financial and social assistance to low-income residents. The ultimate goal of
this chapter is to promote a deeper understanding of the information infrastructure challenges
facing community-based organizations at a time of severe cuts to funding for public assistance
programs and to provide concrete suggestions for developing more humane cloud computing
systems.

	  

	  

147	  
	  

Standardization and Flexibility
Before I begin my discussion of the infrastructural challenges facing MESH and offer
concrete recommendations to address these challenges, I first need to review two concepts that I
believe are helpful for understanding the sociotechnical struggles facing MESH and their efforts
to create a more humane information infrastructure. These two concepts are “standardization”
and “flexibility.” I begin by reviewing research within infrastructure studies that provides an
important framework for analyzing the tensions between external organizational demands and
internal organizational needs at MESH.
As I described in this study, standards are integral to the stabilization of infrastructure.
From the electrical grid to the Internet, standardization helps infrastructure become embedded in,
and thus invisible in, support of other processes. Bowker and Star (1998) described the
importance of standards in this way: “it is not possible to build a modern housing development
without them: too much needs to come together—electricity, gas, sewer, timber sizes, screws,
nails and so on” (p. 233). The challenge in creating standards, however, can often be found in
negotiations between global processes and “local adaptations” (Gasser, 1986). Hanseth et al.
(1996) explained how the terms standardization and flexibility provide important conceptual
tools for understanding the development of information infrastructure, or “II.” They described
that in computer science, standardization “denotes the social and technical process of developing
the underlying artifact related to II—namely, the standards that govern the communicative
patterns.” Flexibility, on the other hand, “denotes (a) flexibility in allowing for further changes
or (b) flexibility in the pattern of use” (p. 408). Ultimately, they argue that the development of II
requires that standards be flexible and open to change over time. Hanseth et al. (1996) suggested

	  

	  

148	  
	  

the phrase “anticipated and alternating flexibility” (p. 419) to describe the need for II to allow for
required and anticipated changes over time.
More recent studies have recognized that information infrastructure “needs to be flexible
and open to change as the world and the demands on that infrastructure change” (Pargram &
Palme, 2009, p. 198). The architecture of the Internet depends on its flexibility. In my research, I
have been concerned with the consequences of those state IT systems (i.e., eCornerstone) that
lack flexibility. In the case of MESH, the challenge in creating standards in ETO was most
visible while trying to negotiate the sociotechnical demands of state agencies and the United
Way, on the one hand (e.g., program structure and information reporting requirements), and
MESH’s internal organizational needs, on the other (e.g., configuring software to record invisible
work, influence policymakers, and attract new funding sources).
At the same time, Jasper and I learned during the ETO implementation that each of
MESH’s fifteen community-based programs has its own information gathering needs (e.g.,
demographic information) and nine of these programs were required to use a different state or
federal management information system for data collection and reporting. The infrastructural
tensions that became visible during the ETO implementation, particularly with the Teen REACH
and PASS programs, became an opportunity for me to develop a deeper understanding of the
need to balance standardization and flexibility in the development of information infrastructure
at MESH. In the remainder of this chapter, I take up the issue of how to address this challenge in
designing cloud computing software applications for community-based organizations.

	  

	  

149	  
	  

Designing Fair, Equitable, and Effective Standards
Flexibility in infrastructure design is essential to the goal of developing more responsive
information systems for community-based organizations such as MESH. In addition, ethical
guidelines in the development of standards should be considered to promote more fair cloud
computing software applications. Busch (2011) argued that ethics are integral to the creation of
standards, particularly because standards are everywhere in society and have certain benefits and
costs associated with them. For example, “food safety standards are generally used to avoid
undesired consequences—death and illness” (p. 247). In order to address some of the ethics
involved in the creation of standards, Busch provided a set of guidelines or a “standard for
standards,” which he explained “may be helpful in determining whether standards achieve their
ethical objectives” (p. 301):
1. Delegate to subsidiary bodies when possible.
2. Use precaution.
3. Do minimal violence.
4. Make accountable standards.
5. Encourage the voice of publics through participation.
6. Use the most appropriate form of standard.
7. Ask about path dependence.
8. Design appropriate tests.
9. Open new avenues to thinking and acting by making routine things habitual.
10. Review standards, tests, and indicators frequently.
11. Use law experimentally. (pp. 300–308)
In this chapter, I describe how many of these guidelines should be applied as community-based
organizations engage with public and private funders in the development of centralized IT
systems to document outcomes and provide accountability.

	  

	  

150	  
	  

Responding to Infrastructural Tensions
In this section, I briefly review the tensions between standardization (state IT systems)
and flexibility (ETO) in the configuration of cloud computing software at MESH before turning
to a discussion of how Busch’s (2011) guidelines can be applied to the development of future
state IT systems. I summarize the conflicting dimensions that existed between external
stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs. The former consists of state, federal, and
private funders who each have their own expectations about how the ETO software should be
used to help them know how their money is being spent. Funders played a significant role in
influencing MESH’s decision to purchase ETO Impact software. However, these funders did not
provide the financial support needed by MESH to maintain the software, train workers, and
produce reports for funders. It is important to note that Arthur Frederichs, the project manager at
Social Solutions, recommended that if an organization wants to use ETO, then it will need a fulltime staff person to manage software and create reports. These staffing costs, as well as the cost
of the monthly software service fees, are a significant burden for community-based organizations
like MESH, particularly at a time when state budgets for human services are being cut every
year.
The internal stakeholder demands have been characterized as expectations—beyond state
and private funders—about how the ETO software could be used. MESH was motivated to use
ETO to surface the invisible work of its employees, conduct community needs assessments,
influence public policy, and gain new sources of funding. This is where we can see MESH as an
actor in the social shaping of cloud computing. In Table 8, I attempt to characterize the various
sociotechnical aspects that came into conflict during the ETO implementation. I will now turn to
summarize my findings from the previous chapters and discuss how the concepts of flexibility

	  

	  

151	  
	  

and interoperability can be useful in designing more fair, equitable, and effective information
infrastructures for community-based organizations that administer state-funded public assistance
programs.

Table 8. External and Internal Infrastructural Dimensions

Social

External Stakeholder

Infrastructural

Internal Organizational

Dimensions

 Tensions 

Dimensions

• State and federal
government agencies
• United Way
• Illinois Framework

• External pressures on
MESH to adopt IT
• Lack of funding for IT
support at MESH
• Existing IT systems failed
to surface invisible work

Technical

• eCornerstone (one of
nine government-

• Understanding community
needs
• Surfacing invisible work
• Influencing public policy
• Generating new funding
sources

• Lack of interoperability

• Paper

• Standardization (external)

• Spreadsheets

mandated information

versus flexibility

• Microsoft Word documents

systems at MESH)

(internal)

• ETO Impact

• Parents as Teachers
• Visit Tracker

• Increasing need for
“configurational
technology” (Fleck, 1994)

External Stakeholder Demands
I introduced the public and private forces that influenced decisions about how the ETO
software should be configured. Here, I characterize these actors as part of the external
stakeholder dimensions while recognizing that the lines between social and technical aspects of
cloud computerization were often blurred. In fact, as social constructivists have argued,
technology is assumed to be part of a “seamless web” of social and technical relations (Bijker et

	  

	  

152	  
	  

al., 2012, p. 4). However, for the purposes of deconstructing the sociotechnical aspects of the
external stakeholder dimensions, I will now attempt to parse them by their interconnected social
and technical aspects.
Social. During my fieldwork at MESH, I found that social, political, and economic forces
played a significant role in shaping cloud computing at MESH. I put them into categories of
public and private. The public forces were primarily defined by state legislation and technology
policy. In an effort to respond to the state’s fiscal crisis, the governor of Illinois passed
legislation in 2010 called Budgeting for Results, which I described as a merit-based system for
allocating public funds for public assistance programs. Around the same time, the Illinois
Framework was announced as a multiyear IT project focused on creating a single cloud
computing system for all of the state’s health and human services agencies. There are over 200
different state agencies, and the Illinois Framework seeks to integrate all of them with a single IT
system. It is not yet clear, however, how the community-based organizations that administer state
public assistance programs will benefit from this statewide IT project. The private forces that
motivated ETO’s development were largely directed from the United Way. I found that the
United Way and other private entities told directors at MESH that they needed to adopt a
centralized data reporting system to both sustain and bring in new funding sources at a time of
chronic cuts. Curtis Fanton, the associate director at MESH, described the external pressures
facing MESH from organizations such as the United Way.
Technical. The technical elements included the state-mandated management information
systems (e.g., eCornerstone) and the other programmatic information systems (e.g., Parents as
Teachers and Visit Tracker). The Visit Tracker cloud computing software recorded data from the
PAT curriculum. There were technical difficulties associated with moving from the Visit Tracker

	  

	  

153	  
	  

software to the ETO software. During our meetings with the workers, managers, and directors in
the PASS program in November and December 2013, we learned that the Visit Tracker software
automatically updated when there were changes to the PAT curriculum. Therefore, we made the
assumption that the company that operates Visit Tracker was closely connected with the PAT
program, which we later found out was true, particularly since PAT had endorsed Visit Tracker.
This made our work more difficult in responding to the PASS employees’ concerns that the ETO
software be updated in a consistent manner. Unfortunately, this key issue was not resolved
before the ETO project was put on hold.
In addition, the lack of interoperability between the state management information
systems that MESH was required to use and the ETO SaaS platform created additional staffing
and administrative challenges for MESH. ETO has great flexibility in terms of how it can be
configured, which I believe could provide MESH with many benefits in both surfacing invisible
work of employees and documenting impact in the community. However, this lack of
interoperability resulted in an increased workload that required staff to duplicate efforts, as I
tried to show in the case of Rhonda’s experiences in the Teen REACH program.
Internal Organizational Needs
As I previously described, the social and technical aspects of cloud computing are
interconnected. These aspects focus on ETO’s potential as a configurational technology to gather
data about community and organizational needs that could be used to surface invisible work,
influence public policymakers, and attract new sources of funding. These technical aspects
included paper, spreadsheets, Microsoft Word documents, and the ETO cloud computing
software. I would argue that the internal technical aspects are more flexible and configurable
because of their local orientation. This could be viewed in contrast to the external, which is more

	  

	  

154	  
	  

fixed and rigid based on more remote forces, including both human and nonhuman actors that
clashed with the organization’s vision for how it could use the ETO software.
Social. The social aspects on the internal organizational side could be understood as (1)
community and (2) organizational needs. As I mentioned, MESH itself, as a community-based
organization, was an actor in the social shaping of cloud computing. The role of MESH as an
actor was visible when Curtis explained that ETO “will also allow us to reach out to our
legislators on what is really needed in the community, versus what we are currently providing.”
This statement encapsulates what I mean by the tension between external stakeholder demands
and internal organizational needs in the cloud computerization process at MESH. Patricia
Ableton, the director of marketing and development at MESH, told me that having the ETO
software will help the organization become nationally accredited as a social service agency. As
she explained, “If we get this accreditation it could bring in more dollars for the agency,” which
would be very useful at a time of severe funding cuts to social services. Kling (1978) referred to
this phenomenon as the “administrative attractiveness” of computing, which has helped welfare
organizations sustain federal funding and attract new sources of funding.
Technical. The information boundaries between paper, spreadsheets, Microsoft Word
documents, and the ETO software represent some of the technical aspects of the internal
organizational dimensions. As I previously mentioned, the internal sociotechnical infrastructure
is more flexible and configurable because of its local orientation. This could be viewed in
contrast to the external dimensions, which are more fixed and rigid, based on the human and
nonhuman actors that came into conflict with the organization’s vision for ETO. There are also
legal issues related to the technical aspects of the ETO software, which I would include as key
relational aspects of the internal organizational dimensions. In addition to the lack of

	  

	  

155	  
	  

interoperability between public (state) and private (ETO) cloud computing systems, there are
legal issues related to data use and sharing between public and private software platforms. These
concerns could be introduced as questions: (1) What are the legal implications of sharing statemandated demographic data with for-profit cloud computing systems? (2) What are the privacy
and security issues related to sharing these data across networks? (3) Do additional consent
forms need to be used to make sure that people agree to sharing their personal data for evaluation
purposes in for-profit cloud computing software platforms, such as ETO? These questions
remained open because the lack of interoperability prevented us from sharing data across public
and private systems. However, these legal issues remain a factor in the future as communitybased organizations, such as MESH, seek to integrate for-profit cloud computing software
platforms.

Recommendations
I conclude this chapter with four recommendations, based on Busch’s (2011) guidelines
for “building standards that are fair, equitable, and effective” (pp. 300–308), for software
developers, public policymakers, and community-based organizations interested in using cloud
computing software to help move people out of poverty. It is important to note that these
recommendations are only relevant, and potentially useful, to community-based organizations
that administer state-funded programs. Specifically, I make recommendations to improve the
configurability of state IT systems to benefit community-based organizations and funders, rather
than advocating for private, for-profit systems in human services, while recognizing that there is
no perfect solution to designing one-size-fits-all state cloud computing software platforms.
However, in making these recommendations, I suggest opportunities to increase flexibility in the

	  

	  

156	  
	  

design of state IT systems to make it easier for community-based organizations to use and share
data as well as to provide a level of public accountability in the process. The purpose of these
recommendations is to address the needs of community-based organizations as they seek cloud
computing software platforms that will allow them to collect data and provide reports to funders
on actual community needs.
Recommendation 1
State policymakers should develop flexible, interoperable software platforms for
community-based organizations. As states develop large-scale information infrastructures to
increase interoperability between state agencies, they should also ensure that these same systems
increase data access and sharing between community-based organizations and state agencies.
The Illinois Framework has the potential to break down sociotechnical silos between state human
services agencies. It could also provide important benefits to community-based organizations by
developing configurational software platforms like ETO. The inclusion of interoperability in
these statewide systems, I argue, would make it potentially easier for community-based
organizations to do more with the data that they are already required to gather and report on for
state agencies. Flexible state IT systems are also less expensive options for these organizations,
which have been pressured into purchasing expensive SaaS platforms without receiving the
financial support to acquire and maintain the for-profit cloud computing software systems.
More concretely, state policymakers and their technical staff should develop ETO-like
systems for community-based organizations. This would give organizations the ability to
configure TouchPoint-like modules that could be configured based on the needs of the
organizations and the communities they serve. In other words, state agencies should design

	  

	  

157	  
	  

flexible, configurable, and interoperable systems that can meet the information needs of both
state agencies and the community-based organizations.
Recommendation 2
State policymakers should engage community-based organizations as key stakeholders in
the development of flexible, interoperable platforms. The Illinois Framework’s stakeholder
engagement process is an excellent model that other states should adopt. During the early months
of the project, the Illinois Framework project leaders held a series of meetings to which
community-based organizations like MESH were invited. This is not only a key aspect of the
software development lifecycle, but it should also be considered as a foundational model for
other states interested in developing flexible, interoperable software platforms for communitybased organizations. Busch (2011) argued that “participation is critical both for designing
standards that are acceptable to all affected parties as well as for providing legitimacy to the
standards themselves” (p. 303). These stakeholder meetings also provide opportunities for
community-based organizations to surface the invisible work of their employees and to provide
feedback about the ways in which state-mandated information systems can create less oppressive
work environments for employees (e.g., reducing stress from surveillance) at community-based
organizations, thus reducing harm.
Recommendation 3
State policymakers should create legal guidelines for community-based organizations
interested in using flexible, interoperable software to repurpose data. State policymakers should
work together with software developers and community-based organizations to determine the
sociotechnical and legal frameworks needed to make it easier for community-based
organizations to access and utilize data from state-mandated information systems. In developing

	  

	  

158	  
	  

more flexible information infrastructures, state policymakers should engage with experts to
determine current and potential legal challenges in this process. Busch (2011) explained that in
the creation of any standard, it is necessary to delegate to subsidiary bodies whenever possible.
In the context of standards setting and enforcement, this means that it is presumed
that local knowledge (and customs, traditions, norms, mores, etc.) takes
precedence over that to be placed in force over some larger geographic area
unless there is a compelling reason why this should not be the case. (p. 301)
If one of the goals of policymakers is to assist the public in reducing their reliance on public
assistance, then one goal should be to anticipate how chronic yearly cuts to public funding
impact community-based organizations and, in particular, how this impacts data access, use, and
reporting needs to attract new sources of funding.
Recommendation 4
State policymakers should increase funding for IT capacity within community-based
organizations that are required to use state-mandated IT systems. As my research has shown,
increasing social and technical demands on community-based organizations like MESH, due to
ongoing cuts to public funding, have made it increasingly difficult for these same organizations
to support the IT demands placed on them by both public and private funders. If funders expect
under-resourced community-based organizations to adopt increasingly sophisticated and
expensive cloud computing systems in the era of big data, then funders should also expect to
increase their own support for IT staff with the skills needed to utilize these systems, train staff,
and keep them running. In my study, I found that a lack of funding was the primary reason that
the ETO software project ultimately failed. Public and private funders need to provide
community-based organizations with the adequate funds to support the successful
implementation of configurable cloud computing systems.

	  

	  

159	  
	  

As I tried to show, MESH needed access to demographic data collected through statemandated information systems to inform policymakers about community needs and gain new
sources of funding during a time of chronic yearly cuts to public funding. However, important
questions remain about the ability of community-based organizations to use information
collected through state-mandated systems, particularly if the lack of interoperability between
these cloud computing systems is not addressed.

Conclusion
In this chapter, I discussed the implications of my findings and focused on particular
aspects of right and wrong (Winner, 1993) involved in the implementation of cloud computing
applications in community-based organizations. I drew upon Busch’s (2011) guidelines for
building standards that are “fair, equitable, and effective” (pp. 300–308) as a framework for
developing flexible, interoperable networked information systems for community-based
organizations to better respond to local needs. I reviewed the tensions between external
stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs, which ultimately influenced the direction
of the ETO cloud computing software at MESH during its implementation phase. I discussed the
need for the inclusion of flexibility and interoperability in the development of future statemandated information systems, while recognizing that there is no perfect solution to the IT
challenges facing state agencies and community-based organizations.
After detailing both the social and technical aspects, while recognizing their inseparable
nature, I put forward four recommendations for state policymakers, software developers, and
community-based organizations interested in using cloud computing as a configurational
technology to respond to external demands and promote internal organizational needs. I hope

	  

	  

160	  
	  

these recommendations may be useful to community-based organizations interested in using
cloud computing software to help people move out of poverty.

	  

	  

161	  
	  

Conclusion
Another step toward creating a humane technology relates to fostering
epistemological pluralism. The aim is to reduce the likelihood that other than
computer-based knowledge will be treated as worthless.
–Murphy and Pardeck (1991, p. 151)

In short, there is a lot of work to do, and we all have a role to play in creating a
more just world.
–Eubanks (2011, p. 151)

In the Introduction, I began by questioning the technological deterministic thinking about
cloud computing, which I explained was propelled in large part by former Google CEO Eric
Schmidt’s comments and further driven by the mainstream media. I used the concept of
technological determinism as an entrance through which to tell a more nuanced and complex
story about the uneven distribution of information technology’s benefits at a time of increasing
social inequality. By focusing on East St. Louis, as a U.S. industrial suburb, I showed how place
matters in understanding the potential of cloud computing to support community information
needs. The purpose was to examine the relational aspects of computerization in communitybased organizations in order to provide an alternative, and perhaps more down to earth,
perspective to counter the technological deterministic accounts.
This research makes a contribution to the field of library and information science by
describing how networked information systems can fail to meet the needs of community-based
organizations that provide state-funded public assistance programs. I argued that in order to
develop successful information infrastructures in human services organizations, cloud computing

	  

	  

162	  
	  

software platforms need to be flexible enough to both provide accountability to funders and meet
the needs of community-based organizations. I also believe this work makes a contribution by
showing the invisible work that is spent by human services professionals who are asked to enter
data into state IT systems. There is an incredible amount of inefficiency in what I found, and I
believe the dissertation can help to surface the challenges faced by organizations as they balance
the expectations of funders with their own internal reporting needs.
I also believe that my ethnography of cloud computing makes a contribution
methodologically because it provided ways to investigate actual connections between macrolevel social, political, and economic conditions and micro-level IT processes within a
community-based organization. This approach also allowed me to examine relationships between
physical infrastructure, such as transportation, and information infrastructure. This relational
perspective led me beyond the local context to consider additional variables that influenced the
ETO implementation.
My study also contributes new knowledge to the field of infrastructure studies by
describing the consequences of what I referred to as a gateway failure, or the absence of a
gateway between subsystems during the implementation of ETO. As a result, human services
professionals in the Teen REACH program were asked to enter the same data into two different
information systems, thus decreasing efficiency and increasing potential data entry errors. In
presenting this analysis, I hope to further expand the space for infrastructure studies research
within the field of library and information science. This research is particularly relevant in its
approach to examining the social shaping of cloud computing software in a U.S. industrial
suburb, which I believe is an important site to study how broader social, political, and economic

	  

	  

163	  
	  

forces uniquely shape information infrastructure in community-based organizations that
administer state-funded public assistance programs.
In this closing section, I elaborate on why East St. Louis was an important place to study
cloud computing. I focus on the important role that a diverse and resilient group of human
services professionals played in providing alternative views of networked information systems. I
refer to Murphy and Pardeck’s (1991) discussion of epistemological pluralism as way to argue
for a more inclusive approach in the development of cloud computing platforms, particularly
within community-based organizations. In doing so, I focus on the reasons why multiple ways of
knowing about technology, beyond the assumptions of businesses and governments, have the
potential to create more fair, just, sustainable, and accountable cloud computing systems that
support community-defined development goals.

Cloud Computing in an Abandoned City
One of the main problems with technological deterministic views about IT is that it can
create “policies and institutions that deepen inequality rather than alleviate it” (Eubanks, 2011, p.
xvi). Throughout this research, I have argued that East St. Louis is a special place, with its own
unique history, challenges, and opportunities for the many resilient people who live and work in
this industrial suburb. It is also the place where my colleagues and I uncovered a much more
expansive, and hidden, infrastructure that extended beyond computers and the Internet. My study
of information infrastructure exposed the previously concealed edges between and across paper,
spreadsheets, state-mandated information systems, and the ETO cloud computing software. In
the process, a broader infrastructure was revealed that introduced the idea that external
stakeholder demands and internal organizational needs created tensions that played a role in

	  

	  

164	  
	  

shaping the ETO software. I showed how the study was unique in this case because MESH is a
community-based organization that uses state-mandated information systems to provide human
services programs.
East St. Louis, as the place where my colleagues and I met infrastructure, played an
important role in influencing decisions about how the ETO software developed. In Chapter 5, I
introduced the public and private forces, including state and federal government agencies, the
United Way, the Illinois Framework, and Budgeting for Results, as some of the factors that
shaped cloud computing at MESH. In Chapter 6, I tried to show how transportation in East St.
Louis was directly tied to a broader infrastructure at MESH. I argued that information
technology failed parent educators in the PASS program who conducted in-home visits with lowincome children and their parents. In this case, poverty, geography, and computerization
intersected to create what Star (1999) called a “nonworking system” (p. 386) for the parent
educators and managers in the PASS program. These infrastructural perspectives together tell a
different story about cloud computing than what a utopian view of cloud computing provides.
Ultimately, I argued that the place where MESH met cloud computing, as an
infrastructure, mattered during the ETO software implementation. This is significant because it
also provides additional context for understanding why the project failed. I have repeatedly
emphasized that this failure was not because the work completed on the project was
unsuccessful. Rather, the organization ran out of money and could not afford to pay the monthly
SaaS fees. As a result, the project was put on hold until MESH can receive additional funding to
get the project back up and running. By focusing my analysis on East St. Louis as an industrial
suburb, I allowed the place where MESH met infrastructure to play a prominent role, which I
argued was critical for understanding how the technology developed.

	  

	  

165	  
	  

I also emphasized the fact that community-based organizations in Illinois, such as MESH,
experience additional challenges in implementing cloud computing because every year state and
federal funding for human services gets cut. At the same time, state and federal agencies, as well
as private funders, expect these same organizations to adopt sophisticated technology systems
with less financial support. In other words, technological deterministic views about cloud
computing in East St. Louis do not compute, and won’t until more economic opportunities are
provided to those who live and work in this low-income region.

Responding to Potential Criticisms of this Research
I now turn to address four potential criticisms, or what I refer to as “misunderstandings,”
of my recommendations included in the previous chapter. The purpose is to clarify my position
on what I have presented in this study and to help the reader better understand my main
arguments about why community-based organizations need more flexible, interoperable cloud
computing systems to meet the needs of funders, the organizations themselves, and the
communities they serve. Those in favor of standardization over increased flexibility, in the
design of information infrastructure, could perhaps level the statements below. The criticisms are
phrased intentionally to highlight any potential misunderstandings of my arguments. The
following statements in bold represent the potential criticisms, which are then followed by my
responses.
Misunderstanding 1: ETO is a good idea just as long as sensitive people configure it.
I began this research with a skeptical view of cloud computing software in human
services. I was (and remain) deeply concerned about the technological deterministic perspectives
that I observed both during my fieldwork and within the commercial media. What I found in East

	  

	  

166	  
	  

St. Louis was that cloud computing software platforms in human services can be a good idea as
long as flexible, interoperable systems—that address the concerns of community-based
organizations—are developed to surface invisible work, help organizations respond to
community needs, and reduce harms from IT within the community. I included recommendations
in Chapter 7 as an attempt to provide concrete steps toward developing more responsive cloud
computing applications within community-based organizations that administer state-funded
public assistance programs, rather than arguing that state-funded community-based organizations
should adopt for-profit, private cloud computing software platforms.
Misunderstanding 2: ETO is a good idea because it will make human services organizations
quantify more of their work with low-income people.
By recommending an ETO-like system for state-funded community-based organizations,
I am not suggesting that human services organizations quantify more of what they do. Rather, as
I suggested in my discussion of Power (1997), our society is traveling down a path towards
standardization and quantification that may be difficult to reverse. Therefore, if organizations are
increasingly expected to quantify their work with individuals and families in low-income
communities, then organizations should have access to more just, equitable, and humane IT
systems that provide benefits to organizations and not just to funders.
There is no doubt that income inequality is being exacerbated by certain technological
developments, as I reviewed in my discussion about the impacts of big data on social inequality
(e.g., see boyd & Crawford, 2011). However, there is power in social movements to effect social
change. The more power that human services agencies and the communities they serve have over
the IT systems that impact their everyday lives, the more likely it may be that the majority in our
society can direct positive social change.

	  

	  

167	  
	  

Misunderstanding 3: ETO is a good idea because it will help human services organizations
get more money from the state and then use this money to quantify more of everything.
Human services organizations absolutely need more money to support their work with
individuals and families in low-income communities, and they also need more money if funders
expect them to adopt ETO-like systems. However, cloud computing software applications should
only be implemented if they are providing benefits to both funders and the communities they
serve. The mission of MESH is to help move people out of poverty. As directors at MESH told
me, people need jobs. Lack of employment is one of the major reasons why people are living in
poverty in East St. Louis. States should focus on finding ways to create jobs, not on forcing
community-based organizations to quantify more of everything.
Misunderstanding 4: ETO is a good idea as long as people have a realistic view of cloud
computing.
Cloud computing can be a good idea for the reasons I’ve described above. However,
when IT systems fail to account for the work of community-based organizations that are
expected to use these systems, then the use of cloud computing software systems need to be
addressed. In this research, I called attention to the areas in which I found cloud computing
needed to be addressed, and I highlighted areas in which human services professionals at MESH
made a positive difference in creating more just, equitable, and effective cloud computing
software applications. I hope these perspectives help to provide a more realistic view of the
needs of community-based organizations in their work helping children and adults to move out
of poverty.
Ultimately, I want to make it clear that I believe there is no perfect solution to the
problem of designing cloud computing software systems that meet the needs of both funders and

	  

	  

168	  
	  

community-based organizations. However, I do want to argue that state IT systems should
facilitate the provision of accurate data to help move more people out of poverty and to provide
public accountability, particularly when there are issues identified by community-based
organizations and residents that need to be addressed (e.g., privacy, surveillance). East St.
Louisans understand the value of broadband technology, yet these vital resources are much lower
on their list of priorities for the reasons I outlined in this study. As Jerold Myers, the vice
president of youth programs best explained, “people in the community keep telling me, ‘We need
jobs. We need to make more money.’” Until there is substantial economic investment in the
Metro East region, East St. Louisans will continue to face a lack of employment opportunities
and persistent struggles caused by trying to live a life in poverty. One way to increase
employment opportunities is for businesses and governments to adopt better ways of knowing
that value local knowledge.

Valuing Epistemological Pluralism
Murphy and Pardeck (1991) explained that one of the undesirable consequences of
computerization is “the monopolization of knowledge” (p. 150). The fear of computers in human
services, they argued, is that computer-generated knowledge will become privileged over other
types of knowledge, such as multiple, local ways of knowing. Murphy and Pardeck argued that
in order to combat these developments, an “awareness must be promoted that restricting the
growth of knowledge is both inefficient and ineffective” (p. 151) and can ultimately become a
form of social control. The authors used the phrase “epistemological pluralism” as a way to
combat the centralization of knowledge that comes as a result of the computerization of human
services. In Chapter 6, I argued that a heterogeneous and resilient group of human services

	  

	  

169	  
	  

professionals played a significant role in shaping technology at MESH. I showed how the
inclusion of multiple perspectives offers the potential of combating the “centralization” of
knowledge in the development of networked information systems. This inclusive approach is
urgent because, as Mosco (2014) argued, cloud computing promotes a “very specific culture of
knowing that valorizes certain types of knowledge and ways of knowing that have significant
implications across social life” (p. 176). By focusing on the insights of the social workers,
program managers, and directors in the PASS and Teen REACH programs, I tried to show how
African American women, in particular, at MESH provided ways of knowing that informed the
infrastructural development of cloud computing software. However, in doing so, I tried to be
careful not to fetishize their “local knowledge,” nor did I wish to treat African American women
as a singular demographic or biological category. Rather, my goal was to share my observations
and analyses of the agency of a heterogeneous group of women at MESH by emphasizing their
contributions in shaping the cloud computing software.
Eubanks (2011) emphasized the significance of epistemological pluralism in her
discussion and application of Visvanathan’s (2005) concept of cognitive justice. As Eubanks
explained, “Cognitive justice in the information age demands that multiple knowledges be
recognized as arising from specific social locations and be integrated into decision making” (p.
152). In Eubanks’s work with low-income women at the YWCA in upstate New York, she
developed what she called “popular technology workshops.” The workshops were built upon
action-based frameworks drawn from participatory action research, popular education, and
participatory design (pp. 106–107). The women of the YWCA developed dozens of popular
technology workshops over a two-year period between 2001 and 2003. The workshops focused
on the everyday technology experiences of a vibrant, diverse, and resourceful group of women

	  

	  

170	  
	  

(p. 151) as a gateway toward analyzing the social structures that often shape these technology
experiences. At the same time, Eubanks argued:
The rhetoric of participation can be cynically deployed to enroll oppressed people
into the process of their own domination, burdening them with extra
responsibilities while failing to shift power relations or patterns of material
inequity. (p. 148)
Eubanks explained that ultimately what is needed is a “high-tech equity agenda” that can help
everyone understand and transform “the real world of information technology that we all share”
(p. 152).
In this research, I shared my observations and analyses of a heterogeneous group of
people living and working in a U.S. industrial suburb who use cloud computing at work. My goal
was to complicate the technological deterministic views about cloud computing, which have
been espoused by elites, and to offer a more human portrait of the extreme sociotechnical
challenges facing low-income communities in their efforts to adopt cloud computing software. I
offered four recommendations toward a more inclusive approach that promotes epistemological
pluralism. My hope is that the stories and suggestions included in this research will begin a
broader conversation about the challenges and opportunities of cloud computing and its
application in support of a more just society.

	  

	  

171	  
	  

References
Agar, M. H. (1980). The professional stranger: An informal introduction to ethnography. New
York, NY: Academic Press.
Anderson, M. L., & Collins, P. H. (1995). Preface. In M. L. Anderson & P. H. Collins (Eds.),
Race, class, and gender: An anthology (pp. xi–xx). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Appadurai, A. (1996). Modernity at large: Cultural dimensions of globalization. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Armbrust, M., Fox, A., Griffith, R., Joseph, A. D., Katz, R., Konwinski, A., … Zaharia, M.
(2010). A view of cloud computing. Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 50–58.
Bailey, B. (2009, September 16). White House embraces cloud computing: Feds unveil “app
store” for U.S. agencies to shop online. San Jose Mercury News. Retrieved from
http://www.mercurynews.com/businessbreakingnews/ci_13341707
Becker, H. (1982). Art worlds. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bell, D. (1973). The coming of post-industrial society: A venture in social forecasting. New
York, NY: Basic Books.
Beniger, J. R. (1986). The control revolution: Technological and economic origins of the
information society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bijker, W. E., Hughes, T. P., & Pinch, T. (Eds.). (2012). The social construction of technological
systems: New directions in the sociology and history of technology (Anniversary
ed.). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bijker, W. E., & Pinch, T. (Eds.) (2012). Preface to the anniversary edition. In W. E. Bijker, T.
P. Hughes, & T. Pinch (Eds.), The social construction of technological systems: New
directions in the sociology and history of technology (Anniversary ed., pp. xi–xxxiv).
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Bordone, A. (2013, June). Ensuring big data makes a measurable difference. Policy & Practice,
71(3), 32–38.
Bowker, G., Baker, K., Millerand, F., & Ribes, D. (2010). Toward information infrastructure
studies: Ways of knowing in a networked environment. In J. Hunsinger, L. Klastrup, &
M. Allen (Eds.), International handbook of internet research (pp. 97–117). Berlin,
Germany: Springer.
Bowker, G., & Star, S. (1998). Building information infrastructures for social worlds: The role of
classifications and standards. In T. Ishida (Ed.), Community computing and support
systems (pp. 231–248). Berlin, Germany: Springer.
	  

	  

172	  
	  

Bowker, G., & Star, S. (1999). Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
boyd, d. (2014). It’s complicated: The social lives of networked teens. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
boyd, d., & Crawford, K. (2011). Six provocations for big data. Retrieved from
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1926431
Brock, A., Kvasny, L., & Hales, K. (2010). Cultural appropriations of technical capital: Black
women, weblogs, and the digital divide. Information, Communication & Society, 13(7),
1040–1059.
Busch, L. (2011). Standards: Recipes for reality. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Business Wire. (2011). Social Solutions and the Promise Neighborhood Institute at Policylink
partner to measure & enhance performance of promise neighborhoods. Retrieved from
http://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20111018005395/en/Social-SolutionsPromise-Neighborhood-Institute-PolicyLink-Partner
Callon, M. (1991). Techno-economic networks and irreversibility. In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of
monsters: Essays on power, technology, and domination (pp. 132–164). London, UK:
Routledge.
Castells, M. (2000). The rise of the network society: The information age: Economy, society, and
culture (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell Publishers.
Catholic Urban Programs. (2014). Catholic Urban Programs. Retrieved from
http://catholicurbanprograms.org
Center for Prevention Research and Development. (2004). Teen REACH annual evaluation
report. Retrieved from http://www.cprd.illinois.edu/publications/teen-reach-annualevaluation-report-0
Charmaz, K. (2001). Grounded theory. In R. M. Emerson (Ed.) Contemporary field research:
Perspectives and formulations (2nd ed., pp. 335–352). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Clifford, J., & Marcus, G. E. (1986). Writing culture: The poetics and politics of ethnography.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Collins, P. H. (2000) Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the politics of
empowerment. New York, NY: Routledge.
Corporation for National and Community Service. (2013). Americorps. Retrieved from
http://www.nationalservice.gov/programs/americorps

	  

	  

173	  
	  

Cowan, R. S. (1983). More work for mother: The ironies of household technology from the open
hearth to the microwave. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Crenshaw, K. (2000). Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A Black feminist critique
of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory, and antiracist politics. In J. James & T. D.
Sharpley-Whiting (Eds.), The black feminist reader (pp. 208–238). Malden, MA:
Blackwell Publishers.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five
approaches. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.
Cusumano, M. (2010). Technology strategy and management: Cloud computing and SaaS as
new computing platforms. Communications of the ACM, 53(4), 27–29.
Dailey, D., Bryne, A., Powell, A., Karaganis, J., Chung, J., & Social Science Research Council
(U.S.). (2010). Broadband adoption in low-income communities. Brooklyn, NY: Social
Science Research Council.
Denzin, N. K. (1989). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological methods (3rd
ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Edwards, P. N., Jackson, S. J., Bowker, G. C., & Knobel, C. (2007). Understanding
infrastructure: Dynamics, tensions, and design. Retrieved from
http://deepblue.lib.umich.edu/handle/2027.42/49353
Eglash, R. (2004). Appropriating technology: An introduction. In R. Eglash, J. L. Croissant, G.
D. Chiro, & R. Fouché (Eds.), Appropriating technology: Vernacular science and social
power (pp. vii–xxi). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Egyedi, T. M. (2000).The standardised container: Gateway technologies in cargo transport. In M.
Holler & E. Niskanen (Eds.), EURASYearbook of Standardization, Vol. 3/Homo
Oeconomicus XVII(3) (pp. 231–262). Munich, Germany: Accedo.
Egyedi, T. M. (2001). Infrastructure flexibility created by standardized gateways: The cases of
XML and the ISO container. Knowledge, Technology, & Policy, 14(3), 41–54.
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (1995). Writing ethnographic fieldnotes. Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2001). Participant observation and fieldnotes. In P.
Atkinson, A. Coffey, S. Delamont, J. Lofland, & L. Lofland (Eds.), Handbook of
ethnography (pp. 352–368). London, UK: SAGE Publications.

	  

	  

174	  
	  

Emerson, R. M., & Pollner, M. (2001). Constructing participant/observation relations. In R. M.
Emerson (Ed.), Contemporary field research: Perspectives and formulations (pp. 239–
259). Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press.
Environmental Protection Agency. (2012, March). EPA proposes cleanup plan, seeks public
comments. Retrieved from
http://www.epa.gov/region5/cleanup/oldamericanzinc/pdfs/oldamericanzinc-factsheet201203-a.pdf
Eubanks, V. (2006). Technologies of citizenship: Surveillance and political learning in the
welfare system. In T. Monahan (Ed.), Surveillance and security: Technological politics
and power in everyday life. New York, NY: Routledge.
Eubanks, V. (2007). Trapped in the digital divide: The distributive paradigm in community
informatics. The Journal of Community Informatics, 3(2). Retrieved from http://cijournal.net/index.php/ciej/article/view/293/353
Eubanks, V. (2011). Digital dead end: Fighting for social justice in the information age.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Francis, J. (2011, July 7). As federal agencies look to the 'cloud,' Amazon capitalizes. The
Washington Post. Retrieved from www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic
Fleck, J. (1994). Learning by trying: The implementation of configurational technology.
Research Policy, 23(6), 637–652.
Fowler, G. A., & Worthen, B. (2009, March 26). The Internet industry is on a cloud—whatever
that may mean. Wall Street Journal–Eastern Edition, pp. A1–A10.
Frechtling, J. A. (2007) Logic modeling methods in program evaluation. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Gangadharan, S. P. (2013). Joining the surveillance society? New internet users in an age of
tracking. Retrieved from
http://newamerica.net/publications/policy/joining_the_surveillance_society
Gasser, L. (1986). The integration of computing and routine work. ACM Transactions on
Information Systems, 4, 205–225.
Geertz, C. (1973a). The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Geertz, C. (1973b). Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In C. Geertz
(Ed.), The interpretation of cultures: Selected essays (pp. 3–30). New York, NY: Basic
Books.

	  

	  

175	  
	  

Gitlin, A., Siegel, M., & Boru, K. (1989). The politics of method: From leftist ethnography to
educative research. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 2(3), 237–
253.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago, IL: Aldine Publications Company.
Gobble, M. M. (2013). Big data: The next big thing in innovation. Research Technology
Management, 56(1), 64–66.
	  
Golding, P., & Murdock, G. (2000). Culture, communications and political economy. In J.
Curran & M. Gurevitch (Eds.), Mass media and society (3rd ed., pp. 70–92). London,
UK: Arnold.
Gramsci, A. (1973). Letters from prison. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Guerstein, M. (2000). What is community informatics (and why does it matter)? Milan, Italy:
Polimetrica. Retrieved from
http://eprints.rclis.org/10919/1/WHAT_IS_COMMUNITY_INFORMATICS_reading.pd
f
Hakken, D., & Andrews, B. (1993). Computing myths, class realities: An ethnography of
technology and working people in Sheffield, England. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hamer, J. F. (2011). Abandoned in the heartland: Work, family, and living in East St. Louis.
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (1995). Ethnography: Principles in practice (2nd ed.). London,
UK: Routledge.
Hanseth, O., Monteiro, E., & Hatling, M. (1996). Developing information infrastructure: The
tension between standardization and flexibility. Science, Technology, & Human Values,
21(4), 407–426.
Harvard Family Research Project. (2014). A profile of the evaluation of Teen REACH program.
Retrieved from http://www.hfrp.org/out-of-school-time/ost-databasebibliography/database/teen-reach-program/evaluation-1-2000-2001-a-summary-of-thepilot-evaluation
Hounmenou, C. (2012). Black settlement houses and oppositional consciousness. Journal of
Black Studies, 43, 646–666.
Hughes, T. P. (1983). Networks of power: Electrification in western society, 1880–1930.
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.

	  

	  

176	  
	  

Illinois Department of Human Services. (2013). eCornerstone: User manual. Retrieved from
http://www.cstonesupport.com/themes/canning/manuals/eCornerstone%20%20User%20Manual.pdf
Illinois Department of Human Services. (2014a). eCornerstone. Retrieved from
https://ecs.dhs.illinois.gov/ecspublic/ecs
Illinois Department of Human Services. (2014b). Grants definitions and acronyms—Illinois
Department of Human Services. Retrieved from
http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=28074
Illinois Department of Human Services. (2014c). Logic model: Teen REACH (TR). Retrieved
from https://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=65910
Illinois Department of Human Services. (2014d). Teen REACH. Retrieved from
http://www.dhs.state.il.us/page.aspx?item=31973
Illinois Framework for Healthcare and Human Services. (2013). Illinois Framework for
Healthcare and Human Services. Retrieved from http://illinoisframework.org
Illinois Office of Management and Budget. (2014). Budgeting for results commission. Retrieved
from http://www2.illinois.gov/gov/budget/Pages/results.aspx
Illinois Public Radio. (2013, March 19). IL senator proposes DCEO overhaul. Retrieved from
http://news.wsiu.org/post/il-senator-proposes-dceo-overhaul
Illinois State Board of Education. (2014). Free and reduced-price meal eligibility data.
Retrieved from http://www.isbe.net/nutrition/htmls/eligibility_listings.htm
Inskeep, S. (Narrator). (2013, September 12). Tired of inequality? One economist says it’ll only
get worse [Radio broadcast episode]. Morning Edition. Washington, DC: National Public
Radio.
Jackson, S., Edwards, P., Bowker, G., & Knobel, C. (2007). Understanding infrastructure:
History, heuristics and cyberinfrastructure policy. First Monday, 12(6). Retrieved from
http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1904/1786
James, J., & Sharpley-Whiting, T. D. (2000). Preface. In J. James & T. D. Sharpley-Whiting
(Eds.), The black feminist reader (pp. ix–xii). Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Jasanoff, S. (2004). States of knowledge: The co-production of science and social order. London,
UK: Routledge.
Jewett, T., & Kling, R. (1991). The dynamics of computerization in a social science research
team: A case study of infrastructure, strategies, and skills. Social Science Computer
Review, 9, 246–275.

	  

	  

177	  
	  

Julnes, P. (2009). Performance-based management systems: Effective implementation and
maintenance. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Karger, H. J. (1986). Phyllis Wheatley house: A history of the Minneapolis Black settlement
house, 1924 to 1940. Phylon, 47(1), 79–90.
Kart, K. (2008, September 29). Google goes to Washington, gearing up to put its stamp on
government. The Washington Post, Retrieved from
www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic
Klein, H., & Kleinman, D. L. (2002). The social construction of technology: Structural
considerations. Science, Technology & Human Values, 27(1), 28–52.
Kline, R., & Pinch, T. (1999). The social construction of technology. In D. MacKenzie & J.
Wajcman (Eds.), The social shaping of technology (2nd ed., pp. 113–115). Buckingham,
UK: Open University Press.
Kling, R. (1978). Automated welfare client-tracking and service integration: The political
economy of computing. Communications of the ACM, 21(6), 484–493.
Kling, R. (1986). The social dimensions of computerization. ACM SIGCHI Bulletin, 17(SI), 337–
339.
Kling, R. (1991). Computerization and social transformations. Science, Technology & Human
Values, 16(3), 342–367.
Kling, R. (2003). Social informatics. In M. Drake (Ed.), Encyclopedia of library and information
science (pp. 2656–2661). New York, NY: Dekker.
Kling, R., & Scacchi, W. (1982). The web of computing: Computer technology as social
organization. Advances in Computers, 21, 1–90.
Koten, J. (2013, June 11). Manufacturing: Unleashing innovation (A special report)—A
revolution in the making: Digital technology is transforming manufacturing, making it
leaner and smarter, and raising the prospect of an American industrial renaissance. Wall
Street Journal–Eastern Edition, p. R1.
Lasch-Quinn, E. (1993). Black neighbors: Race and the limits of reform in the American
settlement house movement, 1890–1945. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Latour, B. (2005). Reassembling the social: An introduction to actor-network theory. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory life: The social construction of scientific facts.
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications.

	  

	  

178	  
	  

Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Law, J. (Ed.) (1991). A sociology of monsters: Essays on power, technology and domination.
London, UK: Routledge.
Law, J. (1992). Notes on the theory of the actor network: Ordering, strategy and heterogeneity.
Lancaster, UK: Centre for Science Studies, Lancaster University. Retrieved from
http://www.comp.lancs.ac.uk/sociology/papers/Law-Notes-on-ANT.pdf
Lewis, R. (Ed.). (2004). Manufacturing suburbs: Building work and home on the metropolitan
fringe. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Lofland, J., Snow, D., Anderson, L., & Lofland, L. H. (2006). Analyzing social settings: A guide
to qualitative observation and analysis (4th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Lumpkins, C. L. (2008). American pogrom: The East St. Louis race riot and black politics.
Athens: Ohio University Press.
Mackay, H., Carne, C., Beynon-Davies, P., & Tudhope, D. (2000). Reconfiguring the user:
Using rapid application development. Social Studies of Science, 30(5), 737–757.
Mackay, H., & Gillespie, G. (1992). Extending the social shaping of technology approach:
Ideology and appropriation. Social Studies of Science, 22(4), 685–716.
Mackenzie, A. (2003). These things called systems: Collective imaginings and infrastructural
software. Social Studies of Science, 33(3), 365–387.
MacKenzie, D., & Wajcman, J. (1999). Introductory essay: The social shaping of technology. In
D. MacKenzie & J. Wajcman (Eds.), The social shaping of technology (2nd ed., pp. 3–
27). Buckingham, UK: Open University Press.
Magnet, S. A. (2011). When biometrics fail: Gender, race, and the technology of identity.
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Malinowski, B. (1922). Argonauts of the western Pacific: An account of native enterprise and
adventure in the archipelagoes of Melanesian New Guinea. London, UK: Routledge.
Marchand, R. (1998). Creating the corporate soul: The rise of public relations and corporate
imagery in American big business. Berkeley: University of California Press.

	  

	  

179	  
	  

Marcus, G. E., & Fischer, M. M. J. (1986). Anthropology as cultural critique: An experimental
moment in the human sciences. Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
McLaughlin, M. (2005). Power, community, and racial killing in East St. Louis. New York, NY:
Palgrave Macmillan.
Meece, M. (2012, May 17). A user’s guide to finding storage space in the cloud. New York
Times, p. 6.
Metro East Settlement House. (2013). United Way of greater St. Louis site visit packet.
Unpublished report.
Miller, D., & Slater, D. (2000). The internet: An ethnographic approach. Oxford, UK: Berg.
Monteiro, E., Hanseth, O., & Hatling, M. (1994). Developing information infrastructure:
Standardization vs. flexibility. Working Paper 18 in Science, Technology and Society,
University of Trondheim, Norway.
Morino, M. (2011). Leap of reason: Managing to outcomes in an era of scarcity. Washington,
DC: Venture Philanthropy Partners.
Mosco, V. (1988). Introduction: Information in the pay-per society. In V. Mosco & J. Wasko
(Eds.), The political economy of information (pp. 3–26). Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Mosco, V. (1996). The political economy of communication: Rethinking and renewal. London,
UK: SAGE Publications.
Mosco, V. (2014). To the cloud: Big data in a turbulent world. Boulder, CO: Paradigm
Publishers.
Mosco, V., & Wasko, J. (1988). The political economy of information. Madison: University of
Wisconsin Press.
Murphy, J. W., & Pardeck, J. T. (1991). The computerization of human service agencies: A
critical appraisal. New York, NY: Auburn House.
Nash, J. C. (1989). From tank town to high tech: The clash of community and industrial cycles.
Albany: State University of New York Press.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2011). The NIST definition of cloud computing.
Retrieved from http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (1995). Falling through
the net: A survey of the “have nots” in urban and rural America. Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Commerce.

	  

	  

180	  
	  

National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (1998). Falling through
the net II: New data on the digital divide. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Commerce.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (1999). Falling through
the net: Defining the digital divide. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
National Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA). (2000). Falling through
the net: Toward digital inclusion. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Parents as Teachers. (2014). About us. Retrieved from http://www.parentsasteachers.org/about
Pargram, D., & Palme, J. (2009). ASCII imperialism. In M. Lampland & S. L. Star (Eds.),
Standards and their stories: How quantifying, classifying, and formalizing practices
shape everyday life (pp. 177–206). Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Pavone, V., & Arias, F. (2011). Beyond the geneticization thesis: The political economy of
PGD/PGS in Spain. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 37(3), 235–261.
Pinkett, R. (2003). Community technology and community building: Early results from the
creating community connections project. Information Society, 19(5), 365–380.
Power, M. (1997). The audit society: Rituals of verification. Oxford, UK: Oxford University
Press.
Rabinow, P. (1977). Reflections on fieldwork in Morocco. Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Reardon, K. M. (1998). Participatory action research as service learning. In R. A. Rhoads & J. P.
F. Howard (Eds.), Academic service learning: A pedagogy of action and reflection (pp.
57–64). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Reardon, K. M. (2000). An experiential approach to creating an effective community-university
partnership: The East St. Louis action research project. Cityscape: A Journal of Policy
Development and Research, 5, 59–74.
Rhinesmith, C. (2012). Free library hot spots: Supporting broadband adoption in Philadelphia’s
low-income communities. International Journal of Communication, 6, 2529–2554.
Rhinesmith, C., Wolske, M., & Kehoe, A. (2011, November). Measuring the impact of citizen
journalism: A study of community newsrooms in north Champaign and East St. Louis,
Illinois. Proceedings of the Community Informatics Research Network (CIRN) 2011
Conference. Retrieved from http://ccnr.infotech.monash.edu/conferencesworkshops/prato2011bestpaper.html.

	  

	  

181	  
	  

Rogers, E. M. (2000). Informatization, globalization, and privatization in the new millennium.
Asian Journal of Communication, 10(2), 71–92.
Rudwick, E. M. (1964). Race riot at East St. Louis, July 2, 1917. Carbondale: Southern Illinois
University Press.
Sætnan, A. R. (1991). Rigid politics and technological flexibility: The anatomy of a failed
hospital innovation. Science, Technology & Human Values, 16(4), 419–447.
Sakole, J. (2013, March 1). Signs point to increased federal adoption of cloud computing. The
Washington Post. Retrieved from www.lexisnexis.com/hottopics/lnacademic
Sandvig, C. (2012). Connection at Ewiiaapaayp Mountain: Indigenous internet infrastructure. In
L. Nakamura & P. A. Chow-White (Eds.), Race after the internet (pp. 168–200). New
York, NY: Routledge.
Sandvig, C. (2013). The internet as an infrastructure. In Dutton, W. H. (Ed.), The Oxford
handbook of internet studies (pp. 86–108). Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sanjek, R. (1990). Preface. In R. Sanjek (Ed.), Fieldnotes: The makings of anthropology. Ithaca,
NY: Cornell University Press.
Sawyer, S., & Tapia, A. (2002). The computerization of work: A social informatics perspective.
In J. George (Ed.), Computers in society (pp. 93–109). New York, NY: Oxford.
Schatzman, L., & Strauss, A. L. (1973). Field research. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
Inc.
Schiller, D. (1999). Digital capitalism: Networking the global market system. Cambridge, MA:
The MIT Press.
Schiller, D. (2007). How to think about information. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Schiller, H. I. (1981). Who knows: Information in the age of the Fortune 500. Norwood, NJ:
Ablex.
Schiller, H. I. (1996). Information inequality: The deepening social crisis in America. New York,
NY: Routledge.
Schoech, D. (1999). Human services technology: Understanding, designing, and implementing
computer and Internet applications in the social services. New York, NY: Haworth
Press.
Schoech, D. (2010). Interoperability and the future of human services. Journal of Technology in
Human Services, 28, 7–22.

	  

	  

182	  
	  

Schuler, D. (1996). New community networks: Wired for change. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley.
Schmidt, E. (2008, May 1). Eric Schmidt at IBM business partners leadership conference [Video
file]. Retrieved from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YXtn6NpitHY
Servon, L. J. (2002). Bridging the digital divide: Technology, community, and public policy.
Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing.
Social Solutions. (2013). ETO Impact non-profit software. Retrieved from
http://www.socialsolutions.com/eto-impact-non-profit-software.aspx
Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Star, S., & Strauss, A. (1999). Layers of silence, arenas of voice: The ecology of visible and
invisible work. Computer Supported Cooperative Work: The Journal of Collaborative
Computing, 8(1/2), 9–30.
Star, S. L. (1999). The ethnography of infrastructure. American Behavioral Scientist, 43(3), 377–
391.
Star, S. L. (2007, March). Orphans of infrastructure: A new point of departure. Paper presented
to the Oxford Internet Institute’s Conference “The Future of Computing: A Vision,”
University of Oxford, UK.
Star, S. L. (in press). From hestia to home page: Feminism and the concept of home in
cyberspace. In N. Lykke and R. Braidotti (Eds.), Between monsters, goddesses and
cyborgs: Feminist confrontations with science, medicine and cyberspace. London, UK:
ZED-Books.
Star, S. L., & Bowker, G. (2010). How to infrastructure. In L. A. Lievrouw & S. M. Livingstone
(Eds.), Handbook of new media: Social shaping and social consequences of ICTs,
updated student edition. London, UK: SAGE Publications.
Star, S. L., & Ruhleder, K. (1996). Steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: Design and access
for large information spaces. Information Systems Research, 7(1), 111–134.
States News Service. (2010). State Senator Dan Kotowski to take lead on spending reform and
budgeting for results. Retrieved from
http://www.illinoissenatedemocrats.com/index.php/caucus-news/feature-storyarchive/1294-state-senator-dan-kotowski-to-take-lead-on-spending-reform-andbudgeting-for-results
Staudenmaier, J. M. (1989). The politics of successful technologies. In S. Cutcliffe & R. Post
(Eds.), In context: History and the history of technology: Essays in honor of Melvin
Kranzberg. Bethlehem, PA: Lehigh University Press.

	  

	  

183	  
	  

Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. M. (Eds.) (1997). Grounded theory in practice. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications.
Taylor, T. L. (2006). Play between worlds: Exploring online game culture. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Theising, A. (2003). Made in USA: The rise and fall of an industrial river town. St. Louis, MO:
Virginia Publishing.
UNESCO World Heritage Center. (2014). Cahokia mounds state historic site. Retrieved from
http://whc.unesco.org/en/list/198
U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). East St. Louis (city), Illinois. Retrieved from
http://quickfacts.census.gov/qfd/states/17/1722255.html
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. (2014). Brownfields and land revitalization. Retrieved
from http://www.epa.gov/brownfields/
Van Maanen, J. (1988). Tales from the field: On writing ethnography. Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press.
Visvanathan, S. (2005). Knowledge, justice, and democracy. In M. Leach, I. Scoones, & B.
Wynne (Eds.), Science and citizens: Globalization and the challenge of engagement (pp.
83–96). New York, NY: Zed Books.
Wajcman, J. (1991). Feminism confronts technology. University Park: The Pennsylvania State
University Press.
Wajcman, J. (2010). Feminist theories of technology. Cambridge Journal of Economics, 34(1),
143–152.
Walker, R., & Lewis, R. (2004). Beyond the crabgrass frontier: Industry and the spread of North
American cities, 1850–1950. In R. Lewis (Ed.), Manufacturing suburbs: Building work
and home on the metropolitan fringe. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
Webster, F. (2002). Theories of the information society (2nd ed.). London, UK: Routledge.
The White House. (2014). The sequester: What is it? Retrieved from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/sequester
Williams, R., & Edge, D. (1996). The social shaping of technology. Research Policy, 25, 865–
899.
Wilson, E. J. (2004). The information revolution and developing countries. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

	  

	  

184	  
	  

Winner, L. (1986). The whale and the reactor: A search for limits in an age of high technology.
Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.
Winner, L. (1993). Upon opening the black box and finding it empty: Social constructivism and
the philosophy of technology. Science, Technology, & Human Values, 18(3), 362–378.	  
	  
Wolcott, H. F. (1999). Ethnography: A way of seeing. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Wolske, M., Gibbs, D., Kehoe, A., Jones, V., & Irish, S. (2013). Outcome of applying evidencebased design to public computing centers: A preliminary study. The Journal of
Community Informatics, 9(1). Retrieved from http://cijournal.net/index.php/ciej/article/view/811/964
Woolgar, S. (1991). Configuring the user: The case of usability trials. In J. Law (Ed.), A
sociology of monsters: Essays on power, technology, and domination (pp. 57–102).
London, UK: Routledge.
Wyatt, S. (2003). Non-users also matter: The construction of users and non-users of the Internet.
In N. Oudshoorn & T. Pinch (Eds.), How users matter: The co-construction of users and
technology (pp. 67–80). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Zuboff, S. (1988). In the age of the smart machine: The future of work and power. New York,
NY: Basic Books.

	  

	  

185	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

186	  

Appendix A: MESH Organizational Chart

Appendix B: Interview Protocol
The Informatization of Community-Based Services in East St. Louis, Illinois
Interview Protocol
Interviewee:
Project/Application:
Interviewer:
Place:
Date:
Time:

#1. Introduce the interviewer.
#2. Introduce the research.
This study is run by University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
The research investigates how the [Metro East Settlement House (MESH)] configured and
implemented the ETO™ case management software. In this process, we are interested in
understanding how the structural, historical, and cultural contexts influenced this process, as well as
what the consequences have been for [MESH] after having implemented the ETO software. The goal
of this study is to develop a deeper understanding of the social contexts that shaped the
implementation phase.

#3. Introduce the interview.
This interview is a semistructured and will be about 45–60 minutes.
#4. Request permission to use the recorder.
We would like to audio record this interview. Your answers are strictly confidential. The recorded
material will be used only for the research and your identity will not be disclosed in any way. Would you
permit us to record the interview?

	  

	  

187	  
	  

Interview Questions for Directors, Managers, and Staff
No.

	  

Main Questions

Follow-up Questions

1

In your opinion, how successful is the ETO
software in helping your organization to
provide community-based services?

a. Can you describe the most important things
emerging in your mind?
b. What are the main goals and objectives for
the software?
c. How have the goals evolved?

2

Can you briefly describe the history of case
management software at the [Metro East
Settlement House]?

a. What has been the most rewarding
experience during this time?
b. What has been the most challenging?

3

Please describe the ETO planning process
at [Metro East Settlement House].

a. How were the staff, managers, and directors
involved in developing the software?
b. How did you get involved in developing the
software?
c. Were community members or others involved
in configuring and/or implementing the
software?

4

How do you finance the design and
implementation of the ETO software?

5

How did your organization decide to
purchase the ETO software?

a. Were there other options? If so, what
influenced your final decision?

6

How did your organization decide to
configure the ETO software?

a. What influenced your decisions during this
phase?
b. Did people have different ideas about how
the software should be configured?

7

How has the ETO software changed the
way your organization provides communitybased services?

a. In what ways has the ETO software changed
the nature of work for your employees?

8

How does your organization evaluate
performance of the ETO software?

a. In what ways have community members
benefited from the ETO software?
b. In what ways have community members not
benefited from the ETO software?

9

In your opinion, what are the factors that
made your organization’s ETO software
implementation a success? What barriers
exist to impede greater success?

a. Can you describe how you have collaborated
with other individuals or organizations during
the ETO software implementation? What
impact did this process have on the
implementation?

10

If you could reconfigure the ETO software,
what would you do differently?

11

Is there anyone else we should talk with
about the ETO software implementation?

	  

188	  
	  

12

Is there anything else that you would like to
say about the ETO software
implementation?

a. If there are documents and any other
materials important to the ETO
implementation, can our research team have
a copy of them?

#1. Demographic question
Now I’d like to ask some questions about you.
1. How long have you been working in human services?
2. How many years have you worked at [MESH]?
3. How long have you worked in your current position?
4. What was your previous position?
#2. Closing
(Interviewer thanks the interviewee, requests him/her to let us know when he/she has any further
information later, and give a business card.)

	  

	  

189	  
	  

Appendix C: Consent Form
	  
INFORMED CONSENT FORM
The Informatization of Community-Based Services in East St. Louis, Illinois
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
Graduate School of Library and Information Science
Champaign, IL 61820
•
•

For questions about the RESEARCH, contact Dr. Linda C. Smith, 217-333-7742, or email
lcsmith@illinois.edu
For questions about your RIGHTS AS A RESEARCH SUBJECT, contact the office for the
Institutional Review Board, Suite 203, 528 East Green Street, University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, IL 61820. Participants may call the IRB office collect, if they identify
themselves as research participants, at 217-333-2670 or contact by email: irb@illinois.edu

Purpose: This research project will examine the everyday experiences of workers, managers, and
directors at the [Metro East Settlement House (MESH)] in East St. Louis, Illinois as they configure
and implement a human services software platform. In this process, we are interested in
understanding the political, economic, historical, and cultural contexts that influence this process, as
well as what the consequences might be for [MESH] after having implemented the software
platform. The goal of this study is to develop a deeper understanding of the structural, historical,
and cultural contexts that shape the software configuration and implementation process.
Your cooperation in this study is completely voluntary. If you prefer not to participate or if you
choose to withdraw from the study at any time, you may do so without penalty. The information
you are asked to provide is for the purpose of research only.
Procedures: The research will employ two types of methods: (1) observations of workers,
managers, and directors at [MESH] during normal work hours, and (2) face-to-face interviews with
employees from the organization.
Observations: The observations on site at [MESH] will take place between June 15, 2013,
and August 15, 2014. During this time, the investigator, Colin Rhinesmith will take notes on
how directors, managers, and staff configure and implement the software. Particular
attention will be paid to how the organization’s programs (for example, content, materials,
etc.) and the contexts that impact these programs (for example, changes in state and federal
funding) contribute to the configuration and implementation process. Notes will be taken
during regular work hours throughout the study duration. You will also be given the option
to participate or not participate in the observations at the end of this form.
Interviews: We are conducting interviews with staff, managers, and directors that have been
involved in the configuration and implementation of the software. We will be requesting
permission to interview you about your participation in this process. You may refuse to

	  

	  

190	  
	  

answer any question and may leave the interview at any time. If you choose to stay for the
whole interview, it will require approximately 45–60 minutes of your time. This interview
will be recorded using digital audio recording equipment and fieldnotes, unless you object to
being recorded. You will also be given the option to request copies of the recordings and
transcripts. A copy of this form will be given to you.
Risks and Benefits: There are no risks in this study beyond those that might be experienced in
everyday life. Because the research will investigate the everyday experiences of workers, managers,
and directors at a nonprofit organization as they implement a case management software platform,
there may be employability risks associated with participating in this study. For example, if a
manager or director discovers during the study that a worker or manager is not performing to a
satisfactory level, there may be employability risks associated for the worker or manager participating
in the study. However, this information about the worker’s poor performance could be discovered
via other means (i.e., not through our research) and present an employability risk to them anyway. In
this case, the risk might stem from the poor performance, not our study.
The expected benefits of the research to the subjects and/or society include their participation in the
first study in East St. Louis, IL, that has examined the political, economic, historical, and cultural
contexts shaping information and communication technology implementation. The subjects are
expected to benefit from their contribution toward helping to develop a deeper understanding of
how a community-based organization in East St. Louis implements information and communication
technology to advance the organization’s mission. The subjects may also find the study interesting.
As there is no more than minimal risk, the benefits of participation outweigh the risks.
Confidentiality: To protect your privacy and that of your colleagues, all transcribing of audio will
be done within the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The audio recordings will
be transcribed between June 15, 2013, and August 15, 2014, and will be destroyed by the end of this
period. The data will be stored in a secure UIUC Box Cloud Service account protected by a
password for the duration of the study (at most five years). Presentations, reports, and publications
will focus attention on general findings about multi-organizational partnerships and not on
individuals or their actions in a way that could result in identification of individuals. We protect your
privacy by using a confidential ID in place of your real name. However, if you are interested in
having your real name included as a participant in this study your identity would be made public and
not protected. You can also choose whether or not you want your name made public at the end of
this letter.
Dissemination of Results: The results of this study will be disseminated in Colin Rhinesmith’s
research at the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. The results may also be disseminated in other publications and conference
presentations authored by Colin Rhinesmith. However, the main purpose of the research is to satisfy
Colin Rhinesmith’s research requirement at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.
Statement from the Agency Professional
I understand the nature of the study and voluntarily agree to participate in the research. I
also agree to be recorded through the use of a digital audio recorder and fieldnotes. I can refuse to
be audio recorded. In addition, I understand that I can stop the observations and/or interviews at
any time. I have had enough time to ask questions and have them answered. I have been given a
	  

	  

191	  
	  

copy of this form whether I agree to participate or not.

Please check one box between yes or no below:
“I agree to being observed on site during normal work hours for this research.” ( Yes
“I agree to allow my interviews to be audio recorded in this research.” ( Yes

No  )

“I agree to allow my name used/associated with my responses in
publications, presentations, etc.”

No  )

( Yes

No  )

SIGNATURE OF PROFESSIONAL _______________________________________
PRINTED NAME OF PROFESSIONAL _______________________________________
AGENCY/POSITION OF PROFESSIONAL _______________________________________
DATE _______________________________________

	  

	  

192	  
	  

Appendix D: Teen REACH Survey 1

	  

	  

193	  
	  

Appendix E: Teen REACH Survey 2

	  

	  

194	  
	  

