UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
Los Angeles

Library Support for Massive Open Online Courseware

A thesis submitted in partial satisfaction
of the requirements for the degree Master of
Library and Information Science

by

Claire Elizabeth Nickerson

2015

UMI Number: 1590386

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1590386
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by
Claire Elizabeth Nickerson
2015

ABSTRACT OF THE THESIS

Library Support for Massive Open Online Courseware

by

Claire Elizabeth Nickerson

Master of Library and Information Science
University of California, Los Angeles, 2015
Professor Beverly P. Lynch, Chair

MOOCs—an online successor to older forms of distance education, such as correspondence
courses, radio for education, and educational television—entered the higher education scene
around 2011-2012 with the founding of Coursera, Udacity, and EdX. Although a literature
review reveals some discussion of how libraries can support MOOC professors, there has been
very little discussion of how libraries can support MOOC students. However, library support for
MOOCs has become very important now that two new trends are forcing MOOC students to take
their coursework more seriously: MOOCs for high school students and MOOCs for credit, both
of which are partially driven by the rising cost of college tuition. Before academic libraries can
provide research assistance or materials to MOOC students, they will need to address
institutional, distance-based, legal, and resource barriers.

ii

The thesis of Claire Elizabeth Nickerson is approved.
Leah Lievrouw
Jonathan Furner
Beverly P. Lynch, Chair

University of California, Los Angeles
2015

iii

Table of Contents
Introduction ..................................................................................................................................... 1
Section One: MOOCs in Context ................................................................................................... 3
What is a MOOC? ....................................................................................................................... 3
The History of MOOCs .......................................................................................................... 5
Precursors to MOOCs ............................................................................................................... 12
Correspondence Courses ....................................................................................................... 12
Radio for Education .............................................................................................................. 15
Educational Television.......................................................................................................... 17
Why MOOCs are not a Threat .................................................................................................. 21
Literature Review on Libraries and MOOCs ............................................................................ 22
Section Two: Why Libraries Should Support MOOCs ................................................................ 26
MOOCs are Gaining Momentum.............................................................................................. 26
MOOCs for Younger Students.............................................................................................. 28
Rising Tuition Costs ............................................................................................................. 29
MOOCs for Credit ................................................................................................................ 31
Taking MOOCs Seriously..................................................................................................... 34
Current Access to Scholarly Resources is Limited ................................................................... 36
MOOC Students and For-Profit Companies ............................................................................. 36
The Potential for Research from MOOC Students ................................................................... 39
Section Three: Public Libraries versus Academic Libraries......................................................... 40
The Arguments for and Against Public Library Support .......................................................... 40
The Arguments for and Against Academic Library Support .................................................... 43
Section Four: Obstacles to be Overcome ...................................................................................... 44
Library Values .......................................................................................................................... 45
Barriers to Universal Access ..................................................................................................... 47
Institutional Barriers to Universal Access ............................................................................ 47
Distance as a Barrier to Universal Access ............................................................................ 50
Legal Barriers to Universal Access....................................................................................... 55
Resource Barriers to Universal Access ................................................................................. 58
A Bright Future ......................................................................................................................... 60
Conclusion .................................................................................................................................... 61
Appendix A: MOOC History Timeline ........................................................................................ 63
Bibliography ................................................................................................................................. 64

iv

Introduction
MOOCs, or Massive Open Online Courses, have existed since approximately 2008 and
have been popular since approximately 2012, when two of the three current major MOOC
providers (Coursera, Udacity, and EdX) were founded. However, although MOOCs have been
touted as a possible replacement or supplement to traditional higher education, MOOC students
do not currently have access to research resources or materials. In this thesis, I argue that
academic libraries should step in to provide this support to MOOC students before for-profit
companies get an opportunity to step into that market niche. I also explore in depth the obstacles
to this goal and some possible solutions.
The argument is divided into four sections. The first section focuses on the background of
MOOCs, explaining in more depth what they are and how they are different from regular online
classes. It briefly covers the history of the MOOC, particularly the history of the three major
MOOC providers, Coursera, Udacity, and EdX. The first section also spends some time covering
the history of distance education before MOOCs, discussing correspondence courses, radio for
education, and educational television in the context of their strengths and weaknesses compared
to those of MOOCs. Finally, it explains why MOOCs are not a threat to traditional academia and
covers the previous literature on library support for MOOC students.
The second section focuses on why libraries should support MOOC students. It explores
the two main trends that are allowing MOOCs to continue to gain momentum, namely the trend
toward developing college-preparation MOOCs for high school students and the trend toward
offering college credit to students who successfully complete MOOCs. Both of these trends are
driven in part by the rising cost of college tuition, and both of these trends give students a reason
to take MOOCs more seriously in terms of the level of effort and scholarship they put in.

1

Between the impetus to take scholarship in MOOCs more seriously and recent advances in peer
grading processes, it seems likely that in the next few years, MOOC students may start writing
actual research papers. To do that, they will need access to scholarly resources, which
unfortunately is currently severely limited. However, if there is a demand for access to scholarly
resources—and there will be—that is not being met, for-profit companies will notice that market
niche and begin to fill it in, perhaps in less than completely ethical ways. Therefore it is up to
libraries, which have a strict code of ethics, to find a way around the obstacles and begin
providing research help and resources.
However, there remains the question of which libraries should be supporting MOOC
students. The third and shortest section compares and contrasts the advantages and disadvantages
of support for MOOC students from public libraries versus from academic libraries and
concludes that the case for support from academic libraries is stronger.
Having established both the reasons why libraries should support MOOC students and
that academic libraries are the best option to provide research resources and support, we continue
to the fourth section, which addresses the obstacles to academic library support for MOOCs and
some ways in which they might be overcome. The fourth section begins with a second look at
library values and how they promote universal access to educational resources. It then divides
the obstacles to universal access into four categories: institutional, distance-related, legal, and
resource-based barriers. However, after discussing each type of barrier, the fourth section also
discusses the current progress toward overcoming that barrier and potential future solutions that
have not yet begun to be implemented.
It should be noted that this thesis focuses primarily on MOOCs and on libraries in the
United States, although there has been some literature that takes a more international

2

perspective. 1

Section One: MOOCs in Context
MOOCs are a relatively new innovation, but they did not appear full-fledged on the
educational technology scene in 2012. Rather, they are an outgrowth of both the distance
education technologies before them—including correspondence courses, radio for education, and
educational television—and of earlier online learning technologies, including learning
management systems, social media sites, online courses, and especially open repositories for
college course materials, such as the Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s OpenCourseWare
site and Apple’s iTunes U. However, before delving into the history of the MOOC, it is
necessary to define in more detail exactly what a MOOC is and is not.

What is a MOOC?
“MOOC,” as has already been mentioned, stands for “massive open online courseware.”
MOOCs are online courses, usually produced by colleges or universities. These courses are open
to anyone who wants to take them for free (or sometimes for a small fee, if the student wants a
certificate saying they have passed the class with a certain grade). Because they are open and
free, the most popular of these courses often attract thousands of students from all over the
world—hence the “massive” part of the name. Most MOOCs have several parts, which may
include video lectures, readings, computer-graded assignments or quizzes, discussions with other
students on a forum, or peer-graded assignments. MOOCs are different from mere video lecture

1

Flamenbaum et al., “Anthropology in and of MOOCs”; Parr, “Europe Hopes for Common Mooc Market and

Currency”; Oyo and Kalema, “Massive Open Online Courses for Africa by Africa”; A. A. and McE, “Online
Learning Is Becoming More Popular In China”; Beaven et al., “The Open Translation MOOC.”

3

series because students take them concurrently, not just at their own paces—all students start at
the same time and have assignments due at the same time so that they can discuss the content and
get help from other students. MOOCs became popular around 2012, although they existed
several years earlier. There are now a number of platforms partnering with colleges and
universities to produce MOOCs, but the most well-known are Coursera, EdX, and Udacity.
There are several key differences between MOOCs and traditional online courses. The
latter are, of course, usually not free and are only open to students of the college or university
that produces them. Out of necessity, professors of MOOCs take a much less active role than
those teaching traditional online courses. It is difficult to interact personally with thousands of
students, even if the professor is always available when the class is being offered, and since
MOOCs are designed and recorded ahead of time—unlike the live video lectures offered through
some more traditional online courses—they can be offered over and over with identical content.
In some ways this reusability is a good thing: after the initial investment of time and money to
create the class, the upkeep costs are low, and students who are unable to take a course when it is
first offered can rest secure in the knowledge that it will probably be offered again without
worrying that the professor will be replaced with one less able or that the content will be
different. On the other hand, this reusability also means that students miss out on the spontaneity
of real-time lectures, the ability to ask the professor questions, and updates to the content based
on advances in the field or current events.
However, MOOCs do have at least two other advantages over traditional online courses.
Firstly, their open enrollment policy provides students with more classmates and more diverse
classmates than closed online courses. This means that students are statistically more likely to be
able to connect with classmates online, as more students are likely to be on the forums at once,

4

providing the learning community with lots of peer support and feedback. The greater diversity
of MOOCs created by open enrollment means that students more likely to encounter a diverse
range of viewpoints by talking to their classmates from other geographical areas, religions, and
ethnic, linguistic, and socioeconomic backgrounds.
Secondly, students have more flexibility in their workload, as they are able to choose
when to watch the recorded video lectures as opposed to having to be online during live lectures.
They can also choose whether or not to complete assignments without worrying about being
graded, skipping those that reinforce concepts or skills they are already familiar with and putting
that time toward higher-quality work on assignments that actually advance their understanding of
the subject matter. This flexibility makes MOOCs a better choice for people with already busy
schedules, like full-time workers and students with dependents.
The History of MOOCs
A summary of the following history of MOOCs may be found in the timeline in
Appendix A. MOOCs, which are a recent innovation, draw from the ideas of online technologies
before them, including learning management systems, social media sites, and online courses.
However, the history of MOOCs really begins in 2002, when the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) founded its OpenCourseWare initiative. 2 Although the OpenCourseWare site
does not, strictly speaking, provide courses, it does provide all of the accoutrements thereof,
including syllabi, readings, and assignments, and in some cases recorded lectures, lecture notes,
examples of student work, online textbooks, and other course materials for all of the courses
taught at MIT. 3 Therefore it is possible for students outside of MIT to follow along with the

2

Haber, MOOCs, 34.

3

“Get Started with OCW.”

5

courses, although they do not receive the same support as students in an actual class.
A similar service, Apple’s iTunes U, was launched in 2004 to provide free access to
educational audio and video content, not only from universities, but also from libraries and
museums. iTunes U has proved popular, garnering three hundred million downloads by 2007,
seven hundred million downloads by 2010, and over a billion downloads by 2013. It has also
been successful abroad, with sixty percent of those downloads occurring outside the United
States. 4
However, there is a major difference between merely making course materials from a
class available to outside students and actively creating new course materials for students not
affiliated with the professor’s institution. The first true massive open online learning community
was called “Connectivism and Connective Knowledge” and it was taught by Stephen Downes, a
Canadian researcher, and George Siemens, a faculty member at Athabasca University in Canada,
in 2008. However, this first community was much less structured than the MOOCs we know
today. It had no official assignments and the professors were very actively involved in day-today activities, publishing a daily newsletter and scheduling outside speakers or students
themselves to give lectures. 5 The goal of the community was based on the principle after which
it was named, connectivism, which is the idea that knowledge and learning are facilitated by
being part of a network, with all members contributing equally to the pool of knowledge. While
Downes and Siemens’s community was no doubt educational, it falls somewhat short of being a
course in the traditional sense of the word. Unlike OpenCourseWare, “Connectivism and
Connective Knowledge” did not provide many of the accoutrements of traditional courses, such

4

Becker, “Connecting MOOCs and Library Services,” 135–36.

5

Haber, MOOCs, 37–39.

6

as learning objectives, assignments, or tests.
However, the term “MOOC” was coined to describe Downes and Siemens’s community
by David Cormier, who helped facilitate the “Connectivism and Connective Knowledge” project.
Some of the scholars who are familiar with both the early connectivist MOOCs and the current
MOOCs modeled more closely after traditional college classes call the former cMOOCs and the
latter xMOOCs to distinguish between the two. 6 This paper will focus exclusively on the latter,
the xMOOCs, which will be called simply “MOOCs” from this point forward.
The first major MOOC provider to emerge was Coursera, which was founded in 2011 by
two computer scientists from Stanford, Daphne Koller and Andrew Ng, in collaboration with the
University of Michigan, Princeton, Stanford, and the University of Pennsylvania. 7 Coursera was
founded using venture capital and originally planned to fund itself through ads aimed at large
numbers of visitors (ala Google or Facebook). 8 The first course on Coursera to garner major
media attention was about artificial intelligence. It was taken by a hundred and sixty thousand
students from a hundred and ninety countries. Some of this success might be due to the
reputation of Coursera’s partner universities, which lent the platform both cachet and credibility.
A year later, Coursera had six hundred and eighty thousand students, forty-three courses, and
thirteen collaborating universities in the United States as well as several foreign universities. 9
These collaborations with foreign universities were the beginning of a concerted attempt to offer
MOOCs not just in the United States, but around the world. In 2013, Coursera began offering

6

Ibid., 39–40.

7

Lewin, “Consortium of Colleges Takes Online Education to New Level.”

8

Sean Coughlan, “UK University Joins US Online Partnership.”

9

Lewin, “Consortium of Colleges Takes Online Education to New Level.”

7

courses in other languages, including Chinese, French, Italian, and Spanish 10 and was also
working on translating some of its courses into Arabic, Japanese, Kazakh, Portuguese, Russian,
Turkish, and Ukrainian. It also formed a partnership with the U.S. State Department and with
several other educational organizations to create “learning hubs” that provide free internet access
and discussion facilitators to students taking MOOCs around the world. The State Department is
using the learning hubs to promote learning in priority fields, such as science, technology, and
entrepreneurship using MOOCs published by Coursera and by other MOOC providers. 11 By
October of 2014, Coursera had grown even more: according to Richard Levin, Coursera’s chief
executive, it had more than ten million students, offered more than eight hundred courses, and
had a hundred and twelve collaborating universities.
Udacity, the second of the three major MOOC providers to arise, was also conceptualized
at Stanford and initially funded by venture capital (and $200,000 of the entrepreneur’s own
money). 12 The entrepreneur who started Udacity, Sebastian Thrun, had already taught one
MOOC about artificial intelligence in 2011, before he decided to found the company. His
approach to teaching the class was much more hands-on than that of most current MOOCs, as he
offered virtual office hours for the students and recommended a textbook for them. 13 After this
experience, Thrun felt that he was making an important impact and that he preferred teaching
MOOCs to teaching in a traditional setting. He announced that he was giving up his tenure at

10
Protalinski, “Coursera Adds 29 New Universities to Bring Total to 62, Offers First Courses in Chinese, Italian,
Spanish.”
11

Lewin, “U.S. Teams Up With Operator of Online Courses to Plan a Global Network.”

12

Henn, “Stanford Takes Online Schooling To The Next Academic Level.”

13

Zou, “Stanford U. Offers Free Online Course in Artificial Intelligence.”

8

Stanford to found Udacity in January of 2012 14 and opened registration for Udacity’s first
course, “Building a Search Engine,” that same month. By March, ninety thousand students had
enrolled in Udacity’s first two courses. Udacity was the first of the three major MOOC providers
to monetize MOOCs, offering a certificate of completion for a small fee. Thrun also considered
trying to make money by selling subscriptions to recruiters, letting them know which students
had acquired useful skills and gotten high scores in his MOOCs, but this plan appears to never
have been implemented. 15 Thrun later made the controversial decision to revamp Udacity to
focus less on academic pursuits and more on job training. 16 Udacity now offers what it calls
“nanodegrees,” which focus on preparing students for specific jobs in technical industries, such
as web and application development, instead of free online education. These nanodegrees are not
free but have, according to Thrun, increased retention rates and student engagement. 17 It is not
surprising that Udacity, as the only one of the major three MOOC providers founded by an
independent entrepreneur and not by a collection of universities, has turned away from free
education toward a more profitable business model.
The last of the three MOOC major providers and the only one that qualifies as a nonprofit
was EdX, which is a collaboration between the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) and
Harvard University that was first announced in May of 2012 via a YouTube video entitled “EdX:
The Future of Online Education is Now.” The joint announcement generated a major media
buzz, with news reporters questioning whether MIT and Harvard would inadvertently put

14
DeSantis, “Stanford Professor Gives Up Teaching Position, Hopes to Reach 500,000 Students at Online StartUp.”
15

Lewin, “Instruction for Masses Knocks Down Campus Walls.”

16

Haber, MOOCs, 165.

17

Dodd, “Udacity’s Nanodegrees Link Students to Tech Jobs.”

9

themselves out of business (which, obviously, they did not). 18 According to an article in
Harvard’s online newspaper, each university initially invested thirty million dollars in the
initiative. They also invited other universities to join the collaboration, with other early adopters
including the University of California, Berkeley, and the University of Texas. The first course
launched on EdX was from MIT, even before MIT decided to partner with Harvard. It was called
“Circuits and Electronics,” and it attracted a hundred and fifty-five thousand students. 19 The
launch was, in other words, a rousing success. A year after the EdX initiative was first
announced, it had attracted twenty-seven collaborators, including universities in Europe, Asia,
and Australia, enabling the platform to offer English-language courses on international issues
and cultures that were created by professors in the countries covered. 20 Given that international
scholarship, especially international scholarship from non-English-speaking countries (including
articles originally written in English) is often ignored or overlooked by scholars in the United
States, 21 this inclusion of international classes is a major step forward. By June of 2013, EdX had
enrolled one million students. 22 As of 2015, EdX is continuing to attract new collaborators and is
planning to expand into mobile technologies so that students can “take their coursework with
them [and] access it as they go about their day.” 23
Especially in the early days of MOOCs, there was a great deal of optimism about their
potential to revolutionize education. However, even near the beginning of the MOOC craze, in

18

Rodrik and Sun, “EdX.”

19

Rouse and Worland, “First Day of School.”

20

Hashmi and Shih, “EdX More Than Doubles in Size with Addition of 15 New Schools.”

21

Gibbs, “Citation Analysis,” 300.

22

Conway, “EdX Enrollment Reaches Seven Digits.”

23

Ararwal, “Building the Next Generation Mobile Learning Experience.”

10

2012, there was also some skepticism about their revolutionary promise. For instance, a 2012
article entitled “The False Promise of the Education Revolution” points out that although
MOOCs have been touted as having the potential to provide access to higher education to
students who otherwise would not have that access, those students are actually the ones who
need face-to-face education the most and that championing MOOCs is a way to avoid fixing
other problems with the educational system. 24 This issue of access versus effectiveness for
underprivileged students has continued to be a major criticism of MOOCs. A short 2013 article
published in Nature points out that the majority of MOOC students already have a college
education and that MOOCs are not actually reaching disadvantaged students. 25
However, alongside this skepticism about the revolutionary potential of MOOCs is hope
for the future. Providers have adapted their business models to pursue other revenue streams as
well so that they can continue to offer MOOCs at low cost. 26 And, as one article points out,
although “MOOCs might not put thousands of colleges out of business in the next 50 years . . .
they are changing how students learn, how professors teach and grade, and how higher-education
leaders figure out what differentiates face-to-face instruction from online learning.” In other
words, they still have the potential to make a difference in higher education, but it might not be
the type of impact originally predicted.
MOOCs are still relatively new, and the future of MOOCs is unclear. However, it may be
possible to make some broad predictions about the future of MOOCs by examining the
provenance, successes, failures, and eventual fate of the distance education technologies that
came before them.

24

Carlson and Blumenstyk, “The False Promise of the Education Revolution.”
Emanuel, “Online Education.”
26
Kolowich, “MOOCs May Not Be So Disruptive After All.”
25

11

Precursors to MOOCs
There are three major distance education technologies that came before MOOCs:
correspondence courses, radio for education, and educational television. Correspondence
courses, while not free like MOOCs, were fairly successful, first becoming popular in the middle
of the nineteenth century, continuing into the middle of the twentieth century, and reaching
students all over the world. In the 1920s correspondence courses began to overlap with radio for
education, which was initially highly touted as a means for adult learning but unfortunately
failed in that goal due to a lack of support from the federal government. However, educational
broadcasts for schoolchildren continued into the 1970s. Meanwhile, educational television took
off after World War II. Although it initially suffered from the same lack of governmental support
as radio for education, educational television broadcasters persevered and eventually won
support from the federal government in the 1960s in the form of matching grants. The history of
each of these three distance education technologies is explored in more detail in the sections to
follow.
Correspondence Courses
The earliest form of distance learning was the correspondence course, in which students
received course materials and exercises by mail and sent the exercises back to be graded.
Correspondence courses were first popularized in the UK in the 1840s by Sir Isaac Pittman, who
sent instruction manuals on his new shorthand method to students through the mail. 27 However,
most of the early correspondence courses were designed to teach foreign languages. The first
language correspondence course was initiated by Charles Touissaint and Gustav Langenscheidt
in Germany in 1856. It was originally designed to teach French to German-speakers but
27

Haber, MOOCs, 20.

12

eventually expanded to teach other foreign languages as well. 28
The concept of correspondence education was quickly picked up in the United States,
where it was initially highly touted—Harper’s Weekly called it “well worthy general attention
[sic]”—but the first attempts were not particularly successful. Shortly after Touissaint and
Langenscheidt created their course, a group called The Society to Encourage Studies at Home
was formed in the United States in 1873 but swiftly failed due to the inability to adapt
coursework to students’ varying levels of ability. Ten years later, in Ithaca, New York, a group
of instructors from various institutions of higher learning gathered together to create
“Correspondence University.” Although they advertised to a wide array of potential students,
including rural families, young workers, and members of the armed forces, Correspondence
University swiftly failed as well. 29
The first successful correspondence school in the United States actually grew out of a
yearly Methodist camp meeting held in New York by Chautauqua Lake. Each summer a group of
Sunday school teachers gathered there to provide instruction, and eventually, in 1879, due to the
demand for continuing education during the rest of the year, the Chautauqua Correspondence
School was created to teach languages. The program was formalized in 1882, when the group
published an official plan of instruction, and continued until 1900. 30
Meanwhile, correspondence schools were also springing up elsewhere in the country. By
the late 1800s, several major universities, including Wesleyan, the University of Chicago, and
the University of Wisconsin, offered degree programs by mail. 31 Nor were correspondence
28

Noffsinger, Correspondence Schools, Lyceums, Chautauquas, 4.

29

Ibid., 4–7.

30

Ibid., 7–11.

31

Haber, MOOCs, 21.

13

courses limited solely to academic subjects: although previous correspondence schools had been
used primarily to teach languages, in 1891 a Mr. Thomas J. Foster, who published a newspaper
column about mining safety, decided to create a correspondence course on mining practices. Due
to the demand for this course, he eventually founded the International Correspondence Schools
of Scranton, Pennsylvania, which by the mid-1920s offered more than 300 professional
preparation courses. 32
Correspondence courses continued to gain popularity into the middle of the 20th century,
and a study by the Carnegie Corporation of New York published in 1926 identified
approximately three hundred of them in the United States alone. 33 But the success of
correspondence courses was not limited to Europe and the United States alone—they also
reached students in third-world countries, including, despite the fact that the courses were in
print, some illiterate students. For instance, in 1962 a group from the Ivory Coast founded the
Institut Africain pour le Développement Economique et Sociale (INADES), which provided
instructors and course pamphlets in French to communities in the French-speaking countries of
Africa. These instructors taught local leaders to lead discussion groups based on the materials
and the questions in the course pamphlets, allowing illiterate students to participate even though
they could not themselves read the course materials. The leaders then mailed back the group’s
responses to the questions (and any new questions they came up with) back to INADES, which
sent instructors to check in with the groups at regular intervals to make sure that the leaders were
effective and the courses were running smoothly. 34

32

Noffsinger, Correspondence Schools, Lyceums, Chautauquas, 11–12.

33

Ibid., 15.

34

Jenkins, Materials for Learning, 5.

14

Correspondence courses are similar to MOOCs in that they initially stirred up a great deal
of hype. In the case of MOOCs it may still be too early to judge whether this hype was justified,
but in the case of correspondence courses, in the long run, it seems they lived up to their
potential, reaching students all over the world, including those who otherwise might not have had
access to high-quality education, or indeed any education.
Correspondence courses are different in that whereas MOOCs are usually designed by
professors at institutions of higher education, correspondence courses were primarily created by
independent teachers. In that respect MOOCs are superior, since it is easy to verify the
credentials of the instructors. However, correspondence courses provided personalized feedback
in a way that most MOOCs, with their computer-graded assignments, do not. But this
personalized feedback came at a cost—a book published in 1926 estimated the median cost per
correspondence course lesson in the United States at $1.66, 35 which may not sound like very
much money but due to inflation equates to more than twenty dollars today. That is still much
less expensive than traditional higher education, but certainly more expensive than MOOCs,
most of which are free.
Radio for Education
The beginning of radio for education overlapped significantly with the end of the
popularity of correspondence courses. In the United States, the beginning of radio broadcasting
for a popular audience occurred in 1920, when the radio station KDKA broadcast live reports of
the presidential election. Two years later, there were almost seven hundred licensed radio
stations in the country, including more than seventy college and university stations. These
stations, along with other stations operated by public and civic institutions, began to broadcast

35

Noffsinger, Correspondence Schools, Lyceums, Chautauquas, 70.

15

educational lectures. For instance, according to the book Schools of the Air, which chronicles the
history of radio for education, the Chicago station WMAQ devoted fifteen percent of its airtime
in 1924 and 1925 to “evening lectures from the faculty at the University of Chicago and
Northwestern University on topics ranging from political science, sociology, and biology to
crime prevention and the value of higher education [and to] informative and self-improvement
programming, covering such diverse topics as child psychology, lawn care, and Midwestern
art.” 36
Educational radio stations also established for-credit courses and certification courses,
especially favoring content aimed at rural listeners, who did not have access to in-person
education. 37 However, educational radio stations lost listeners during the chaotic years of 1925
and 1926 due to unintelligible broadcasts caused by an increased number of stations and a lack of
regulation assigning them to separate frequencies. For instance, the University of Kansas, which
had founded one of the early educational stations, was forced to abandon its home-study courses
after twenty-six other stations began broadcasting at the same frequency. 38 Unfortunately, when
the Federal Radio Commission began to regulate channel frequencies in 1927, although it fixed
conflicting broadcasts, it also assigned educational radio stations primarily to local frequencies
(as opposed to the “clear channel” frequencies that allowed some stations to broadcast for
hundreds of miles) and forbade them to broadcast during evening hours, severely curtailing their
ability to reach the working adults they had originally been designed for. 39
Therefore, although schools of the air continued to exist and to broadcast educational
36

Bianchi, Schools of the Air, 7–10.

37

Ibid., 14.

38

Barnouw and Barnouw, A Tower in Babel, 173.

39

Bianchi, Schools of the Air, 16.

16

content for schoolchildren, they never fulfilled their potential as a vehicle for adult continuing
education. Although during various periods between 1928 and 1979 six universities supported
state-wide educational stations, they mostly focused on “serving the basic, but unmet,
educational needs of rural and small town schools, particularly in subjects such as music, art,
science, history, current events, and storytelling for young children” and never returned to
widespread educational broadcasting for adults. 40 Eventually, after the 1970s, support for schools
of the air petered out as focus and funding shifted to educational television.
Radio for Education had goals similar to those of MOOCs—like MOOCs, but unlike
correspondence courses, they were free. Like MOOCs, they aimed to reach people who
otherwise would not have access to high-quality education, like potential students living in rural
communities. In a way, radio for education is superior to MOOCs because it is more difficult to
obstruct access—anyone with a radio can tune it to a station making an educational broadcast,
but to access MOOC content on most platforms, it is necessary to enroll in the course, even if the
course is free. Therefore there are more obstacles to access and less privacy. Radio for education
also demonstrated that distance education is a complement to, not a threat to, traditional higher
education, as colleges and universities used their stations to both pursue their missions providing
education and to improve public relations. 41
Educational Television
As Schools of the Air were being phased out, their replacements, telecourses, were being
phased in. Although television stations existed before World War II, it was not until after the war
ended in 1945 that commercial televisions became popular. There was also a high demand for

40

Ibid., 296–7.

41

Saettler, The Evolution of American Educational Technology.

17

higher education at that time, as returning veterans were entitled to educational benefits
bestowed by the G.I. Bill. Therefore colleges and universities, which were not equipped to
handle the rush of incoming students, originally turned to educational television as a stopgap
measure—lectures were often recorded ahead of time and then played on television for
undergraduates in the classroom, sometimes with the supervision of a graduate student teaching
assistant. 42 This scheme eventually failed, with both faculty and students expressing
dissatisfaction over the videos. 43
Whether the original use of educational television was advisable or ethical is debatable,
but the use of educational television in the college classroom was the impetus for educational
television for the general public. By 1948, there were eight colleges and universities
broadcasting education television programs. However, like radio for education, educational
television was negatively impacted by the onset of federal regulations. Although the Federal
Communications Commission did set aside some license assignments for non-commercial
stations when it began licensing television broadcasters in 1952, most of the channels allotted
were ultra-high frequency (UHF), which most commercial televisions did not receive well. This
reception issue could be circumvented by renting air time on other stations, but as with radio, the
times available for educational programs were not ideal for working viewers, who could not
watch during the day. 44
However, unlike the radio broadcasters before them, producers of instructional television
persevered in producing educational content for adults. For instance, South Carolina

42

Zigerell, The Uses of Television in American Higher Education, 2–3.

43

Zigerell, The Uses of Television in American Higher Education, 16–17.

44

Ibid., 10.

18

implemented a “statewide linkage” that used closed-circuit television (CCTV) to enable distance
learners to watch lectures at public sites around the state and earn graduate degrees by also
sending in correspondence exercises and exams and visiting the campus occasionally.
Pennsylvania State, which had a similar program, attracted up to twenty thousand enrollments
per year in its CCTV program during the 1960s. 45 Part of this success is probably explained by
the availability of new recording technologies that allowed adult students who could not watch
during the day to record educational programs and watch them later. Some courses were also
offered in the early morning—for instance, New York University offered a variety of for-credit
classes on CBS through its “Sunrise Semester” program, which aired at six in the morning from
1957 through 1982. 46
In the 1960s, the U.S. government apparently changed its mind about supporting
educational television, perhaps due to the change in which political party controlled the White
House. In 1962, President John F. Kennedy signed the Educational Television Facilities Act,
which provided matching grants to universities and nonprofits for educational television
programs, although applicants had to be eligible for an educational broadcasting license from the
Federal Communications Commission. Specifically, the Educational Television Facilities Act set
aside thirty-two million dollars over a period of five years and focused on ensuring a fair
geographic distribution of educational television funds, with no state being eligible for more than
a million dollars in total matching grants. 47
Shortly thereafter, the federal government also enacted the Public Broadcasting Act of
45

Ibid., 16.

46

Haber, MOOCs, 25.

47

Emmerson, “A History of the Changes in Practices of Distance Education in the United States from 1852--2003,”
83–84.

19

1967, which technically provided support for both radio for education and educational television,
but perhaps fell into the category of “too little too late” with regards to support for the former.
The Act set aside another thirty-eight million dollars to support educational broadcasting
programs over the next three years; established the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, which
was designed to support educational broadcasting and to keep it free of undue federal influence
in the future by providing community service grants; and established the Commission of
Instructional Technology in order to study the impact of educational broadcasting. 48
One problem with instructional television as a distance education method—one that has
persisted into the era of the MOOC, its modern-day replacement—was that instructional
television had low production values compared to other television programs. 49 Unlike radio
programs, which could be produced at low cost at a quality not far inferior to that of commercial
programs, television made possible special effects, fancy sets, and other expensive but visually
stimulating entertainment. Educational television, with its low budget and often amateur creators,
could not compete with the quality of professional programs, resulting in dull televised classes
consisting merely of professors lecturing in front of chalkboards. Therefore, although the
availability of distance education classes increased during the era of educational television, these
classes were not necessarily stimulating. Similarly, although some MOOCs have higher
production values in their videos, many still struggle to depart from the “professor-with-achalkboard” model, meaning that students must be very committed to the idea of completing a
class in order to persevere through the dullness. By contrast, students seem less willing or able to
drop in-person classes should those classes prove dull, which is one of the reasons that MOOCs

48

Ibid., 83–85.

49

Zigerell, The Uses of Television in American Higher Education, 13–14.

20

do not really pose a threat to traditional higher education.

Why MOOCs are not a Threat
However, one of the arguments against academic libraries supporting MOOCs has been
that they are poised as a competitor to traditional higher education, with one of the major trends
in MOOCs at present being the trend toward offering MOOCs for credit—a trend that will be
discussed in more detail in the next section. In reality, although there has been some discussion
of the possibility of MOOCs replacing traditional degrees, 50,51 most scholars seem dismissive of
the concept because although MOOCs can successfully deliver content, they cannot deliver the
same quality of interaction, feedback, or mentoring as a traditional course. 52,53,54 Like MOOCs,
each previous new distance learning technology was hailed as innovative and having the
potential to revolutionize higher education, but none of them really constituted a threat to
traditional institutions of higher education, as evidenced by the fact that they have come and
gone and yet colleges and universities continue. It is likely that MOOCs will not constitute much
of a threat, either, and that they, like their predecessors, will eventually be phased out or become
obsolete as newer technologies take their place.
However, MOOCs, like other distance learning technologies before them, do have the
potential to be useful for students who otherwise would not have the opportunity to get or
continue their higher education. Academic institutions supported correspondence courses, radio
for education, and educational television for two reasons: first, because they believed in the
50

“Massive Open Online Courses - A Threat to Traditional Teaching?”

51

Winterhalter, “Will Free Online Courses Ever Replace a College Education?”

52

McNutt, “Bricks and MOOCs.”

53

Youngberg, “Why Online Education Won’t Replace College--Yet.”

54

Wu, “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs,” 580.

21

cause of educating the public; and second, because it promoted good public relations. It is for
these same reasons that academic libraries should support MOOCs. MOOCs also provide
another practical benefit for the universities that create them: they constitute an opportunity to
experiment with pedagogical methods, allowing professors to test new teaching methods and
lesson plans on a wide audience before implementing them in the classroom. 55 By supporting
MOOC students as they would traditional students, libraries can help to make this
experimentation more rigorous. However, there remains the question of how exactly libraries can
or should be supporting MOOCs.

Literature Review on Libraries and MOOCs
Because of the relative newness of MOOCs, there has been little literature on how
libraries can support MOOCs, and most of it has focused on MOOC creation rather than
implementation. In other words, there has been more discussion of how libraries can support the
professors teaching MOOCs than of how they can support MOOC students, perhaps because
professors are usually affiliated with academic libraries whereas MOOC students may not be
affiliated with any library. The following literature review focuses only on those articles that
specifically discuss how libraries can support students.
One of the first articles to focus on how libraries and MOOCs could work together was
published in 2012 by Katy Mahraj. Unlike most of the literature on MOOCs and libraries that
came afterward, her article focused primarily on how librarians could directly support MOOC
students, not just their professors. She argues for librarians to be embedded in the MOOC
process, making posts on the class forums when students showed signs of struggling in order to
“support participants as they assess their own information needs, identify useful resources, and
55

Ibid., 579.

22

develop skills in finding, evaluating, accessing, managing, synthesizing, and using information in
an online learning environment.” 56 Several later articles criticized this approach as being overly
labor intensive, 57,58 but these articles ignore that fact that although the number of enrolled
students in MOOCs can be huge, only a small number of these students are usually active in the
course forums.
The following year, in 2013, a small flood of literature on libraries and MOOCs was
published. The first of these articles was published by a Forrest Wright, who is neither a librarian
nor a MOOC professor but a researcher for Thomson Reuters. He suggested that, due to the
obstacles in providing library services to MOOC students (which are discussed in more detail in
a later section of this paper), librarians should start with simple support solutions like reaching
out to MOOC professors to provide links to library research guides and open-access research
tutorials, such as those published by the American Library Association (ALA) or the Multimedia
Education Resource for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT). Wright’s ideas have the
advantage of not requiring time-intensive labor and avoiding copyright issues. However, he
overlooks the fact that many MOOC students may not have previous experience using library
resources and therefore self-service guides that merely provide lists of resources and steps in the
research process will not be nearly as effective as they would be for students at traditional
universities, who often receive formal training on how to use research guides.
Gloria Creed-Dikeogu and Carolyn Clark, two scholars from Kansas, published a 2013
article entitled “Are You MOOC-ing Yet? A Review for Academic Libraries” that specified the

56

Mahraj, “Using Information Expertise to Enhance Massive Open Online Courses,” 366.

57

Wright, “What Do Librarians Need to Know About MOOCs?”

58

Creed-Dikeogu and Clark, “Are You MOOC-Ing Yet?”

23

two main roles librarians can play in MOOCs: handling copyright issues and teaching
information literacy. Creed-Dikeogu and Clark stress that it is important for students in MOOCs
to have strong information literacy skills, especially because connectivism, the philosophy upon
which MOOCs were originally founded, is based on the premise that the ability to seek out and
filter useful information is crucial to the learning process. Moreover, they see MOOCs as an
“opportunity to increase the information literacy skills of huge numbers of students” at once.
Therefore they suggest that librarians help by modeling correct citation practices, providing
information literacy assessment tools, and creating online information literacy tutorials. 59 Like
Wright, they recognize that MOOC students do need to be more self-sufficient than students in
traditional institutions of higher education; they must be self motivated and resourceful.
However, also like Wright, they do not go far enough in suggesting solutions whereby librarians
can directly assist students.
Meredith Schwartz published an article in Library Journal in 2013 describing how
libraries can support MOOCs. Schwartz suggests that professors should turn to libraries even
before MOOCs are produced for assistance navigating copyright issues and finding open-access
learning resources to include. Then, during the production phase, she suggests that libraries can
help professors create strong materials by weighing in on the recording and editing process and
providing technical support. The “biggest question mark,” she states, is whether libraries can or
should attempt to support MOOC students. Her argument for supporting MOOC students is that
especially for those taking classes in the humanities, the ability to find supplemental resources
might prove useful and that students farther from the library need more help, not less. She also
mentions that there has been research demonstrating that students who have completed

59

Ibid., 4.

24

traditional college courses are more successful in MOOCs because they already have the
necessary academic skills. Librarians could help less experienced students close that gap. Her
argument against supporting MOOC students centers around the lack of resources and time
librarians have to support additional students. 60
Also in 2013, Bernd W. Becker, a scholar from San Jose State University, which boasts a
robust online library school program, published an article in the Behavioral and Social Sciences
Librarian suggesting that libraries can support MOOC students by beginning to develop a
collection of recommended open-access journals and scholarly websites that can be accessed
from all over the world. 61 This is a very sensible suggestion, as such a collection would be free to
develop and, while potentially time consuming, could also be useful to students enrolled at the
university the library supports, overcoming objections of time spent supporting MOOC students
to the detriment of students enrolled at the institution. Like Wright, Creed-Dikeogu, and Clark,
Becker recommends that libraries set up self-service resources specifically for MOOC students,
including a page of frequently asked questions and tutorials. However, he also suggests—albeit
not very enthusiastically—that libraries create a joint email account for soliciting and answering
questions from MOOC students to avoid putting the brunt of the effort of supporting MOOC
students on any one librarian. 62 This is also an excellent idea.
However, in addition to discussing and coming up with good ideas as to how libraries can
support MOOC students, it is also necessary to discuss why libraries should support MOOC
students, lest the effort required to support these additional patrons lead libraries to conclude that

60

Schwartz, “Massive Open Opportunity.”

61

Becker, “Connecting MOOCs and Library Services,” 137.

62

Ibid., 137–8.

25

minimal support, such as the self-service guides that have been suggested in many of the articles
above, is sufficient.

Section Two: Why Libraries Should Support MOOCs
MOOCs began to gain public recognition as an alternative to traditional higher education
and online classes around 2012 and are still gaining popularity, in part due to two new trends:
first, MOOCs are being developed for high school students; and second, there has been a push by
MOOC companies to offer college credit for them, which means they could become a viable
alternative for earning undergraduate degrees. This larger audience means that MOOC students
are becoming a more attractive target for marketers, particularly those that sell educational
products. This is especially true because MOOCs do not currently provide access to many of the
resources that traditional universities do, including access to library materials and research
assistance. Therefore libraries—which have a code of ethics demanding that they provide
accurate, unbiased, and uncensored information—should step in to provide these services before
for-profit companies have a disproportionate chance to shape the next generation of high-school
graduates and baccalaureate-earners.

MOOCs are Gaining Momentum
MOOCs are more popular today than ever before in terms of media coverage and public
interest. Together, the Wall Street Journal, Los Angeles Times, and New York Times published
425 articles mentioning MOOCs from 2013 to 2014. 63 As a point of comparison, the iPhone 6,
which came out in 2014, was only mentioned in 340 articles in that same time span. 64 The media

63

“MOOC OR MOOCs OR (Massive Open Online Course*).”

64

“iPhone 6.”

26

focus on MOOCs may have contributed to public interest in the subject: if you look at the
Google Trends page for “MOOC” and “MOOCs,” there are very few searches until about 2012,
when interest began to shoot up. It reached its highest point so far in February 2014 and remains
high. 65
However, on the surface, the media may seem to be behind the curve on the popularity of
MOOCs. Enrollment in individual MOOCs is going down: in a recent study examining
publically available statistics on MOOC enrollment and completion that looked at enrollments in
91 courses, the average number of students enrolled in each course was more than forty thousand
in 2011 but had dropped to less than thirty-five thousand by mid-2013. 66 However, this
enrollment statistic is misleading. Because of the sheer number of MOOCs now available,
students now have a great deal of choice regarding which classes they enroll in, which means
that the total number of students is spread across more classes. In 2014, Harvard and the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, the partners behind EdX, one of the three most wellknown MOOC platforms (the other two being Coursera and Udacity), released statistics about
enrollment in their courses: between fall 2012 and summer 2013—less than a year—almost
600,000 students registered for at least one MOOC. 67 That statistic, of course, does not even
include registrants on other platforms, of which there are many. Overall, MOOC enrollments are
going up.
The large number of students enrolling in MOOCs is fueled by two new trends. First,
MOOC providers are now catering to younger students by offering courses specifically tailored

65

“Google Trends - MOOC and MOOCs.”

66

Jordan, “Initial Trends in Enrolment and Completion of Massive Open Online Courses,” 134.

67

“Real-Time MOOC Snapshot.”

27

for college preparation, including Advanced Placement (AP) courses, which prepare students to
take AP exams that can potentially enable them to skip introductory college courses. And
second, MOOC providers are attempting to offer college credit for their courses. These trends,
which both have the potential to allow MOOC students to obtain college degrees more quickly
and less expensively, seem likely to continue because of the increasing cost of tuition at
traditional institutions of higher education. In the face of insufficient financial aid, students are
afraid of taking on massive student loan debt and are looking for less expensive alternatives,
such as MOOCs. Students taking MOOCs for college preparation or for credit will have to take
their online coursework more seriously than early MOOC students, but fortunately advances in
connectivist learning are making it possible for MOOC designers to assign and provide detailed
feedback on increasingly rigorous writing assignments.
MOOCs for Younger Students
Although there are now several MOOC providers offering courses designed for younger
students, EdX is one of the companies leading the way on the high-school-MOOC initiative: it
now offers more than forty MOOCs tailored specifically to high-school students, including
courses designed to help these students prepare for Advanced Placement (AP) exams, which can
be used to meet general education requirements in some colleges and allow students to skip over
taking basic classes. The MOOCs are marketed as a tool to help high-schoolers get ready for
college and be more competitive in the admissions process. 68 Whether this emphasis on
heightened preparation is a good idea is up for debate, but it does potentially help level the
playing field for students who otherwise would not have access to the courses intended to
prepare them for these exams: according to the College Board, the company that developed the

68

“High School Initiative.”

28

AP program, although AP enrollments have increased substantially over the past decade, forty
percent of public high schools in the United States still do not offer any AP classes. 69 Therefore
this trend toward MOOCs for younger students makes a lot of sense: students want access to
these classes so they can get into more competitive universities and graduate from those
universities faster.
Universities also potentially benefit from students taking college-level classes before they
enroll because it helps admissions officers identify students who are ready for college-level work
during the admissions process, making the process easier as more and more students apply for
the same number of spots. And beyond the college-preparatory applications of MOOCs for high
school students, if MOOC platforms begin to offer vocationally focused courses for younger
students, they could potentially gain more job skills before graduation, preparing themselves for
future employment.
Rising Tuition Costs
Even with the current limited course offerings for younger students, parents who plan to
send their children to college have a reason to encourage their high-schoolers to enroll in
MOOCs: getting AP credit means being able to skip introductory university classes, which
means graduating faster—and less expensively. With skyrocketing tuition costs, anything that
enables students to graduate faster begins to look attractive. According to the U.S. Department of
Education’s National Center for Education Statistics, as of the 2011-2012 school year, the
average cost per year of attending a four-year college as an undergraduate was $23,066, and that
cost has been climbing steadily every year. 70 Meanwhile, the median household income in the

69

“Number Of Students Taking Advanced Placement Classes Nearly Doubles Over Last Decade.”

70

“Tuition Costs of Colleges and Universities.”

29

United States was only $61,455 that year according to the 2011 Community Survey. 71 That
means that the cost of one year of college is more than a third of most families’ annual income,
and some families, of course, are sending more than one child to college at a time. As in the past,
families are using financial aid to fill the gap between income and the cost of college.
But unlike in the past, a large percentage of that financial aid consists of student loans,
leading to increased student loan debt. 71% of undergraduates received some form of financial
aid for the 2011-2012 school year. Of those, 42% took out student loans—in an average amount
of $7,100—and 5% had parents who took out federal Direct PLUS loans, in an average amount
of $12,100. Meanwhile, the average amount of educational grants that did not need to be paid
back was only $6,200. 72 As a result, student loan debt in the U.S. has been steadily increasing.
2010 was the first year average student loan debt for graduating seniors was over twenty-five
thousand dollars, clocking in at $25,250. 73 As of 2013 it is up to $28,400.74 Nor is there any sign
that the trend toward increased student loan debt will soon be reversed—in July of 2013, the
interest rate on new federal student loans doubled. According to the Hamilton Project, which
researches economic issues and advocates for economic policy improvements, forty percent of
American households with heads under the age of thirty-five had outstanding student loan debt in
2010. From 2002 to 2012, the total volume of student loans in the U.S. grew 77 percent and the
average debt per student increased by almost sixty percent. Delinquency rates are high, in part
due to the economic downturn, which has made it difficult for recent graduates to get jobs.

71

“Social Explorer: Median Family Income.”

72

“2011–12 National Postsecondary Student Aid Study (NPSAS:12): Student Financial Aid Estimates for 2011–
12.”

73

Hamilton, “Average Student Loan Debt Exceeds $25,000.”

74

“Student Debt and the Class of 2013.”

30

Student loan debt is rising even faster than tuition costs. 75 It is clear that while financial aid is
helpful in affording college, it only goes so far, and students who take out loans will be feeling
that financial burden for years to come. Therefore students are looking for more cost-effective
alternatives. Meanwhile, MOOCs are free or inexpensive and often offered by prestigious
institutions, such as would be very expensive to attend in person.
MOOCs for Credit
Rising tuition is also one of the driving forces behind the other major trend in the world
of MOOCs right now: the movement toward MOOCs for credit. According to the Hamilton
Project, as of 2013, “the unemployment rate for individuals twenty-five and older without a high
school diploma was over 11 percent, but below 4 percent for those with a college degree” and the
rate of return on investing in a college education was more than fifteen percent. 76 Students want
to get college degrees so they can have more job opportunities and attain a higher salary, but the
cost of enrolling in a university or college can be prohibitive and they are afraid of taking on
huge amounts of debt. While offering AP credit via MOOCs for high school students allows
them to graduate from college faster, offering college credit for other MOOC courses might
allow future students to graduate from college without attending a traditional institution of higher
education at all.
The trend toward MOOCs for credit began in 2013, when Coursera, one of the most wellknown MOOC providers, began offering some courses that had been approved for transfer credit
by the American Council on Education’s College Credit Recommendation Service (ACE
CREDIT), which is “a recognized authority in assessing non-traditional education experiences,

75

Greenstone and Looney, “Rising Student Debt Burdens.”

76

Ibid.

31

with more than 2,000 colleges and universities considering ACE CREDIT recommendations in
determining the applicability to their course and degree programs.” 77 Although ACE CREDIT
accreditation is only a form of recommendation, not a mandate for acceptance of credit on the
part of colleges and universities, it still carries substantial weight because of the high visibility
and reputation of the American Council on Education (ACE), which lobbies for the rights of
adult learners and contributes to federal policy debates on education. 78 To receive credit for these
courses, students must sign up for the paid (but inexpensive) “Signature Track” version of
Coursera’s usually free classes, which uses webcam photos and typing patterns to verify
students’ identities when they turn in their work. 79 The student must also take an online credit
exam, for which there is an additional fee, at the end of the course. 80
The trend toward MOOCs for credit has continued across other platforms since. Coursera
is now no longer the only MOOC platform to experiment with offering college credit for its
classes: Udacity, another well-known platform, has recently teamed up with Georgia Tech to
offer an online master’s degree in computer science, which, although it does require a separate
application and some extra exams and projects, takes place entirely in MOOC format, with
degree-seeking students sharing classes with students who are not taking the course for credit. 81
Even more recently, Coursera announced its first online degree, an MBA it plans to offer in
collaboration with the University of Illinois. 82 These MOOC-for-credit opportunities are not free,

77

“Coursera Blog: Five Courses Receive College Credit Recommendations.”

78

“About the American Council on Education.”

79

“Signature Track Guidebook.”

80

“Coursera Blog: Five Courses Receive College Credit Recommendations.”

81

“Udacity, Georgia Tech, and AT&T Partnership.”

82

Young, “U. of Illinois, With MOOC Provider, Will Offer Low-Cost Online M.B.A.”

32

but they are certainly less expensive for students than taking a comparable course at a traditional
institution of higher education, in addition to being more flexible and requiring less paperwork.
Meanwhile, offering credit is also profitable for MOOC providers, who make money from
charging students small fees.
There has also been a legislative push to offer credit for MOOCs: in February 2013,
Darrell Steinberg introduced a bill into the California Senate that would have required public
colleges in the state to accept grants to develop MOOC versions of their 20 most in-demand
undergraduate courses and offer credit in partnership with a MOOC platform. 83 The bill did not
pass as originally written, as it was intended to expand access to in-demand courses to reduce
dropout rates and therefore the final version gave colleges the option of developing their own
online courses instead. 84 However, a similar bill in Florida that “orders Florida education
officials to study and set rules that would allow students who have yet to enroll in college to earn
transfer credits by taking MOOCs” did pass in 2013. 85,86
Course credit from MOOCs is not yet universally recognized by colleges and universities
or by employers, but it may become more widely accepted once these organizations begin to
recognize some of the advantages of digital credentials over traditional degrees. A digital
certificate says that the student is organized and self motivated—he or she can set goals and
follow through on them without needing the structure and guidance provided by a college or
university. It also has the potential to provide more information than a traditional diploma or
transcript, which only lists classes taken and grades received but does not explain the content of
83

Rivard, “MOOC Bill Dead for Now.”

84

“SB-520 Student Instruction: California Online Student Incentive Grant Programs.”

85

Kolowich, “MOOCs May Not Be So Disruptive After All.”

86

“‘Watered Down’ MOOC Bill Becomes Law In Florida.”

33

each class or preserve the student’s work for potential employers to scrutinize. Currently MOOC
certificates do not provide this information, but the potential is there: a digital learning
environment can preserve a student’s work and make it more easily accessible than a series of
paper assignments tucked away in a professor’s filing cabinet.
Taking MOOCs Seriously
Both of these trends, the trend toward MOOCs for younger students and the trend toward
MOOCs for credit, give students a reason to take their MOOCs more seriously. If they want AP
credit or college credit, not only do they have to complete the coursework, but they also have to
work hard and complete it at a higher level, with higher-quality work, because they are being
graded. Of course, not every MOOC student is going to be active or work hard. Statistically
speaking, because class sizes are so large and there are no barriers to entry, the majority of
students are going to either not follow up on taking the class at all or be passive observers. About
fifty percent of students who enroll in MOOCs actually take the class, with a median value of
9.8% of those students completing the class. 87 However, it seems likely that as larger percentage
of MOOC students start taking classes for college preparation or for credit, a larger percentage of
them will begin to take their online coursework seriously. Meanwhile, currently active MOOC
students tend to be very active indeed, as evidenced by the success of connectivist MOOCs, in
which students aggregate information about the topic, remix that content by recording it for
themselves in different formats, repurpose that information to create their own content, and feed
that content forward to other participants. 88 MOOC providers are catching on to the success of
connectivist learning strategies and making MOOCs more interactive.

87

Jordan, “Initial Trends in Enrolment and Completion of Massive Open Online Courses.”

88

Kop, Fournier, and Mak, “A Pedagogy of Abundance or a Pedagogy to Support Human Beings?”

34

For instance, many MOOCs now incorporate writing assignments that are collaboratively
graded. On Coursera, peer-graded assignments are processed in four phases: the submission
phase, the peer evaluation phase, the self-evaluation phase, and the results phase. Students first
complete the assignment by the submission deadline. Then they are assigned to critique several
other students’ submissions. They are provided with a quantitative rubric to fill out and a space
for comments and given several days to complete the evaluations. When they are done
evaluating other students’ work, they must evaluate their own. After the end of the evaluation
phases, students receive a grade based on the average score assigned to them by other students. 89
Although of course being graded by an experienced instructor is preferable, collaborative
grading makes it possible for students to receive individual feedback even in classes where
enrollment tops several thousand individuals. Students must complete the peer evaluations to be
successful in the class, and having multiple students critique each paper and averaging the scores
they assign together makes the grading as fair as possible.
Although peer grading is not perfect, it does go a ways toward addressing concerns about
the effectiveness of teaching humanities courses in MOOC format by creating an environment in
which it is possible to assign rigorous writing tasks, such as traditional academic research papers.
There is a popular perception among academics that MOOCs are only good for teaching subjects
where right and wrong answers are easy to determine, like math or computer science 90: the
equation either works or it doesn’t. The program outputs the correct answer or it doesn’t.
Humanities courses are harder to implement as MOOCs because they are more subjective and
grading has traditionally been qualitative rather than quantitative; collaborative grading is a

89

“Peer-Graded Assignments.”

90

Heller, “Laptop U.”

35

potential solution. Although there are still other challenges involved in humanities courses—for
instance, inducing students to participate in forum discussions as actively as they would in class
discussions—peer grading has enabled the creation of an online learning environment in which
serious MOOC students write academic papers.

Current Access to Scholarly Resources is Limited
As things currently stand, the resources available to serious MOOC students are
extremely limited. Unless they are affiliated with a university, generally they do not have access
to research materials or research help for writing papers. Since many of them, in the near future,
are likely to be high school students or students trying to obtain cheaper degrees by not going
through a traditional institution of higher education, they may never have done any schoolwork
at the college level before. This lack of scholarly resources or assistance is particularly acute for
students who have low incomes or live in rural or international areas where they do not have
access to public libraries. Of course, students who have internet access to take MOOCs also have
access to other online resources, but many of these resources are not scholarly and there is no
guarantee that inexperienced students will be able to identify those that are. Even with the
growth of the Open Access Movement, the scholarly resources freely available on the internet
are currently insufficient for scholarly research in many areas. These barriers to access to
scholarly materials will be discussed further below in the section on barriers to universal access.

MOOC Students and For-Profit Companies
In the meantime, as long as serious MOOC students want and do not have access to
research resources through traditional channels, there is the potential for institutions other than
libraries to step in and provide them. Students who take MOOCs for credit have already
demonstrated that they are willing to pay a fee for online academic resources, and it seems

36

unlikely that for-profit companies will continue to ignore the growing potential market for online
research resources. In fact, there are already a large number of online marketers that sell
educational products and would be well placed to step into this growing niche.
For instance, a relatively new company called K12 offers “flexible and customized online
services to students who struggle or otherwise aren’t comfortable in brick-and-mortar schools”
and “has long been a focal point in the debate over the role of for-profit companies in
education.” 91 As suggested by its name, the company offers services aimed at children in prekindergarten through high school. These services include online courses and one of the target
groups listed on their website is “college and career-minded students” 92—the same group that
new MOOCs for high school students are aimed at. It does not seem like a stretch to suggest that
for-profit companies such as K12, which already offer online services for these students, would
be interested in filling the emerging niche of providing online research resources to support
online students, including MOOC students.
At least one scholar has already recognized the potential of “the iTunization of
Information” as a way to get scholarly digital resources into the hands of MOOC students: Kerry
Wu, in a 2013 article on “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs,” points out that if scholarly
publishers decide to reach out to MOOC students and offer articles for purchase or rental “a la
carte” for low prices, they could make a substantial amount of money based on the volume of
MOOC students who are potential purchasers. Wu also suggests that publishers could
accomplish this by partnering with MOOC providers or instructors to recommend articles to

91

Cavanagh, “K12 Inc. Building A New Brand For Some Services. (cover Story).”

92

“College and Career-Minded Students.”

37

purchase. 93 This model must absolutely be prevented from occurring. It has a high potential for
abuse, with publishers or MOOC providers recommending unnecessary or off-topic articles to
make more money. It also undermines the accessibility of MOOCs for low-income students and
cuts libraries out of the educational process, causing students to miss out on their expertise.
For-profit companies are not necessarily bad, and they don’t necessarily provide poorquality services. Two of the three major MOOC providers, Coursera and Udacity, are themselves
for profit (EdX, the third major provider, is a nonprofit). 94 However, the courses offered on these
platforms obviously reflect the values and opinions of the professors who designed them; it is
easy to see the source of the biases. Research services, however, reflect more complex biases
than MOOCs themselves. The research materials have a bias reflecting their authors’ views. The
research collection has a bias reflecting its selectors’ views. The items suggested to the student
by the reference assistant reflect that person’s biases. The items selected by the student reflect
the students’ biases. The way the student uses those resources also reflects his or her biases.
Navigating the research and writing process, in other words, is much more complex in terms of
bias than taking a class because it is more individualized and less guided.
Libraries and librarians are, of course, not perfect and have biases of their own. However,
libraries have an advantage over private companies providing research materials and services in
that they have a history of being aware of this bias and actively trying to eliminate or reduce it. A
recent annotated bibliography analyzing works about bias in library services and collections
identifies seventeen articles and books on the subject published between 2004 and 2012, which
focus on bias-related issues including diversity, community outreach, reference, filter bubbles,

93

Wu, “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs,” 582.

94

Shumski, “MOOCs by the Numbers.”

38

censorship, collection development, and LGBT issues. 95 In an attempt to reduce bias in libraries,
librarians have implemented a strict code of ethics.
The American Library Association, “the oldest and largest library association in the
world,” 96 has an eight-principle Code of Ethics. In this code, ALA declares its commitment to
providing equitable access to accurate, unbiased, and uncensored information; protecting users’
privacy and confidentiality; not advancing private interests; and not allowing personal
convictions to interfere with professional duties. The ALA Code of Ethics was adopted in 1939
and has since been revised several times, most recently in 2008. 97 ALA also has a separate Code
of Ethics for Librarians, which will be discussed in more detail later in the section on
overcoming challenges to providing research materials to MOOC students. 98 This time spent
thinking in depth about bias and ethics makes libraries a safer bet for educating the students of
tomorrow than for-profit companies.

The Potential for Research from MOOC Students
In an era when MOOCs are gaining momentum, it is especially important to ensure that
students are getting high-quality education. The two main trends in the world of MOOCs at the
moment, MOOCs for high school students and MOOCs for credit, are both providing a wider
audience for MOOCs and ensuring that the students who take them are taking them more
seriously. Advances in connectivist learning, including peer grading, are making it both possible
and likely that in the near future, MOOC students will begin working on research projects and

95

Dimsdale, “An Annotated Bibliography on Bias in Library Services and Collections.”

96

“About ALA.”

97

“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association | Advocacy, Legislation & Issues.”

98

“Code of Ethics for Librarians.”

39

papers, especially since high school students will want to demonstrate their ability to handle
college-level research for admissions officers. If libraries, with their strict code of ethics
designed to reduce bias, do not step in to provide research help and resources to MOOC students,
we risk leaving the next generation of students to the mercy of biased resources from for-profit
companies. As Jonathan Haber’s book MOOCs puts it, “if a free MOOC class includes required
reading that students would have to pay to obtain, how open (or democratic) can a MOOC
program really be?” 99

Section Three: Public Libraries versus Academic Libraries
Once we have established that it is necessary and indeed morally obligatory for libraries
to support MOOC students by providing research resources and reference assistance, the
question arises of which libraries, exactly, ought to be providing this support. There are two
obvious choices, public libraries and academic libraries, and there are good arguments to be
made for each. Public libraries are more prevalent, are designed to serve the public (which
includes MOOC students), and have a gentler learning curve than academic libraries. On the
other hand, academic libraries have more scholarly materials, particularly older scholarly
materials, and are designed to support students.

The Arguments for and Against Public Library Support
Public libraries seem like the obvious choice for supporting MOOC students who are not
already affiliated with an institution of higher education. There are more of them than academic
libraries, students may already be familiar with how to use them, and they are designed to
99

Haber, MOOCs, 59.

40

support the general public.
Most people in the United States, at least, are familiar with public libraries. According to
a 2013 report from the Pew Research Center, eighty-one percent of Americans ages sixteen or
older have visited a public library or bookmobile at some point in their lives, forty-four percent
have visited a public library website at some point in their lives, and seventy-two percent had
either used a public library or lived in a house where a family member had used a public library
in the past year. These numbers, although not exactly equal, are relatively comparable regardless
of race, age (excepting website use), household income, and community type (urban versus
suburban or rural). Americans with more education are more likely to have visited a public
library, both in their lives and in the past year, but even so, sixty-six percent of Americans
without a high-school diploma have used a public library (versus eighty-six percent of those with
a college degree). 100 Taken together, all of these numbers mean that most Americans are familiar
with public libraries—they probably know where their local libraries are and how to use them, or
at least have a friend or family member who can help them get oriented.
By comparison, according to the 2013 5-year American Community Survey estimate,
slightly fewer than thirty percent of Americans have a bachelor’s degree or higher. Even if you
include people whose highest educational attainment is an associate’s degree (about eight percent
of Americans), that means that most potential MOOC students in the U.S. are probably not
familiar with any academic library, let alone academic research libraries. However, a recent
study conducted by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania found that out of a sample of
34,779 survey respondents taking their MOOCs through Coursera, about seventy-nine percent of
them had at least a bachelor’s degree, which is not representative of the greater population. They

100

Zickuhr et al., “Section 1.”

41

concluded that “while there is tremendous hope for this educational platform, the individuals the
MOOC revolution is supposed to help the most—those without access to higher education . . . —
are conspicuously underrepresented among the early adopters.” However, only 8.5 percent of
those invited to take the survey responded, 101
Public libraries are also excellent places to do research on popular culture, local
community history, and genealogy, as they are more likely to collect popular books, magazines,
and other popular media than academic libraries and often serve as a repository for community
publications, like local newspapers or phone books. 102 However, although public libraries may
be appropriate for some specific types of research, generally they do not have the range of
research materials available at academic libraries.
According to a 2005 article from the journal The Serials Librarian comparing serials
paradigms in public and in academic libraries, there are several key differences. Firstly, in public
libraries, “one person is often responsible for managing the periodicals collection of a main
library and all branches,” although “managers of branches, or other subject specialists,
sometimes offer suggestions for making purchasing or cancellation decisions,” whereas in
academic libraries, there is usually “a more interactive and inclusive team approach for making
collection decisions” and “the team may consist of faculty, staff and librarians.” 103 Greater
diversity among the selectors and greater expertise in the subject areas for which they are
selecting journals or databases means a more varied selection—helping to overcome selection
bias to a degree—and materials better targeted to patrons’ specific fields of research. In the

101

Christensen et al., “The MOOC Phenomenon.”

102

Headley and Langendorfer, “Comparing and Contrasting Serials in Public and Academic Libraries.”

103

Ibid.

42

academic model of selection, every journal or database has been chosen by someone who is
familiar with the subject, enabling them to make decisions based on knowledge that a non-expert
might not necessarily have, such as which journals are seminal and which are secondary.
Academic librarians also “often expect or seek faculty input” 104 when they are selecting new
materials, which means that they are choosing materials that have been specifically designated as
appropriate to supplement higher education by individuals who have teaching experience in that
field.

The Arguments for and Against Academic Library Support
Another of the major arguments for academic libraries supporting MOOCs is that not
doing so may cause them to lose relevance. If MOOC providers partner with private
companies—for instance, publishers—to provide research materials to students, or even if
private companies reach out directly to MOOC students, academic libraries may no longer be the
primary information brokers for scholarly materials. Instead, they may become, as one article
puts it, “an exclusive club catering to the small group of students that are still paying big money
for the on-campus experience.” 105
MOOCs also provide an opportunity for academic libraries to advocate for open-access
publishing, which has been a huge topic in the library community in recent years. 106,107,108 If
professors who have designed MOOCs see that the traditional model of scholarly publishing is
preventing their students from accessing scholarly resources, they may become more inclined to
104

Ibid.

105

Wu, “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs,” 582.

106

Lara, “The Library’s Role in the Management and Funding of Open Access Publishing.”

107

Linlin Zhao1, “Riding the Wave of Open Access.”

108

Vandegrift and Bolick, “Free to All.”

43

publish in open-access journals or repositories so that those students can have access to their
work. 109 However, this course of events may not occur if academic libraries do not bring access
barriers to the attention of professors by attempting to serve MOOC students.
However, the argument has been made that MOOCs are not in-depth enough for
librarians to be relevant: as one article puts it, “many MOOCs are short, vocationally oriented
courses lasting as little as four to six weeks. Where a MOOC aims to equip individuals with a
very specific set of skills and knowledge, librarian input may well be superfluous.” 110 That may
be true in the case of vocational courses, such as Udacity aims to provide, but the majority of
MOOCs are academically oriented. In the long run, if MOOC students are to be successful as
students, they must learn information literacy skills, regardless of how steep the learning curve
might be, and they need access to scholarly research materials. Therefore academic libraries are
the better choice. However, even if academic libraries commit to providing research help and
resources for MOOC students, there are still obstacles to overcome.

Section Four: Obstacles to be Overcome
Traditionally, scholars affiliated with institutions of higher learning have used research
libraries, while members of the public mostly frequent only public libraries. But is it right that
access to scholarly works should be limited to only patrons affiliated with an institution? Article
twenty-six of the United Nations’s “Universal Declaration of Human Rights” states that
everyone has the right to education, that higher education should be accessible to all, and that

109

Wu, “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs,” 582.

110

Barnes, “MOOCs,” 165.

44

education strengthens respect for human rights and promotes understanding. 111 Access to
scholarly works supports education, including self-education. In light of the goal of using
education to uplift people, and in light of historical library values and human rights to
information, everyone should have access to scholarship through the resources and services of
research libraries.
However, before this can occur, research libraries must work to address institutional,
distance-related, legal, and resource-based barriers to universal access. This paper discusses the
history of and reasons for the existence of these barriers and suggests some possible solutions,
including outreach and awareness, digitization on demand, open access and digital first sale, and
improved fundraising techniques. In this discussion, the MOOC students who do not currently
have access to research libraries are variously referred to as “outside users,” “public users,”
“nontraditional users,” and “potential patrons.” It is also important to acknowledge that most
research libraries are affiliated with institutions of higher learning, and to address barriers
accordingly.

Library Values
One of the central tenets of library values has always been equal access for everyone. The
earliest modern rules of librarianship were written in 1931 by Shiyali Ramamrita Ranganathan,
and two of them were, “Books are for use,” and, “Every reader his book.” 112 Although they do
not explicitly state that everyone should have equal access to libraries, you obviously do not have
to be affiliated with a research library to be a reader, and if an outside reader wants to use a book,
that is what they are for. In 1939, the American Library Association (ALA) adopted its first code

111

112

“The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.”
Gorman, Our Enduring Values., 19.

45

of ethics, which stated that “impartial service should be rendered to all who are entitled to use the
library” and that “librarians should participate in public and community affairs.” 113 To truly
engage with the public, it is necessary to invite the public into the library, and once they are
there, they are entitled to impartial service. The same year, they adopted a Library Bill of Rights,
the current version of which reads, “Library resources should be provided for . . . all people of
the community the library serves,” and, “A person’s right to use a library should not be denied or
abridged because of origin, age, background, or views.” 114 If origin is not a grounds to deny
library services, surely a potential user who has an origin outside of the institution a research
library traditionally serves should still have access. ALA also has a statement on Intellectual
Freedom Principles for Academic Libraries that states, “A service philosophy should be
promoted that affords equal access to information for all in the academic community.” 115 The
public is part of the academic community. Traditional institutions of higher learning do not hold
a monopoly on either education or scholarship; anyone can pursue either or both, and therefore
should have access to research materials and services.
Kay Mathiesen, in her 2013 article “The Human Right to a Public Library,” makes the
argument that public libraries are a human right, derived from three rights to different types of
information mentioned in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. 116 However, access to
public libraries is insufficient in providing universal access to information. Public libraries
provide access to current and useful information, but their purpose is not the same as that of
academic libraries, which often contain older and more obscure materials, as their mission is
113

114

115

116

“Code of Ethics for Librarians.”
“Library Bill of Rights.”

“ALA | Intellectual Freedom Principles for Academic Libraries.”
Mathiesen, “The Human Right to a Public Library.”

46

more focused on catering to researchers than on maximizing the use of all materials. Therefore, it
is important, in the interests of human rights and of education, to provide universal access to
research library materials as well.

Barriers to Universal Access
There are four types of barriers facing research libraries as they consider offering their
materials to a wider audience. Firstly, there are institutional barriers related to the desire of
potential patrons and research libraries to interact and to the ability of the former to navigate
library resources despite classification practices, collection bias, and low technical skills.
Secondly, physical barriers include the time required for interlibrary loan, the difficulty—for
some potential patrons—entailed in obtaining consistent internet access, the lack of availability
of older materials as ebooks, and the cost of digitization. Thirdly, there are legal barriers to
universal access, specifically related to copyright laws on digital materials. And finally, the idea
of expanding access brings up resource-based issues, including the limited time research
librarians have to cater to outside patrons, the amount of work they are already doing, and the
lack of support and funding for expanding access.
Institutional Barriers to Universal Access
Before other barriers to universal access to research library materials and services can be
addressed, it will be necessary to break down a number of institutional barriers. The most
important institutional barriers are twofold: first, few members of the public use or understand
the purpose of research libraries; and second, research libraries do not necessarily welcome
outside users. The former is true in part because of the latter, and also in part because of other
institutional barriers, like classification practices and collection biases. However, librarians can
begin to address these barriers through recognizing the importance of serving nontraditional

47

users, reaching out to them and to a more diverse pool of potential library students, and
providing research assistance in addition to just access to materials.
The two most important institutional barriers to address are inducing in potential patrons
a desire to use research libraries and instilling in research libraries a willingness to cater to the
general public. Few members of the public use public libraries, and even fewer use research
libraries. Although in the United States, at least, most people believe that libraries are important
to their communities, thirty-one percent of the U.S. population over the age of sixteen seldom or
never uses public libraries. 117 Public use of research libraries is much lower: a 2004 survey of
sixty-five academic libraries found only two where librarians estimated that twenty percent or
more of the users were unaffiliated. 118 Part of the problem is that few members of the public see
any reason to want to visit a research library, but the other part is that although most research
libraries allow some use by outside patrons, 119 they are not particularly welcoming to them. Few
research libraries mention serving unaffiliated users in their mission statements, and there is a
recurring question of whether they have the resources to do so, 120 which will be addressed in the
section on resource barriers below.
Part of the reason that there is low use of research libraries by the public is that, even in
research libraries that are welcoming to outside users, resources can be difficult for the
uninitiated to navigate. Library catalogs may marginalize topics in which outside users are
interested, and local collections may not contain the items they are looking for.
Catalogs are organized using controlled vocabularies that make it relatively easy to find
117

118

119

120

Zickuhr, Purcell, and Rainie, “Library Engagement Typology.”
Shires, “A Library of One’s Own.” 317.

Courtney, “Barbarians at the Gates.” 478.
Shires, “A Library of One’s Own.” 316.

48

information on mainstream topics but “reflect the marginalizations and exclusions of the society
they serve.” 121 Outside users, especially those living in rural areas or underdeveloped countries,
are often already marginalized and may find that marginalization reflected in the controlled
vocabulary used for topics in which they are interested.
And even if their search efforts are successful, there may not be much to find. Collections
in research libraries reflect the biases, known or unknown, of their selectors, which may result in
a lack of access to the scholarly topics outside users want to research. A 1991 study found, for
example, that liberal titles are more likely to be found in academic libraries, while conservative
ones are more likely to be found in public libraries. 122 Given that older scholarly works are
unlikely to remain in the collections of public libraries, that might make it difficult to find past
conservative titles. It is difficult to fix the problem of bias in collection development because of
the “introspection illusion,” which is the tendency of selectors to conclude that they have no
biases after examining their thoughts and feelings and not identifying any. Bias is insidious
specifically because it is so often unconscious, 123 but it can have a major impact on
nontraditional users, who hail from background very different than those of research librarians.
Breaking down institutional barriers will require a four-step process: first, research
libraries must realize that it is important to cater to outside users. Second, they must conduct
outreach—not just to potential patrons, to convince them of the value of using research libraries,
but also to diverse potential students of librarianship. In the long run, while good intentions and
awareness are an important beginning, diversity among the people who create controlled

121

122

123

Olson, “The Power to Name.” 639.

Quinn, “Collection Development and the Psychology of Bias.” 278.
Ibid., 282.

49

vocabularies and select materials is the best way to reduce unintentional marginalization. And
third, in the meantime, librarians must cultivate awareness of the needs of outside users and seek
to assist them as much as possible, especially because they may lack the technical skills
necessary to navigate library resources due to limited education or lack of familiarity with
information technology.
Distance as a Barrier to Universal Access
One of the main barriers to universal accessibility of research library materials is that of
distance. Many potential patrons, especially those in rural areas or developing countries, do not
live near a research library and do not have the means to travel to one. Even for potential patrons
who live close to a research library, that library may not have the materials that the patron wants
or needs. The obvious solution for the latter problem is interlibrary loan, but it can be very slow.
And although it is important to acknowledge the digital divide, most of the possible ways to
overcome distance barriers involve digital solutions. Ebooks are promising, but most older titles
are not available in that format, and for those that are, copyright can still be an issue. Even if it
were not an issue, digitizing books that were not originally published as ebooks is slow and
expensive. However, digitization on demand shows promise as a way to provide access to
potential patrons despite distance barriers.
Since the first quarter of the twentieth century, the traditional remedy for a patron’s home
research library not having the materials a patron wants has been interlibrary loan. 124 Even if a
potential patron does not live close to a research library, he or she may live close enough to
another library to pick up interlibrary loan books there, and some remote areas also have
bookmobiles or book delivery services that could be used to transport interlibrary loan materials

124

Nisonger, “Accessing Information.” 2.

50

for the last few miles. The problem with interlibrary loan as a solution is that it is slow.
Document delivery services, at least in areas where there is internet access, have become faster
as they have become mostly electronic, but there has not been the same progress in the speed of
sending physical materials that are too long for document delivery. According to Thomas
Nisonger’s 2001 review of literature on interlibrary loan turnaround times, various studies have
found that the average time from a patron submitting a request to his or her library receiving the
item is anywhere from seven to thirty-eight days, with the median at 13.6. 125 Although the
studies he cites are from the 1990s, there have been no significant advances in shipping speed
since then, the last major innovation in shipping being the creation of international standards for
shipping containers in the 1960s. 126 For potential patrons who live in remote areas, turnaround
time for interlibrary loan requests is likely to be even longer, from two to three weeks.
Before continuing to discuss the possible solutions to the slow speed of interlibrary loans,
it is important to acknowledge what in the mid-1990s was named the “digital divide.” At that
point, the internet had begun, like the printing press, the steam engine, and the automobile before
it, to be hailed as a technological advancement that would revolutionize society. However, access
to the internet was (and is still) strongly correlated with income and education. 127 Although some
scholars at that time expressed hope that competition would drive down the price of computers
and internet access, 128 and although internet access in the United States has indeed become more
widespread, the digital divide still exists, particularly in rural and low-income areas and in
developing countries. A 2009 article about digital access in Africa, for example, asserts that
125

126

127

128

Ibid.

Levinson, The Box.

Hoffman and Novak, “Bridging the Digital Divide.” 3.
Howland, “The ‘Digital Divide.’” 288.

51

internet access is still “not widely available in schools, libraries, or homes” there and that “there
is a gross underutilization of technologies” because of the lack of required infrastructure to
support them. 129 Even if MOOC students are able to get the necessary internet access to
complete their coursework, that does not necessarily mean that they have access to the internet
all the time. For instance, Coursera’s learning hubs provide internet access for MOOC students,
but only during specified discussion times. Many of the possible solutions to the problem of
distance as a barrier to universal access to research materials rely on the internet as a faster mode
of delivery, and although it is beyond the scope of this discussion to suggest solutions to the
digital divide, it is clearly an issue that must be addressed if research libraries are truly to be able
to provide fast, universal access to potential patrons.
One potential solution to the problem of slow interlibrary loans is the invention of
ebooks. Although ebooks have existed as far back as 1971, when Project Gutenberg began their
digitization process, ebooks have only come to the notice of the general public since the early
2000s. Previous to that, ebooks tended to be digital versions of texts in the public domain—in
other words, usually texts that would be relatively easy to obtain anyway because anyone could
reprint them. 130 Libraries quickly embraced ebooks as a new lending format, in part to forestall
assertions that they are becoming irrelevant in the digital age. 131 Although there are some legal
barriers to lending ebooks due to copyright, which is discussed in the section on legal barriers
below, in theory an ebook can be delivered instantly anywhere in the world. The high delivery
speed makes ebooks appear to be an attractive alternative to interlibrary loan; however, the

129

130

131

Mutula, “Information and Computer Technology Management Challenges in the Networked World.” 63.
Mullin, “A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the E-Book.” 20-21.
Breeding, “Ebook Lending.” 24.

52

reality is that only a relatively small minority of books are available in electronic format from
libraries. Most publishers only began to offer ebooks after 2000. 132 Therefore, even in libraries
that devote a high percentage of their acquisitions budgets to ebooks, a relatively small
percentage of the total collection will be digital because of the proportion of older materials,
which are not generally available as ebooks, to newer materials. Nonetheless, for newer scholarly
materials, ebooks are an excellent option for universal access.
There has been some effort, of course, to digitize older books, most notably on the part of
the aforementioned Project Gutenberg and, more recently, Google Books. The latter, unlike the
former, digitizes books that are still under copyright. Google defends this practice by pointing
out that although users can search the text of these books, they cannot read the entirety; they see
only bibliographic information about the book and a few sentences surrounding the search term
to provide context. 133 Therefore, although this practice, regardless of its legality or morality, is
excellent for helping users to discover books and for preserving the content of those books, it is
of little help to potential research library patrons who want to obtain copies of older books, since
they would still have to request those books via interlibrary loan.
Part of the problem with obtaining older texts as ebooks is the difficulty of digitization,
which is both a time-consuming and an expensive process, the more so because the time and
money needed for each project are difficult to estimate. In 2010, three Spanish researchers
invented a mathematical model for cost estimation that they called DiCoMo, the Digitization
Cost Model, after spending five years digitizing twelve thousand books. DiCoMo included two
main cost factors: size-independent overhead, the cost of preparing the tools, which varies

132

133

Polanka, No Shelf Required., 10.
“Perspectives – Google Books.”

53

according to the fragility of the item to be digitized; and time cost, which varies according to the
number of pages the item has. They also identified a large number of modifiers that could
increase or decrease the digitization time, including the staff’s experience and familiarity with
tasks and tools, the presence of foreign or ancient languages, the condition of the paper, the
modernity of the typeface, the age of the book, the desired quality of the final product, and the
adequacy of the technology used. 134 Given the complexity of estimating the duration and cost of
digitization projects, most libraries, with their limited budgets, have been understandably hesitant
to commit large amounts of resources to pursuing them. Even with accurate cost models, it is
clear that digitization is expensive; an exponential curve based on the DiCoMo model estimates
that a book with two hundred and fifty pages will take about two hundred and twenty-five hours
to digitize. 135 That’s a lot of effort to put in for a faraway potential patron, even without counting
the cost of tools, materials, and labor.
However, digitization is not an entirely hopeless proposition as a faster alternative to
sending older books though physical interlibrary loan, as there has been some recent progress on
the front of cheaper, faster digitization. Google came up with a gentler high-speed process for
scanning books in 2003, although they have not published the details. 136 There has also been
some discussion of the use of automated book scanners to provide on-demand digitization of
library resources. Initial costs for obtaining the machine and setting up a workflow are high, such
that research libraries might not be willing to invest in them purely for the sake of unaffiliated
patrons, and the digitized copies that result are of only moderate quality. However, libraries

134

135

136

Bia, Muñoz, and Gómez, “DiCoMo.” 143-144.
Ibid., 145.

“Google Books History – Google Books.”

54

might be willing to invest for the sake of their own traditional patrons, who, in one survey,
expressed high interest in full-text book digitization on demand, with ninety-one percent of
respondents interested. Just as importantly, the same study found that ninety-three percent of
library staff respondents were interested in digitization on demand, partly because it could be
used to replace lost or damaged items. 137 With such a high degree of interest from both
traditional patrons and library staff, libraries might be willing to invest in digitization on demand,
with secondary benefits to faraway potential patrons.
Legal Barriers to Universal Access
Many of the barriers to universal access to research materials are a result of legal
restrictions. Libraries are able to lend out physical materials and to provide them via interlibrary
loan due to a piece of copyright law called the first sale doctrine, which, despite efforts to amend
it for the digital age, does not currently apply to ebooks. As a result, most libraries that want to
lend out ebooks currently license rather than purchase them, which means that they must abide
by publishers’ restrictions on lending. However, the growing open access movement is an
attempt on the part of scholars to reclaim control of their work and offer it to a broader audience.
As the open access movement matures, we must continue to fight for a digital first sale doctrine.
The first sale doctrine states that once a person purchases a copyrighted work, he or she
has the right to sell (and, by extension, to lend) that work without the permission of the copyright
owner, as long as no copies of the work are made. The first sale doctrine has its roots in English
common law of the sixteenth century, which prohibited restrictions on the use or re-sale of
property that had been transferred to a new owner. 138 It became precedent in the United States in

137

138

Chamberlain, “Investigating Faster Techniques for Digitization and Print-on-Demand.” 61-63.
United States Code Congressional and Administrative News. 1984.2, Stat. 2898-2899.

55

1908 as a result of the Supreme Court case Bobbs-Merill Co. v. Straus 139 and was written into
law the following year. 140 Thereafter, the first sale doctrine was minimally revised in 1976 (Title
17, Section 109) and has not been changed since. 141
The first sale doctrine is not, however, currently considered to apply to digital documents,
such as ebooks, in part because it is so difficult to transfer an ebook without making a copy of it.
In 1997, Congressmen Rick Boucher and Tom Campbell introduced the Digital Copyright Era
Enhancement Bill, which proposed adding wording to Section 109 that would make it legal to
make copies of copyrighted digital documents for the purpose of transferring them as long as the
original document was immediately deleted. 142 The American Libraries Association (ALA)
supported the bill, 143 but Congress chose to have the Copyright Office and the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration (NTIA) conduct a joint study (later
combined with a study on the Digital Millennium Copyright Act, DMCA 144) on the possible
effects of the change. 145 The study, which was completed in 2001, identified three main
problems with the Boucher-Campbell model of digital first sale: one, the first sale doctrine was
never intended to grant reproduction rights; two, the first sale doctrine has limits in the real
world that it does not have in the digital (e.g. geography, deterioration of works); and three, the
requirement that copy owners delete their copies after selling would be difficult to verify or
139

140

141

142

143

144

145

“Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus - 210 U.S. 339 (1908).”

“An Act to Amend and Consolidate the Acts Respecting Copyright.”
“U.S. Copyright Office - Copyright Law: Chapter 1.”

“Bill Text - 105th Congress (1997-1998) - THOMAS (Library of Congress).”

Flagg, “ALA Praises Internet Copyright Bill: Digital Era Copyright Enhancement Act of 1997.”
“Digital Millennium Copyright Act,” §1.104.

Wolf, The Digital Millennium Copyright Act., 15-16.

56

enforce, which is perhaps the most compelling argument. 146 The DMCA itself did not cause any
significant changes in libraries’ rights to lend digital materials. 147 The ebook industry, however,
prefers to avoid the issue of digital first sale altogether by licensing instead of selling ebooks to
libraries.
Despite the lack of progress on the front of digital first sale, some scholars and
institutions are fighting back against copyright restrictions on digital materials. The open access
movement, which began in approximately 1998 but is only now gaining momentum, is an
attempt to wrest control of scholarly communication back from the commercial publishing
industry. In addition to causing issues with digital copyright, the industry has begun charging
very high prices for online journal access, with prices rising 227 percent between 1986 and 2002.
It has also begun “bundling” journals, requiring libraries to subscribe to journals they do not
want in order to get access to the ones they do. A growing alternative to traditional publishing,
open access publishing allows scholars to provide free online access to their work, usually with
minimal copyright and licensing restrictions. Most open access journals are, however, still peer
reviewed. 148 Open access is excellent for allowing members of the general public to view
research that they previously would have had to obtain from a research library. However, open
access research is not a substitute for providing the general public with access to the services of
research libraries for three reasons. First, just as older texts are seldom available as ebooks, older
research is seldom available in open access journals. Second, although open access is gaining
traction, it does not seem likely that it will entirely replace the traditional scholarly publishing

146

147

148

“DMCA Report Executive Summary.”

Anderson, “First Sale, Digital Copyright, and Libraries.”
Bergman, “The Scholarly Communication Movement.”

57

industry any time soon. And third, even if the public can view scholarly materials through open
access, access alone is not a substitute for the assistive services of a research librarian.
While the open access grows and matures, therefore, it will be necessary to continue to
fight for the creation of a digital first sale doctrine; the issue is not yet concluded. In July of 2013
the Department of Commerce released a green paper exploring “Copyright Policy, Creativity,
and Innovation in the Digital Economy.” The paper notes that more and more copyright owners
are avoiding the issue of digital first sale altogether by “structur[ing] the transaction as a license
rather than a sale . . . This has long been the case for software and is now becoming more
common for e-books.” It suggests that policy-makers may be motivated to modify the first sale
doctrine to prevent it from becoming obsolete as digital distribution becomes more common. The
paper does not make suggestions as to how or whether the doctrine should be modified but does
point out that “since the Copyright Office’s examination of the digital first sale doctrine in 2001,
much has changed.” 149 The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office began soliciting comments online
in October 2013, in person via a public meeting in December 2013, 150 and plans to continue
soliciting them via public roundtable meetings in July of 2014. 151 It is important that librarians
attend these meetings and advocate for digital first sale as a means to improving access to
scholarship for everyone, traditional and nontraditional users alike.
Resource Barriers to Universal Access
Even if all of the institutional, distance, and legal barriers to universal access to research
library materials and services were to be addressed, libraries would still need to find the support,
149

“Copyright Policy, Creativity, and Innovation in the Digital Economy.”

“Request for Comments on Department of Commerce Green Paper, Copyright Policy, Creativity, and
Innovation in the Digital Economy | NTIA.”
150

151

“Director’s Forum: A Blog from USPTO’s Leadership.”

58

money, and time to serve nontraditional users. Support for outside access programs is not
consistent among upper management in research libraries because of high turnover rates, but
there is still an incentive for middle managers to innovate. However, there is little money (and
therefore little staff and librarian time) to support these programs. To truly implement universal
access to research library materials and services, it will be necessary to hone fundraising skills
and seek new sources for major gifts.
There has been, since the mid-seventies, high turnover of directors in research
libraries. 152 A high rate of turnover makes it difficult to introduce new programs, such as would
be necessary to cater to outside users, because each new director will have new priorities and
may not support initiatives launched by the previous director. However, in a work environment
that has grown increasingly competitive, 153 there is more incentive for middle managers to
attempt to boost their performance reviews by creating innovative new programs, including
public outreach.
However, even with an incentive to introduce new programs to serve potential users,
there is not currently enough funding for them, or, perforce, enough time. Research libraries are
already experiencing such extreme budget cuts that some of them have implemented or are
considering implementing a fee to provide services to patrons not affiliated with the parent
organization. 154 Even if these fees are charged only on a cost-recovery basis, they discourage
outside patrons from seeking research library services, and the potential patrons who are already
under-privileged in regard to access to scholarship are the most likely to be unable to afford a

152

153

154

Woodsworth, “Getting Off the Library Merry-Go-Round.”
Hernon and Schwartz, “Leadership.” 243.

Brooks, “Library Research on Campus.” 347.

59

fee.
Yet if neither libraries nor potential patrons can afford to fund research services for the
latter, who would provide the monetary support for these services? The recent economic
downturn has made it more difficult to obtain grant funding from both private and government
organizations. 155 However, libraries can still seek to solicit major gifts to fund new programs.
Many research libraries, especially academic libraries, do not use their connections to the fullest
to find good prospects. It is true that academic libraries themselves do not have alumni from
whom to solicit gifts and connections, but they do have connections to schools and departments
that have access to alumni’s ears. An article describing fundraising tactics used at the University
of Michigan’s library suggests meeting with deans, offering Special Collections tours to
colleagues who have visiting donors, participating in alumni or parent events on campus, and
inviting development officers to see new exhibits before they open so that they have time to
invite donors. 156 Offering services to outside users is a worthy goal, and one that potential donors
are likely to have sympathy with, many of them being outside users themselves.

A Bright Future
Although there are many obstacles to the ethical goal of research libraries providing
universal access to scholarly research and reference services, they are not insurmountable. If
research libraries are willing to accept outsiders as patrons, to reach out to them, and to nurture
diversity in the information professions as a method of reducing marginalization, institutional
barriers can be overcome. As internet access becomes more widespread, and as we perfect fast,
inexpensive digitization techniques, it will be possible to provide faster, more reliable

155

156

Gonzalez, “Major Gifts Funding for Academic Libraries, 2003 to 2007.” 64.
Bennett, “Creating Partnerships That Pay off.”

60

interlibrary loan services in spite of the distance between some potential patrons and the research
materials they want. Scholars and libraries will continue to pursue the open access movement
and to campaign for a digital first sale doctrine to manage legal barriers to universal access. And
finally, libraries must cultivate diligently the funding resources around them that are currently
overlooked to support new programs for outside users. Universal access will not occur overnight,
but it is coming, and sooner than we think.

Conclusion
It is easy to see that although MOOCs are new, they have triggered a great deal of
innovation in the field of higher education, have made higher education available to students
who otherwise would not have access to it—especially students outside the United States, who
have been perhaps even more impacted by the advent of the MOOC than have Americans—and
have caused a number of dilemmas for educators and for librarians. One of the largest of these
dilemmas, whether libraries should support MOOCs and if so, how, has yet to be resolved. We
have demonstrated unambiguously that libraries, and specifically academic libraries, should
provide research materials and reference assistance to MOOC students and examined many of
the obstacles and possible solutions thereto, but there remain major questions to be answered.
For instance, if it becomes easier for MOOCs to acquire accreditation and thereby be
eligible for course credit, will credit for MOOCs continue to be low cost or will MOOC
providers try to take advantage of the greater potential for profit by raising their prices? If
academic libraries do begin to offer support for MOOC students, will they need to implement
special programs for younger MOOC students, who are a growing demographic and might need
more guidance? And will the inability to agree on a digital first sale doctrine drive even more

61

scholarly resources to move to a licensing model, making it even harder for MOOC students to
get access to them?
These questions will eventually need to be resolved if MOOCs are to continue to be a
viable option for distance education, but for the moment, if academic libraries were only to begin
to consider how they can help students taking MOOCs in spite of the obstacles, that would be a
good start.

62

Appendix A: MOOC History Timeline

63

Bibliography
A. A., and A. McE. “Online Learning Is Becoming More Popular In China.” Distance Education
Report 18, no. 21 (11/1/2014 2014): 4–4.
“About ALA.” American Library Association, 2015. http://www.ala.org/aboutala/.
“About the American Council on Education.” American Council on Education, 2014.
http://www.acenet.edu/about-ace/Pages/default.aspx.
“ALA | Intellectual Freedom Principles for Academic Libraries.” Accessed June 9, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/Template.cfm?Section=interpretations&Template=/ContentManagem
ent/ContentDisplay.cfm&ContentID=8551.
Anderson, Byron. “First Sale, Digital Copyright, and Libraries.” Behavioral &amp; Social
Sciences Librarian 21, no. 1 (2002): 73–76. doi:10.1300/J103v21n01_07.
Ararwal, Anant. “Building the Next Generation Mobile Learning Experience.” edX, May 12,
2015. https://www.edx.org/Qualcomm%20and%20edX.
Barnes, Cameron1, cbarnes@une.edu.au. “MOOCs: The Challenges for Academic Librarians.”
Australian Academic & Research Libraries 44, no. 3 (September 2013): 163–75.
doi:10.1080/00048623.2013.821048.
Barnouw, Erik, and Erik Barnouw. A Tower in Babel: A History of Broadcasting in the United
States, to 1933. His A History of Broadcasting in the United States, v. 1. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1966.
Beaven, Tita, Anna Comas-Quinn, Mirjam Hauck, Beatriz de los Arcos, and Timothy Lewis.
“The Open Translation MOOC: Creating Online Communities to Transcend Linguistic
Barriers.” Journal of Interactive Media in Education, January 1, 2013.

64

Becker, Bernd W. “Connecting MOOCs and Library Services.” Behavioral & Social Sciences
Librarian 32, no. 2 (April 2013): 135–38. doi:10.1080/01639269.2013.787383.
Bennett, Linda. “Creating Partnerships That Pay off.” Bottom Line: Managing Library Finances,
The 18, no. 2 (June 1, 2005): 92–94. doi:10.1108/08880450510597541.
Bergman, Sherrie S. “The Scholarly Communication Movement: Highlights and Recent
Developments.” Collection Building 25, no. 4 (October 1, 2006): 108–28.
doi:10.1108/01604950610705989.
Bia, Alejandro, Rafael Muñoz, and Jaime Gómez. “DiCoMo: The Digitization Cost Model.”
International Journal on Digital Libraries 11, no. 2 (June 2010): 141–53.
doi:10.1007/s00799-011-0073-9.
Bianchi, William. Schools of the Air: A History of Instructional Programs on Radio in the
United States. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co., 2008.
“Bill Text - 105th Congress (1997-1998) - THOMAS (Library of Congress).” Accessed June 6,
2014. http://thomas.loc.gov/cgi-bin/query/z?c105:H.R.3048:
“Bobbs-Merrill Co. v. Straus - 210 U.S. 339 (1908).” Justia US Supreme Court Center. Accessed
June 6, 2014. http://supreme.justia.com/cases/federal/us/210/339/case.html.
Breeding, Marshall. “Ebook Lending:Asserting the Value of Libraries as the Future of Books
Unfolds.” Computers in Libraries 31, no. 9 (November 2011): 24–27.
Brooks, Andrea Wilcox. “Library Research on Campus: Examining a Fee-Based Library Service
Within University Walls.” The Journal of Academic Librarianship 36, no. 4 (July 2010):
347–50. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2010.05.008.
Carlson, Scott, and Goldie Blumenstyk. “The False Promise of the Education Revolution.”
Chronicle of Higher Education 59, no. 17 (December 21, 2012): 17–17.

65

Cavanagh, Sean. “K12 Inc. Building A New Brand For Some Services. (cover Story).”
Education Week 33, no. 27 (April 2, 2014): 1–17.
Chamberlain, Edmund. “Investigating Faster Techniques for Digitization and Print-on-Demand.”
New Review of Academic Librarianship 18, no. 1 (April 2012): 57–71.
doi:10.1080/13614533.2012.660769.
Christensen, Gayle, Andrew Steinmetz, Brandon Alcorn, Amy Bennett, Deirdre Woods, and
Ezekiel J. Emanuel. “The MOOC Phenomenon: Who Takes Massive Open Online
Courses and Why?” SSRN Scholarly Paper. Rochester, NY: Social Science Research
Network, November 6, 2013. http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=2350964.
“Code of Ethics for Librarians.” American Library Association, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/history/index5.
“Code of Ethics of the American Library Association | Advocacy, Legislation & Issues.”
American Library Association. Accessed January 6, 2015.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/proethics/codeofethics/codeethics.
“College and Career-Minded Students.” K12, Inc., 2014. http://www.k12.com/who-wehelp/college-career-minded.
Conway, Madeline R. “EdX Enrollment Reaches Seven Digits.” The Harvard Crimson, June 30,
2013. http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2013/6/20/edx-million-students-benchmark/.
“Copyright Policy, Creativity, and Innovation in the Digital Economy.” Department of
Commerce Internet Policy Task Force, 2013.
http://www.uspto.gov/news/publications/copyrightgreenpaper.pdf.
“Coursera Blog: Five Courses Receive College Credit Recommendations.” Coursera, February
7, 2013. http://blog.coursera.org/post/42486198362/five-courses-receive-college-credit.

66

Courtney, Nancy. “Barbarians at the Gates: A Half-Century of Unaffiliated Users in Academic
Libraries.” Journal of Academic Librarianship 27, no. 6 (November 2001): 473.
Creed-Dikeogu, Gloria, and Carolyn Clark. “Are You MOOC-Ing Yet? A Review for Academic
Libraries.” Kansas Library Association College and University Libraries Section
Proceedings 3, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 9–13. doi:10.4148/culs.v1i0.1830.
DeSantis, Nick. “Stanford Professor Gives Up Teaching Position, Hopes to Reach 500,000
Students at Online Start-Up.” The Chronicle of Higher Education Blogs: Wired Campus,
January 23, 2012. http://chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/stanford-professor-gives-upteaching-position-hopes-to-reach-500000-students-at-online-start-up/35135.
Dimsdale, Denise. “An Annotated Bibliography on Bias in Library Services and Collections.”
Georgia Library Quarterly 50, no. 1 (Winter 2013): 31–38.
“Director’s Forum: A Blog from USPTO’s Leadership.” Accessed June 9, 2014.
http://www.uspto.gov/blog/director/entry/we_are_traveling_around_the.
“DMCA Report Executive Summary.” Accessed June 6, 2014.
http://www.copyright.gov/reports/studies/dmca/dmca_executive.html.
Dodd, Tim. “Udacity’s Nanodegrees Link Students to Tech Jobs.” Financial Review, February 2,
2015. http://afr.com/news/policy/education/udacitys-nanodegrees-link-students-to-techjobs-20150204-133fjm.
Emanuel, Ezekiel J. “Online Education: MOOCs Taken by Educated Few.” Nature 503, no. 7476
(November 21, 2013): 342–342. doi:10.1038/503342a.
Emmerson, Anne M. “A History of the Changes in Practices of Distance Education in the United
States from 1852--2003.” Ed.D., Dowling College, 2005.

67

http://search.proquest.com/docview/305342174/abstract/A4616EA0BDA340FBPQ/1?acc
ountid=14512.
Flagg, Gordon. “ALA Praises Internet Copyright Bill: Digital Era Copyright Enhancement Act
of 1997.” American Libraries 29, no. 1 (1998): 19.
Flamenbaum, Rachel, Manduhai Buyandelger, Greg Downey, Orin Starn, Catalina Laserna,
Shreeharsh Kelkar, Carolyn Rouse, and Tom Looser. “Anthropology in and of MOOCs.”
American Anthropologist 116, no. 4 (December 2014): 829–38. doi:10.1111/aman.12143.
“Get Started with OCW.” MIT OpenCourseWare, 2015. http://ocw.mit.edu/help/get-started-withocw/.
Gibbs, W. Wayt. “Lost Science in the Third World.” In Scholarly Metrics under the Microscope:
From Citation Analysis to Academic Auditing, by Blaise Cronin and Cassidy R Sugimoto,
293–306, 2015.
Gonzalez, Luis J. “Major Gifts Funding for Academic Libraries, 2003 to 2007.” Library
Leadership & Management 24, no. 3 (June 2010): 64–69.
“Google Books History – Google Books.” Accessed June 3, 2014.
http://www.google.com/googlebooks/about/history.html.
“Google Trends - MOOC and MOOCs.” Google Trends, 2014.
http://www.google.com/trends/explore.
Gorman, Michael. Our Enduring Values: Librarianship in the 21st Century. Chicago: American
Library Association, 2000.
Greenstone, Michael, and Adam Looney. “Rising Student Debt Burdens: Factors Behind the
Phenomenon.” The Hamilton Project 5 (July 2013).

68

http://www.hamiltonproject.org/files/downloads_and_links/June_Jobs_Blog_FINAL_1.p
df.
Haber, Jonathan. MOOCs. MIT Press Essential Knowledge Series. Cambridge, Massachusetts:
MIT Press, 2014.
Hamilton, Walter. “Average Student Loan Debt Exceeds $25,000.” Los Angeles Times.
November 3, 2011, sec. LATExtra; Part AA; Business Desk.
Hashmi, Amna H, and Cynthia H Shih. “EdX More Than Doubles in Size with Addition of 15
New Schools.” 5/21/2013. The Harvard Crimson. Accessed April 30, 2015.
http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2013/5/21/edx-expansion-fifteen-schools/.
Headley, Stephen, and Jeanne M. Langendorfer. “Comparing and Contrasting Serials in Public
and Academic Libraries.” The Serials Librarian 48, no. 3–4 (June 6, 2005): 289–93.
doi:10.1300/J123v48n03_10.
Heller, Nathan. “Laptop U.” The New Yorker, May 13, 2013.
http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2013/05/20/laptop-u.
Henn, Steve. “Stanford Takes Online Schooling To The Next Academic Level.” NPR.org,
January 23, 2012.
http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2012/01/23/145645472/stanford-takesonline-schooling-to-the-next-academic-level.
Hernon, Peter, and Candy Schwartz. “Leadership: Developing a Research Agenda for Academic
Libraries.” Library & Information Science Research 30, no. 4 (December 2008): 243–49.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2008.08.001.
“High School Initiative.” EdX. Accessed December 7, 2014. https://www.edx.org/high-schoolinitiative.

69

Hoffman, Donna L., and Thomas P. Novak. “Bridging the Digital Divide: The Impact of Race on
Computer Access and Internet Use.,” February 2, 1998.
http://eric.ed.gov/?q=Bridging+the+Digital+Divide%3a+The+Impact+of+Race+on+Com
puter+Access+and+Internet+Use&id=ED421563.
Howland, Joan Sidney. “The ‘Digital Divide’: Are We Becoming a World of Technological
‘haves’ and ‘have-Nots?.’” Electronic Library, The 16, no. 5 (December 31, 1998): 287–
89. doi:10.1108/eb045651.
“iPhone 6.” Proquest Newspapers. Accessed January 13, 2015.
http://search.proquest.com/results/.
Jenkins, Janet. Materials for Learning: How to Teach Adults at a Distance. London ; Boston:
Routledge & K. Paul, 1981.
Jordan, Katy. “Initial Trends in Enrolment and Completion of Massive Open Online Courses.”
International Review of Research in Open & Distance Learning 15, no. 1 (February
2014): 133–59.
Kolowich, Steve. “MOOCs May Not Be So Disruptive After All.” The Chronicle of Higher
Education, August 8, 2013. http://chronicle.com/article/MOOCs-May-Not-Be-SoDisruptive/140965/.
Kop, Rita, Hélène Fournier, and John Sui Fai Mak. “A Pedagogy of Abundance or a Pedagogy to
Support Human Beings? Participant Support on Massive Open Online Courses.” The
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning 12, no. 7 (October 18,
2011): 74–93.
Lara, Kate. “The Library’s Role in the Management and Funding of Open Access Publishing.”
Learned Publishing 28, no. 1 (January 2015): 4–8. doi:10.1087/20150102.

70

Levinson, Marc. The Box: How the Shipping Container Made the World Smaller and the World
Economy Bigger. Princeton University Press, 2010.
Lewin, Tamar. “Consortium of Colleges Takes Online Education to New Level.” The New York
Times, July 17, 2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/07/17/education/consortium-ofcolleges-takes-online-education-to-new-level.html.
———. “Instruction for Masses Knocks Down Campus Walls.” The New York Times, March 4,
2012. http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/05/education/moocs-large-courses-open-to-alltopple-campus-walls.html.
———. “U.S. Teams Up With Operator of Online Courses to Plan a Global Network.” The New
York Times, October 31, 2013. http://www.nytimes.com/2013/11/01/education/us-plansglobal-network-of-free-online-courses.html.
“Library Bill of Rights.” Accessed June 9, 2014.
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/librarybill.
Linlin Zhao1, l.zhao@deakin.edu.au. “Riding the Wave of Open Access: Providing Library
Research Support for Scholarly Publishing Literacy.” Australian Academic & Research
Libraries 45, no. 1 (March 2014): 3–18. doi:10.1080/00048623.2014.882873.
Mahraj, Katy. “Using Information Expertise to Enhance Massive Open Online Courses.” Public
Services Quarterly 8, no. 4 (October 1, 2012): 359–68.
doi:10.1080/15228959.2012.730415.
“Massive Open Online Courses - A Threat to Traditional Teaching?” E-Learning Update, no. 40
(June 2013): 1–6.
Mathiesen, Kay. “The Human Right to a Public Library.” Journal of Information Ethics 22, no. 1
(April 1, 2013): 60–79. doi:10.3172/JIE.22.1.60.

71

McNutt, Marcia. “Bricks and MOOCs.” Science 342, no. 6157 (October 25, 2013): 402–402.
doi:10.1126/science.1246943.
“MOOC OR MOOCs OR (Massive Open Online Course*).” Proquest Newspapers. Accessed
January 13, 2015. http://search.proquest.com/results/.
Mullin, Christopher. “A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the E-Book.” PNLA Quarterly
67, no. 1 (October 15, 2002): 20–27.
Mutula, Stephen M. “Information and Computer Technology Management Challenges in the
Networked World: Implications for Libraries in Africa.” Journal of Interlibrary Loan,
Document Delivery & Electronic Reserves 19, no. 1 (January 2009): 57–73.
doi:10.1080/10723030802533879.
Nisonger, Thomas E. “Accessing Information: The Evaluation Research.” Collection
Management 26, no. 1 (2001): 1–23.
Noffsinger, John Samuel. Correspondence Schools, Lyceums, Chautauquas. Studies in Adult
Education. New York: The Macmillan Company, 1926.
“Number Of Students Taking Advanced Placement Classes Nearly Doubles Over Last Decade.”
KPBS Public Media, February 11, 2014. http://www.kpbs.org/news/2014/feb/11/morestudents-taking-advance-placement-tests-ever/.
Olson, Hope A. “The Power to Name: Representation in Library Catalogs.” Signs 26, no. 3
(April 1, 2001): 639–68.
Oyo, Benedict, and Billy Mathias Kalema. “Massive Open Online Courses for Africa by Africa.”
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning 15, no. 6 (December 1,
2014): 1–13.

72

Parr, Chris. “Europe Hopes for Common Mooc Market and Currency.” Times Higher Education,
no. 2123 (October 17, 2013): 10–10.
“Peer-Graded Assignments.” Coursera, n.d. http://courserahelp.zendesk.com/hc/enus/articles/201212339-Peer-Graded-Assignments.
“Perspectives – Google Books.” Accessed June 3, 2014.
http://www.google.com/googlebooks/perspectives/.
Polanka, Sue. No Shelf Required: E-Books in Libraries. 1 edition. Chicago: Amer Library Assn
Editions, 2010.
Protalinski, Emil. “Coursera Adds 29 New Universities to Bring Total to 62, Offers First Courses
in Chinese, Italian, Spanish.” The Next Web, February 21, 2013.
http://thenextweb.com/insider/2013/02/21/coursera-adds-29-new-universities-to-bringtotal-to-62-offers-first-courses-in-chinese-italian-and-spanish/.
Quinn, Brian. “Collection Development and the Psychology of Bias.” The Library Quarterly 82,
no. 3 (July 1, 2012): 277–304. doi:10.1086/665933.
“Real-Time MOOC Snapshot.” BizEd 13, no. 3 (June 5, 2014): 56.
“Request for Comments on Department of Commerce Green Paper, Copyright Policy, Creativity,
and Innovation in the Digital Economy | NTIA.” Accessed June 9, 2014.
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/federal-register-notice/2013/request-comments-departmentcommerce-green-paper-copyright-policy-cre-0.
Rivard, Ry. “MOOC Bill Dead for Now.” Inside Higher Ed. Accessed December 16, 2014.
https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2013/08/01/controversial-california-billoutsource-student-learning-dead-until-2014-or-later.

73

Rodrik, Delphine, and Kevin Sun. “EdX: Harvard’s New Domain.” The Harvard Crimson,
October 4, 2015. http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2012/10/4/edx-scrutiny-onlinelearning/.
Rouse, Hana N, and Justin C Worland. “First Day of School for Harvard Online.” The Harvard
Crimson, October 16, 2012. http://www.thecrimson.com/article/2012/10/16/edXHarvard-classes-start/.
Saettler, L. Paul. The Evolution of American Educational Technology. Englewood, Colo:
Libraries Unlimited, 1990.
“SB-520 Student Instruction: California Online Student Incentive Grant Programs.,” May 28,
2013. http://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/billAnalysisClient.xhtml.
Schwartz, Meredith. “Massive Open Opportunity.” Library Journal 138, no. 9 (May 15, 2013):
22–22.
Sean Coughlan. “UK University Joins US Online Partnership.” BBC News, July 17, 2012.
http://www.bbc.com/news/education-18857999.
Shires, J. Michael. “A Library of One’s Own: A Survey of Public Access in Florida Academic
Libraries.” Reference & User Services Quarterly 45, no. 4 (July 1, 2006): 316–26.
Shumski, Daniel. “MOOCs by the Numbers: How Do EdX, Coursera and Udacity Stack Up?”
Education Dive, August 15, 2013. http://www.educationdive.com/news/moocs-by-thenumbers-how-do-edx-coursera-and-udacity-stack-up/161100/.
“Signature Track Guidebook.” Coursera. Accessed December 16, 2014.
https://www.coursera.org/signature/guidebook.
“Social Explorer: Median Family Income,” 2012.
http://www.socialexplorer.com/tables/ACS2011/R10858189.

74

“Student Debt and the Class of 2013.” Project on Student Loan Debt, November 2014.
http://projectonstudentdebt.org/files/pub/classof2013.pdf.
“The Universal Declaration of Human Rights.” Accessed June 9, 2014.
http://www.un.org/en/documents/udhr/.
“Tuition Costs of Colleges and Universities,” 2013.
http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=76.
“Udacity, Georgia Tech, and AT&T Partnership.” Udacity, 2014.
https://www.udacity.com/georgia-tech.
United States Code Congressional and Administrative News. Vol. 1984.2. St. Paul, Minn: West
Pub. Co, n.d.
“U.S. Copyright Office - Copyright Law: Chapter 1.” Accessed June 6, 2014.
http://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap1.html.
Vandegrift, Micah, and Josh Bolick. “‘Free to All’: Library Publishing and the Challenge of
Open Access.” Journal of Librarianship & Scholarly Communication 4, no. 4 (October
2014): 107–16. doi:10.7710/2162-3309.1181.
“‘Watered Down’ MOOC Bill Becomes Law In Florida.” Inside Higher Ed, July 1, 2013.
https://www.insidehighered.com/quicktakes/2013/07/01/watered-down-mooc-billbecomes-law-florida.
Winterhalter, Benjamin. “Will Free Online Courses Ever Replace a College Education?”
Distance Education Report 18, no. 17 (9/1/2014 2014): 2–2.
Wolf, Christopher. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act: Text, History, and Caselaw. Silver
Spring, Md.: Pike & Fischer, 2003.

75

Woodsworth, A. “Getting Off the Library Merry-Go-Round: McAnally and Downs Revisited.”
Library Journal 114, no. 8 (5/1/1989 1989): 35–38.
Wright, Forrest. “What Do Librarians Need to Know About MOOCs?” D-Lib Magazine: The
Magazine of Digital Library Research 19, no. 3/4 (April 2013).
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/march13/wright/03wright.html.
Wu, Kerry. “Academic Libraries in the Age of MOOCs.” Reference Services Review 41, no. 3
(August 2013): 576–87. doi:10.1108/RSR-03-2013-0015.
Youngberg, David. “Why Online Education Won’t Replace College--Yet.” Chronicle of Higher
Education 58, no. 44 (August 17, 2012): 24–24.
Young, Jeffrey R. “U. of Illinois, With MOOC Provider, Will Offer Low-Cost Online M.B.A.”
Chronicle of Higher Education, May 15, 2015, A17.
Zickuhr, Kathryn, Kristen Purcell, and Lee Rainie. “Library Engagement Typology.” Pew
Research Center’s Internet & American Life Project. Accessed June 7, 2014.
http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/03/13/library-engagement-typology/.
Zickuhr, Kathryn, Lee Rainie, Kristen Purcell, and Maeve Duggan. “Section 1: An Overview of
Americans’ Public Library Use.” Pew Internet Libraries, December 11, 2013.
http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2013/12/11/section-1-an-overview-of-americans-publiclibrary-use/.
Zigerell, James. The Uses of Television in American Higher Education. New York: Praeger,
1991. http://catalog.library.ucla.edu/vwebv/holdingsInfo?bibId=3637836.
Zou, Jie Jenny. “Stanford U. Offers Free Online Course in Artificial Intelligence.” The Chronicle
of Higher Education Blogs: Wired Campus, August 2, 2011.

76

http://chronicle.com/blogs/wiredcampus/stanford-u-offers-free-online-course-inartificial-intelligence/32622.

77

