Assessing the TALL Texans Leadership Institute

By

TINA A. OSWALD, Bachelor of Arts, Master in Library and Information Science

Presented to the Faculty of the Graduate School of
Stephen F. Austin State University
In Partial Fulfillment
O f the Requirements
For the Degree of
Master of Secondary Education

STEPHEN F. AUSTIN STATE UNIVERSITY
August 2015

ProQuest Number: 1581883

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest
Que
ProQuest 1581883
Published by ProQuest LLC(2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

ABSTRACT

Leadership is needed in every profession, including library science. This knowledge has
led to the formation of leadership institutes within the field. The Texas Library
Association (TLA) created the TALL Texans Leadership Institute in 1994. This yearly
event has never been formally assessed. TLA needs to be able to provide proof of the
value of the Institute for those who participate. To gather data on the Institute and its
effect on participants, a survey was devised and sent out in electronic format to all former
participants. The survey results showed that the Institute creates in the participants
improved self-confidence that produces leadership qualities in terms of increased
publications and presentations. The participants repeatedly cited the interaction with
other participants and mentors as chief benefits of the Institute. In the future, the Institute
should expand its assessment and make sure that the mentoring role continues for at least
a year for each participant.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I owe a debt of gratitude to my thesis committee, especially to my committee chair, Dr.
Neill Armstrong. They have all been so supportive throughout this long endeavor. I
would also like to thank the Steen Library staff and all my colleagues who have watched
me struggle and gave me support during this academic undertaking. Also to those at the
Texas Library Association, they helped me locate e-mails for all of the former TALL
participants and encouraged me to complete this task. In the end, I have to thank my
family! This has been tough on them, but they have been my cheerleaders through it all.
So, thank you Brian for giving me the time to take classes, to study, and to work on my
thesis. You kept it all going so I could do what was needed for this degree. To my two
girls, Jessica and Rebecca, you were both young girls when I began this process, and now
you are young women that I am very proud of. To my Dad, Edward Atkinson, who
moved to Nacogdoches in the midst of all this “thesis business” and wondered if I would
ever finish! Well, I did, but I could not have done so without a lot of support and
understanding.

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page

ABSTRACT.....................................................................................................

ii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS...........................................................................

iii

LIST OF TABLES..........................................................................................

vi

CHAPTER I

1

CHAPTER II

INTRODUCTION......................................................
Background of the Problem.............................

1

Purpose of the Study........................................

3

Research Questions...........................................

4

LITERATURE REVIEW.............................................

5

Management......................................................

6

Leadership.........................................................

8

Leadership and Management Development....

10

Assessment/Evaluation......................................

11

Adult Learning..................................................

14

Mentoring..........................................................

16

Summary............................................................

17

iv

CHAPTER III

METHODOLOGY.........................................................

18

CHAPTER IV

ANALYSIS...................................................................

22

CHAPTER V

SUMMARY, CONCLUSIONS, AND
RECOMMENDATIONS....................

32

Summary...........................................................

32

Conclusions.......................................................

33

Recommendations.............................................

40

REFERENCES..................................................................................................

44

APPENDICES...................................................................................................

50

Appendix A—Survey.......................................

51

Appendix B—Tables........................................

58

Appendix C— Survey Note..............................

64

VITA...................................................................................................................

65

v

LIST OF TABLES

Page

Table 1

Current Job Situation......................................

56

Table 2

Degrees Earned Since TALL..........................

56

Table 3

Job Requirement—Research, Write,
Publish During TALL

57

Job Requirement—Research, Write,
Publish After TALL.............

57

Table 5

Publications Before and After TALL

58

Table 6

Presentations Before and After TALL

58

Table 7

Seven Statements—Agree or Disagree

59

Table 8

Seven Statement Statistics..............................

60

Table 9

Benefits of Activities Following TALL

61

Table 4

vi

CHAPTER I

Introduction

Background of the Problem
Leadership may be considered as a natural phenomenon in most professions.
Within the workplace, leaders are those individuals who are expected to influence and
motivate others and ensure that all are working toward the common goals of the
organization.
In the field of librarianship, national and state library organizations have offered
leadership institutes to assist those working in libraries with leadership training and
professional growth. In the early 1990’s, the Texas Library Association (TLA) began to
discuss the idea of the creation of a leadership institute for librarians within the state of
Texas. TLA looked at other models when they began their design. Programs reviewed
included: Michigan Library Association Leadership Academy, New Jersey Library
Leadership Institute, Snowbird Leadership Institute, and UCLA Fellows Program. TLA
then began to carve out the requirements for their institute: it would be provided
annually, a librarian would have to be mid-career, and one would need to be nominated
and then apply for this leadership institute. Other things to consider included the need for
a facilitator or facilitators to lead the institute, as well having mentors or leaders within
the library field in Texas who would attend the institute and assist in the learning process.
1

There was also the need for an application/selection process. It was decided there would
be a cap on the number of participants selected each year. This institute was named the
Texas Accelerated Library Leadership Institute, or the TALL Texans Leadership Institute
(hereafter referred to as either TALL or Institute). This Institute became active in 1994
and has been offered every year since its inception.

Pat Hawthorne, a 1994 TALL

Texans Institute graduate, in her article for the Texas Library Journal (1999) on the
history of the Institute, reported that the committee that set up the Institute wanted it to
support librarians in “their professional growth by offering an opportunity for
concentrated learning which combines practical knowledge, personal skills, vision, and
communication” (p. 156). Therefore, the goals of the TALL Texans Leadership Institute
were: to foster leadership capabilities for Texas librarians and their communities; to
define leadership development for TLA members; and to foster cultural diversity in
library leadership in Texas. Once selected to participate, the applicant was expected to
attend the Institute. During the hands-on, active-learning experience offered by the
Institute, selected participants worked to foster leadership capabilities and to articulate
and define their own leadership development agenda. Participants of the Institute are
required to make a two-year commitment of involvement within the Texas Library
Association in leadership roles.
As an Institute with a longitudinal history, many Texas librarians have attended
this unique learning experience. However, as of 2012, the TALL Texans Leadership
2

Institute had never assessed itself other than through the administration of a satisfaction
survey of participants at the conclusion of the Institute. Assessment is essential as a way
to gauge the extent to which the Institute is providing the necessary elements to support
Texas librarians in leadership roles.
According to Pemick (2001), the final task of a leadership institute should be
program evaluation. This kind of evaluation has not been undertaken by the TALL
Texans Leadership Institute. This inquiry seeks to determine whether the TALL Institute
enhances leadership within the library science field within the state of Texas.
Specifically, does the Institute provide effective and sufficient training in the area of
leadership development, as expressed in its goals and objectives?
Purpose of the Study
This study was initiated out of a concern to assess the TALL Texans Leadership
Institute by surveying former participants. A survey was designed to determine former
TALL participant’s perceptions of the TALL Texans Leadership Development Institute
as well as whether there was a relationship between the amount of professional activities
before and after participation in the Institute. Through survey responses, the study
explored evidence of leadership growth through job title changes or through an increase
in participation in professional associations, in presentations given, or in publications
written. Further, this study examined the perspectives of librarians towards the
effectiveness of this particular leadership Institute. Additionally, would the survey show
3

that the Institute provided enhancement to the leadership development and capabilities
for those mid-level librarians who attended?
Research Questions
The study sought to ascertain information on the effect of the Institute on
participants’ professional lives and careers. Participants were queried about their careers
in terms of changes in job titles and employment opportunities. Did the TALL Texans
Leadership Institute affect a participant’s professional life in terms of job title and
employment opportunities? Moreover, did the Institute motivate participants to
participate in the Texas Library Association or other library or employment related
organizations? Finally, did the Institute have an effect on a participant’s leadership
capabilities in terms of personal and career goals?

4

CHAPTER II

Literature Review

In many organizations, people are needed who possess strong leadership skills.
Often a person is thrust into a leadership role with little or no formal training in how to be
a leader or how to lead others in optimal fashion. This may potentially cause a new
leader to flounder or perceive that they are failing in their new role. This is true for many
organizations, including libraries. Librarians chosen for leadership roles may be
expected to lead a staff of professional librarians, along with paraprofessionals, and/or
student employees for an entire library or a specific department within a library. How are
these librarians, when asked to assume leadership roles, to handle these leadership
responsibilities? With little or no training, some do quite well. Others may not perform
well as they struggle to fit into a new role. One way that the need for trained leadership
has been addressed in the field of Library Science is through the mechanism of leadership
development institutes. Most of these have been created by national library associations,
such as the American Library Association’s (ALA) Snowbird Leadership Institute, and
the Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL) Research Library Leadership
Fellows program, or by state library organizations such as the Texas Library
Association’s (TLA) TALL Texans Leadership Institute. The rationale for the creation
of these leadership institutes has been the recognition of a need to assist newly emerging
5

leaders in the profession—a need for the field of Library and Information Science to
“grow” their own leaders from those already working in the field.
According to Albanese (2008), librarians are mostly satisfied within their chosen
field of work. They are satisfied with the jobs they have, positions that typically require a
Master’s in Library Science degree from an American Library Association accredited
program. However, as individuals accrue time on the job many encounter limited
opportunity for advancement within the field. Consequently, some leave their library
positions and seek advancement in other professions. Professional librarians tend to be
on a level playing field with other professionals in terms of their academic backgrounds
however, there appears to be scant preparation in the areas of leadership or management
in Library Science degree programs. As a result, librarians are prepared to work in the
field, but may not be prepared to advance or lead. Moreover, there is the issue of
librarians in the field facing retirement in the near future, the “graying” of the library
profession (Edge & Green, 2011; Lenzini, 2002; Arthur, 1998; Curran, 2003; Mason &
Wetherbee, 2004). As such, the profession has recognized a need to begin to “grow” the
next generation of library leaders.
Management
A manager is defined by Murray (2010) as a person who organizes others to
complete a task or goal (p. 1). Additionally, in the Business Dictionary.com (online
edition), the definition o f management is articulated as “the organization and
6

coordination of the activities of a business in order to achieve defined objectives” and
“directors and managers who have the power and responsibility to make decisions and
oversee an enterprise.” Murray (2010) noted that although the terms leadership and
management go together and are linked and complimentary, they are not the same thing.
He further states that a good manager must also be a good leader. Though the terms are
often used interchangeably, there can be one without the other. A pioneer in the field of
leadership studies states, “The manager does things right; the leader does the right thing”
(Bennis, 2000, p. 5). A leader’s role is to both inspire and motivate those people around
them in order to complete the job of the organization. Alternatively, a manager does
more of the planning, organizing and coordinating of the work to be accomplished. As a
result, leadership may be seen as an art that utilizes a person’s non-cognitive skills, while
management may be perceived as more of a science using a person’s cognitive skills.
While management skills are necessary in the profession, it is seldom a subject in
graduate programs in the field of Library and Information Sciences (MLIS). This
problem has been previously documented in studies on the MLIS curriculum, especially
in terms of the need for, and lack of, management courses (Lemaster, 1981; Chandler,
1994; Elgohary, 2003; Koenig, 2007). According to Wilkinson (2013), “many scholars
have criticized MLIS programs for consistently under-preparing new librarians for the
kinds of research activities they will have to undertake in their professional careers” (p.
58). A study by Mackenzie and Smith (2007) revealed that of the 48 ALA accredited

programs in the United States and Canada that were reviewed, 43.8 percent did not
require a management-related course, and only 54.2 percent required one management
course. According to Line (2007), the education for the Library and Information Science
professional should prepare individuals to manage three things: resources, people, and
systems. Deyrup (2004) concluded that MLIS programs may not prepare graduates for
managerial roles in the libraries where they will be employed.
Leadership
Leadership skills need to be cultivated for an employee to advance in most work
environments. What is leadership? According to Bass and Bass (2008), the traditional
definition has changed and is now commonly considered in terms of the leader as a
person and how that person, through behavior and interactions, affects those who are led
(p. 15). Uhl-Bien (2003) defines leadership as the use of a person’s influence to bring
about a transformation of some kind (p. 132). In this view, leadership causes a change in
behavior. In “Leadership and Culture” (2004), when leadership is defined, it is “highly
culturally dependent” (para. 1). In other words, the leadership behavior of the person and
what is expected of that person as a leader varies across cultural lines, with culture
referring to a “group’s collective values, expectations, attitudes, and behaviors” (para. 4).
There is a culture within every profession, including librarianship. In that same article,
leadership is further defined as, “a process of influencing others to do what they would
not do otherwise” (para. 21). Crosbie (2005) lists the eight skills needed by leaders.
8

They include: collaboration/teamwork, communication skills, initiative, leadership
ability, people development/coaching, personal effectiveness/personal mastery,
planning/organizing, and presentation skills. Crosbie further states that these skills can
be taught, and thus learned (p. 47). Allio (2005) notes that it is a paradox in that
leadership cannot be taught, but it can be learned and those with leadership potential
require an education in leadership (p. 1072). Forrest and Peterson (2006) concur that
leadership requires both conviction and will, so that teachers of adults can “empower
students to develop such characteristics” (p. 117).
Northouse (2004) points out, “Since the early 20th century, hundreds of research
studies have been conducted on the traits of leaders” (p. 11). However, while many
characteristics o f effective leaders have been identified, consensus of agreement on
specific traits is lacking (Northouse, 2009). According to Germain (2012), “it is the
leader and her or his personality that are central to the leadership process” (p. 33). One
personality trait that is deemed necessary for leadership is that of self-confidence or selfassurance (Germain, 2012; Kirkpatrick & Locke, 1991; Lashway, Mazzarella & Grundy,
2006). Another important trait is the ability to build strong working relationships with
others (Donaldson, 2001). Therefore leadership is seen as not a trait unto itself, but as a
combination of traits that a person has in themselves that allows them to be seen by
others as a leader.

9

While leadership and management seem to belong together—one who wants to
succeed needs to be able to accomplish both of them—they are two very distinct and
different terms. Allio (2005) noted that “leaders think laterally” while “managers think
linearly” (p. 1073). As was stated earlier, leadership can be seen as an art, while
management can be seen as a science. Therefore, leadership is a non-cognitive skill,
while management is a cognitive skill. Many of the leadership traits must be within a
person who wants to lead. These traits include: character, compassion, creativity, and
they can be nurtured in a person who is destined to lead. These are not traits that can be
taught, but they can be honed as they are used in the practice of leadership. Thus, one
can become a leader by practicing these traits in the organizations where one would like
to be a leader. Management is a more cognitive ability. It includes such traits as being
able to follow orders and organize the work to be done and make sure the work is done in
an efficient manner. If the traits of the two are carefully studied it becomes clear that
leadership is focused on the people that provide the labor to complete the work that is
needed, while management is focused more on the work itself. However, Murray (2010)
notes that in the current economy these two, management and leadership, are more
difficult to separate, as both are needed to assign the tasks and define the purpose of those
tasks to those doing the work.

10

Leadership and Management Development
How are leadership and management skills developed within individuals in an
organizational context? How may future leaders be identified and nurtured?
Historically, there are those few who are bom leaders, who have ideas and are not afraid
to articulate those ideas and go about making those ideas come to fruition. Others have
followed them as these are people who generate trust and have the efficacy to make
things happen. However, when new leaders are needed within an organization there may
not be enough of these natural leaders to go around. Many organizations seek to grow
their own leaders. In order to advance leaders in the library profession, numerous
leadership development programs have been established at both the state and national
levels. In 2010, the American Library Association (ALA) counted over twenty academic
and professional institutions that offered formal leadership training in the United States
(Romaniuk & Haycock, 2011). These programs or institutes were developed by leaders
in the library field who saw a need to assist in leadership development. These programs
are designated leadership training institutes as the focus is related to the participants’
current position and field of work. According to Pemick (2001), there are nine tasks that
a leadership program should include: 1) leadership program selection criteria; 2)
definition of leadership competencies; 3) creation of an application process; 4)
assessment of current leadership skills; 5) developmental activities; 6) an alignment of
structures to reinforce the program; 7) development of leaders in context; 8) planning for
11

the next generation of leaders; and 9) evaluation of the program. Tasks one through eight
are accomplished before and during the leadership training. Task nine, evaluation of the
program, occurs at the end of the training and reflects program effectiveness.
The training needed to foster leadership occurs within a leadership program.
Crosbie (2005) maintains that the goal of successful training should be to “produce
meaningful lasting behavior change in the participants who attended the sessions” (p. 49).
It is also a way to prepare an employee to take on new tasks within their organization. It
is desired that leadership training equip a new leader with the skills to assist those around
them in solving, or deflecting, performance problems that might arise.
Assessment/Evaluation
According to Kraiger, Ford, and Salas (1993), “training evaluation is the
systematic collection of data regarding the success of a training program” in order to
ascertain whether training objectives were met and whether job performance was
enhanced (p. 311). The evaluation technique most widely used for training programs was
created by Donald L. Kirkpatrick in 1975. Though this technique is over thirty-five years
old, it has remained the most viable and is applicable to any training situation.
Kirkpatrick’s model includes the following four levels: reaction to the training by
attendees; learning acquired by the attendees; behavioral changes observed in the
attendees; and results that were expected due to the training (Kirkpatrick, 1996; Alliger &
Janak, 1989; Kraiger, Ford & Salas, 1993). The reactions level can include asking
12

training participants their opinion of the program. Kirkpatrick’s learning acquisition
level is most often done in conjunction with a testing instrument but it may also be
completed by observing the behavior of a trainee after the training is completed. Did the
training change the person’s actions, reactions, and accomplishments on the job? This
also addresses behavioral changes, which is Kirkpatrick’s level three. The final level,
results, should show the impact the training had on the trainee and, in turn, on the
organization in which the trainee is employed.
Other efforts have been made to evaluate the training provided through leadership
institutes. Some of those are within the library profession, such as the assessment of the
Snowbird Leadership Institute while others evaluated leadership institutes for other
professions, such as the Fireline Leadership Training. In each of these cases, the training
was created to build leadership for a particular profession and was evaluated as to how
well the institute in question was able to meet its goal of molding leaders for that
profession.
Neely and Winston (1999b) attempted to evaluate the Snowbird Institute after it
had been conducted for nine years. Their assessment was carried out by
creating/developing a survey that was sent to all former participants. This fulfills
Kirkpatrick’s level 1 in training assessment, the reaction of the participants to the training
received (Kirkpatrick, 1996). Kirkpatrick asserts that it is o f upmost importance to
“determine how people feel about a program because training decisions . . . can be made
13

on the basis of one or two comments from participants” (p. 55) with the assertion that
participants need to enjoy training to gain any benefit from it. The survey attempted to
determine if the training had any impact on the participants’ jobs, as noted by the
participants.
The Fireline Leadership Training was assessed to determine the “effectiveness of
leadership training, with the objective being to accurately determine how the leadership
training impacted job performance” (DeGrosky, n.d.b). To perform his assessment,
DeGrosky utilized a survey that allowed the participants to evaluate the training received.
In addition, DeGrosky devised a survey to be sent to the supervisors of those who
attended the training. This survey attempted to answer the question of how the training
affected the individual and their abilities within the work place. This would fulfill
Kirkpatrick’s level 3 assessment with an appraisal being made by others in the
participant’s work place in relation to changes in the participant while at work
(Kirkpatrick, 1996).
Adult Learning
With the founding of the American Association for Adult Education in 1926,
there began the inquiry into the learning process of adults within the United States.
According to Knowles, Holton, and Swanson (2005), the concern with how adults learn
was begun with the publication of the work, The Meaning o f Adult Education, by Eduard
Lindeman, in 1926. Lindeman stated five key assumptions about the adult learner:
14

•

Adults are motivated to learn;

•

Adults’ orientation to learning is life centered;

•

Adults bring life experiences to learning;

•

Adults need to be self-directing;

•

Individual learning differences need to be acknowledged (p. 39-40).

Adult learning should be conducted in a way that engages and acknowledges the
needs and experiences of the adult person, as

.. adults are what they have done”

(Forrest & Peterson 2006). Adult students are usually classified as those who are 24
years of age or older (Cini & Fritz, 1997) and that have “assumed the primary social role
of worker, spouse, or parent” (Forrest & Peterson, 2006). The body of literature on the
adult learner has been growing steadily in recent years and can be attributed to the
growing number of “non-traditional” students who have been making their way to the
many institutions of higher education to begin or complete their college career, complete
training for certification, or meet required continuing education requirements. Many
adult learners have returned to the classroom due to job or employment conditions.
The term utilized for adult learning is andragogy. According to Forrest and
Peterson (2006), this term had its beginning in Germany in the 19th century with
contemporary use of the word coming from the works o f Malcolm Knowles in the 1970s
(p. 114). Andragogy is defined as “any intentional and professionally guided activity

15

that aims at a change in adult persons” (Holton, Knowles & Swanson, 2005) and “focuses
on the adult learner and creation of an independent, adaptable individual” (Forrest &
Peterson, 2006). Teachers of adult learners must use different techniques to reach adult
students; these can include the use of parables to present a situation or problem with the
expectation that those being taught would work together to devise solutions.
Training for adults should be built upon the foundations of adult learning and
should include knowledgeable trainers, a manageable structure, a comfortable learning
environment, relevant content, and useful pre-institute readings and assignments
(MacDonald, et.al., 1998). Adult learners should be able to immediately apply what they
have learned (Forrest & Peterson, 2006). In order to fully engage adult learners, there
needs to be time for the formation of peer, as well as mentoring, relationships within the
group. As noted by Kram (1985), the forming of a "relationship constellation" or a
"mentoring mosaic," can be achieved either formally or informally. Mosaics, once
established, can function as a network, a community, and a resource for those involved.
Mentoring
The aspect of mentoring is vital in leadership development. Many researchers see
the mentoring role as one that is taken on by a particular person; it is a one-on-one
relationship. Darling (1985) describes “nonpeople mentoring” as events that are not a
part of a person’s regular life but are influential with a “meaningful impact on our lives
that we learn from, grow as a result of, and that change our feelings about ourselves and
16

our lives” (p. 42). These mentoring events, not connected to the normal parts of a
person’s daily life, often stand out as positive experiences that assist the individual in
moving toward the realization of their full potential. Darling insists that these events, to
be of the most benefit, must be perceived by the individual experiencing them as positive,
broadening opportunities. Darling (1985) defines the process of mentoring as one in
which a person is “guided, taught, and influenced in life’s work in important ways” (p.
42).
Summary
This chapter identified some o f the literature on the topics of importance to this
study. These include: leadership, management, and their development; the role of
leadership institutes and their assessment; adult learning; and the importance of
mentoring in personal growth and development. Chapter 3 reviews the methodology of
the study, and the role of the survey. Chapter 4 contains the analysis of the survey
results, and Chapter 5 closes with conclusions and recommendations.

17

CHAPTER III

Methodology

The purpose of this study was to assess the effectiveness of the Institute in
fulfilling its goal of providing leaders to the library profession and the Texas Library
Association. In order to collect data, and gather the opinions and information needed
from the past TALL Texans Leadership Institute participants from 1994 until 2012, a
survey was constructed and distributed. This survey was developed utilizing two
previous surveys that were employed to assess similar leadership institutes, The
Snowbird Institute (Neely & Winston, 1999a) and The Fireline Leadership Training
(DeGrosky, n.d.a). These surveys were obtained for use by direct correspondence with
the survey authors. The final survey of thirty-seven questions was entered into Qualtrics.
The use of Qualtrics allowed the survey form to be created and electronically distributed
to all participants for whom an e-mail address could be found. (The complete survey is
available in Appendix A.)
While there had been discussions on sending out the survey in paper form that
would have proven quite costly. The researcher chose to devise the survey electronically
and send it out via e-mail. As Couper (2000) notes, the value of a survey is limited by
the willingness of those asked to complete them (p. 465). Because the author of this
study was a member of a previous class of TALL Texans, it was believed that everyone
18

that received the survey would take the time to fill it out completely, as they would want
to help a fellow former Institute participant assess the program. However, that was not
the case. This can be blamed, in large part, on the fact that so many in the United States
are “bombarded with survey requests that they either tune out completely or base their
participation decisions on the content, topic, entertainment value, or other features of the
survey” (Couper, 2000, p. 465). Not all people will be willing or able to complete a
survey, and as a result, there is always a significant level of nonresponse. While there
were several participants who had difficulties with the survey, those that contacted the
researcher were able to have corrections made so that they could respond to the survey.
There may have been others with similar problems that did contact the researcher for
assistance.
The complete list of participants, from the beginning of the Institute in 1994 until
2012, was less than 500 (n=361). The number of participants for which contact
information could be found and that attended the Institute from its inception, in 1994,
until 2012 was 361. Therefore, all previous participants for which contact information
could be found were contacted and invited to complete the survey. The survey was sent
out February 12,2014 with a target deadline of February 28, 2014. Two reminders about
the survey were subsequently sent out: one on February 19, and a second on February 26.
With the reminders, there was the hope of increasing the response rate. Each participant
received the survey through a personal e-mail address. While participants were notified
19

that they could request a paper copy of the survey, only one paper copy was requested,
and that one was never returned. Once the deadline had passed, there were a total of 192
returned surveys for a response rate of 53.19%.
The survey results in Qualtrics were transferred into SPSS for further evaluation.
The most used statistical method was that of frequencies. Percentages were utilized in
analyzing thirteen of the questions on the survey, with most of these questions being
demographic in nature. This gave a clear picture of who the participants were. There
were two questions that were answered using a Likert scale. Seven of the survey
questions required respondents to describe their thoughts or feelings about a particular
event or component of the Institute. There were five questions in which responses were
to be placed into a table format. These were found to be the most difficult to decipher,
but they did yield significant data and were used to compare both before TALL and after
TALL data. These assisted in helping to identify if the Institute had any effect on the
participants’ professional lives, such as types of jobs they had in years preceding and
following their participation in the Institute, as well as in terms o f publishing articles or
books, and presenting at local, regional, state, and national conferences.
One especially pertinent question asked about involvement in professional
organizations. This is listed as one of the goals of the TALL Texans Leadership
Institute—developing new leaders for the Texas Library Association. In this question,
respondents were asked to list up to eight professional associations in which they were
20

involved, what type of involvement they had within the organization (offices held,
conferences attended), and their years o f involvement. It was hoped that there would be a
correlation between their year as an Institute participant and greater involvement in
professional organizations, especially as it pertained to their involvement and work
within the Texas Library Association. While this question required them to reflect upon
their career, it was especially helpful as it provided a kind of progress report on their
involvement. It also may have caused them to reflect on what they have done to give
back to their chosen profession. It was hoped that this data would show an involvement
that continued in the Texas Library Association after their TALL participation.
Because there were several questions in which former participants had to recall
what they had done during their years as a library professional, there was some concern
over respondents’ ability to complete those questions. These particular questions did not
receive complete response rates. In the instructions given in the introductory note of the
survey, it was suggested that participants have a copy of their curriculum vitae or resume
available for ease in answering some of the survey questions. None the less, some
respondents mentioned that there were questions that called for answers that were
difficult to recall.

21

CHAPTER IV

Analysis

Institute participants were overwhelmingly female and mostly white. In 2013,
according to the U.S. Bureau o f Labor Statistics, the total number of librarians employed
was 194,000 and of that total, 84.1 % were women. Of those women, 85.1 % were white.
Institute participants mirrored the gender and ethnicity of librarians working in the field
with the majority of respondents choosing female for gender and white for ethnicity.
There was a wide age range among the participants. The TALL Institute seeks mid­
career librarians and library staff to attend. As this survey dealt with all participants since
1994, the age range was expected to be wide with some participants now retired. The
range in ages went from the youngest at 33 years to the oldest at 72 years.
All participants in the TALL Texans Leadership Institute must be nominated. Of
the 187 respondents to this question, the majority were self-nominated. This was
followed by nomination by a library colleague, and then nomination by a Library
Director. There was a small number that did not know or did not remember who
nominated them.
The Texas Library Association works to achieve a diverse mix of librarians and
library staff from different types of libraries that attend TALL each year, so that all types
of librarians and libraries may be included in the Institute. The majority of TALL
22

attendees were employed in public libraries, followed by school libraries, then academic
libraries, and a few from government and special libraries. Several respondents noted
that they were not employed in a library type that was listed, indicating their employment
either at a combined public/college library or with a library vendor.
Over the course of a librarian’s working life, many make changes in their
workplace as well as in the type of work they do. Survey respondents were asked about
the type of library they were currently working in to see if the type of library where they
were employed had changed. The majority, at the time of the survey, were employed at
public libraries, followed by academic libraries, followed by those employed in school
libraries. Several were employed in special libraries. A significant number responded
with “not working in a library at this time,” and eight listed their employment as retired.
Two of the respondents chose the option of “other”, and listed their place of employment
as a public/college joint use library.
The majority of respondents have stayed within the state of Texas. O f the 183
that responded to this question, 161 of them are still residing within the state. The
remaining 22 are either employed in one of nine different states, retired or not working,
with one living abroad. This is meaningful because one of the reasons for TALL,
according to the Texas Library Association, is to create leaders within the participant’s
library, community, and within the Texas Library Association. The fact that the majority

23

are still within the state suggests that these leaders remain available to assist in the
leadership arena for the state library association.
Employment within the library field is labeled as either paraprofessional or
professional. A paraprofessional is a person working in any type of library that does not
have an accredited Master’s degree in Library/Information Science (MLIS). Many who
work in libraries in smaller communities may not have the MLIS, but they may be the
person in charge of the library where they are employed. TALL seeks to be of benefit to
all those working in libraries within the state, therefore the MLIS is not required to attend
TALL. However, the vast majority (90%) of those that have attended TALL do have this
MLIS degree. O f those holding the degree, all had been in the field for at least three
years, with one having been a professional librarian for 49 years. On average,
participants who were professionals had been working for 9 years and 11 months prior to
attending TALL and would continue to work in the profession after TALL for an average
of 9 years and 3 months. Most of those with paraprofessional positions had spent at least
two years in library employment. In both the paraprofessional and the professional ranks,
participants have been in every type of position available, from student worker to Library
Director. It should be noted that many library employees work as paraprofessionals prior
to pursuing the MLIS degree and moving into the professional librarian ranks.
There was the expectation that a leadership institute would encourage participants
to move up into the ranks of leadership within their work environment, moving into a job
24

with increased responsibility. That can often be denoted by a new job and/or higher
ranking job title. Therefore, respondents were queried about their job title at the time
they attended TALL, and their current job title.

Responses are shown in Appendix B,

Table 1 with 174 former participants answering this query. Less than half of them (74)
had acquired a higher titled position, while there were 63 who maintained their same
position. As Albanese (2008) stated in his work on academic librarians and job
satisfaction, a “majority of those surveyed listed their chance for job advancement at their
current place of employment as “fair to poor”” (p. 37). If that is added in with the fact
that many librarians are women with families, then the ability to move and relocate for a
job with more responsibility or leadership opportunities may not be a viable option for
them. Therefore, it may be that TALL participants continue to work where they are and
utilize the leadership opportunities that are available in their current place of
employment. So, while the Institute cannot guarantee a higher level job, it still provides
the training necessary to move into leadership positions, should they become available,
according to those that have attended the Institute.
A leadership institute could potentially provide a participant the chance to reflect
on his/her time left as a working member o f society and things that are yet to be done
within their professional lives. The question was asked about any degrees that were
earned after participation in TALL. The majority had not earned a degree after the
Institute. There were 31 respondents who had completed a degree after participating in
25

TALL. Of those who had completed a degree after TALL, 13 (41.94%) had completed a
master’s degree with two of those being in the field of Library Science. O f those who
answered that they had completed another degree, there were 18 respondents (58.06%)
who answered yes. Nine had completed, or were working on, a doctoral program, and
nine were working on some type of certification program. See the responses in Appendix
B, Table 2.
Some librarians employed in higher education have the title of faculty. As a
result, they may be required to work toward tenure as part of their employment
requirements. A survey question sought to determine whether or not their employment,
both as they went through TALL or after TALL, required them to work toward tenure.
The majority did not have that requirement in their employment status during TALL or in
their employment following TALL. Therefore it does not appear that tenure at their place
of employment was a factor in whether or not a participant wrote for publication, made
presentations at professional meetings or conferences, or had a leadership role in a
professional association (see Appendix B, Tables 3 and 4).
It was determined that the Institute might have been a catalyst for participants in
the arena of publications. As Appendix B, Table 5, illustrates, the number of
publications of all types rose after TALL participation, with the exception of
magazine/newsletter articles which were slightly lower after TALL participation. From
the responses received, averages could be derived. It is interesting to note that on
26

average respondents that were professional librarians were in that profession for 19 years
and 2 months. They had been professional librarians for an average o f 9 years and 11
months before they were selected to participate in TALL. Once they were a TALL
graduate, they went back to their profession and stayed for an average of 9 years and 3
months. The number of respondents that had a publication of any type before attending
TALL was 56, while the number of respondents that published after they had completed
TALL was 72 with some reporting publications both before and after TALL. Therefore,
there is supportive data that TALL may have increased the number of publications as
there were more publications completed after participation in TALL (72) than before
participation in TALL (56).
In the area of presentations given before TALL attendance and after TALL
attendance, the number of presentations that were made by the participants increased (see
Appendix B, Table 6). This was especially true for presentations given at either state or
local meetings. This leadership ability reflected through giving presentations shows an
increase after TALL participation which lends credence to the Institute’s ability to
provide participants with a boost in self-confidence that is needed to speak in front of an
audience.
The majority of participants responded that the TALL Institute had an effect on
their career path with 83 (53.2%) of the 156 respondents answering yes (see Appendix B,
Table 7). Most believed that their TALL experience had been beneficial in some way.
27

Participants were asked their thoughts on their participation in TALL by gauging
their agreement with particular statements about the Institute. The statements and
participant’s responses are contained in Appendix B, Table 7. The mode and median for
all of the statement responses was calculated and can be seen in Appendix B, Table 8.
For all statements, the mode was either 1-strongly agree, or 2-agree. This indicates that
most participants were in agreement with the positive statements about the TALL Texans
Institute and its effect on their job performance and career. It should be noted that the
statement with the highest response rate of 1-strongly agree was, “I enjoyed my
participation in the TALL Texans Leadership Institute.” This enjoyment component is an
important one as Kirkpatrick (1996) asserts in his work on assessment. If a person is not
enjoying herself during a training session, she will not gain full benefit from the training.
Therefore, the response for that variable is significant. It was also telling that the
attributes of 5-strongly disagree and 6-not applicable were not selected as answers by any
of the respondents.
Appendix B, Table 9 shows the respondent’s reactions to the activities for
participants after the Institute was over. When asked the extent to which follow-up
activities were beneficial, respondents overwhelmingly specified that they received the
most benefits from the relationships developed with other participants with a mode of
1—Great benefit; and the mentoring relationships with a mode of 1—Great benefit. The
respondents rated the most beneficial of those activities as being the relationships
28

developed with other TALL participants and the mentor relationships that were formed.
With over 150 responses rating the importance of follow up activities, the three follow up
activities reflect the relationships made during the Institute. Opportunities following the
Institute to reconnect with both former mentors and participants were seen as highly
beneficial to most responders.
As a participant in various types of training or workshops, it is often necessary to
complete an evaluation form to provide feedback on the training. While these types of
questions reflect a participant’s feelings toward the training, they also provide a glimpse
into how the training was perceived. The majority of respondents noted that the Institute
was of practical value to them when they returned to their jobs. There were comments
such as the belief that they were “unconsciously applying things learned” to their job
situation. One participant stated that, “the staff noticed changes for the better in my
performance right away.” Most were able to list at least one part of the Institute that was
of use to them once they returned to their jobs, with most mentioning two or three things
that they were able to apply as they resumed their work lives. There were two
participants who responded negatively: one answered that there was nothing from the
TALL Institute that helped them when they returned to their job, and the other replied, “I
didn’t really find it useful.” Nine answered that it was difficult to remember as it was too
long ago when they attended. One stated that although it was so long ago, “The
experience itself DID positively influence my job.” The most often cited part of the
29

Institute that was deemed to be most helpful upon the participants return to work was the
relationships and networking that was fostered with the other TALL participants during
their time at the Institute. According to 24 participants, these relationships were fostered
quickly and a learning community was built among the participants, with many of these
relationships remaining intact after the Institute. As one participant stated, there was the
knowledge that there were “library colleagues I could rely on if I needed assistance in
some library situation.”
When asked to include additional comments about the impact of TALL on their
career, 58 (30.2%) attendees responded. Most indicated that Institute attendance gave
them a confidence in their ability that had been lacking and gave them more credibility as
a leader. Others noted the fact that it assisted them in getting involved in the Texas
Library Association. The aspect of networking and its importance was mentioned by
many, as was the ability to use what was learned at the Institute with their staff. This was
often noted in terms of being a mentor for others. Five respondents asserted that the
Institute had no impact on them at all, and one noted a feeling of failure as it was not the
“life-changing week that so many other TALLs seem to have.”
One complaint from earlier participants was the lack of “follow up” by the
mentors after the Institute concluded. This has been corrected in the past few years with
mentors being assigned several participants with whom they are to maintain contact in
the year following the Institute.
30

What the researcher has at the end is a list of survey questions and answers from
the respondents. The averages of the number of respondents that answered each question
provides some interesting data. There are some individuals who will log into an online
survey, look at some of the questions, maybe even go to the end of the survey to see the
length, and then decide not to complete the survey. Others may begin the survey, but
once they realize the depth of the questions asked, and the effort required, do not
complete the survey. This may have happened with some of the respondents for this
survey. While there were 192 that responded in some way, there was no question that
was answered by 100% of the respondents. Of all the questions, there were six that were
answered by 187 respondents. That was the greatest number of respondents for any
question. The lowest number of respondents was one question which only had 35 that
responded to it. The average number of respondents that answered for all the questions
asked was 148.

31

CHAPTER V

Summary, Conclusions, and Recommendations

Summary
The purpose of this study was to query former participants of the TALL Texans
Leadership Institute about the effect of the Institute on their professional lives and
careers. To accomplish this, a survey was created using two previously designed surveys
that were developed to assess other leadership institutes, The Snowbird Institute (Neely
& Winston, 1999a) and The Fireline Leadership Training (DeGrosky, n.d.a.). Qualtrics,
an online survey software, was used to provide the housing for the new survey which was
sent out via e-mail to all participants of the Institute from 1994 up to and including the
class of 2012. Over 190 surveys were completed yielding a response rate of over 50%.
In surveying the literature for this study, much was found on the topics of
management and leadership. These two terms, which some use interchangeably, are
actually two very distinct terms with differences in their meaning. Management should
be used to describe the coordination of activities that an entity, usually a business,
completes in order to achieve stated goals. Leadership should be used as a description of
how a person can influence others to bring about change. The paradox is that leadership
cannot be taught, but it can be learned. Leadership and management skills are needed
within the library profession and it was noted that these skills and courses are typically
32

not a part of the Master’s degree in Library and Information Sciences that all professional
librarians must obtain. Therefore, leadership institutes were set up for professional
librarians and other library staff to provide an education in leadership and assist in honing
management skills. It was found that there were nine tasks that a leadership program
should include. The TALL Texans Leadership Institute had done eight of the nine. The
ninth and final task is the evaluation of the program. That is what this study attempted to
do.
In the assessment, attention needs to be paid to the type of training and learning
that is taking place. It is important to remember that leadership institute participants will
be adults, and training must be geared toward adult learners. The way that adults learn
and the reasons that they seek training are much different than that of non-adults.
Andragogy is a theory or approach to training that is adult-centered. Adult education
acknowledges that adults need to be able to apply what they have learned quickly in their
lives or employment. Another important aspect related to andragogy is the need for adult
learners to form peer and mentoring relationships within their group of learners.
Once the surveys were received, the responses were imported to SPSS for
statistical analysis.
Conclusions
There were three research questions that guided this inquiry. A survey of former
TALL participants was undertaken. In the survey, TALL respondents were asked to
33

respond to numerous questions about their professional lives and their employment in the
time prior to TALL, and in the time after TALL. One research question focused on how
TALL participation affected a person’s professional life in terms of changes in job title
and employment opportunities. Another research question sought to determine whether
TALL participation increased a person’s activity in either the Texas Library Association
or any other library organization. The third research question sought the effect of TALL
participation on a person’s leadership capabilities as it related to their personal and
professional goals and their career
The demographics of the survey participants were reflective of those working in
the field of Library and Information Science. As such, TALL participants were
overwhelming white and female. They also tended to stay in their jobs for extended
amounts of time, and often were not given the opportunity to move up in their
organization. According to Albanese (2008), librarians frequently have limited
opportunity for advancement within the field. As such, many view the TALL institute as
a way to increase their employability in upper level administrative positions or as a
confirmation of their ability to perform in upper level management positions in their
library. While there were some that moved in to leadership/management positions,
according to changes in job title, it was not a significant number. However, opportunity
for upward mobility was often limited, as noted previously. Also, it is worth

34

remembering that leadership can be exercised in any position, independent of a person’s
job title.
One way to gauge leadership ability may be seen in an individual’s research
contributions to their profession. This is especially true in many academic careers,
including the field of librarianship. Many that work in an academic setting (college or
university) in the field may be required by their contract to fulfill tenure requirements in
order to retain their position. It was believed that most TALL participants would fall
under the tenure requirement, especially those working as professional librarians in
academic settings. However, the majority of respondents did not have a tenure
requirement in their place of employment. Thus, an increase in production of
publications and presentations could not be linked to a tenure requirement. It was also
interesting to note that the majority of respondents had increased their publication and
presentation output following the Institute. While this increase cannot be claimed as a
result of the Institute, the majority of respondents did credit the Institute with an increase
in their sense of self-confidence. According to Germain (2012), self-confidence will
allow a person to feel that efforts to influence others is appropriate. Therefore, this
increase in self-confidence could be linked to a person’s belief that they have worthy
information to impart to others and this can take the form of presentations and
publications within their field.

35

While there are those librarians that might publish or present at professional
meetings even if it was not an employment requirement, the amount of these types of
professional endeavors that was done by participants after the TALL Institute is
impressive. It is believed that the self-confidence that TALL instilled in many of the
participants may have been a motivating factor in the number of publications and
presentations that former participants made. According to Sisson (2012), a person
making a presentation is demonstrating bravery and showing leadership ability to those in
the audience, as they do something that most others fear above all other things. This is
what the Institute strives to do; instill leadership ability. The fact that more presentations
are made after TALL participation, and that these presentations are not necessarily
employment driven, gives credence to an increase in leadership ability after TALL. It is
especially noteworthy as it relates to an increase in State or Regional Library Conference
participation as many of those would be at Texas Library Association events. One of the
main goals of TALL is increased participation in the leadership of TLA. A presentation
made at the Texas Library Association Annual Conference is one way to develop and
hone leadership skills. This data can be seen in Appendix B, Table 6.
The question of whether or not the TALL Texans Leadership Institute is
successful in its attempts to provide leadership training to paraprofessional and
professional librarians in the state of Texas was not an easy query to answer. While most
of the respondents were positive about the Institute and its effect on their careers, it was
36

not clear that the Institute was the reason for the positive effects that were produced. In
fact, a few of the respondents reflected that their careers and professional lives would
have been the same—with or without the Institute. One participant admitted feeling
“disappointed” in the TALL experience and noted the need for more mentoring.
However, the majority noted that the networking and growth in self-confidence that were
gained from the Institute were life and career altering. The participants linked TALL to
an increase in self-confidence, and that self-confidence was needed for them to become
more involved in their workplace and their professional association. The majority of
respondents believed that TALL had fostered leadership development for them.
The benefit noted by many participants, that the Institute helped to strengthen the
self-confidence of participants, should not be overlooked. Several factors may enter into
the building of this self-confidence with the first being that the Institute requires a
nomination and a lengthy in-depth application process. Therefore, when a person is
nominated and then accepted to attend TALL, those elements are confidence builders.
The setting of the Institute—being apart from the normal work setting and familiar
colleagues—allows for the building of a new learning community. All participants are
unknown to each other, and so on equal footing. The building of community happens
quickly, and these bonds have proven to be very strong. This allows for enhanced
learning to occur and for each participant to play a role in the learning community.
Knowing that one is an important member of this newly formed learning community is
37

another confidence builder. While one is participating in the Institute, the President of
the Texas Library Association is present for the Institute, often in a mentor role, and
inserts the new TALL participants into TLA committees so that they can begin to
increase their participation in TLA immediately. It is interesting to note that TALL takes
place in the month of June each year. In the month of July, TLA convenes their Annual
Assembly. Annual Assembly is a collection o f the elected and appointed leaders of the
different committees, groups, districts, and Round Tables that make up TLA. Annual
Assembly is the main planning session for the Annual Conference. The new TLA
President appoints these new TALL participants to the committees in June, and they are
required to attend the Annual Assembly for that year in July and take on these newly
appointed roles. These appointments also boost confidence levels and allow an
immediate use of those skills honed at the Institute.
The responses to questions and the comments made about relationships formed
with other participants and mentors were overwhelmingly positive. The building of
relationships, with other like-minded individuals, cannot be ignored as an important
aspect in the leadership training process. Therefore, the way the Institute is conducted—
in a neutral setting away from the normal family and work arenas—with the participants
living and working together for a designated period of time is an important aspect of the
Institute. This approach leads to the building of a learning community which relates to a
more positive training experience. Kirkpatrick (1996) noted that participants need to
38

enjoy a training to gain benefit from it. One element that can make an experience more
enjoyable is the construction of positive relationships that develop during the experience.
One goal of the Institute is the building of leaders for the Texas Library
Association. It is much easier to become involved within an organization when an
individual knows others within that organization. Donaldson (2001) describes this as the
“very human, personal need for affiliation” (p. 62). The Institute always includes,
through the mentors, some of the most influential leaders involved in TLA. This can
include Library Directors, along with former and current Texas Library Association
Presidents. During the time that they lived and learned together at the Institute,
relationships were formed and comradery developed. These relationships transfer to the
TLA organization as the new TALL’s are assigned to TLA committees and task forces
and asked to take on leadership roles for the organization.
As the Institute is meant to be for those library employees who are mid-career, the
average number of years as a professional for participants was 19 years and 2 months.
The average number of years that each respondent worked as a professional librarian
prior to TALL (9 years and 11 months) shows that they were at about their mid-career
point. After they had completed TALL, they went back to work as a professional for an
average of 9 years and 3 months. If one examines the Institute as a training type of
experience, it is reassuring that those receiving this training and learning experience have

39

time left in their professional careers to be able to utilize what they have learned to assist
in leading their colleagues and the profession forward.
The TALL Texans Leadership Institute was instigated by a group of leaders
within the Texas Library Association that saw a need for leadership development within
the library profession within the state. They set up the Institute in the hopes of providing
that development. It is difficult to imagine that there was no assessment established for
the Institute. This study is a beginning, but more needs to be done in this arena.
Suggested recommendations follow.
Recommendations
There were comments about the length of the survey, as well as the length of time
that had passed between their participation in TALL and this survey. As a result, in the
future other surveys could be devised with fewer questions that could be sent out to
participants after a specified amount of time had passed since their participation in
TALL. A survey such as this, sent to participants in the November following their
participation, would be required to be filled out. If a required survey was completed after
six months following their participation in TALL, there would likely be a higher response
rate, and participants would have a clearer memory of the Institute. From the Institute’s
inception to the present, the only type of feedback collected has been a survey of each
participant’s feelings at the conclusion of their time at the Institute. The survey for this
study was devised to collect data from as many former participants as possible to be able
40

to assess the TALL Texans Leadership Institute and its influence on a participant’s
employment and participation in leadership opportunities following the Institute.
Program assessment is a necessary component to any training. Unless there is
some form o f before and after evaluation, it is challenging to gauge the effect of a single
experience on an individual. Use of “smile” surveys is one way, but that only allows a
participant to comment on their own feelings. That type of survey cannot describe the
worth of an experience in terms of personal and professional transformation. Asking a
participant to comment on the experience after returning to their place of employment
would allow time for the participation to have produced changes in the participant. These
changes could be noted through evaluation.
To better assess the Institute, there could be the creation of both a pre-test and a
post-test that would be administered to each participant. The pre-test could be completed
as the participants meet for the first time at the very beginning of the Institute, while the
post-test would be taken as the final act at the conclusion of the Institute. This would
provide insight to participants and event organizers on the knowledge levels of the
participants before and after the Institute. However, it would not be able to fully
ascertain the effect of the Institute in terms of professional activity and other leadership
qualities that a person would take with them as a result o f their participation.
Another avenue for research would be to construct and send out a survey to each
TALL participant’s supervisors and one or two colleagues/co-workers within one year of
41

a participant’s involvement in the Institute. This survey could ask them to describe
changes noticed in the participant subsequent to their return to the workplace, and might
include questions about leadership roles participants volunteered for or were assigned to
within the year following their attendance at the Institute, and/or changes in job title or in
job assignment. This type of survey could be sent out annually to the former year’s
TALL participant’s supervisors and colleagues, just as the new class of TALL Texans
was preparing to meet.
One aspect that is lacking is in the form of a continuation in the mentoring
process that was begun at the Institute. This had been mentioned as a concern in the
survey. As a result, the researcher spoke with the Director of the Institute and was
assured that this had been rectified. Each of the mentors at the Institute, in recent years,
was given the task of contacting a number of the participants for the year that they were a
mentor, and continuing the mentoring process for the year following the Institute.
However, the researcher has been in contact with one recent (June 2014) participant, and
this person has not been contacted by anyone since the end of the Institute. This
mentoring process must be continued after a participant has returned to her place of
employment to assist them as they develop their leadership style. Also, each participant
has a Personal Action Agenda that they formulate and articulate in writing at the Institute.
One of the items on that agenda is to be a personal goal, while a second item is to be
something accomplished for the institution in which they are employed. These agendas
42

are seen as an important part of the Institute that is to be accomplished after the Institute
is over. Each participant is expected to work on and complete these items within a year
of their participation in the Institute. They may need some assistance while they
complete their Personal Action Agenda items. A mentor that they can speak with, via
phone or e-mail, can go a long way in assisting them as they work to complete these
items. Therefore, the Institute should make sure that some type of mentoring is in place
in the year following the Institute for all of the participants.
The researcher feels there is a need to put several of these recommendations into
practice to better ascertain the effect of the Institute on each participant. The Texas
Library Association would be able to point to the positive outcomes the Institute can
provide for attendees. Positive aspects could take the form of quantitative data that could
provide an employer the answer to the question, “What is in it for me and my
institution?” Often employers and/or their institutions are asked to assist in funding their
employee to attend the Institute or, at the very least, provide release time to attend. If
employers are asked to give an employee time off and provide funding, then data that
reflects the return they can expect would be very helpful. Further evaluation needs to be
conducted in other areas, such as pre- and post-tests and/or surveys to former participants
employers or colleagues as noted above. This would provide TLA with additional data to
demonstrate the worth of the Institute to both employers and those that might be
interested in participating in the Institute.
43

REFERENCES

Albanese, A. R. (2008). Take this job and love it. Library Journal, 133(2), 36-39.
Alliger, G. M., & Janak, E. A. (1989). Kirkpatrick's levels of training criteria: Thirty
years later. Personnel Psychology, 42, 331 -342. doi: 10.1111 /j. 17446570.1989.tb00661.x
Allio, R. J. (2005). Leadership development: Teaching versus learning. Management
Decision, 43, 1071-1077. doi:10.1108/00251740510610071
Andres, L. (2012). Survey research design - Then and now. In L. Andres, Designing &
Doing survey research (pp. 1-13). London: SAGE.
Arthur, G. (1998). The ‘graying’ of librarianship: Implications for academic library
managers. The Journal o f Academic Librarianship, 24, 323-327.
Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2008). The Bass handbook o f leadership: Theory, research, and
managerial applications (4th ed.) New York, NY: Free Press.
Bennis, W. (2000). Managing the dream: Reflections on leadership and change (pp. 311). Cambridge, MA: Perseus Publishing
Chandler, Y. J. (1994). Professional preparation competencies fo r law librarianship: A
Survey o f experts in law librarianship and private law librarians (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Full Text. (Order
No. 9513317)
Cini, M. A., & Harden Fritz, J. M. H. (1997). Organizational leadership and professional
communication: Dovetailing theory with praxis for adult learners. A Leadership
Journal; Women in Leadership, Sharing the Vision, 2(1), 133-139.
Couper, M. P. (2000). Review: Web surveys: A review of issues and approaches. Public
Opinion Quarterly, 464-494.
Cranton, P. (1996). Professional development as transformative learning: New
perspectives fo r teachers o f adults. San Francisco, CA: Josey-Bass Publishers.
44

Crosbie, R. (2005). Learning the soft skills of leadership. Industrial and Commercial
Training, 37, 45-51. doi:l0.1108/00197850510576484
Curran, W. M. (2003). Succession: The next ones at bat. College & Research Libraries,
6 4 ,134-140. doi: 10.5860/crl.64.2.134
Darling, L. W. (1985). "Mentors" and "mentoring". The Journal o f Nursing
Administration, 15(3), 42-43.
Darling, L. W. (1986). The mentoring mosaic: A new theory of mentoring. In W.A. Gray
& M. M. Gray (Eds.), Mentoring: Aid to excellence in career development,
business and the professions (Vol. 2, pp. 1-7). Vancouver, B.C.: International
Association for Mentoring.
DeGrosky, M.T. (n.d.a) [Fireline Leadership Course Evaluation forms]. Unpublished
forms.
DeGrosky, M. T. (n.d.b). A methodfor evaluating the Fireline Leadership training.
Unpublished manuscript.
Deyrup, M. M. (2004). Is the revolution over? Gender, economic, and professional parity
In academic library leadership positions. College & Research Libraries, 65, 242250. doi: 10.5860/crl.65.3.242
Donaldson, G. A. (2001). Cultivating leadership in schools: Connecting people, purpose,
and practice (pp. 56-73). New York, NY: Teachers College Press.
Edge, J., & Green, R. (2011). The graying of academic librarians: Crisis or revolution?
Journal o f Access Services, 8(3), 97-106. doi:10.1080/15367967.2011.566517
Elgohary, A. A. (2003). Educational preparation o f entry-level professional librarians
Employed by Florida research libraries (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Full Text. (Order No. 3109500)
Forrest, S. P., & Peterson, T. O. (2006). It's called andragogy. Academy o f Management,
Learning & Education, 5(1), 113-122. doi:10.5465/amle.2006.20388390
Germain, M. (2012, May). Traits and skills theories as the nexus between leadership and
expertise: Reality of fallacy? [Electronic version]. Performance
45

Improvement, 51(5), 32-39. doi:10.1002/pfi.21265

German, L., Owen, V., Parchuck, J., & Sandore, B. (2009). RLLF in the rear-view
mirror: A report on the impact and value of the ARL Academic Library
Leadership Fellows Program. Journal o f Library Administration, 49, 795-809.
doi: 10.1080/01930820903396780
Hawthorne, P. (1999). Leadership in the Lone Star State: The TALL Texans Leadership
Development Institute. Texas Library Journal, 75, 156-159.
Kirkpatrick, D. (1996). Great ideas revisited. Training & Development, 50(1), 54.
Kirkpatrick, S. A., & Locke, E. A. (1991, May). Leadership: Do traits matter? [Electronic
version]. Executive, 5(2), 48-60. doi: 10.5465/AME. 1991.4274679
Knowles, M. S., Holton, E. F., & Swason, R. A. (2005). A theory of adult learning:
Andragogy. In The adult learner: The definitive classic in adult education and
human resource development (6th ed., pp. 35-72). Burlington, MA: Elsevier.
Koenig, M. D. (2007). Looking back: A review of four key articles from volume one.
Education fo r Information, 25, 57-61. Retrieved from
http://www.iospress.nl/joumal/education-for-information/
Kraiger, K., Ford, J. K., & Salas, E. (1993). Application of cognitive, skill-based, and
affective theories of learning outcomes to new methods of training evaluation.
Journal o f Applied Psychology, 78(2), 311-328. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.78.2.311
Kram, K. E. (1985). Mentoring at work: Developmental relationships in organizational
life. Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
Lashway, L., Mazzarella, J., & Grundy, T. (2006). Portrait of a leader. In S. C. Smith &
P. K. Piele (Eds.), School leadership: Handbookfo r excellence in student
learning (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press,
Leadership and culture. (2004). In Encyclopedia o f applied psychology. Retrieved from:
http://www.credoreference.com/entry/estappliedpsyc/leadership_and_culture
LeMaster, O. H. (1981). An assessment o f the Graduate School o f Library and
46

Information Science curriculum o f the University o f Tennessee (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Full Text. (Order
No. 8208978)
Lenzini, R. (2002). The graying o f the library profession: A survey of our professional
association and their responses. Searcher, 10(1), 88-97. Retrieved from
http ://www. infotoday.com/searcher/default, asp
Line, M. B. (2007). Requirements for library and information work and the role of library
education. Education fo r Information, 25 ( 1), 27-39. Retrieved from:
http ://www. iospress.nl/j oumal/education-for-information/
MacDonald, C. J., Cousins, J. B., Bucknell, T., & Nariman, N. (1998). Technicians learn
to lead. Technical Training, 9(5), 48-51.
Mackenzie, M. L. & Smith, J. P. (2007). An exploratory study of libraries and their
managers: Management education for leaders of non-traditional businesses.
Proceedings o f the 7(fh annual meeting o f the American Society fo r Information
Science and Technology, October 2007, 44( 1), 960-975.
doi: 10.1002/meet. 145044027
Management, (n.d.). In Business dictionary.com. Retrieved from: http://www.business
dictionary.com/definition/management.html#ixzz2U2HOpO 11
Mason, F. M., & Wetherbee, L. V. (2004). Learning to lead: An analysis of current
Training programs for library leadership. Library Trends, 53, 187-217. Retrieved
from https://www.press.jhu.edu/joumals/library_trends/
Murray, A. (2010). The Wall Street Journal essential guide to management: Lasting
lessons from the best leadership minds o f our time. New York, NY: HarperCollins
Publishers.
Neely, T. Y. (2009). Assessing diversity initiatives: The ARL Leadership and Career
Development Program. Journal o f Library Administration, 49, 811-835.
doi: 10.1080/01930820903396830
Neely, T. Y., & Winston, M. D. (1999a). Snowbird Leadership Institute: A survey of the
implications for leadership in the profession. In H. A. Thompson (Ed.) Racing
toward tomorrow—ACRL 9th National Conference Proceedings (pp.313-324).
47

Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Neely, T. Y., & Winston, M. D. (1999b). Snowbird Leadership Institute: Leadership
development in the profession. College & Research Libraries, 60, 412-425.
doi:10.5860/crl.60.5.412
Northouse, P. G. (2009). Introduction to leadership: Concepts and practice. Thousand
Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Pemick, R. (2001). Creating a leadership development program: Nine essential tasks.
Public Personnel Management, 30(4), 429-444. doi:177/009102600103000401
Romaniuk, M. & Haycock, K. (2011). Designing and evaluating library leadership
programs: Improving performance and effectiveness. The Australian Library
Journal, 60, 29-39. doi:10.1080/00049670.2011.10722554
Sisson, N. (2012, October 9). Five reasons why the fear of public speaking is great for
you. In Forbes. Retrieved February 14, 2015, from http://www.forbes.com/sites/
work-in-progress/2012/10/09/five-reasons-why-the-fear-of-public-speaking-isgreat-for-you/
Summers, F. W., & Summers, L. (1991). Library leadership 2000 and beyond: Snowbird
Leadership Institute. Wilson Library Bulletin, 66(4), 38-41.
Tessman, N. (1990). Learning to be library leaders. Wilson Library Bulletin, 65(2), 1618.
Uhl-Bien, M. (2003). Relationship development as a key ingredient for leadership development.
In S. Murphy & R. Riggio (Eds.), The future o f leadership development. Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.

U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2013). Labor force statistics from
The current population survey. Household data, annual averages. Retrieved
from http://www.bls.gov/cps/cpsaatl l.pdf
Van Gent, B. (1996). Andragogy. In A. C. Tuijnman (Ed.), International encyclopedia
o f adult education and training (2nd ed., pp. 114-117). Tarrytown, NY: Pergamon.

48

Wilkinson, Z. (2013). Rock around the (tenure) clock: Research strategies for new
academic librarians. New Library World, 114, 54-66.
doi: 10.1108/03074801311291965

49

APPENDI CES

50

Appendix A

TALL Texans Leadership Development Institute Survey
1. What is your gender?

Female

Male___

2. What is your ethnic/racial ancestry? Check all that apply:
White
Asian/Asian American
African American
American Indian/Native American
Hispanic/Latino
Other

3. What is your age? ______
4. During what year did you participate in the TALL Texans Leadership Development
Institute? Class o f__________
5. Please check, from the following choices, the person who nominated you for TALL.
Library Director
Library Colleague
Self-Nominated
Don’t know
Other (Please specify.)_____________________
6. In what type of library did you work at the time you attended TALL?
Academ ic
Public
Special
Government
School (K-12)
Other (Please specify.)
Not working in a library
7. In what type of library do you work now?
Academic
Public
Special
Government
Other (Please specify.)
Not working in a library
8. What was your job title at the time you attended TALL?
9. In what state are you currently working?
10. What is your current job title?

51

School (K-12)

11. How long have you been in your current position?
12. Did you have an accredited Master’s degree in Library/Information Science (MLIS)
at time of TALL attendance? (If No, skip to question 16.)
Yes
No
Was in process
13. For how long have you been a professional librarian?

years

months

14. How many years of professional library experience did you have did you have prior
to your TALL participation?
years
months
15. What professional library positions (e.g., General reference librarian, Social sciences
librarian, etc.) had you held prior to participating in TALL, and how long did you hold
each position? (List only the four most current positions held.)
Please indicate these positions in chronological order, with the most recent past position listed first.

Position

Amount of Time

1.
2.

3.
4.
16. Have you held any paraprofessional position(s) in the library science field?
(e.g., Library Associate, or any Library position that did not require degree)

Yes

No

17. How many years of paraprofessional experience did you have before participating in
TALL?
years
months
18. What type(s) of paraprofessional position(s) (e.g., Library Associate, or any Library
position that did not require a degree) had you held prior to participating in TALL, and
for how long did you hold each position? (List only the four most current positions held.)
Please indicate these positions in chronological order, with the most recent past position listed first.

Position

Amount of Time

1.
2.

3.
4.

52

19. Please check the item which applies to your current job situation, compared to your
job situation when you attended TALL. Are you:
a. In the same position at the same library?
b. In the different position at the same library?
c. In a similar position in a different library?
d. In a different position in a different library?
e. Retired
f. None of the above (Please specify.)
20. What degrees have you earned since TALL?
None
Bachelor’s
Subject Area
Master’s
Subject Area
Doctorate
Subject Area
Other (Please specify.)
21. In your current job position, are you required to engage in research, write, or publish
in order to obtain promotion, tenure, or a tenure equivalent?
Yes
No
22. If you have held another position(s) since participating in TALL, have you been
required to engage in research, write, or publish, in order to obtain promotion, tenure, or a
tenure equivalent?
Yes
No
23. How many of each of the following have you published (authored or co-authored)
before and since participating in TALL?__________________ ___________________
A fter TALL
Publications
Before TALL
Journal Articles
Books
Book chapters
Book reviews
Papers in conference proceedings

53

24. How many presentations have you made before and since participating in TALL?
(Please list the name of the conference and the year attended (i.e., American Library
Association Conference, 2005).)_______________________ ____________________
After TALL
Before TALL
Presentations
National Library
Conferences
Statewide or Regional
Library Conferences
Local (Board meetings, City
Council, School Board, etc.)
Other conferences (non­
library)
25. Please indicate up to eight professional associations of which you are a member, your
involvement, and the years you have been involved. _____________________________
Years
Association (Note Conference
Officer
Committee
Involved
library or non­
Attendance
(List office M ember
held)
(List
library)
(List years
Committee)
attended)

54

26. Do you think that your career path would have been different without your TALL
No
participation? ___Yes
27. Please explain your answer to the previous question.
28. As a TALL participant, what, if any, benefits in fostering leadership do you feel you
attained?
29. Have you participated in any other leadership programs in addition to TALL?
Yes No
30. If yes, please list the program(s) and the year(s) that you were a participant.
Program
Year

31. For the next seven statements, please indicate the extent that you agree or disagree
with each statement.
Strongly
Agree
Strongly
Statement
Neutral
Disagree
Agree
Disagree
If required to do
readings/assignments
prior to TALL, they
were pertinent and
relevant.
My participation in
TALL contributed to
my obtaining
subsequent position.
The learning and
interaction with
other TALL
55

participants and
mentors contributed
to the quality of my
experience in the
program.
TALL influenced my
ability to perform
my iob.
The TALL training
was effective and
sufficient in assisting
me in my confidence
and leadership
abilities.
TALL training was
relevant to my job.
I enjoyed my
participation in the
TALL Texans
Leadership Institute.
32. The next three statements refer to activities following participation in TALL. For
each, please indicate the extent that you felt each was beneficial to you.
(Please check one number with 5 being contributed to a great extent and 1 being did not
contribute.)
a. Informal reunions at TLA conference
5
4
3 ___2 ___ 1
b. Collegial relationships developed with other participants?
5
4
3 ___2 ___ 1
c. Mentoring relationships?
5
4
3
2
1
33. Please feel free to comment on any aspect of the two previous questions.
34. Was the training received at the TALL Institute of practical value to you?

56

35. What part of the Institute, if any, did you find most useful to you once you returned to
yourjob?
36. Please include any additional comments about the impact of TALL on your career.
37. Please include any additional comments about this questionnaire so that we may
improve it for future use.
Thank you so much for your willingness to participate in this survey!
If you have filled in a paper survey, please return it in the self-addressed stamped
envelope that was included with the survey.
This survey was crafted using two surveys used to collect data on two other leadership
institutes: The Snowbird Leadership Institute and the Fireline Leadership Training.
Permission was obtainedfrom the authors, Neely and Winston (Snowbird Leadership
Institute survey), and DeGrosky (Fireline Leadership training survey). The author
thanks them fo r allowing the use o f these surveys to create the one above that was used in
this study.

57

Appendix B

Table 1: Current Job Situation
ANSWER

RESPONSE PERCENTAGE

In the same position at the same library

47

29%

In a different position at the same library

36

23%

In a different position in a different library

35

22%

Retired

15

9%

No longer working in a library

14

9%

In a similar position in a different library

11

7%

None of the above

4

1%

162

100%

TOTAL

Table 2: Degrees Earned Since TALL
ANSWER
RESPONSE
None

PERCENT

127

80%

Bachelor’s Degree

0

0

Master’s Degree

13

8%

Other

18

12%

TOTAL

159

100%

58

Table 3: Job Requirement—Research, Write, Publish During TALL
ANSWER
PERCENTAGE
RESPONSE
Yes

16

10%

No

131

80%

Retired

16

10%

TOTAL

163

100%

Table 4: Job Requirement—Research, Write, Publish After TALL
ANSWER
RESPONSE
PERCENTAGE
Yes

15

10%

No

121

83%

Retired

10

7%

TOTAL

146

100%

59

Table 5: Publications Before and After TALL
TYPE OF PUBLICATION
BEFORE TALL

AFTER TALL

Journal Article

32

117 (+1 in progress)

Book

2

18

Book Chapter

12

42 (+1 in progress)

Book Review

280

1,542

17

39

865

799

Paper in Conference Proceeding
Magazine/Newsletter Article

64**
None
65*
*There were 67 respondents, but one answered with a number one, and another answered with a
question mark.
**There were 65 that responded, but one answered with a question mark.

Table 6: Presentations Before and After TALL
PRESENTATION(S) AT:
BEFORE TALL

AFTER TALL

National Library Conference

48

151

State/Regional Library Conference

144

467

Local Meeting (Board, City Council,
etc.)

413

1,493

Other Conference (non-library)

192

350

60

fS
00

i?
M b8

a wt

a Ijy
i© .2
t/J Q

©
uLa
M

M

8

on

<

5

*

** p ?

©

VO

®
s
v©

00

r-

N

•d*

N
V)

M
v©

h<S

vt

n

I enjoyed my participation in the TALL Texans
120
Leadership Institute._______________________________________

O
)
Nn V
pn

oo

h

C/3
J
J
<
H
©

8

2A
o

>*

D
4>

&
C/3

ss-<
o

<u
fcb
<
G
<U

r0

1

I
S
C/3

a
©

sa
On
.S'S
«A5j
*€&58 pa*-©
OJD

•II
s |8
iz *a
2■e
*c
*•
£© ©

«Q o*
©
©
La
La

*S ®

&*
* &

S3 5

•9
©

S

£

8

O
©
J
J
<
H .
•5 §
a *■§

B
s
2 a
a*
© 8u
.2

u a
ST
a« ©
Vi
>>JS

S

C
U
>
0>
C/3

61

©
£
*8
j s

^
<

S
*8* !-8

=>

©

B
H ~
*• 2**
©
«© " 2•*■»

fa !a

s
BLa
•

S

I © ba

.2 «

S « V
5L a ^o £f t ,

I I I
a
! I©
taA W

Sf 3«®58
®

P a 'C
a .1 S.

.© a,
,2 2
fc £

8l H
©
M
©

A

-a 8
a 2

*©“ »
►
>

©

B*

2

■ fr

ts g

2
fe
a
*•»

« -«
» 8

1 8

.©
8
*►
»

®
B
(A l &

12
©

a £

s

8

s? «o

.2 © x

Zt ~ a

-J

■a a >>

H a E

<

H

-3

•**

a

8

I

6* w

a a

©

8
e
^8

a

J
J
<
H
r~

B
on
m
_
«
««

H8

oan
h

iH

Table 8: Seven Statement Statistics
MEDIAN

MODE

1. If required to do readings/assignments prior to TALL,
they were pertinent and relevant.

2

2

2. My participation in TALL contributed to my obtaining
subsequent positions.

3

2

3. The learning and interaction with other TALL
participants and mentors contributed to the quality of my
experience in the program.

1

1

4. TALL influenced my ability to perform my job.

2

2

5. The TALL training was effective and sufficient in
assisting me in my confidence and leadership abilities.

1

1

6. TALL training was relevant to my job.

2

1

7. I enjoyed my participation in the TALL Texans
Leadership Institute.

1

1

STATEMENTS

62

<u

0>

«j in
u,
Tt

3
2 So>
0)
*o G
4>
o
CQ
s

3
"cQ S<u
<L»
u*
c
o
o
CQ

-8 g

4>
cQ * 2
h*
0> 4>
G
0/
o
oa
s

KS t 2
o
c
2
d>
O
CQ

s* * 5
2
c
o
,2

»n

> § CQ

CQ

t J-

»n

5o ®tx
H S

tti

u

> T fl)
3
V
* ■ §

oo

Os
<N

5<: <s

Zo

uc
4>
CQ

—
A t~
<u
e g
wm

o

Os

m

■^t
m

r “>

<N
<N

O

■*?+

hJ
J

2U w
2C
•el
O
^
«2 CQ

m

s
bO
fi

s *1
o

o
fx,

o»r>

SO

<N

00

CQ

M
<u
Q*

CQ

c/2 c/2
o

<
U-H
o

O

n

J3
3
03

H

o
e
o
m

C

o

o

• Gi

3 *4>*-<

«■§
aa
t2 ^
£ P

Urn

2c/5 *jg
r-?

G
O

,G
- 2 *5

u T3

*T= o

.2 cx
00 o

J2

«

*3

S

U

*o

63

OO
G
*G
O
c
0)

Appendix C

Survey Note
This survey was designed to determine your perceptions of the TALL Texans Leadership
Development Institute as well as whether there is a relationship between the amount of
professional activities before and after participation in the Institute. Your responses will
be completely confidential. Your completion of this survey is your consent to participate
in this study. If at any time, you choose not to continue with this survey, please exit
without submitting. You may contact the researcher, Tina A. Oswald
(toswald@sfasu.edu, or (936)569-1363), or her advisor, Dr. Neill Armstrong
(armstronn@sfasu.edu, or 936-468-1844) with any questions or concerns about the
survey. Any concerns with the research may be directed to the Office of Research &
Sponsored Programs at 936-468-6606. The results of this survey, with all personal
identification removed, will be reported to the Texas Library Association and will be
published as part of my thesis for a Master’s degree in Secondary Education at Stephen F.
Austin State University.
Thank you for your participation.
Tina A. Oswald, TALL Texan, Class of 1999

64

VITA

Tina Atkinson Oswald was bom in Titusville, Florida, on July 13,1962. Her
family moved several times when she was a child and she spent her high school years at
North Augusta high School in North Augusta, South Carolina. After completing high
school, Tina entered Winthrop College in Rock Hill, South Carolina. She received a
Bachelor of Art degree in English in May 1984. She then went on to attend the
University of South Carolina in Columbia, South Carolina where she obtained a Master
of Library and Information Sciences degree in May 1986. Since then, she has worked in
libraries at institutions of higher education: College of Ganado, Ganado, Arizona;
Washington State University, Pullman, Washington; Alabama A&M University, Normal,
Alabama; and Stephen F. Austin State University, Nacogdoches, Texas. She entered the
Graduate School of Stephen F. Austin State University in August of 2007, and received
the degree of Master of Secondary Education in August of 2015.
Permanent Address:

1904 Creekview Bend
Nacogdoches, Texas 75965

Publication manual of the American Psychological Association, 6th edition, 2010
This thesis was typed by Tina Atkinson Oswald.

65

