UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
Los Angeles

Use and Nonuse of Michel Foucault’s The Archaeology of Knowledge and The Order of Things
in Archival, Library, and Information Science Journal Literature,1990-2015:
Reflections on How Foucault Became a Foucauldian Discursive Formation

A thesis submitted in partial satisfaction
of the requirements for the degree
Master of Library and Information Science

by

Scott Hamilton Dewey

2015

UMI Number: 1592960

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1592960
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by
Scott Hamilton Dewey
2015

ABSTRACT OF THE THESIS

Use and Nonuse of Michel Foucault’s The Archaeology of Knowledge and The Order of Things
in Archival, Library, and Information Science Journal Literature,1990-2015:
Reflections on How Foucault Became a Foucauldian Discursive Formation

by
Scott Hamilton Dewey

Master of Library and Information Science
University of California, 2015
Professor Leah A. Lievrouw, Chair

Using full-text database searches and other bibliometric techniques, this thesis tracks, both
quantitatively and qualitatively, the visible use of two of Foucault’s major early works related to
discourse analysis from a large sample of LIS scholarly journals. This study found citations of
the two works to be relatively limited and general, with LIS scholars preferring later works by
Foucault and secondary sources regarding Foucault. Users of secondary discussions of the books
also favored general rather than specific explorations of Foucauldian ideas. Citation of the works
tended to concentrate especially in a core of academically oriented journals, yet the books also
get cited and used in more standard, practical LIS journals. This study suggests possible reasons
for the comparatively modest visible use of Foucault’s two important early works.

ii

The thesis of Scott Hamilton Dewey is approved.

Anne J. Gilliland
Jonathan Furner
Leah A. Lievrouw, Committee Chair

University of California, Los Angeles
2015

iii

Table of Contents

I. Introduction: Research Problem

1

II. Research Methods

6

III. Research Findings

13

A. Journal Search Results

13

B. Citation-Specific Search Results

18

C. Tertiary Use

26

D. Detailed Comparison of Use of Archaeology of Knowledge versus Order of Things

40
44

IV. Analysis of Findings
A. Limited Visible Use and Relative Marginalization of
The Archaeology of Knowledge and The Order of Things

44

B. Preference for Secondary Sources

55

C. Possible Incentives for Display of Use of Foucault Rather than Use of Foucault?

59

D. Temporal Dimensions to the Disappearance of the Author

62

E. “Crowding Out” and the Principle of Least Effort

65

F. Journal Presence and Penetration

71

G. Tertiary Use

76

V. Conclusion

81

Appendices

91

Supplemental Bibliography

118

iv

List of Appendices

Appendix 1: Unavailable, Unsearchable, and Zero-Results Journals

91

Appendix 2: Bibliography of 188 Articles Citing Archaeology or Order
in This Study’s Database

92

Appendix 3: Journals with Articles Citing Archaeology, Order, Both, or the
Discourse on Language, with Depth of Use, Plus Citations of Other Foucault Works

106

Appendix 3a: Journals with Known Citations Only to “Other” Foucault

107

Appendix 4: Top Journals for Use of “Other” Foucault

108

Appendix 5: Top Journals for Use of Archaeology, Order, or Both

109

Appendix 6: Very Substantial Uses of Archaeology, Order, or Both

110

Appendix 7: Substantial Uses of Archaeology, Order, or Both

111

Appendix 8: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Work/Depth of Use

112

Appendix 9: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Depth of Use/Year

114

Appendix 10: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Work/Year

116

v

List of Supplementary Materials

[Note to readers: the three Excel spreadsheets listed below include the raw data supporting the claims
made in the body of the thesis as well as the various appendices. These spreadsheets will be submitted
along with this thesis for public access. The labels on the spreadsheets indicate the specific focus of each
one.]

Scott_Dewey_Foucault_Citations_2015.xls
Scott_Dewey_Foucault_Journal_Searches_2015.xls
Scott_Dewey_Foucault_Relevant_Journal_Articles_2015.xls

vi

I. Introduction: Research Problem
Postmodernism has been called “the most influential intellectual trend of the last third of
the 20th century, and one of the central trends in the Western cultural-theoretical thinking since
the 1960s.”1 As such, postmodernism has significantly impacted many academic fields, including
archival, library and information science/studies (hereinafter LIS).2
Of all the figures associated with postmodernism, probably the most widely known and
widely cited is Michel Foucault (1926-1984),3 the French intellectual historian and theoretician
who was found to be the single most cited author (not just postmodernist author) of books in the
humanities during 2007 as well as the most cited postmodernist writer within LIS.4 Foucault has
1

Piret Viires, “End of Irony? Estonian Literature after Postmodernism,” Interlitteraria, vol. 16, no. 2 (2011): 451463, at p. 451; see also Jose Lopez and Garry Potter, eds., After Postmodernism: An Introduction to Critical Realism
(New York: Athlone, 2001), at p. 3. For general background on postmodernism, see, e.g., Gary Aylesworth,
“Postmodernism,” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online, available at
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/postmodernism/ (discussing the origins and development of various different
branches of postmodernism).
2

Archivist and scholar Brien Brothman has listed, as examples of fields significantly impacted by postmodernist
deconstruction, “architecture, management science, legal studies, literary theory, organizational theory, public
administration, social theory, and even religious and theological studies.” Brothman, “Declining Derrida: Integrity,
Tensegrity, and the Preservation of Archives from Deconstruction,” Archivaria, vol. 48 (Fall 1999): 64-88, at p. 65.
Blaise Cronin and Lokman I. Meho similarly note how postmodernists have “left their mark on the American
academy and their footprints all over ISI’s (now Thomson Reuters) citation indexes.” Cronin and Meho, “Receiving
the French: A Bibliometric Snapshot of the Impact of ‘French Theory’ on Information Science,” Journal of
Information Science, vol. 35 (2009): 398-413, at p. 399. John Buschman and Richard A. Brosio in 2006 found
postmodernist ideas still stimulating inquiry and debate in fields such as education, anthropology, and LIS.
Buschman and Brosio, “A Critical Primer on Postmodernism: Lessons from Educational Scholarship for
Librarianship,” Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 32, no. 4 (2006): 408-418, at p. 408. The University of
California, Los Angeles Graduate School of Education and Information Studies groups archival science together
with other LIS fields or sub-fields, unlike some other programs that do not.
3

For helpful brief background regarding Foucault’s life and ideas, see, e.g., Gary Gutting, “Michel Foucault,”
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online, available at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/foucault/ ; Wikipedia
contributors, “Michel Foucault,” Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault
(accessed January 26, 2015). For more extensive background, see, e.g., Francois Cusset, French Theory: How
Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze & Co. Transformed the Intellectual Life of the United States (J. Fort, translator)
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2008). Like some other figures generally grouped under the category
of “postmodernism,” Foucault did not necessarily perceive himself to be a “postmodernist” and sometimes had
sharp differences of opinion with other postmodernist thinkers.
4

See “Most Cited Authors of Books in the Humanities, 2007,” Times Higher Education online, March 26, 2009,
available at http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/405956.article (based upon data from Thomson Reuters’ ISI
Web of Science); Cronin and Meho, “Receiving the French,” supra note 2, at p. 401.

1

been called “‘the central figure in the most noteworthy flowering of oppositional intellectual life
in the twentieth century West.’”5 He is especially remembered for offering radical critique of
conventional assumptions, methods, or systems of knowledge and meaning. As LIS scholar Gary
Radford notes, “The dissolution of taken-for-granted structures is a hallmark of Foucault’s
work.”6 The structures Foucault challenged include not only governments, academic and
professional disciplines, and other authoritative institutions, but language, knowledge, power,
and authority in general.
Because much of Foucault’s critique is rooted at the essential, fundamental level of
language and communication itself, the concept of discourse is especially central to Foucault’s
thought, and Foucault, in turn, is particularly identified with that concept.7 For Foucault,
discourse tends to build in assumptions and “taken-for-granted structures” that ultimately and
cumulatively take on a life of their own by controlling, confining, and defining thought,
understanding, knowledge, and what may be recognized or understood to be true in any
particular community or context. As Radford explains, “For Foucault, objectivity and truth are
sites of struggle among competing systems of discourse. What is scientific at any particular
historical juncture is determined by which system is dominant and which system is true[.]”8
5

Michael Olsson, “Power/Knowledge: The Discursive Construction of an Author,” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 2
(April 2007): 219-240, at p. 221 (quoting Gary P. Radford, “Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library:
Conceptions of Knowledge and the Modern Library Experience,” Library Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 4 (October 1992):
408-424, at p. 416).
6

Gary P. Radford, “Flaubert, Foucault, and the Bibliotheque Fantastique: Toward a Postmodern Epistemology for
Library Science,” Library Trends, vol. 46, no. 4 (Spring 1998): 616-634, at p. 622.
7

Regarding Foucault and discourse, see, e.g., Ronald E. Day, “Poststructuralism and Information Studies,” Annual
Review of Information Science and Technology, vol. 39 (2005): 575-609, at pp. 575, 589-593; Stuart Hannabuss,
Foucault’s View of Knowledge,” Aslib Proceedings, vol. 48(4) (April 1996): 87-102; Gary P. Radford, “Trapped in
Our Own Discursive Formations: Toward an Archaeology of Library and Information Science,” Library Quarterly,
vol. 73(1) (January 2003): 1-18; Bernd Frohmann, “Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and
Information Science,” Library & Information Science Research, vol. 16 (1994): 119-138, at p. 119.
8

Gary P. Radford, “Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library: Conceptions of Knowledge and the
Modern Library Experience,” Library Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 4 (October 1992): 408-424, at p. 418.

2

Discourse analysis, whether following Foucault or influenced by his work directly or indirectly,
has had and continues to have a major impact on many fields, including LIS.9
In order to try to recognize, uncover, and dissolve the taken-for-granted structures built
into and unquestioningly assumed within established systems of discourse that Foucault labeled
“discursive formations,” Foucault introduced what he termed “archaeological” and
“genealogical” methods of investigation and critique. The archaeological approach tends to be
more identified with and explored within Foucault’s earlier (roughly pre-1970) works; the laterdeveloped genealogical approach mostly appears in his later (post-1970) works, although the
earlier-developed archaeological approach persisted in Foucault’s later thought, inklings of the
genealogical approach were already present in his earlier works, and there is substantial
intellectual and conceptual overlap between the two broad periods of Foucault’s work. Nor are
discourse, archaeology, and genealogy the only concepts Foucault explored by any means; they
are interwoven with various other recurring themes and ideas of special interest to Foucault, such
as the relationship between power and knowledge, the disappearance of the subject (sometimes
referred to as the “death of the author,” in the words of Foucault’s contemporary Roland Barthes,
who also famously explored that question), “governmentality,” surveillance and “Panopticism,”
and, overarchingly, historicity and the inherent historical and contextual situatedness of
knowledge, among others.
In light of the significant influence of Foucault and discourse analysis upon LIS among
other fields, this study seeks to trace the visible impact on LIS scholarship of two of Foucault’s
9

As a rough measure of the level of interest in discourse analysis in LIS, a search for “discourse” or “discursive”
appearing in the titles or abstracts of articles in ProQuest’s Library and Information Science Abstracts (LISA)
database produces 1,651 results; a similar search of H.W. Wilson’s Library Literature and Information Science
database brings up 1,090 results. For comparison, a similar search in EBSCO’s very broad, multidisciplinary
Academic Search Complete database produces 93,389 results, 11,620 if the search specifies “discourse analysis.”
[Searches conducted on May 26, 2015.]

3

most influential early works exploring the concept of discourse and his archaeological approach
to studying it: The Order of Things (1966/1973) [hereinafter referred to as “Order” for brevity’s
sake] and The Archaeology of Knowledge (1969/1972) [hereinafter referred to as
“Archaeology”].10 This study analyzes how these two works have influenced library and
information science (LIS) scholars and practitioners, as evidenced by visible discussion, citation,
and use of these works in LIS scholarly journal literature.
In addition to tracing the use, absorption, and understanding of these works of Foucault
within the LIS arena generally, this study also seeks to trace any patterns of variation in such use
and understanding between different sectors and sub-areas of the wider LIS field, to determine
whether there is discernible evidence of significant differences in rates of use or citation, in depth
or extent of use, or in understandings or interpretations of the works and their meaning and
significance between different sectors of LIS.
To accomplish this differential analysis, rather than taking a top-down approach by first
assigning or assuming preexisting distinct sectors of LIS and then investigating the results based
upon those categories, the study instead adopts a fine-grained, bottom-up approach of monitoring
and measuring appropriation and use of Foucault’s two works within the wider LIS
field/community. It analyzes precisely which scholars have appropriated one or the other or both
of Foucault’s works for use in precisely which publications, whether there are discernible
patterns of variation in that appropriation, and whether any such differences tend, in practice, to
also resolve into visible differences, distinctions, and/or boundaries between sectors of LIS that
traditionally have been viewed as relatively distinct from each other.

10

The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences (New York: Vintage, 1970 [English translation of
original French edition, Paris: Gallimard, 1966]); The Archaeology of Knowledge (New York: Pantheon Books,
1972 [English translation of original French edition, Paris: Gallimard, 1969]). A.M. Sheridan Smith translated both.

4

This particular focus on disciplinary differentiation arose from a preliminary hypothesis
predicting that in practice, the extent, nature, and quality of use and understanding of one work
relative to the other might tend to serve as an indicator mechanism marking tacit selfidentification with one or another sub-area of LIS by LIS scholars or practitioners, based upon
the way the work is characteristically appropriated (or not) by particular clusters or communities
of scholars. Had the study produced robust results revealing such apparent differential use and
understanding of the two works, it was hoped that it might serve as a proof of concept
experiment regarding the proposition that the bottom-up approach adopted for mapping
boundaries between sub-areas of LIS might actually provide a better and more reliable approach
to disciplinary mapping than one based upon pre-existing conventional, top-down assumptions
regarding such divisions within LIS.
In the end, the study’s results mostly failed to reveal the hoped-for bottom-up disciplinary
or sub-disciplinary mapping of the LIS field. This was partly due to what proved to be a
substantial disparity in use of the two works overall: within the LIS arena, The Order of Things
appears to be relatively little-used and marginalized compared to The Archaeology of
Knowledge. Yet the fine-grained, bottom-up approach used in the study proved to be fruitful in
revealing other interesting and suggestive patterns regarding the particular dynamics of the
dispersion and diffusion of influential ideas and concepts within a scholarly community.
Notably, the study results seemingly tend to confirm some of Foucault’s and his followers’ own
thoughts and ideas regarding the nature of discourse and discursive formations, by showing how
Foucault and his important early works have, in a sense, themselves become a Foucauldian
discursive formation.

5

II. Research Methods
As noted in the preceding section, this study’s goal was to closely track LIS scholars’
visible use of The Archaeology of Knowledge and The Order of Things. In order to locate as
many citations and uses of the two books as possible, full-text databases of numerous LIS
journals were searched digitally. The journals selected to search for evidence of LIS scholars’
use of Foucault’s works were drawn from three different sources that rank LIS journals by
leadership and/or impact on their fields or subfields. These sources were consulted mostly
without regard to their specific proposed rankings, but rather only to identify a large pool of
relatively well-known, well-regarded, and widely read LIS journals.
Regarding LIS generally, this study drew upon a list of leading LIS journals prepared by
Judith M. Nixon11 as well as SCImago Journal and Country Rank’s LIS journal rankings of the
top 100 LIS journals for 2013 (the most recent year available).12 All 100 journals on the
SCImago list were searched for this study. Nixon’s polling results pointed toward some 12 to 15
journals as being especially salient, basically all of which also appeared on the SCImago list—
but if any did not, they were added to the list of journals to search for this study. Specifically
regarding archival science journals, this study drew upon Professor Karen Anderson’s 2009
“Proposed Journal Ranking List for Archives and Records Management,” prepared for the
Australian government’s Excellence in Research in Australia research quality audit initiative and
based upon consultation with all Australian academic archival programs along with a substantial
number of non-Australian universities (including UCLA).13 This resource indicates that the
11

Judith M. Nixon, “Core Journals in Library and Information Science: Developing a Methodology for Ranking LIS
Journals,” College and Research Libraries, vol. 75, no. 1(January 2014): 66-90.
12

Available at http://www.scimagojr.com/journalrank.php?category=3309.

13

Available at aeri2009.files.wordpress.com/2009/05/archival-journal-ranking-aeri.doc or at http://ebook-freedownloads.com/ebook-doc-free-doc-download-journal-page-5.htm.

6

archival science literature in the Anglophone world tends to be heavily dominated by the single
leading journal from each of the major English-speaking nations—i.e., American Archivist
(U.S.), Journal of the Society of Archivists, recently renamed the Journal of the Archives and
Records Association (U.K.), Archivaria (Canada), and Archives and Manuscripts (Australia)—
along with the international journal Archival Science. All the journals on Anderson’s list that
were rated “A+” or “A,” some of which also appear on the lists from Nixon or SCImago, were
searched for this study. In certain rare cases where a journal was not included on one of the
aforementioned lists but was electronically searchable and revealed significant use of Foucault—
for example, First Monday—the journal was added to the search list.14
Wherever possible, full-text searches for “Foucault” were conducted in all journals on the
search list. Many journals’ search interfaces seem not to allow root-truncation searching (e.g.,
“foucaul*”), and preliminary test searches for permutations such as “foucauldian,” “foucaultian,”
and “foucault’s” indicated that such additional searches would change the overall search results
little and would mostly only find sources including passing references to Foucault rather than
actual citations, so additional searches of these permutations were not conducted.
Not all journals on the search list were searchable in full text. Some simply are not yet
electronically available; others are, but are not presently available through UCLA’s library
system. Among those journals that were full-text searchable, the years of coverage varied
according to UCLA’s subscription agreements with the journals and publishers in question.
Thus, sometimes editions from earlier years or quite recent years might not be electronically
available or searchable even if most editions of a particular journal were. Of these, some journals
allowed full-text searching of all the electronically available editions, then reported which results
14

Certain other, otherwise-promising journals that are not electronically searchable at UCLA, such as Knowledge
Organization, were not added to the list.

7

could or could not be accessed at UCLA; others just denied electronic searching and access
altogether to editions not covered by subscription agreements. In certain cases, as with the
leading Australian archival journal, Archives & Manuscripts, although UCLA has holdings in
print covering many years, its electronic access is sharply limited to very recent years. For some
journals, electronic access was available back into the 1980s or earlier; for others, digital access
only extended back to the early 1990s or later. With certain journals, digital searchability
deteriorated noticeably for earlier editions (early 1990s or before), perhaps due to older and
lower-quality scans impeding optical character recognition (OCR). Thus, occasionally an article
that did in fact contain the desired search term and was electronically available would fail to
appear in a list of search results. With some other journals, although the search interfaces
accurately reported the presence of “Foucault” within the text, footnotes, or bibliography of an
article, the article, when downloaded as a PDF, could not be searched electronically using Adobe
Reader and had to be searched manually. For some journals, part of their run was available only
in one database, other years in a different database. Notwithstanding these complications,
however, most journals were electronically available and readily full-text searchable from the
early 1990s through 2013, 2014, or 2015—a research resource that would have been
unimaginable only twenty years ago.
Ultimately, 105 journals were searched according to these parameters. Of these, six were
entirely unavailable at UCLA; another six were unsearchable, either actually or practically (as
with the Journal of the Medical Library Association, which proved to have far too many article
authors or cited authors named Foucault). Another six journals were searchable, but any results
searches produced were unavailable at UCLA. Another 24 journals were available and
searchable, but showed no results for Michel Foucault. [For a list of these various categories of
8

journal—unavailable, unsearchable, no relevant results, etc.—see Appendix 1.] Of the 63
remaining journals that had electronically available articles including actual citations or
references to the right Foucault, some searches still produced additional stray results: a fraction
of the articles on the results list remained unavailable, the references in some articles were to a
different Foucault (such as 19th-century physicist Leon Foucault of “Foucault’s Pendulum” fame
or present-day computer scientist Alan Foucault), or references to Foucault were only duplicative
stray references appearing in a journal’s front or back matter. Leaving aside such stray results
and static, the next section will address the relevant findings from these journal searches.
After legitimate citations and references to Foucault were identified and winnowed, the
results were further refined by separating citations of Archaeology or Order from citations to
other works of Foucault or passing references to him or his works among the relevant articles
identified in the journal search results. Then all citations of Archaeology or Order (or of the
“Discourse on Language,” included as an appendix to the principal English-language editions of
Archaeology but also published separately as “The Order of Discourse”) were analyzed
separately to determine the relative depth of use of Foucault’s works, what ideas or concepts
from Foucault the later author drew upon, whether the author cited page numbers and which
page numbers, whether the author quoted Foucault and which quotes, and various other
parameters, in hopes of providing a fine-grained overall picture of the nature of LIS scholars’ use
of Archaeology and Order.
The results of these various journal searches and close citation analyses were later
entered into Excel spreadsheets to help with counting occurrences of particular phenomena,
recognizing potential patterns, and the like. The journal search database includes columns for all
journals that returned at least some relevant search results containing “Foucault,” the number of
9

articles in each journal showing positive results, articles found but unavailable electronically at
UCLA, articles with a different Foucault or other stray or duplicative results, articles that only
cite or mention works by Foucault other than Archaeology or Order (or the “Discourse on
Language”), articles that cite Archaeology (and possibly other works by Foucault) but not Order,
articles that cite Order (and possibly other works by Foucault) but not Archaeology, articles that
cite both Archaeology and Order (and possibly other works by Foucault), articles that cite the
“Discourse on Language” (usually but not always along with Archaeology), articles that mention
Archaeology and/or Order only in the bibliography, articles that cite Archaeology and/or Order
only relatively briefly and in passing in the main text or footnote text, articles that made
substantial use of Archaeology and/or Order, articles that indicate at most only secondary use of
Foucault (usually where Foucault’s name appears only in the title of a cited secondary source),
articles where Foucault’s name appears only in passing in the text with no citation to his work,
book reviews mentioning Foucault in passing, and editors’ introductory articles or letters to the
editor mentioning Foucault.
The citation-specific database covers each separate citation to Archaeology or Order (or
the “Discourse on Language”), with columns tracking the journals, the author(s) of the articles
with the citation(s), the year of publication, how many citations per article, which of Foucault’s
works was cited, the depth of use of the work indicated by the citation, the Foucauldian
concept(s) used, whether the citation was only in a footnote, whether the author cited specific
pages in Foucault and which ones if so, whether or not the citation to Archaeology or Order was
part of a co-citation along with other works by Foucault, whether or not the citation was part of a
co-citation along with other authors (such as, for example, Barthes, Derrida, Giddens, or Latour),
and whether or not the citing author quoted Foucault and which quotations if so. Depth of use
10

was measured on a scale of five levels (or six, counting the bibliography-only category), ranging
from general passing reference with a citation (very limited or almost no visible use of
specifically Foucault’s ideas) to passing reference with a citation (limited use) to significant use
(perhaps two or three sentences specifically focused on Foucault’s work(s)) to substantial use
(about a short paragraph or more devoted primarily to one or the other (or both) of Foucault’s
works) to very substantial use (multiple paragraphs or pages devoted largely or entirely to
Foucault’s ideas as expressed in Archaeology or Order). This depth-of-use scale is thus a rough
measure of how much attention the citing author devotes to Archaeology or Order, and how
much visible “work” either book does in the citing article. Although just where to set the
boundaries between neighboring levels of use on the scale admittedly might sometimes involve
judgment calls in certain cases, there is a very clear difference between, for instance, “general
passing reference” and “significant,” or between “passing reference” and “substantial.”
The methods described above were used to trace visible evidence of secondary use of
Foucault’s Archaeology of Knowledge or Order of Things in LIS journal literature. However, this
study also sought to trace evidence of tertiary use—scholarly use of works by secondary users
who had made use of the primary sources.15 Such tertiary use could not be pursued in the same
manner as the secondary use, however; full-text searches for use of all the secondary users’
writings in all the journals on the search list, although theoretically possible, was effectively
impracticable. Instead, tertiary use was monitored by running searches in the Web of Science
Citation Index database on the writings of major secondary users of Archaeology or Order.
Conveniently, the Web of Science database covers many of the journals on this study’s journal
15

This notion of tertiary use as secondary use of secondary use is, notably, different from the established concept of
primary, secondary, and tertiary sources in traditional librarianship and archival practice, where tertiary sources
include resources such as dictionaries, indices, and almanacs that summarize and distill information from secondary
sources that was originally derived from primary sources.

11

search list, especially those that revealed the most active use and awareness of Foucault’s two
books, as well as other writings by significant users of Foucault in some cases. The results of
these searches for secondary citations will be detailed in the following section.
The overall research process for this study also included close readings of both
Archaeology and Order to gain an overall sense of the nature of Foucault’s thought, and the
concepts expressed in those works and the total fund of ideas potentially to be drawn from them,
as well as close readings of those articles in the LIS journal literature that have made especially
extensive use of one or both of Foucault’s books.

12

III. Research Findings

A. Journal Search Results
As described in the preceding section, the research phase of this process began with
extensive digital searching of full-text databases for the appearance of the search term
“Foucault” in a wide array of journals related to the LIS field, broadly conceived. Out of 105
journals in which such searches were attempted, 36 journals were unavailable, unsearchable, or
searchable but included no mentions of any Foucault. A further six journals, although searchable
online, only produced articles that fall outside UCLA’s electronic subscription terms and are
hence unavailable for purposes of this study. Another ten journals produced result lists including
items that were unavailable along with others that were available, again due to variations in the
terms of UCLA’s electronic subscriptions.
In the end, out of the original list of 105 LIS journals, the search process identified a total
of 69 journals and 1,062 results containing any references to any Foucault. Checking of the use
of “Foucault” in context revealed that 124 of these results only contained references to a
different person named Foucault or duplicative or otherwise irrelevant references to Michel
Foucault, such as in journal or conference advertisements, tables of contents, or journal volume
indices, while a further 52 articles remained electronically unavailable. After winnowing out this
chaff, there were 886 articles in 63 journals that mentioned the “right” Foucault and were
available for full-text searching.
Out of the remaining 886 articles, 259 of them cited works by Foucault, but only works
other than The Archaeology of Knowledge, The Order of Things, or one or another version of the
Discourse on Language. Although it was beyond the scope of this project to keep a complete
13

tally of such other sources, there was a clearly visible overall pattern favoring the use of certain
of Foucault’s well-known later works, such as Discipline and Punish (published in French in
1975, translated in 1977), one or another volume of the three-volume History of Sexuality (which
appeared in French and English from 1976 to 1986), and Power/Knowledge, a collection of
essays written between 1972 and 1977, along with less frequent citations of other later works or
of other early works such as Madness and Civilization (abridged and translated, 1964) or Birth of
the Clinic (1963, translated 1973).16
In a further substantial subset of the 886 articles, no work by Foucault was cited, and
Foucault was only mentioned in passing. This was true for some 238 standard journal articles,
plus 99 book reviews and eleven editors’ introductions to special editions of particular journals
or letters to the editor. [A small handful of book reviews or intro essays that actually cited
Archaeology or Order are included in the results for those books, however.] In another 88
articles, Foucault’s name only appeared strictly in the context of secondary use, usually just as
part of the title of a cited book or article from a secondary author, much more rarely in contexts
where an author did not herself say anything directly about Foucault, but only reported what a
different author said, usually in passing, usually in a quotation from the secondary article.
Leaving aside these citations exclusively of other works or uncited name-references in
passing, the full-text journal searches found a total of 188 articles in which Archaeology, Order,
and/or the Discourse on Language are cited. [See Appendix 2.] Out of this total, 123 articles
cited Archaeology without Order (although in some cases mostly using the Discourse on
16

Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison (New York: Vintage, 1979); Foucault, The History of
Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction (New York: Vintage, 1980); Foucault, The History of Sexuality, vol. 2: The Use of
Pleasure (New York: Vintage, 1985); Foucault, The History of Sexuality, vol. 3: The Care of the Self (New York:
Vintage, 1986); Foucault, Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977, ed. Colin Gordon
(Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, 1980); Foucault, Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of
Reason (New York: Vintage, 1988); Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception (New
York: Vintage, 1975).

14

Language); 37 articles cited Order without Archaeology; 25 articles cited both books in the same
article; and three articles cited neither book but did cite one or another version of the Discourse
on Language. Predictably, these citations varied widely in quality and depth, which will be
discussed at greater length in the citation-specific analysis below. An initial evaluation of depth
of usage indicated that 38 articles made quite substantial use of Archaeology and/or Order, while
144 mostly just cited them in passing, and a further six articles only listed one or the other in the
articles’ bibliographies. Significantly, these numbers only monitor use of Archaeology and/or
Order; they only indicate that one or the other source was cited in a particular article, but not
whether the author also used other of Foucault’s works. Thus, in many cases, Archaeology or
Order was cited along with other, usually later, works of Foucault, and in more than a few cases,
such articles made significantly greater use of the later Foucault sources than of Archaeology or
Order. [See Appendix 3.]
Perhaps unsurprisingly, journals vary in the amount of attention they have devoted both
to Foucault in general and to Archaeology or Order in particular. Regarding mentions of
Foucault in general, the journal searches statistically showed some tendency toward a rightwardskewed long-tail formation, with 42 of the 63 journals having ten or fewer articles with
references (and 21 of those with three or less), while 12 journals had between 32 and 67 articles
including references. The same trend intensifies when the focus is shifted to either articles citing
Archaeology and/or Order or articles citing “Other” Foucault. Regarding “Other” Foucault, 26 of
the 63 journals have zero citing articles, 49 have fewer than five, only nine have ten or more, and
only four have more than twenty, ranging between 25 and 36. [See Appendix 4.] More
significantly for purposes of this study, the distribution of articles including citations of
Archaeology, Order, or the “Discourse on Language” is also skewed sharply rightward, with 22
15

of the 63 journals showing no citing articles, an additional 15 journals showing only one article,
49 showing less than five, and only six journals showing more than ten (up to sixteen). [See
Appendix 5.]
Notably, the closely similar performance in the respective long tails for “Other” and
Archaeology/Order would seem to indicate a similar overall lack of interest in Foucault
generally among the majority of journals searched; while the visibly superior performance of
“Other” citations relative to Archaeology/Order at the other end of the scale presumably reveals
the higher overall level of interest in Foucault’s later works, alluded to above, among those LIS
journals and authors who do take an interest in Foucault. In keeping with these hypotheses, one
finds, for example, a substantial degree of overlap between the “zero” journals for both
Archaeology/Order and “Other” Foucault (16 journals).17
Similarly, fourteen of the same journals appear in the top sixteen slots for both
Archaeology/Order and “Other” Foucault. Yet the variations in their relative rankings on each
list and their relative frequencies of use of Archaeology/Order or “Other” works perhaps helps
somewhat to illuminate the distinctive overall “personalities” of the various journals and the
scholars who contribute to them.
Thus, Archival Science, which places first on the Archaeology/Order (“A/O”) list with 16
citing articles, is only eleventh on the “Other” list with seven. JASIST, second on the A/O list
with 14, places sixth on the “Other” list, also with 14 (again emphasizing the higher citation
tallies at the top of the “Other” list, which also, of course, includes a wider range of possible

17

These are: Archives & Museum Informatics, Behavioral and Social Sciences Librarian, Collection Building,
Health Information and Libraries Journal, Information Retrieval, Journal of Archival Organization, Journal of
Interlibrary Loan, Document Delivery & Electronic Reserve, Library Collections, Acquisition & Technical Services,
Library Hi Tech, Library Hi Tech News, Reference Librarian, Reference Services Review, Revista Espanola de
Documentacion Cientifica, Scientometrics, and Serials Librarian.

16

sources). In all, fourteen of the same journals show up in the top sixteen slots on both lists.18
Some of these show relatively equal numbers of citations and comparatively close rankings on
each list, such as Archivaria, Library Quarterly, Information Research, and Library Trends;
other journals vary widely in their citation tallies and ranking between the two lists, usually
tending to indicate a marked preference for other/later Foucault—notably including Information
& Organization, First Monday, Information Communication & Society, and Ethics &
Information Technology. Only a few journals skew, usually much less sharply, in favor of
Archaeology and/or Order—for instance, Journal of Documentation, Library & Information
Science Review (hereinafter LISR), and Information Processing & Management. [See
Appendices 3 and 4 for rankings on both lists.] Even regarding journals that show a relatively
high level of interest in Foucault’s earlier works in these statistics, however, it is important to
remember that a fair proportion of those articles that cite Archaeology or Order also cite, often
with greater interest, other, later works by Foucault.
Shifting the focus from mere numbers of citing articles to the depth of use made by citing
articles, the ranking of journals changes significantly. That is, frequency of citing articles does
not always correspond to really substantial use of Foucault’s works. So, for instance, JASIST,
which ranks near the top with 14 articles citing Archaeology or Order, has twelve that cite one or

18

These 14 include Archival Science, JASIST, Archivaria, Library Quarterly, Information & Organization,
Information Research, Journal of Documentation, Library Trends, First Monday, Information Communication &
Society, Organization Science, Ethics & Information Technology, Social Science Computer Review, and ARIST. For
comparison, the rankings of the top 20 LIS journals by total references to Foucault (including references in passing,
book reviews, and such, and thus offering a somewhat different index to awareness of/traffic in Foucault) tend to
roughly track both the Archaeology/Order and “Other” lists, the “Other” list perhaps somewhat more closely: 1.
Information Communication & Society (67 references); 2. Library Quarterly (63); 3. JASIST (57); 4. First Monday
(56); 5. Information & Organization (54); 6. Archivaria (51); 7. Ethics & Information Technology (42); 8.
Information Research (42); 9. Archival Science (39); 10. Organization Science (32); 11. Journal of Documentation
(32); 12. Library Trends (27); 13. Social Science Computer Review (22); 14. College & Research Libraries (20); 15.
Journal of Information Science (19); 16. ARIST (14); 17. Information Technology & People (14); 18. Reference &
User Services Quarterly (13); 19. Library & Information Science Review (12); 20. Journal of Academic
Librarianship (11); Scientometrics (11).

17

the other relatively briefly in passing, and only two that delve into Foucault’s works more
deeply. Similarly, Archival Science, with 16 citing articles, shows only three substantial uses.
Information & Organization, with a total of twelve citing articles, has 11 that cite the work(s)
briefly, only one that uses the work quite substantially. Only eight journals—Library Quarterly,
Journal of Documentation, Archivaria, Archival Science, JASIST, Library Trends, ARIST, and
Aslib Proceedings—show at least two substantial uses, and only the first four journals on that list
show more than two. An additional dozen journals included at least one substantial use of
Archaeology or Order, while 43 other journals did not.19 [See Appendix 3.]

B. Citation-Specific Search Results
In addition to tracing the frequency of use of Foucault’s Archaeology of Knowledge or
Order of Things at the journal level, this study also traces that use within the articles identified
through the journal searches down to the level of individual citations. Moreover, because
citations of the sources in question sometimes may be scattered in different, discontinuous parts
of a citing article, in such cases, this study traces and evaluates the use for each separate “citing
event,”20 where feasible.
As noted in the preceding section on Research Methods, this study uses a five-level scale
to measure and categorize depth of use: General Passing Reference (“GPR”), for the most
nonspecific references (above the level of mere mention in a bibliography without any citation),
19

Journals with at least one substantial use include College & Research Libraries, First Monday, Information &
Organization, Information Communication & Society, Information Research, Journal of Education for
Librarianship, Journal of Information Technology, Journal of the Society of Archivists, LISR, Libri, New Library
World, and Organization Science.
20

The concept of a “citing event” is introduced here to indicate that in some situations, either multiple citations of
the same source, or citations of separate sources, may be used in very close proximity and may be harnessed to the
same discussion or ideas. In such situations, rather than being (perhaps somewhat artificially) pulled apart, formally
separate citations of the same or different sources are grouped together as a “citing event.”

18

often just used for a general concept and frequently in a co-citation with other works by Foucault
or with other writers besides Foucault; Passing Reference (“PR”), sharing many of the
characteristics of a GPR but not quite as vague or conceptually broad or non-specific, perhaps
amounting to a sentence or two that lightly but recognizably draw specifically upon Foucault’s
ideas; Significant Use, still usually somewhat brief but clearly focused specifically on Foucault
and making Foucault’s ideas do some actual work in the article, usually up to two or three
sentences’ worth; Substantial Use, noticeably heaver and generally longer than “Significant,”
with at least a short paragraph’s worth of material focused on Foucault and his ideas with a
generally higher level of specificity; and finally, Very Substantial Use, involving truly extensive
use that may add up to multiple long paragraphs or pages. Because Very Substantial Use cannot
be neatly broken down and categorized by separate citation as the other varieties of use can be,
those articles that make very substantial use of Archaeology or Order are not included in the
quantitative citation-specific data. As for the others, a single, moderately extensive, in-depth use
of one book or the other (or both), if located all in one place and more or less continuously there,
is categorized as one “substantial” use, for example, while three separate passing references
scattered throughout an article are treated as just that: three separate passing references, each
considered separately.
This system is then used to offer a somewhat finer-grained evaluation of articles at the
whole-article level rather than the level of separate citing events. That is, however many separate
citing events an article may contain, the article as a whole is categorized according to the highest
level of use that occurs within it. This particularly makes sense in situations where, for example,
an article includes a significant or substantial use of Archaeology or Order somewhere in the
middle, with perhaps an earlier brief citation referring ahead to it and a later passing citation
19

referring back to it. This study occasionally may allow one rare exception to the rule of
categorization of articles by highest level of use in any one separate citation: where there are
multiple separate significant and thoughtful uses of Archaeology or Order in an article, that
article sometimes may be categorized as Substantial Use. Multiple substantial uses already
constitute Very Substantial Use.
Also as noted in the earlier section, in addition to categorization by levels of depth of use,
the citation-specific searches and analysis also tracked year of publication, number of citations
per article, use of Archaeology or Order or both, use of the Discourse on Language, which
Foucauldian concepts were used, which if any quotations were used, which if any page numbers
were cited, and whether a citation of Archaeology or Order was a co-citation, either with other
Foucault writings or with writers other than Foucault. Here are the results of the citation-specific
searches.
Counting all multiple separate citations of Archaeology or Order occurring within the
188 articles identified by the journal search, and not counting those articles that make Very
Substantial Use and are therefore too unwieldy to fit within the parameters of the citation
database, there are 210 total citations to either or both of these works (or to the Discourse on
Language). Of these, the clear majority, 147, are to Archaeology alone (including four that use
Archaeology only indirectly through the work and words of secondary authors), plus five that
draw exclusively upon the Discourse on Language. There are 43 citations of Order alone, plus
15 separate citing events that use both Archaeology and Order together. There are also 15
articles in the Very Substantial Use category that make extensive and repeated use of one or both
sources and exceed the limits of the citation-specific database. [See Appendix 6.]

20

Reshuffling the citation-specific data to focus on it both by year and by work, 20 of the
uses of Order occurred before 2001, 15 of them since 2005, and nine (three per year) occurred
during a window of heightened activity from 2004-2006. Of the 15 uses of both works in the
same citing event, seven appeared in the years up through 2002, and five during the years after
2007, with three from 2006-2007 and none in 2004 or 2005. As to citations of Archaeology, 31
had appeared before 2001 another 31 from 2001-2004, 29 just from 2005-2007, 30 from 20082010 (17 of those in 2010 alone), and 27 since 2010. In terms of the depth of these citationspecific uses, of the 43 such uses of Order alone, five were substantial, five were significant, and
20 were highly general passing references (GPR—the lowest level of use above BibliographyOnly, of which Order accounted for three of the six). Of the 152 citations of Archaeology and/or
the Discourse on Language, 18 were substantial, 36 were significant, and 57 were GPRs. Of 15
citing events using both works, two were substantial, four significant, with six GPRs.
As discussed earlier, the citation-specific data also allows finer-grained categorization of
articles according to the highest level of depth of use of any one citation appearing in them, and
the Very Substantial uses can be brought back into the statistical picture. Again, there were a
total of 126 uses of Archaeology (including the three specifically of the Discourse on Language),
37 uses of Order alone, and 25 uses of both works. [For a full list of all 188 of these articles, see
Appendix 2.] Out of these, 15 ranked as Very Substantial, 24 as Substantial, 35 Significant, 41
Passing References, 67 GPRs, and six “Bibliography-Only.” [For a list of all articles categorized
as Substantial Use, see Appendix 7.] In terms of depth of use by articles as a whole, articles
citing Order alone showed one Very Substantial, four Substantial, and four Significant uses.
Sources citing Archaeology alone included five Very Substantial, 15 Substantial, and 28
Significant uses. In the “Both” category, there were nine Very Substantial, four Substantial, and
21

three Significant uses. [See Appendix 8.] Especially considering that several of the “Both”
articles making Very Substantial use relied noticeably more heavily on Archaeology while only
one did so on Order, and the same overall pattern is generally true for substantial or significant
uses, also, the overall balance in visible depth of use swings markedly toward Archaeology.
Using this system of measurement, certain journals again are prominent for the depth of
use of Foucault’s two early works. For instance, the Library Quarterly hosted four of the fifteen
Very Substantial uses, two Substantial, and four Significant uses, while the Journal of
Documentation published two of the Very Substantial, four Substantial, and three Significant
uses. Archivaria was notable in the archival arena for publishing three Substantial and six
Significant uses—there were no actual Very Substantial uses in any archival journals, although
Richard Brown’s two articles in Archivaria came relatively close to meeting that standard. The
performance of journals in terms of depth of use also could depend significantly on which
scholars were publishing in them; Gary and Marie Radford accounted for all six of the Very
Substantial uses to appear in the Library Quarterly or the Journal of Documentation, for
instance, while of the one Very Substantial, one Substantial, and three Significant uses to appear
in Information Research, Elin K. Jacob accounted for the two most substantial uses as an author
or coauthor.
Lumping Archaeology and Order together to focus on depth of use by year, an interesting
pattern emerges: to some extent frequency of use, but especially depth of use, appear to have
peaked during the period from 2005-2007. For instance, after several Substantial uses appearing
from 1991 through 2001, then none from 2002-2004 and only one in 2005, 2006-2007 saw seven
substantial uses. Since 2007, there have been only eight additional Substantial uses. A similar
pattern emerges for Significant uses: there were twelve during 2005-2007 (four each year), while
22

there were only eleven Significant uses during the entire period before 2005, with only eleven
Significant uses since 2007 (three of those in 2010 alone). Other measurements, whether year by
year or by groups of years, tend to show the same peak in active, in-depth use around 2005-2007,
with a gradual buildup before and a noticeable decline afterward. The pattern for Very
Substantial uses is more uneven and may also have tended to lead Substantial and Significant
uses; for instance, there were five Very Substantial uses from 2001-2004, two of them in 2001,
two in 2003, and none in 2004, while there were only two Substantial uses and five Significant
uses during that period, whereas the period from 2005-2007 saw only two additional Very
Substantial uses but eight Substantial and 12 Significant uses. Whether or not Very Substantial
uses were thus somewhat “front-loaded” and may have helped to stimulate additional in-depth
use, the pattern after 2007 has been even clearer regarding Very Substantial uses: there has been
only one during the past seven years (the Radfords with Lingel in 2012). [See Appendices 9-10.]
Turning to the concepts that are addressed in these various uses of Archaeology or Order,
the single most predominant category is (perhaps predictably) “Discourse,” which appeared as
one of the concepts in 80 citing events (around 38 percent of the total), along with 9 appearances
of the closely related concept, “Discursive formation.” Some other notable recurring conceptual
categories, sometimes showing clustering around certain journals or authors, include:
Archaeology (11); Archive (19, 11 of them from Archival Science alone and another 5 from
Archivaria); Classification (12, four of them associated with articles written or co-written by LIS
scholar Elin K. Jacob); Death (or Disappearance) of the Author (or Subject) (11); DisciplineAcademic (10, four of them in JASIST); History/Historicity (13, seven of them in archival
journals and 5 of them from archivist-historian Brien Brothman alone); Multiple Temporalities
(3, related to History/Historicity and appearing exclusively in the writings of Brien Brothman);
23

Power/Knowledge (24, second most popular after Discourse); and Representation (10, 6 of them
appearing in Information & Organization and three of those in Simon Lilley’s 1998 article).
Various other Foucauldian concepts appeared only once, some of them linked to recurring
concepts or to each other, some perhaps not. A further nine citing events were so vague as to be
unidentifiable as to concept. Any given citing event might involve more than one identifiable
concept; the numbers given above and below seek to account for all of them as well as
possible.21
Aside from the various minor examples of concept-clustering noted in passing above,
perhaps only two other relatively striking points are visible in the data regarding Foucauldian
concepts: although “Discourse” together with “Discursive Formations” represent the single most
dominant Foucauldian concept appearing in the literature that tends to be widely scattered
throughout a broad range of journals, that particular concept is largely absent from JASIST (two
out of fourteen citations) and is also mostly absent from the archival journal literature as a whole
(six out of 43 citing events, three of those from Richard Brown (1991 and 1995) alone). By
contrast, “Power/Knowledge” appears to be relatively widely distributed and appears as a
concept in four archival journal articles, accounting for one-sixth of the total for that concept, not
far from the rate of roughly one-fifth of all articles (33 of 188) and citations (43 of 210) for
which archival journals account.

21

Other recurring concepts include: Document (including Document/Monument) (6); Episteme (7); Epistemology
(2); Genealogy (2); Postmodernism (5); Question of ‘Man’ (2); Statement (7); Structuralism (2); Sub-discourse (3,
exclusively appearing in an article by Isto Huvila); Text (2), and Will to Knowledge (2). Identifiable concepts
appearing only once include: Disordered Epistemologization, Everything Is Never Said, Evidence, Governmentality,
Hegemony, Individuation, Intertextuality, Language Games, Linking of Statements, Materiality, Mode of Existence,
Positivism, Posthumanism, Poststructuralism, Science, Self-Identity, Signification, Technology/Knowledge, Truth,
Universal Language, Unsaid/Enunciative Field, Vicinity of Science, and Who is Speaking. Although the citationspecific database limited the concept count to three concepts per citing event because it was very rare for any
scholars to go over that limit, certain scholars such as Anne Gilliland and Elin Jacob did include four or five
concepts in a single substantial, complex citing event.

24

Regarding co-citations of Archaeology and/or Order together with other works by
Foucault, 29 of the citing events were these; 28 of them included later works by Foucault (mostly
Discipline and Punish, History of Sexuality, Power/Knowledge), while only one included an
earlier work (Birth of the Clinic). As to co-citations with other authors, there were 51. Fellow
French postmodernist philosopher Jacques Derrida appeared in 15 of these—more than any other
single scholar—while other writers such as Barthes, Bourdieu, Habermas, and Rabinow (a noted
scholar and interpreter of Foucault who also appears often in article bibliographies) appeared
relatively frequently along with more sporadic references to figures such as Heidegger, Kuhn,
Latour, Levi-Strauss, and Rorty, along with various more recent (and generally less towering)
writers.
In 70 citing events, authors provided page numbers. That means that in the other 140
cases (two thirds of the total), they did not. In most cases where page numbers were used, they
are relatively precise (either a single page or occasionally a range of two pages) and fairly often
are linked to a particular quotation from Foucault. The single favorite page in Archaeology or
Order among LIS scholars appears to be Archaeology, p. 49, cited eight times; another popular
page was Archaeology, p. 129 (cited four times). In a few cases, authors cited specific pages plus
Archaeology, Chapter 1 or 2; one author twice cited Archaeology’s introduction generally;
another author pointed readers generally toward Order, Chapter 9, in connection with a
discussion of the Question of ‘Man’ addressed at length in that chapter; and two different authors
both cited generally to the relatively broad page range of “pp. 79-134 (Part III)” in Archaeology.
Yet most authors who cited page numbers at all were fairly precise about them. Perhaps notably,
out of the 70 citations that provided any sort of page numbers, 31 (over 44 percent) appeared in
archival journals, specifically Archival Science, Archivaria, and the Journal of the Society of
25

Archivists (a rate roughly double the archivists’ percentage either of total citations or of journal
articles, in each case around 20 percent). Of the citing events providing page numbers, the
overwhelming majority cited Archaeology alone, with only seven citing Order alone, another
three citing both Archaeology and Order, and another three citing only the Discourse on
Language. It appears that only 52 authors or pairs/sets of authors used page numbers, in 57
articles (around 30 percent of the total).
Mostly the same authors using page numbers appear among those 51 authors who quoted
from Foucault. Only five authors who used quotes did not provide page numbers for those
quotes, and at least one of these quotes was very generic (“grid”). Ironically, four of these five
authors were using quotes from Order, including the relatively famous “face drawn in the sand,”
“vicinity of science,” and classification of animals in ancient China quotations. Among the
favorite and most recurring quotations are ‘‘practices that systematically form the objects of
which they speak” (describing discourses, in Archaeology at p. 49), “The archive is first the law
of what can be said” (describing, obviously, Foucault’s concept of the archive, in Archaeology at
p. 129), and “systems of dispersion” (describing discursive formations and positivities, in
Archaeology at p. 173), although other quotations also recur, such as “grids of specification”
(Archaeology at p. 42), “Who is speaking?” (Archaeology at p. 50), and the “face in the sand”
(Order at p. 422). Only 14 writers used more than one quote from Archaeology or Order; only 6
used more than two.

C. Tertiary Use
As discussed in the previous section, this study attempts to trace tertiary use of Foucault’s
works—in other words, secondary use of writings by secondary users of Archaeology or
26

Order—by searching the Web of Science Citation Index to track the use of writings regarding
Foucauldian concepts by those authors who were found to have made especially substantial use
of Archaeology or Order from the journal database searches.
Theoretically optimum application of this search technique would require follow-up by a
careful reading, and evaluation for use of Foucauldian concepts, of each publication that appears
on the citation lists of writings by substantial users of Archaeology or Order—a massive and
time-consuming undertaking unfortunately beyond the scope of this project. Yet some significant
and suggestive information regarding tertiary use also appears from analyzing the secondary
citation lists themselves, including which authors have made tertiary use, and in which journals.
As noted, the journal full-text searches revealed fifteen articles that made Very
Substantial Use of Archaeology or Order: Carol Brooke’s 2002 article in the Journal of
Information Technology, Ronald Day’s 2005 article in ARIST, Bernd Frohmann’s 2001 article in
Journal of Education for Librarianship, Stuart Hannabuss’ 1996 article in Aslib Proceedings,
Maria Humphries’ 1998 article in Organization Science, Elin Jacob and Hanne Albrechtsen’s
1998 article in Information Research, Cheryl Knott Malone and Fernando Elichirigoity’s 2003
article in JASIST, six separate articles by Gary Radford either with or without Marie Radford in
Library Quarterly (1992, 1997, 2001, 2003) or in Journal of Documentation (2005, 2012), Sanna
Talja’s 1999 article in Library & Information Science Review, and Luke Tredinnick’s 2007
article in Aslib Proceedings. For good measure, various other authors and articles that made quite
if not “very” substantial use of Archaeology or Order were added to the Web of Science search
list: Jack Andersen and Laura Skouvig’s 2006 article in Library Quarterly, John Budd’s 2006
article in Library Trends, and Jutta Haider and David Bawden’s 2007 article in the Journal of
Documentation. [Some other articles making substantial use of Archaeology or Order are too
27

recent to have left much if any citation trail.] Also added to the list are certain authors such as
Bernd Frohmann and Michael Olsson, who have repeatedly demonstrated a substantial
familiarity with various of Foucault’s works, even if their published articles do not always show
much evidence of specific use of Archaeology or Order. Archival Science and Archivaria,
regrettably, appear not to be covered by the Web of Science, so citations of Richard Brown’s two
articles making quite substantial use of Archaeology or Terry Cook’s 2001 article citing both
works may not be identified using that tool, and both authors’ names and title key words are so
common as to make full-text searching impracticable. The results of the tertiary citation searches
regarding these articles and authors are given below.
Ronald Day’s 2005 article in ARIST includes what appears to be among the most
extensive and intensive discussions of Foucault’s ideas that has appeared in LIS journal literature
to date.22 The Web of Science shows 17 articles that cite Day’s article. Seven of these citing
articles were authored by scholars who already are identified in this study’s journal search results
as users, in most cases significant or substantial users, of Archaeology or Order (Buschman (two
separate citing articles),23 Haider and Bawden, Lindh and Haider, Lund, and Tredinnick (two
citing articles)). [Such identified users are sometimes referred to hereinafter as the “usual
suspects”; see Appendix 2 for a full list of these identified users.] Several other citing articles on
the list come from scholars who are not necessarily that interested in using Foucauldian ideas
themselves, but rather are reflecting more broadly on the intellectual state, history, or evolution
22

Day’s article, although it devotes extensive attention to Foucault, notably also discusses other authors and ideas
related to poststructuralism and postmodernism.
23

Buschman, notably, is not a “user” of Foucault in the same sense as many of the other authors who appear on the
list of users; he tends to reject various aspects of Foucault and his ideas, but he also stays very engaged with the
scholarship of his fellow LIS scholars who are users, as his repeated appearance in citation lists attests. See, e.g.,
John Buschman, “Transgression or Stasis? Challenging Foucault in LIS Theory,” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 1
(January 2007): 21-44; John Buschman and Richard A. Brosio, “A Critical Primer on Postmodernism: Lessons from
Educational Scholarship for Librarianship,” Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 32, no. 4 (2006): 408-418.

28

of the LIS field and are noting Day’s article and related scholarship more or less as a milestone
on that path (Burke, Cronin (two citing articles), Furner, McKechnie et al.).24 The remaining five
articles on the list may or may not show a particular interest in Foucauldian ideas, but again, it is
probably impossible to tell for certain without reading the articles closely. Five of the citing
articles also appeared in ARIST like Day’s article; two others appeared in JASIST; two others in
Journal of Documentation; one apiece in Information Research, Library Quarterly, and Libri;
and five in other journals.
Gary Radford, sometimes joined by his wife Marie or other coauthors, might win the
lifetime achievement award for sustained and extensive use of Foucault among LIS scholars; his
various authored or co-authored publications extensively exploring Foucauldian ideas already
span twenty years, from 1992 to 2012, and the Radfords account for six of the fifteen articles
categorized as making Very Substantial use of Archaeology and/or Order in this study. As with
Day’s article discussed above, only perhaps more so, Web of Science searches regarding
Radford’s various contributions tend to show significant clustering in terms of both citing
authors and journals.
First published and most cited among Radford’s articles is “Positivism, Foucault, and the
Fantasia of the Library” (1992), which has been cited 39 times in the Web of Science.25 Along
with three self-citations, one partial self-citation (Budd and Radford, 1997), and one citation by
Marie Radford, 17 other citing articles include authors or coauthors who appear in this study’s
24

Colin Burke, “History of Information Science,” ARIST, vol. 41 (2007): 3-53; Blaise Cronin, “The Sociological
Turn in Information Science,” Journal of Information Science, vol. 34, no. 4 (August 2008): 465-475; Cronin and
Meho, “Receiving the French,” supra note 2; Jonathan Furner, “Philosophy and Information Studies,” ARIST, vol.
44 (2010): 161-200; Lynne McKechnie et al., “Dancing Around the Edges: The Use of Postmodern Approaches in
Information Behaviour Research as Evident in the Published Proceedings of the Biennial ISIC Conferences, 19962010,” Information Research, vol. 17, no. 4 (December 2012).
25

Gary P. Radford, “Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library: Conceptions of Knowledge and the
Modern Library Experience,” Library Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 4 (October 1992): 408-424.

29

journal search results as users of Archaeology or Order.26 Adding to this roster Blaise Cronin
(two separate articles), who is neither a Foucault “user” nor particularly sympathetic to
Foucauldian ideas but who has repeatedly tracked the bibliometric presence of French
postmodernism,27 and Archie Dick, an early and significant explorer of postmodernist ideas in
LIS,28 there are only fourteen authors listed on the Web of Science who are not among the “usual
suspects” with a demonstrated awareness of and interest in (early) Foucault. Like the article
itself, 16 of the citing articles appeared in the Library Quarterly; another four in the Journal of
Documentation; two apiece in JASIST, Library & Information Science Review (LISR), and
Library Trends; one in ARIST; and twelve in various other journals.
Gary and Marie Radford’s 1997 article regarding stereotypes of female librarians has
been cited 28 times.29 Some of these citing articles and authors, judging by their titles, may be
more interested in stereotypes of female librarians than in Foucauldian ideas in particular.
Nevertheless, counting eight self-cites along with other “usual suspects” (Andersen and Skouvig,
Bawden, Buschmann, McKenzie, Olsson, and Talja), half of the citing articles come from known
Archaeology or Order users. Seven citing articles appeared in Library Quarterly; three apiece in
Journal of Documentation and Library Trends; two in LISR; and thirteen in other journals.

26

These are: Andersen and Skouvig, Andersen alone, Buschmann (three separate citing articles), Hjørland (two
separate articles), Budd and Raber, Budd alone, Raber alone, Olsson (two separate articles), Mark (not Ronald) Day,
Frohmann, Haider and Bawden, Huvila, and Weigand.
27

See, e.g., Cronin, “The Sociological Turn in Information Science,” supra note 24; Cronin and Meho, “Receiving
the French,” supra note 2.
28

See, e.g., Archie L. Dick, “Library and Information Science as a Social Science: Neutral and Normative
Conceptions,” Library Quarterly, vol. 65, no. 2 (April 1995): 216-235; Dick, “Epistemological Positions and
Library and Information Science,” Library Quarterly, vol. 69, no. 3 (July 1999): 305-323.
29

Marie L. Radford and Gary P. Radford, “Power, Knowledge, and Fear: Feminism, Foucault, and the Stereotype of
the Female Librarian,” Library Quarterly, vol. 67, no. 3 (July 1997): 250-266.

30

Regarding the Radfords’ various other very substantial uses of Archaeology or Order, the
Radfords’ 2001 article shows 24 citing articles.30 In addition to four self-cites, the usual suspects
account for 12 citing articles,31 leaving only eight scholar/authors who do not already appear in
this study’s journal search results as users of Archaeology or Order. Seven citing articles
appeared in Library Quarterly; three in Journal of Documentation; one in JASIST; and 13 in
other journals. Radford’s 2003 article32 has been cited by 25 articles, including one self-cite
along with eleven usual suspects.33 The Radfords’ 2005 article has been cited 13 times in the
Web of Science.34 The usual suspects account for five of these.35 Both of the latter two articles
show more of the same sort of journal clustering seen with the others. The Radfords’ and
Lingel’s 2012 article does not yet show citations.36
To sum up the results for the Radfords’ six articles that make very substantial use of
Archaeology and/or Order: counting 18 self-cites, authors who appear in this study’s journal
search results as users of Archaeology or Order account for 71 out of 129 total citing articles. 41
out of the 129 citing articles appeared in the Library Quarterly (like four of the six Radford
articles); another 18 citing articles appeared in the Journal of Documentation (like the other two
30

Gary P. Radford and Marie L. Radford, “Libraries, Librarians, and the Discourse of Fear,” Library Quarterly, vol.
71, no. 3 (July 2001): 299-329.
31

Andersen and Skouvig, Buschman (three separate citing articles, one co-authored with Brosio), Dilevko, Haider
and Bawden, Huvila (two separate articles), McKenzie, Rayward, Talja et al., and Tuominen et al.
32

Gary P. Radford, “Trapped in Our Own Discursive Formations: Toward an Archaeology of Library and
Information Science,” Library Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 1 (January 2003): 1-18.
33

Andersen and Skouvig, Budd, Buschman (three separate citing articles, one co-authored with Brosio), Haider and
Bawden, Lloyd, Savolainen, Talja & McKenzie, Talja with Tuominen and Savolainen, and Wiegand.
34

Gary P. Radford and Marie L. Radford, “Structuralism, Post-structuralism, and the Library: de Saussure and
Foucault,” Journal of Documentation, vol. 61, no. 1 (2005): 60-78.
35

Andersen and Skouvig, Buschman, Haider and Bawden, Johannisson and Sundin, and Tredinnick.

36

Gary P. Radford, Marie L. Radford, and Jessica Lingel, “Alternative Libraries as Discursive Formations:
Reclaiming the Voice of the Deaccessioned Book,” Journal of Documentation, vol. 68, no. 2 (2012): 254-267.

31

out of six Radford articles). Although various other journals appeared repeatedly on the lists of
citing articles, no others were as salient (e.g., Library Trends (6), LISR (5)). For the record, it
should be emphasized that certain citing articles actually represent more than just a single citing
article in these statistics, both among the “usual suspects” and among other authors, because the
same article frequently cited more than one of the Radfords’ articles.37
An example of a very substantial secondary use of Archaeology or Order that displays
some clustering of tertiary authors but relatively little clustering of journals is Talja (1999),
which has been cited 45 times.38 Along with two self-cites and two partial self-cites (with
McKenzie, or with Tuominen and Savolainen), nine articles and six “usual suspects” appear in
the list of citing authors in the Web of Science.39 Talja’s article has been cited four times in
Information Research, three times apiece in Library Quarterly, Journal of Documentation, and
JASIST, as well as twice apiece in ARIST and LISR, but it is also especially remarkable for the
degree to which its secondary use has moved entirely beyond the recognizable LIS literature to
other fields: citing journals include, for example, Journal of Sociology, Engineering Studies,
Studies in Higher Education, Scandinavian Journal of Caring Sciences, Business Economics,
Sociology of Health and Illness, and various other often health- or education-related journals and
articles reflecting an interest in discourse analysis.

37

Among the usual suspects, this is especially the case with Buschman, who cites several of the Radfords’ articles in
each of three of his separate articles; the same pattern exists with, for example, Andersen and Skouvig, who cite five
Radford articles, and Haider and Bawden, who cite four out of six. This pattern is also true for scholars outside the
circle of “usual suspects,” however: authors such as Joseph Deodato, Mary P. Freier, Edward A. Goedeken, Deborah
Hicks, Leah Shaw, and K. Tancheva all cite two or three Radford articles in the same article.
38

Sanna Talja, “Analyzing Qualitative Interview Data: The Discourse Analytic Method,” Library & Information
Science Review, vol. 21, no. 4 (November 1999): 459-477.
39

Fleming-May, Haider and Bawden, McKenzie (in two other articles), Savolainen (in two other articles), and
Tuominen (in three articles, two of them with co-authors). Also appearing, perhaps notably, are Deborah Hicks and
Sharyn Wise, whose recent articles do not appear in the database for this study but who frequently show up as
secondary users of identified significant secondary users such as Olsson or the Radfords.

32

In sharp contrast to the relatively frequently cited works of Talja and the Radfords, or
even to the highly important but modestly cited contribution from Ronald Day, some secondary
sources that rank as Very Substantial Use of Archaeology or Order in this study show few if any
citations at all on the Web of Science. So, for instance, Stuart Hannabuss’ 1996 article on
Foucault in Aslib Proceedings,40 which like Ronald Day’s 2005 article is among the most
significant reflections on Foucault’s thought within the LIS journal literature, has been cited
three times according to the Web of Science, one of these a self-cite (also in Aslib Proceedings)
along with citations from Haider and Bawden and from Bawden alone (both in Journal of
Documentation). Luke Tredinnick’s 2007 article in Aslib Proceedings,41 which made very
substantial use of Archaeology and Order among other works of Foucault, has been cited only
once (in an article co-authored by John Willcocks, who appears in this project’s database as a
rare significant user of Order along with heavier use of other, later Foucault works.) Maria
Humphries’ 1998 article in Organization Science,42 which made extensive and thoughtful use of
Foucault’s early works applied to the context of business information, has been cited in only two
articles, both of which appear to be focused directly on business and not likely to make much use
of Foucauldian ideas. Malone and Elichirigoity (2001) have been cited only four times,43 one of
them a self-cite, one of them by Andersen & Skouvig (in Library Quarterly, 2006). Even
allowing that the Web of Science may give an imperfect and incomplete measure of a

40

Stuart Hannabuss, “Foucault’s View of Knowledge,” Aslib Proceedings, vol. 48, no. 4 (April 1996): 87-102.

41

Luke Tredinnick, “Post-Structuralism, Hypertext, and the World Wide Web,” Aslib Proceedings, vol. 59, no. 2
(2007): 169-186.
42

Maria Humphries, “For the Common Good? New Zealanders Comply with Quality Standards,” Organization
Science, vol. 9, no. 6 (Nov.-Dec. 1998): 738-749.
43

Cheryl Knott Malone and Fernando Elichirigoity, “Information as Commodity and Economic Sector: Its
Emergence in the Discourse of Industrial Classification,” JASIST, vol. 54, no. 6 (April 2003): 512-520.

33

publication’s full impact, the results for these articles suggests that their visible wider impact
may have been (undeservedly) limited.
As to articles rated as Substantial use, Haider & Bawden (2007),44 cited 16 times, shows
some journal clustering, less author clustering. Citing authors on the identified user list include
only Fleming-May, Turner and Allen, and Bawden (with Robinson). Citing journals include
Journal of Documentation (three articles), Library Trends (two articles), and LISR. Andersen &
Skouvig (2006),45 which is relatively rare in making substantial and repeated use of both
Archaeology and Order along with various later works by Foucault, has been cited 8 times. Like
the Haider and Bawden article, it shows some journal clustering with limited author clustering.
Only Haider and Bawden, plus a self-cite by Andersen, represent the identified users of
Archaeology or Order. However, the Journal of Documentation (three articles), ARIST, and
Library Quarterly account for over half the citing articles. John Budd’s 2006 article in Library
Trends was not officially classified as constituting Very Substantial use in this study but almost
could have been.46 It has been cited nine times, including four of the “usual suspects”:
McKenzie, Talja and McKenzie, the Radfords, and San Segundo, one of the rare Spanishlanguage scholars to appear on the list of identified users in this study. Although Budd’s article
has not yet collected enough citations to show pronounced journal-clustering all by itself, its
citing journals represent most of the most frequently occurring “journal usual suspects” on this

44

Jutta Haider and David Bawden, “Conceptions of ‘Information Poverty’ in LIS: A Discourse Analysis,” Journal
of Documentation, vol. 63 no. 4 (2007): 534-557.
45

Jack Andersen and Laura Skouvig, “Knowledge Organization: A Sociohistorical Analysis and Critique,” Library
Quarterly, vol. 76, no. 3 (July 2006): 300-322.
46

John M. Budd, “Discourse Analysis and the Study of Communication in LIS,” Library Trends, vol. 55, no. 1
(Summer 2006): 65-82.

34

study’s Web of Science citation lists: Journal of Documentation (2 articles), Information
Research, JASIST, Library Quarterly, Library Trends, and LISR, plus two others.
Two other articles/authors included in the list of Very Substantial users of Archaeology
or Order display little, or else rather different, clustering of tertiary citing authors or journals:
Brooke (2002) and Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998). Of three articles authored or co-authored by
Jacob that have associations with Archaeology or Order and show citation lists in the Web of
Science, the first, Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998),47 categorized in this project as Very Substantial,
has been cited in only six articles, including one self-cite, two articles by Huvila, and one by
Tennis. Jacob (2001),48 cited 17 times, includes only two self-cites, Huvila, Hjørland, and Tennis
among the citing authors. The third Jacob article (2004),49 and her most frequently cited article
with 42 citing articles, which unlike the other two only cites Order twice rather briefly, only
shows three self-cites plus Frické and Hjørland from this study’s list of identified users of
Archaeology or Order. Thus, out of a total of 65 citing articles, authors on this study’s list of
identified users of Archaeology or Order account for only 14, six of them self-cites. The journals
publishing these citing articles generally showed even less of the sort of familiar clustering seen
in most of the earlier examples of Very Substantial users, and journals and author names suggest
a generally broader, more international tertiary use. All three of Jacob’s articles together show
six citing articles in JASIST, three apiece in Journal of Documentation and Information
Research, and two in ARIST. By contrast, and showing a markedly different sort of clustering,

47

Elin K. Jacob and Hanne Albrechtsen, “When Essence Becomes Function: Post- Structuralist Implications for an
Ecological Theory of Organizational Classification Systems,” Information Research, (1998): 519-534.
48

Elin K. Jacob, “The Everyday World of Work: Two Approaches to the Investigation of Classification in Context,”
Journal of Documentation, vol. 57, no. 1 (2001): 76-99.
49

Elin K. Jacob, “Classification and Categorization: A Difference that Makes a Difference,” Library Trends, vol.
52, no. 3 (Winter 2004): 515-540.

35

Jacob’s works have been cited in Knowledge and Organization 14 times—twice as many times
as all the other Very Substantial or additional substantial users put together (7)—and in the
Journal of Information Science five times, almost as many times as all the other writers put
together (7).
Brooke (2002),50 cited 39 times, shows only two self-cites and an article by Willcocks
from this study’s list of identified secondary users of Archaeology or Order. The journal list for
citing articles also looks entirely different from most of the others featured in this study:
Information Systems Journal appears nine times, the European Journal of Information Systems
four times, the Journal of Information Technology, Journal of the Association for Information
Systems, and Social Science Computer Review all twice apiece, Ethics & Information Technology
and Information & Organization each only once, and the usual journal suspects for the other
substantial users of Archaeology or Order—Journal of Documentation, Library Quarterly,
Information Research, LISR, etc.—not once.
In addition to the various substantial or very substantial uses/users discussed above, two
additional authors who demonstrate substantial background and familiarity with Foucault, even
though they make little use of Archaeology or Order, also were searched in the Web of Science.
One of these is Michael Olsson, whose doctoral dissertation concerned Foucault’s ideas,51 but
whose various articles mostly cite Foucault only in passing or rely upon secondary sources
regarding Foucault. Olsson has eight articles showing citation lists in the Web of Science; these
lists vary in length from one to ten citing articles and cumulatively add up to 42 citations,
although with certain writers and articles citing several different Olsson articles in the same
50

Carole Brooke, “What Does It Mean to Be ‘Critical’ in IS Research?,” Journal of Information Technology, vol. 17
(2002): 49–57.
51

See Michael R. Olsson, “Re-Thinking Our Concept of Users,” Australian Academic & Research Libraries, vol.
40, no. 1 (2009): 22-35, at p. 28.

36

citing article. Sixteen of the citations are self-cites; other “usual suspects” account for eight
citations.52 Olsson’s citation lists show some slight journal clustering: two articles apiece from
ARIST, Information Research, and Australian Academic and Research Libraries, one apiece
from Journal of Documentation, JASIST, Library Quarterly, LISR, and Libri.
Bernd Frohmann has been saved for last as a special and somewhat peculiar situation.
Frohmann (2001) is categorized as an example of Very Substantial Use of Archaeology or Order
in this study;53 however, notwithstanding the fact that the publishing journal, the Journal of
Education for Library & Information Science, is recognized by the Web of Science, there seems
to be no record for that particular article among Frohmann’s more than thirty publications that do
appear in the Web of Science.54 In lieu of that missing information, other influential publications
by Frohmann relating to Foucauldian concepts regarding discourse have been searched, even
though Frohmann directly uses Foucault in them only a little, and early Foucault, including
Archaeology and Order, not at all. Two of these articles appear to be among the most widely
cited articles concerning discourse analysis in the entire LIS journal literature; a third, less wellknown or widely used, appears likely to be an earlier, conference paper version exploring similar
ideas. All three of Frohmann’s works tend to show, relatively strongly, the sort of clustering of
citing authors and journals seen with authors such as the Radfords.

52

Heizmann (who cites three different Olsson articles in the same article), Given, Haider and Bawden, Talja and
McKenzie (citing two different Olsson articles), and Talja with Hartel.
53

Bernd Frohmann, “Discourse and Documentation: Some Implications for Pedagogy and Research,” Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, vol. 42, no. 1 (Winter, 2001): 12-26.
54

Strangely, there seemingly is not even a zero placeholder as there often is for articles that have not yet been cited
by articles published in journals covered by the Web of Science.

37

Frohmann (1992),55 seemingly his first major foray into discourse analysis, had been
cited 76 times as of early 2015, when the various Web of Science search lists used in this study
were compiled.56 Citing authors who appear in this study’s list of identified users account for 36
of the 76 citing events;57 adding Archie Dick as an honorary member of the list would raise the
total to 38 (50%). Thirteen of these citing articles appeared in Journal of Documentation, eleven
in Library Quarterly, nine in ARIST, eight in JASIST, and five apiece in Information Research
and LISR, along with 16 in other journals and nine books or book chapters. The overall picture is
mostly similar with Frohmann (1994),58 cited 61 times. Citing authors who are identified
users/“usual suspects” include 35 out of the 61 citing authors.59 LISR accounted for nine of the
citing articles, ARIST and Library Quarterly for eight apiece, Journal of Documentation for six,
JASIST for five, and Information Research for four, along with other journals and books or book
chapters. What appears to have been a conference-paper version of Frohmann’s 1992 article or
an otherwise parallel study has been cited eleven times.60 Counting two self-cites, eight of these

55

Bernd Frohmann, “The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint,” Journal of
Documentation, vol. 48, no. 4 (1992): 365-386.
56

By early May, that number had risen to 78 citing articles.

57

Budd (two articles); Budd and Raber; Raber and Budd; Buschman (three articles); Day (three articles); FlemingMay (two articles); Haider and Bawden; Jacob; Lund; McKenzie (two articles); Olsson (nine articles); Pawley;
Radford; Rayward; Talja and McKenzie; Tuominen; Tuominen with Talja and Savolainen; and Wiegand, plus three
self-cites.
58

Bernd Frohmann, “Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and Information Science,” Library &
Information Science Research, vol. 16 (1994): 119-138.
59

Budd and Raber; Buschman (two articles); Chelton; Day (two articles); Ellis; Fleming-May (two articles); Given
and Olson; Haider and Bawden; Hjorland (three articles, one with Capurro); Jacob and Shaw; Jacobs; Joyce; Lloyd;
Lund; Malone and Elichirigoity; McKenzie; Olson (two articles); Olsson (three articles); Radford and Radford; San
Segundo; Talja (two articles); Talja and McKenzie; Talja with Tuominen and Savolainen; Tuominen; and Turner
and Allen, plus one self-cite.
60

Bernd Frohmann, “Knowledge and Power in Library and Information Science—Toward a Discourse Analysis of
the Cognitive Viewpoint,” in Vakkari & Cronin, eds., Proceedings of the International Conference on Conceptions
of Library and Information Science: Historical, Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives, Tampere, Finland, August
16, 28, 1991 (Tampere, 1992), at pp. 135-148.

38

come from “usual suspects”: Buschman; Ellis; Haider and Bawden; Jacob and Shaw; Talja
alone; and Talja with Tuominen and Savolainen. Citing articles include three apiece in ARIST
and Journal of Documentation, and one apiece in Information Research, Library Quarterly, and
LISR.
Viewing the results on tertiary use cumulatively, counting all the Very Substantial users
of Archaeology or Order together, without Olsson or Frohmann and without the additional
substantial users such as Andersen and Skouvig, Budd, and Haider and Bawden but including
Jacob and Brooke, scholars on this study’s list of identified secondary users of Archaeology or
Order accounted for 111 (with 32 self-cites) out of a total of 302 citing articles listed in the Web
of Science (many of them double-counted because they cite more than one Very Substantial Use
in the same article) (36.75%). Excluding the somewhat anomalous results for Jacob and Brooke,
the ratio changes to 94 (with 24 self-cites) out of 198 (47.47%). Further excluding the also
somewhat anomalous 1999 Talja article with its broad appeal beyond the LIS field, the ratio
changes to 81 (with 20 self-cites) out of 153 (52.94%). Adding in the substantial users, the ratio
changes to 91 (with 22 self-cites) out of 186 (48.92%); adding in Olsson’s and Frohmann’s
works produces a ratio of 193 (with 42 self-cites) out of 376 total listed citing articles (51.33%).
Including everybody all together (i.e., Jacob, Brooke, and Talja with the others) gives a ratio of
223 (with 54 self-cites) out of 525 (42.48%).
In terms of cumulative results for journal clustering, Library Quarterly accounted for 69
of the citations, Journal of Documentation for 59, ARIST for 34, JASIST for 27, LISR for 25,
Information Research for 22, and Library Trends for 10—in other words, 246 out of 525 total
citations, or 46.86%, with Library Quarterly and Journal of Documentation together
representing 24.38 %. Excluding Brooke, Jacob, and Talja, these tallies become 66, 53, 33, 18,
39

23, 18, and 9, respectively—220 out of 376, or 58.51%, with Library Quarterly and Journal of
Documentation together representing 31.65%.

D. Detailed Comparison of Use of Archaeology of Knowledge versus Order of Things
As noted in an earlier section, one original goal of this study was to trace whether
differential use of Archaeology versus Order corresponded to differential self-identification and
self-location of scholars within the LIS field. As also noted, such differential analysis proved
mostly impossible due to the very wide disparity between use of one book and the other;
basically, in practice, compared to other works of Foucault including Archaeology, Order
appears to be relatively invisible and ignored by LIS scholars. However, notwithstanding the
wide disparity, a comparison in scholars’ visible usage of the two books may reveal some other
interesting patterns.
As discussed earlier, out of a total of 188 articles in which Archaeology, Order, and/or
the Discourse on Language are cited, 126 articles cited Archaeology without Order, 37 articles
cited Order without Archaeology, and 25 articles cited both books in the same article. In each of
these categories, the clear majority of the uses are only passing references or quotations with
little additional discussion. Out of the list of uses of Order alone, there are seven relatively
substantial uses.61 On the list of uses of Archaeology alone, there are 24 relatively substantial
uses.62 On the list of articles using both books, there are twelve that make relatively substantial

61

Clark 1998, Introna 2007, Jacob & Albrechtsen 1998, Jacob 2001, Lilley 1998, Sotto 1997, and Zhang & Jacob
2013.
62

Andersen and Skouvig 2006, Brooke 2002, Brothman 2010, Brown 1991, Brown 1995, Budd 1997, Budd &
Raber 1998, Carter 2006, Day 2005, Frohmann 2008, Haider & Bawden 2007, Haider & Bawden 2006, Haikola &
Jonsson 2007, Herb 2010, Hubbard 1995, Huvila 2015, Lund 2009, Malone & Elichirigoity 2003, Maynard 2009,
Radford & Radford 2005, Radford & Radford 1997, Stoler 2002, Talja et al. 2005, Talja 1999.

40

use of one or the other.63 In seven of these cases, the use of Archaeology (or the Discourse on
Language) heavily predominates over the use of Order;64 in four cases the use of each book
could be called roughly equal;65 and in only one case did the use of Order clearly outweigh that
of Archaeology (Jacob 2001). [See Appendix 8.]
One somewhat surprising pattern that did pop out from this comparative use data is that
Order generally seems to be relatively more invisible in North America, and perhaps less so in
the rest of the world, including other Anglophone nations such as Australia and the United
Kingdom. To test this, the educational and professional backgrounds of all users of Order were
searched.66 Out of the 37 articles and corresponding authors who used Order only, 22 of them
showed either strong professional or strong educational associations outside North America,
usually both.67 Six other articles involved geographically mixed authorship including scholars
from North America along with others not from North America (two of these involving Elin K.
63

Budd 2006, Frohmann 2001, Gilliland 2011, Girdwood 2009, Hannabuss 1996, Humphries 1998, Jacob 2001,
Radford et al. 2012, Radford 2003, Radford & Radford 2001, Radford 1992, Tredinnick 2007.
64

Budd 2006, Frohmann 2001, Gilliland 2011, Humphries 1998, Radford et al. 2012, Radford 2003, Radford &
Radford 2001.
65

Girdwood 2009, Hannabuss 1996, Radford 1992, Tredinnick 2007. In light of the discussion that follows in the
next paragraph, note that in three out of four cases of relatively equal use of the two books, the authors are strongly
associated with the United Kingdom educationally and professionally (Girdwood, Hannabuss, and Tredinnick).
66

Uses/users of Order alone include: Andersen (1999), Berg et al. (2005), Bowker (1996), Clark (1998), Day
(2004), Day (2000a), Day (2000b), Denegri-Knott & Taylor (2005), Dennis & Al-Obaidi (2010), Dervin et al.
(2006), Douglas (1993), Eastman and Bailey (1998), Ferraioli (2005), Frické (2013), Golden-Biddle and Locke
(1993), Gomez and Jones (2000), Hanson (2009), Horner (1992), Introna (2007), Jacob (2004), Jacob & Albrechtsen
(1998), Jashapara (2007), Kallinikos (1999), Lilley (1998), Lin & Chen (2012), McSweeney (1995), Milojevic et al.
(2011), Refinetti (1989), Rymarczuk & Derksen (2014), Scholz (2008), Seadle (2000), Sotto (1997), Truex et al.
(2000), Wersig (1993), Willcocks (2006), Zeggio Martinez (2013), and Zhang & Jacob (2013). Uses/users of both
Archaeology and Order include: Andersen and Skouvig (2006), Cook (2001), Dalbello & Spoerri (2006), Frohmann
(2001), Gilliland (2011), Girdwood (2009), Hannabuss (1996), Hardiman (2009), Hatch (1997), Hjørland (2002),
Humphries (1998), Jacob (2001), Johannisson and Sundin (2007), Munro (1993), Nakata (2002), Olsson (2007),
Qayyum (2012), Radford (1992, 2001, 2003), Radford et al. (2012), Tennis and Sutton (2008), Tredinnick (2007),
and Wake (2008).
67

This (relatively non-invasive) search mostly just involved checking for online resumes or similar sources of
information indicating whether the scholars in question had received undergraduate or graduate degrees from
universities outside of North America, have been employed long-term outside North America, or show other major
national affiliations outside of North America, usually a combination of more than one.

41

Jacob as a co-author).68 There were only nine situations where all authors appeared to have
entirely North American professional and educational associations; three of these involved
articles by Ronald Day, one was by Jacob, while F. Allan Hanson is an anthropologist, not an
LIS scholar. Out of 24 articles and their authors who used both Archaeology and Order, 16 of
them showed substantial educational or professional background outside of North America,
while only eight of them showed purely North American associations; of the latter, four articles
were from the Radfords, one from Elin Jacob.69
Regarding both users only of Order and users of both works, as well as geographically
mixed coauthor situations along with authors or coauthors all with substantial non-North
American associations, however, it should be noted that in several of these cases, the authors in
question are now associated with Indiana University or with Rutgers and thus have as colleagues
either Elin Jacob (and Ronald Day) or Gary Radford, both active users of Order. Thus, in such
cases (or perhaps even in all cases), the selection of Order for use might depend more on recent
professional associations than on earlier educational exposure. Nevertheless, the strong
association of Order with non-North American educational and/or professional background is
intriguing.
One other pattern of note: notwithstanding well-known and well-respected senior
Canadian archivist Terry Cook’s admonition that Order, along with Archaeology, should be

68

Non-North American nations represented on the list included the United Kingdom (10), Australia (2), Sweden (2),
Brazil (2), China, Denmark, the Netherlands, France, Germany, Greece, New Zealand, Singapore, and Taiwan. In an
e-mail message, Professor Jacob identified herself as all-American.
69

Non-North American nations represented on the list included the United Kingdom (7), Australia (3), Sweden (2),
Denmark, Ireland, and New Zealand.

42

required reading for archivists,70 Order is almost entirely absent from the archival literature. Out
of 101 articles in archival journals that mention Foucault in any way; out of 55 such articles that
cite any work by Foucault; out of 33 such articles that cite Archaeology, Order, or both; and out
of 43 actual citations of Archaeology or Order in these archival journal articles, there are five
articles that use Order and five citing events, four of them citing Archaeology together with or in
close proximity to Order, two of them as brief passing references. Also perhaps notably, of the
handful of exceptions to that rule of overall non-use of Order by archivists (Cook 2001, Gilliland
2011, Girdwood 2009, Hardiman 2009, and Wake 2008), all authors save possibly Cook have
substantial educational or professional associations with one or the other of the British Isles, and
all articles appeared in journals of international reach and focus (Archival Science) or at least
non-North American focus (the UK-based Journal of the Society of Archivists).

70

See, e.g., Terry Cook, “Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts,” Archival
Science, vol. 1 (2001): 3-24, at p. 8, fn. 8; Cook, “Fashionable Nonsense or Professional Rebirth: Postmodernism
and the Practice of Archives,” Archivaria, vol. 51 (2001): 14-35, at p. 24, fn. 21.

43

IV. Analysis of Findings

A. Limited Visible Use and Relative Marginalization of The Archaeology of Knowledge and
The Order of Things
This study began with a tacit foundational assumption: that both The Archaeology of
Knowledge and The Order of Things are especially central and crucial to the understanding and
use of Foucault and his work in general. Thus, the study anticipated finding relatively extensive
as well as intensive use of the two works, and it was hoped that close comparison of the varying
ways the books had been put to use might resolve into an interesting and illuminating way to
help map the boundaries of LIS and its subfields from the bottom up.
To the extent that the data produced by this study regarding visible use of Archaeology or
Order in LIS journal literature accurately reflects actual appropriation of either or both works by
LIS scholars, however, the results would seem to indicate that rather than being especially
central and crucial for those who would incorporate Foucauldian ideas in their work, both works
have instead been treated as relatively marginal and peripheral in the LIS field. This conclusion
is reinforced not only by the fact that a clear and substantial majority of the articles in this
study’s database that cite Foucault at all only cite works other than Archaeology or Order (259
versus 188), but also that of those articles that do cite Archaeology or Order, a substantial
fraction, probably a majority, also cite other works by Foucault and make heavier use of them
than of Archaeology or Order.
Perhaps related to this seeming relative marginality, use of Archaeology or Order also
has tended to be characterized by a relatively high overall level of vagueness and non-specificity.
Measured either by specific citations or by articles as a whole, almost two thirds of all uses
44

constituted only brief, passing references, while those uses categorized as “Significant,” although
more than mere passing references, also remain relatively brief and generally indicate relatively
little reliance upon Foucault’s works.71 This overall sense of generality in the use of Archaeology
or Order is heightened by the conceptual lumping-together indicated by the 29 co-citations
together with other (later) works of Foucault and the 51 co-citations with other scholars; notably,
such co-citations cumulatively accounted for almost 40 percent of all citing events involving
Archaeology or Order. Yet perhaps most of all, the overall dearth of page numbers may be most
emblematic of the generality in usage of Archaeology or Order, with perhaps the most typical
example being a relatively passing reference to the concept of discourse or discourse analysis,
perhaps with a mention of Foucault’s name, followed by a general citation of Archaeology.
Ironically, in more than a few cases where Archaeology or Order were cited without page
numbers, in neighboring sentences and paragraphs in the same article, the author was visibly
more fastidious about using page numbers in citing other sources, sometimes including other
works by Foucault.72
As discussed in an earlier section, in addition to the seeming comparative marginalization
of both Archaeology and Order relative to Foucault’s later works, there is a clear hierarchy of
marginalization between the two books: if Archaeology is less salient in the literature than this
study originally anticipated, Order is almost invisible. This might seem somewhat ironic, given
that Foucault himself emphasized the close relationship between the two works both explicitly,
71

The same likely would also apply to many of the citations of Foucault’s later works, of course.

72

Admittedly, part of the cause of the comparative lack of page numbers in citations of Archaeology or Order could
arise from the longstanding convention in some of the sciences and social sciences of non-specifically citing entire
sources that are usually relatively concise and compact journal articles in which the particular point cited may be
relative easy to find even without page numbers. Yet even in such disciplines, authors often appear to adjust that
convention by including page numbers, especially with citations of books, presumably recognizing that a nonspecific citation of an entire book is usually not that helpful for those who wish to use and follow the citing author’s
research.

45

by identifying Archaeology as a more complete theorization of ideas he started exploring in
Order and other earlier works,73 and implicitly, by repeatedly and extensively referring back to
those works, especially Order, throughout Archaeology. Thus, Foucault in a sense invited his
readers to think of Archaeology and Order together, rather like two parts of a larger whole; but
the visible evidence from this study suggests that relatively few LIS scholars have accepted or
noticed that invitation.
Yet the relatively limited visible evidence of extensive use of Archaeology or Order
perhaps necessarily begs the question of whether the works might nonetheless have had, and be
having, significant but invisible impact on LIS scholars? And on that point, this study produced
some interesting and perhaps surprising or counterintuitive results: namely, several of the
scholars who profess to have been strongly influenced by Foucault, or otherwise have
demonstrated substantial familiarity with Foucault, in practice visibly use and cite Foucault fairly
little.
This pattern may be particularly pronounced in archival scholarship. One dramatic
example is Terry Cook, who in footnotes in several articles repeatedly emphasizes the influence
Foucault had on his thinking74 and also specifically points out both Archaeology and Order as
key works for archivists,75 but who also only rarely cites or quotes Foucault in his numerous

73

Foucault, Archaeology of Knowledge, at pp. 14-15.

74

“There seems no point to citing here a shelf-full of postmodernist books. However, in addition to Foucault’s own
analysis and historical methodology, and Derrida's seminal volume, my understanding of postmodernism owes
much to an early exposure to the work of [various later secondary scholars].” Terry Cook, “Archival Science and
Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts,” Archival Science, vol. 1 (2001): 3-24, at p. 8, fn. 8. Basically
the same footnote also appears in Cook, “Electronic Records, Paper Minds: The Revolution in Information
Management and Archives in the Post-Custodial and Post-Modernist Era,” Archives & Manuscripts, vol. 22, no. 2
(November 1994): 300-328, at p. 326, fn. 27; and Cook, “Fashionable Nonsense or Professional Rebirth:
Postmodernism and the Practice of Archives,” Archivaria, vol. 51 (2001): 14-35, at p. 24, fn. 21. Some of the
publications from Cook’s long and distinguished career predate the present window of electronic availability and
thus had to be pursued by other means.
75

“For Foucault, his key works for archivists are The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences

46

articles. Indeed, aside from a substantial and fairly lengthy paragraph devoted entirely to
Foucault in his 2001 article in Archival Science and a mostly identical paragraph in his earlier
1994 article in Archives and Manuscripts (each with a footnote non-specifically citing both
Archaeology and Order), plus a brief biographical description of how Foucault influenced his
thought in a 2005 article in Archival Science that cited only a secondary source regarding
Foucault,76 Foucault seems to have rarely made it into the main text of Cook’s articles as more
than a passing reference if that, notwithstanding the great importance Cook clearly saw in
Foucault both for himself personally and for the archival profession generally.77 Again, as noted
in the preceding section, for all Cook’s emphatic recommendation of Order along with
Archaeology, Order appears to have remained almost entirely unused among archivists,
especially Cook’s fellow North Americans.
Another, rather similar and striking example from the archival arena of demonstrated
awareness together with limited visible use of Foucault is South African archivist Verne Harris.
Harris has long been a particularly devoted and steadfast disciple of Foucault’s contemporary,
French postmodernist philosopher Jacques Derrida, and frequently cites, quotes, and uses
Derrida at length in his articles.78 Foucault appears less frequently and more furtively, yet
enough to indicate Harris’ familiarity with his ideas, also. For instance, in a memorable and
(New York, 1970, originally in French in 1966) and especially The Archaeology of Knowledge (New York, 1972,
originally in French in 1969). A good introduction to his thought is Gary Gutting, Michel Foucault's Archaeology of
Scientific Reason ….” Cook, “Archival Science and Postmodernism,” p. 16, fn. 22. Basically the same footnote also
appears in Cook, “Electronic Records, Paper Minds,” p. 327, fn. 33. Notably, Cook here is accepting Foucault’s
implicit invitation to group and consider the two works together.
76

Cook, “Macroappraisal in Theory and Practice: Origins, Characteristics, and Implementation in Canada, 1950–
2000,” Archival Science, vol. 5 (2005): 101-161, at p. 122 and fn. 33.
77

The statement regarding infrequency of citation of Foucault is based upon electronic searches of nine
electronically available articles written or co-written by Cook, including two co-authored with Joan Schwartz, along
with more the more general database searches that form the basis of this study.
78

See, e.g., Verne Harris, “Against the Grain: Psychologies and Politics of Secrecy,” Archival Science, vol. 9
(2009): 133-142; Harris, “Antonyms of Our Remembering,” Archival Science, vol. 14 (2014): 215-229.

47

partly biographical article regarding the South African government’s archival policies toward the
end of the apartheid regime, Harris observes in a footnote:
My disclosure of the major shaping pre-impressions carried in my head as I started
writing this article reflects a recognition that no observer, no writer, is exterior to the
object of his or her observation. In my case the complicity verges on the obscene. I
was, and am, an active participant in virtually every process which I critique in the
article. So I am irrevocably caught in the tensions between the archival record
conventionally defined, Foucault’s assemblage of society’s discourses, and the
psychic archive explored by Freud, Jung, Derrida, Hillman, and others.79
Elsewhere, Harris’ publications also reveal traces of substantial familiarity with Foucault,
yet Foucault is mentioned only sporadically and rarely cited. There are two notable examples of
this overall rule. In a 2002 article in Archival Science co-written with Wendy Duff, Foucault is
co-cited along with several other authors;80 and in a 2009 article in the same journal, Harris
gently mocks archivists of the early 1980s for their resistance to the writings of figures such as
Foucault, Hélène Cixous, or various other scholars who might have challenged their insular
understandings, and he chides Heather MacNeill slightly for using Foucault’s ideas only
narrowly regarding surveillance, “but nothing else from his vast oeuvre.”81 Otherwise, though,
Foucault only appears to haunt Harris’ many publications like a ghost in occasional passing
name references.82

79

Verne Harris, “The Archival Sliver: Power, Memory, and Archives in South Africa,” Archival Science, vol. 2
(2002): 63-86, at p. 64, fn. 1. Harris, something of a superstar in the relatively quiet archival profession, heroically
risked his life and career to blow the whistle on the apartheid regime’s plans to destroy massive amounts of
documents regarding the policies and practices of apartheid over many decades during the years immediately before
the national elections that would ultimately transfer power to the Mandela government.
80

Wendy M. Duff & Verne Harris, “Stories and Names: Archival Description as Narrating Records and
Constructing Meanings,” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002): 263-285, at pp. 276, 277, and 277, fn. 49.
81

Harris, “Against the Grain,” supra note 78, at pp. 135-36, 137, and 140. Characteristically, Harris cites several
works by Derrida, but none by Foucault.
82

This statement is based upon an electronic search of ten of Harris’ electronically available articles as well as a few
additional book reviews written by Harris or written about Harris’ books, in addition to wider database searches.

48

Yet another noteworthy example from the archival world of a scholar who almost
certainly is very well steeped in Foucault but uses him visibly only sporadically is Brien
Brothman. Brothman’s oeuvre probably represents the most intensive and sophisticated
exploration of postmodernist ideas that the archival arena has yet seen or is ever likely to,
including the ideas of writers such as Lyotard, Deleuze, and Guattari along with figures better
known in the LIS and archival world such as Foucault and Derrida. Like Harris, Brothman has
spent most of his time and energy devoted to postmodernism on Derrida; also like Harris,
Brothman reveals a deep familiarity with Foucault’s works, but cites or uses them only relatively
rarely.83
Other archival scholars who have evinced a significant and persistent interest in
postmodernist ideas, such as Joan Schwartz and Tom Nesmith, at most usually only mention
Foucault sporadically in passing in their publications, mostly do not cite specific works of
Foucault, and do not cite Archaeology or Order.84
Although the archival arena may be particularly striking in its roster of scholars who
demonstrate an awareness of Foucault but do not visibly cite or use him much in their work,

83

Brothman, unlike Harris, is an identified user of Archaeology (not Order) in this study’s database. Brothman
specifically cites Archaeology in Brothman, “Archives, Life Cycles, and Death Wishes: A Helical Model of Record
Formation,” Archivaria, vol. 61 (Spring 2006): 235-269, at p. 260, fn. 48; Brothman, “The Limits of Limits:
Derridean Deconstruction and the Archival Institution,” Archivaria , vol. 36 (Autumn 1993): 205-220, at pp. 212, fn.
28 and 215, fn. 52; Brothman, “Perfect Present, Perfect Gift: Finding a Place for Archival Consciousness in Social
Theory,” Archival Science, vol. 10 (2010):141–189, at pp. 142 and 143, fn. 4; and Brothman, “The Past that
Archives Keep: Memory, History, and the Preservation of Archival Records,” Archivaria, vol. 51 (Spring 2001): 4880, at pp. 62, fn. 20 and 63, fn. 24. Brothman further displays his familiarity with Foucault in, e.g., Brothman, “The
Society of American Archivists at Seventy-Five: Contexts of Continuity and Crisis, A Personal Reflection,”
American Archivist, vol. 74 (Fall/Winter 2011): 387–427. The statements in this paragraph are based upon electronic
searches of eleven of Brothman’s electronically available articles.
84

This conclusion is based upon electronic searches of six electronically available articles apiece from Schwartz and
Nesmith (and not including articles co-authored by Schwartz with Cook, already considered earlier). Canadian
archivists notably appear to have shown a stronger overall interest in postmodernist ideas than those in any other
Anglophone nation, but this mostly has not translated into heavy use or citation of early Foucault. See, e.g., the
various articles listed in Joan M. Schwartz and Terry Cook, “Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of Modern
Memory,” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002):1-19, at pp. 10-11, fn. 17.

49

archivists are certainly not alone in this. Notable scholars closer to the heart of traditional LIS
show some of the same tendency.
One striking example is Michael Olsson, an Australian LIS scholar who used
Foucauldian ideas prominently in his doctoral dissertation, which analyzed the “social/discursive
construction” of LIS scholar Brenda Dervin.85 In his 2007 article in Library Quarterly that
includes the fullest discussion of Foucault out of all his electronically available articles, Olsson
notes, “A crucial conceptual starting point for the study was Michel Foucault’s work on the
discursive construction of power/knowledge.”86 Yet of the five works by Foucault that Olsson
co-cites near the beginning of his article, which include Order, Archaeology, Discipline and
Punish, and the first volume of The History of Sexuality along with an essay from Foucault’s
later period, two of these sources (Order and the essay) never reappear in the citations, while
each of the other three makes only one brief reappearance. Instead, Olsson makes heavy and
thoughtful use of various secondary sources that discuss Foucault and Foucauldian discourse,
including Paul Rabinow’s Foucault Reader (published in 1984)87 along with a book and article
by Radford, Frohmann’s influential 1992 and 1994 articles, a book by Talja, and others. Several
of Olsson’s other articles that do not focus as closely on Foucault each contain three closely
parallel passages in which Olsson notes the importance of Foucault’s influence upon his work
with a co-citation to Archaeology, Discipline and Punish, and Power/Knowledge usually plus
Rabinow or Derrida, notes Foucault together with Barthes in the context of the postmodernist
concept of the “death of the author,” briefly explains Foucault’s belief in the fundamental

85

Michael Olsson, “Power/Knowledge: The Discursive Construction of an Author,” Library Quarterly, Vol. 77, No.
2 (April 2007): 219-240, at p. 219.
86

Ibid.

87

Paul Rabinow, ed., The Foucault Reader (New York: Pantheon Books, 1984).

50

subjectivity of knowledge, and includes a quote from Rabinow on that point: “‘For Foucault,
there is no external position of certainty, no universal understanding that is beyond history and
society’ (Rabinow 1984, 4).”88 Later in each article, there is also a reference to Foucault’s notion
of the “Battle for Truth.”89 Yet beyond these limited appearances, Foucault is mostly absent from
the main text and citations of the articles, and Olsson instead relies more on secondary sources,
including Talja and Frohmann, especially Frohmann’s 1992 article, as well as his own earlier
publications.90
The reliance of Olsson, along with many other authors, on Frohmann’s 1992 or 1994
articles as sources regarding Foucauldian concepts relating to discourse is perhaps somewhat
ironic, given that, as noted in an earlier section, Foucault, directly, is mostly absent from both
these articles, and Archaeology and Order, usually considered among Foucault’s most key works
exploring the concept of discourse, are entirely absent.91 Instead, in those articles, aside from
some relatively minor visible use of Power/Knowledge, a collection of essays from Foucault’s
later career, Frohmann relies on secondary sources, such as Mark Poster (1984) or Dreyfus and
Rabinow (1983).92 Indeed, other postmodernist thinkers such as Lyotard and Baudrillard appear

88

Michael R. Olsson, “Re-Thinking Our Concept of Users,” Australian Academic & Research Libraries, vol. 40,
no.1 (2009): 22-35, at pp. 22, 23; Olsson, “The Play’s the Thing: Theater Professionals Make Sense of
Shakespeare,” Library & Information Science Research, vol. 32 (2010): 272–280, at pp. 273-74; Olsson, “All the
World’s a Stage – the Information Practices and Sense-Making of Theatre Professionals,” Libri, Vol. 60 (September
2010): 241–252, at pp. 241, 244-45.
89

Olsson, “Re-Thinking Our Concept of Users,” p. 28; Olsson, “The play's the thing,” p. 278; Olsson, “All the
World’s a Stage,” p. 245.
90

See the various articles by Olsson listed in the preceding two footnotes, supra.

91

Bernd Frohmann, “The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint,” Journal of
Documentation, vol. 48, no. 4 (1992): 365-386; Frohmann, Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and
Information Science,” Library & Information Science Research, vol. 16, no. 2 (Spring 1994): 119-138.
92

Mark Poster, Foucault, Marxism, and History: Mode of Production Versus Mode of Information (Cambridge and
New York: Polity Press, 1984); Hubert L. Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow, Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983).

51

in the 1992 article almost as prominently as Foucault.93
This relative absence of Foucault from some of Frohmann’s most influential works
regarding the quintessentially Foucauldian concept of discourse might seem ironic and
counterintuitive, particularly given that Frohmann, with an academic background in philosophy94
and a long record of demonstrating a strong interest in philosophy and critical theory in his many
publications over the past 25 years, is almost certainly better versed in Foucault than all but a
scant handful of LIS scholars in the Anglophone world. Certain later publications showcase
Frohmann’s fluency and familiarity with Foucault much more than the earlier articles, though
except for Frohmann’s 2001 article, they, too, usually make relatively little if any use of
Archaeology or Order.95 Also, although the articles from the early 1990s of course got a long
head start in the race to accumulate citations, few of Frohmann’s other articles yet come
anywhere close to showing the extent of impact on other LIS scholars seen with the oft-cited
1992 and 1994 articles.96
For another striking example of relatively limited use of Foucault by an LIS scholar who
is eminently well-equipped to use him, and who has a substantial and demonstrated interest in
the sorts of issues and concepts traditionally associated with Foucault, there is Ronald Day, one
of the few LIS scholars who might rival Bernd Frohmann in his level of sophistication,
93

Frohmann, “The Power of Images,” supra note 91.

94

See Frohmann’s curriculum vitae, available at his faculty web page:
http://www.fims.uwo.ca/people/faculty/frohmann/.
95

See, e.g., Frohmann, “Discourse and Documentation: Some Implications for Pedagogy and Research,” Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, vol. 42, no. 1 (Winter, 2001): 12-26; Frohmann, “Documentary
ethics, ontology, and politics,” Archival Science, vol. 8 (2008): 165-180 (uses two works of later Foucault, none of
early Foucault); Frohmann, “Subjectivity and Information Ethics,” JASIST, vol. 59, no. 2 (2008): 267–277 (an
example of an article that makes some use of Archaeology, but much more of later Foucault).
96

As another seeming example of the same phenomenon, Jacob’s 2004 article, which addresses Foucauldian ideas
but barely mentions Foucault, has been cited 42 times, while her earlier articles that delve into Foucault and Order
more deeply have been cited markedly less (23 times cumulatively).

52

familiarity, and fluency regarding a wide range of abstruse postmodernist authors and writings,
together with other critical theory and philosophy. As noted in an earlier section, Day’s 2005
article in ARIST on poststructuralism is one of the most important, in-depth explorations of
postmodernism yet to appear in the LIS literature, and it digs deeply into Foucault’s work along
with that of other postmodernist figures.97 Yet aside from that one striking foray, Foucault seems
to be generally more notable for his absence from most of the rest of Day’s oeuvre, with usually
only cameo appearances in other articles.98 Perhaps tellingly, even in Day’s excellent, thoughtprovoking book regarding the history of discourse in the LIS field, Foucault appears only once in
a footnote.99
Although six authors, three from the archival arena and three not, do not make a very
large sample, it nevertheless seems curious and suggestive that several notable LIS scholars,
probably representing a substantial core of those LIS scholars most familiar with and able to
visibly use and cite Foucault, Archaeology, and Order, mostly refrain from doing so even while
recognizing Foucault’s importance either explicitly or implicitly. Although each of the authors in
this small and relatively special set of scholars might have had his own personal and particular
reasons for not making greater visible use of Archaeology or Order, their seeming pattern of
relative hesitance, disinterest, or other disinclination toward making greater use of Foucault’s
early works appears to parallel the wider pattern found in this study of relatively limited, mostly
generalized use of these works by other LIS scholars who are likely to be far less conversant
97

Day, “Poststructuralism and Information Studies,” supra note 7.

98

See, e.g., Ronald E. Day, “The ‘Conduit Metaphor’ and The Nature and Politics of Information Studies,” JASIST,
vol. 51, no. 9 (2000):805–811, at p. 809, fn. 10; Day, “Tropes, History, and Ethics in Professional Discourse and
Information Science,” JASIST, vol. 51, no. 5 (2000): 469-475, at p. 472, fn. 9; Day, “Community as Event.” Library
Trends, vol. 52, no. 3 (2004): 408-426, at p. 414.
99

Ronald E. Day, The Modern Invention of Information: Discourse, History, and Power (Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press, 2001), p. 123, fn. 2.

53

with Foucault or postmodernism. That is, both scholars near the top of the LIS field in terms of
theoretical sophistication regarding postmodernism, and scholars with other, more usual
preoccupations, perhaps seem to overlook Archaeology and Order more than might be expected.
If so, that may raise the question whether the theoretical leaders and the rest of the field are all
responding in the same way spontaneously, or whether the rest of the field might be following
the cues they are receiving from the theoretical leaders?
In certain fundamental ways, of course, theoretically sophisticated scholars are, by
definition, differently situated from those of us who are less so. Scholars who are already
conversant with a broad range of theory and theoretical works are better able to pick and choose
among those works for the right works to serve their specific needs, just as a skilled artisan
knows which is the best tool for a particular task. Thus, scholars such as Brothman, Day, and
Frohmann don’t have to reach for Foucault for their theoretical needs (as some of the rest of us
might); they can (and do) equally well draw on other authors such as Baudrillard, Deleuze, or
Lyotard (or Habermas, or Heidegger), most of whom remain relatively unknown in the LIS
field.100 Thus they can be more selective about how and when to pull out Foucault. Notably, for
example, in the three cases identified in this study (outside of his 2005 ARIST article) where Day
cites early Foucault, he selects Order rather than the more usual Archaeology, and he uses Order
for specific concepts that are particularly present there and not as much in other of Foucault’s
works, such as classification or the eighteenth-century “question of man.”101 The same applies
when Brothman uses Archaeology regarding the specific issue of multiple temporalities. Thus,
theoretical leaders, with a wider range of more precise theoretical tools at their disposal, can

100

See, e.g., Cronin and Meho, “Receiving the French,” supra note 2, at p. 401.

101

See, e.g., the sources cited in note 98, supra.

54

more easily choose when to use Foucault and when not to. Yet it remains intriguing how often
they choose not to.

B. Preference for Secondary Sources
Yet another advantage theoretically sophisticated and knowledgeable LIS scholars have
over the rest of us is that in addition to having greater awareness and familiarity with original
sources such as Foucault, they also have greater familiarity with the various secondary sources
that help to explicate such original sources. As such, even if they wish to use ideas that appear in
or are especially associated with Foucault’s works, they do not have to use those works directly,
and can turn to other sources that may explain those ideas in ways that may be easier for readers
to follow and understand. Although at first glance an author’s deliberate use of secondary
sources to say what Foucault says might appear only to be a form of intellectual laziness, it might
instead be calculated to maximize clarity and impact for readers, as well as to avoid getting on
the potentially slippery slope of trying to neatly and accurately summarize exactly what Foucault
said, and meant, on a particular topic. Thus, where an author is familiar with both Foucault’s
original works and a secondary author’s explanation of parts of them, and where the citing author
finds that the secondary author did an unusually good job of clarifying Foucault’s meaning, the
citing author may be well justified in using the secondary work, and pointing readers toward it,
instead of to the original—especially with works as complex and non-self-explanatory as
Foucault’s.102
102

See, e.g., Patrick Wilson, “Bibliographic Instruction and Cognitive Authority,” Library Trends, vol. 39, no. 3
(1991): 259-270, at p. 264 (noting “Michel Foucault’s The Archaeology of Knowledge (1972), a famous but abstract
and difficult work that is hard to imagine serving as a textbook in an advanced [bibliographic instruction] course”);
Rachel Hardiman, “En mal d’archive: Postmodernist Theory and Recordkeeping,” Journal of the Society of
Archivists, vol. 30, no. 1 (April 2009): 27–44, at p. 36 (noting “the criticism of Michel de Certeau that in Foucault’s
writing, both the sources themselves and the links between them and his conclusions remain opaque”).

55

In keeping with this, it is interesting to note how Terry Cook, who mostly does not cite
Foucault at more than a general level yet who emphasizes the crucial importance of both
Archaeology and Order for archival scholars, immediately also offers some recommended
secondary sources as a helpful introduction to Foucault’s works—clearly and explicitly
recognizing that most uninitiated scholars will need some secondary source as a guide. Although
most other scholars in the group discussed above are not so overt, nevertheless, for a scholar who
is versed in Foucault to discuss Foucault’s ideas using secondary sources is fairly clearly
signaling to readers, first, that it is acceptable to draw on good secondary sources for help in
understanding Foucault, and, second, that at least in some contexts, these secondary sources may
be preferable to the original, certainly at least for gaining a working familiarity and a practical
ability to use Foucault’s ideas. Such scholars are, in effect, tacitly encouraging the use of
secondary sources at the very least in conjunction with exploration of Foucault’s original works;
in actual practice, given human nature, the message received might be that it is all right to use the
secondary sources instead of the originals. The latter message might come across particularly
strongly especially where scholars give relatively little indication of having used Foucault
themselves in more than a relatively general way.
Another factor that could be at work regarding theoretically sophisticated scholars, and
another way they differ from most of the rest of us, is that they are likely to be more aware of the
actual complexity of Foucault’s work and the difficulty and danger of trying to neatly and
concisely summarize writing that frankly often resists such neat repackaging. As such, for
example, it is likely much easier for those of us who are relatively uninitiated to go to a
particular page of Foucault, see an enticing quote regarding some Foucauldian concept such as
“the archive” or “discursive formations,” and take it out of context, assuming we understand
56

sufficiently what it means, and that Foucault’s meaning is reasonably straightforward and selfexplanatory as in most authors’ books. More theoretically sophisticated scholars who are better
versed in Foucault, however, might be aware that any one concept in Foucault usually is linked
closely and conditionally to an almost endless array of other, often complex concepts, few of
them self-explanatory and perhaps dangerous to take out of context. At any rate, this is another
possible reason why some scholars who are quite familiar with Foucault and emphasize his
importance and influence nevertheless make limited visible, specific use of his works or rely
more on secondary sources.
Whether theoretically sophisticated scholars are indeed signaling to the rest of us how to
use or not use Foucault and the rest of us mostly are following those cues, or whether the rest of
us are coming to the same general conclusions on our own, the fact remains that, as noted above,
the scholarly use of Archaeology and Order in the LIS field remains comparatively limited as
well as often vague and generalized. This is especially striking given the overall popularity of
discourse analysis in the field, and the fact that Archaeology is the single work by Foucault most
closely associated with discourse, plus the additional fact that Foucauldian discourse analysis is
by now one of the most dominant varieties of discourse analysis (though certainly not the only
one, as various theoretically sophisticated LIS scholars are quick to point out).
Along with the comparatively limited use and vagueness of use, it appears likely that
many LIS scholars may be following the example of the scholars discussed above by getting
most of their Foucauldian discourse analysis from secondary sources rather than delving directly
into Foucault’s works. That is perhaps especially obvious with the 88 articles (ten percent of the
original total of 886 articles) in which Foucault’s name only appears in the article as part of the
title of a cited secondary source (sometimes an article by the Radfords, who usually include
57

Foucault’s name in their article titles). The same sort of primary reliance on secondary sources is
likely at work in many of the 238 journal articles that mentioned Foucault’s name but did not cite
any of his works. Moreover, it likely is still at work with a substantial percentage of those
articles that do cite Archaeology or Order, particularly if the citation was highly general or in
passing (or only in the bibliography). For instance, a relatively typical mention of the general
concept of discourse, together with a non-specific citation of Archaeology (the entire book),
could mean one of a few different things: the author might be indicating that she had indeed read
all of Archaeology and knows what is in there, including the extended discussion of discourse;
she could be indicating that she had at least read through some or all of the passages specifically
concerning discourse; she could be trying to make it look as though she is familiar with the book
when she really isn’t (as we scholars do from time to time); she could be making no claim to
familiarity with the contents of the book, but merely be using the book as a general placeholder
for the concept of discourse with which it is so closely associated while giving a respectful nod
toward Foucault; or she could be making no claim to familiarity but be helpfully pointing readers
toward an additional source of information that she knows is respected regarding the topic of
discourse. With some of these possibilities, there may be little difference in practice between a
passing reference with a citation and a passing reference without a citation. With all of these
possibilities, even where the author is truthfully flaunting the fact that she has read the entire
book, in terms of the actual writing of her article, she is still likely to be relying more on
secondary sources that speak directly to her particular issues of concern and help to focus
thinking about them. The same, ironically, often will tend to be true even in cases where an
author includes page numbers or a quotation, because a helpful secondary source often may have
been the actual original source of the idea or quotation used, even if the author then went and
58

found the same quote in the original. For that reason, Olsson’s practice of explicitly quoting
Foucault through Rabinow rather than directly, for example, might provide fuller disclosure
regarding the actual process by which the ideas in a particular publication were assembled.

C. Possible Incentives for Display of Use of Foucault Rather than Use of Foucault?
Along with Cook’s explicit but generalized urging of scholars to consider Foucault’s
early works, and the more tacit similar message from other scholars described above, and the
overall generality of citations and uses, the dearth of page numbers, and so on—another related
example of use/nonuse of Foucault and his early works is perhaps further illuminating of the
wider overall phenomenon that this study seems to be finding at work.
In his 2002 article, “The Myth of the Computer Hacker,” Reid Skibell observes,
This explanation of how the myth was formed will rely on the work of Michel
Foucault, and specifically his understanding of discursive formation. Rather than
digressing into a full discussion of Foucault’s thought, which is available in great
detail in other places, it will be assumed that the reader has some familiarity with his
work. In The Archaeology of Knowledge, Foucault reconsiders his earlier project of
Madness and Civilization and argues that the emergence of a discipline is not
isolated to changes in one field of knowledge, but rather that its claim to legitimacy,
and thus its authority, cut across many fields (Foucault 1972a). This is exactly what
happened with computer hacking, where the concept was constituted by knowledge
in a variety of disciplines and texts, and also projected knowledge back onto them. 103
In an article that delves thoughtfully and repeatedly into the generalized concept of
discourse analysis, the passage above constitutes the sole mention of either Archaeology or
Order—in this case Archaeology, notably without a page number. Moreover, there is only one
other citation of any work by Foucault in the article—a relatively general use of Discipline and

103

Reid Skibell, “The Myth of the Computer Hacker,” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 5, no. 3 (2002):
336-356, at p. 339. Skibell and his worthy article emphatically are not here being singled out for criticism, but rather
are merely being used as an appropriate example of a much wider sociological phenomenon.

59

Punish regarding the psychology and discursive character of a society’s penal system (again with
no page number),104 plus two more references in passing to Foucauldian concepts and a separate
listing of the Discourse on Language in the article’s bibliography.
Both generalized citations of Foucault’s work in Skibell’s article appear to both concisely
and accurately summarize particular important concepts in Foucault’s work; they thus tend to
confirm that Skibell indeed has the familiarity with Foucault that he assumes his readers will
share. For purposes of this study, though, the potential sociological signaling significance of the
passage above is perhaps most interesting, when considered in the context of a wider discursive
fabric of similar explicit or implicit signals to a wider scholarly community.
To analyze and dissect the key statement more closely, consider it again: “Rather than
digressing into a full discussion of Foucault’s thought, which is available in great detail in other
places, it will be assumed that the reader has some familiarity with his work.” After announcing
that Foucault’s concept of discursive formation/s is central to the article and necessary for
understanding it, Skibell first notes, explicitly like Cook, that a fuller discussion of Foucault’s
specific ideas here would be an unnecessary digression; second, indicates that such discussion
can be found in “other places,” presumably secondary sources, though unlike Cook, Skibell is
not specific about his recommendations; and third, again unlike Cook but probably like a good
many other scholars, Skibell assumes readers’ familiarity with Foucault.
This latter assumption potentially operates at several different levels, intellectually or
sociologically/discursively. It may be a generally accurate assumption: the readers of this article
in this journal may in fact generally be already familiar enough with Foucault’s ideas to not need
additional explication here to understand the rest of the article. At that level, the statement says,

104

Ibid., at p. 342.

60

more or less, “We all know this already.” To the extent if any that the assumption is not entirely
accurate, and some readers who have stumbled upon the article really are not up to speed with
Foucault, the passage alludes generally to other places to find the missing information and says,
in effect, “Readers should have familiarity with Foucault’s work.” Combining “We all know this
already” with “Readers should have familiarity with Foucault’s work,” however, tends to create
a new sociological dynamic in the assumption, probably entirely unintentionally on Skibell’s (or
other authors’) part; it sort of says, in marketing-psychology terms, “Anybody who is anybody is
already familiar with Foucault’s work.”
The sociological signaling function of that latter implicit statement leads in at least two
(or three, or four?) possible directions. First, it creates a sociological incentive for laggards to get
up to speed with Foucault’s ideas, so that they can actively join in the discussion and, in effect,
speak the same language as “the cool kids” who already are fluently conversant in
Foucauldianese. Second, and perhaps somewhat more dangerously, it creates a strong incentive
for people to convey the impression that they are conversant, even if they really are not. [And
third, and fourth: such a statement could also potentially trigger rejection responses, either
active/hostile toward Foucault and his disciples, or passive/ignoring them.]
Given the sociological incentives at work, together with the human realities of limited
time, limited energy, and the eternal temptation of intellectual laziness, explicit or implicit
statements conveying a message similar to Skibell’s, and repeated countless times throughout a
scholarly community’s discourse, may tend in practice to create a relatively strong incentive for
community members to display familiarity with Foucault—and in so doing, act like “the cool
kids”—together with a relatively weak incentive to delve extensively into Foucault’s work, or
even perhaps into secondary works—given that “the cool kids” who “all know this already”
61

have, explicitly or implicitly, indicated that it is not particularly necessary to use the already
known material with great precision. All this may tend toward an academic community’s culture
and discourse reflecting a relatively high frequency of emblems of display—passing name
references, highly generalized citations mostly without page numbers, and the like, which
indicate at least a shallow familiarity with the person and works mentioned but leave uncertain
and may tend to mask the actual depth of understanding underneath the level of display—
together with a relatively low frequency of substantial uses of works that more clearly
demonstrate, in themselves, actual depth of understanding. In short, the sociological incentives
and tendencies described above may tend, almost inevitably, to push toward turning a popular
author and his or her ideas into a sort of fad or fashion statement, primarily for display. To the
extent that happens, it will necessarily tend to distance the discourse in actual circulation from
the original author and original sources.

D. Temporal Dimensions to the Disappearance of the Author
To veer perhaps slightly in the direction of Brien Brothman with his special interest in
historicity and multiple temporalities, there is also an interesting and important temporal aspect
to this whole process of progressive removal from an original author and original sources. That
is, even assuming that at a certain point in time everybody within a particular scholarly
community was indeed entirely conversant with a certain important body of literature and
ideas—or in other words, assuming that Skibell’s assumption was indeed entirely correct at the
moment he (and others) made it—such an assumption likely will not and cannot apply to a later
time when the interest and immediacy of that body of literature has faded. Yet ironically,
because the community members at the time “all knew this already,” they also felt no need, or at
62

least only a lesser need, to leave careful signposts regarding their understandings and
interpretations of that body of literature—such as specific supporting discussions of particular
important concepts and ideas, or page numbers. Viewed from a longer-term temporal
perspective, their discussions of the popular concepts of their time can become like an archival
collection with missing provenance and other missing metadata; certain ideas and their origins
that “everybody already knew,” and which thus might have seemed entirely evident to them, may
be left in effect only hanging in the air, or seeming to appear abruptly from nowhere, to later
readers.
Also perhaps ironically, the evidence in this study suggests that this process of ideas and
concepts erasing their own footprints through the sociological practice of discourse may tend to
be inevitably magnified and accelerated with the most popular works and ideas. At first glance,
this may seem counterintuitive; certainly the works that make the greatest splash, that leave the
deepest imprints on a community, should also leave the deepest, clearest tracks for others to
follow? Yet in practice, the more proper analogy might be an explosion, or a flooding river, that
suddenly washes away or destroys familiar signposts, landmarks, and records and leaves in its
wake a trackless waste of confusion; or perhaps a desert sandstorm, covering over familiar
markers with layers of sediment and leaving an unrecognizable landscape.
The key point here may be that although this process of erosion or sedimentation and
covering over of memory and understanding is always inevitable and ongoing in the human
realm, it can actually happen more quickly and explosively precisely regarding those ideas with
the widest currency and popularity at a given moment in time: that which does not need to be
explained will not be explained, and thus ultimately will cover its own tracks and pass into the
realm of myth, or unmoored discourse, even more rapidly than smaller and more plodding
63

intellectual currents. In short, there may be a particular risk for that which “everybody knows” to
soon become something that nobody really knows, at least not in much detail. Perhaps an
analogy to evolutionary biology is appropriate: just as fruit flies can change and evolve away
from any original settled evolutionary state far more rapidly than can slower-reproducing
elephants or oak trees, so the higher rate of “reproduction” (or frequency, replication, etc.) of
popular ideas during a discursive “feeding frenzy” can more rapidly unmoor and distance those
ideas from their original sources than with less popular, slower-replicating ideas. In sum:
intellectual popularity, rather than establishing deeper and clearer footprints associated with
original sources as might traditionally be expected, instead may only accelerate the rate of
change that erases links to original ideas. Even if the ideas in fact have a heavy impact, they and
their footprints may be, ironically, harder to trace. An active discursive formation is thus
inherently an engine of rapid change, or as Foucault put it, a “system of dispersion.”105
Continuing in a temporal vein, this study provides some suggestive quantitative data
tending to support the hypothesis of the gradual erasure of key works of Foucault from the very
discourse they helped to form, and to which they are (or are supposed to be) conceptually central
and crucial. This study grew out of an earlier, abortive study of postmodernist ideas in LIS that
revealed intriguing if impressionistic indications of visible interest in specific postmodernist
writers tending to rise, then recede, in the LIS journal literature. That study never reached the
point of gathering quantifiable evidence of that possible trend. This study, however, does provide
relatively convincing quantitative data indicating that visible interest in and substantial use of
Archaeology and Order may have peaked between 2005 and 2007—which, if so, roughly
matches the impressionistic tentative timeframe from the earlier study, also. This study’s data

105

Foucault, Archaeology of Knowledge, p. 173.

64

shows a fairly clear overall decline in substantial use of the two works starting in 2008 and
continuing since; should that trend continue, it would appear that Archaeology and Order may be
doomed to largely disappear from the very discourse regarding discourse that they helped so
much to stimulate, except perhaps for an occasional passing reference or quotation out of
context—rather like Foucault’s famous “face in the sand” quote at the end of The Order of
Things.106

E. “Crowding Out” and the Principle of Least Effort
The tendency toward generalized citations concerning generalized topics may go with a
parallel tendency toward using the name of a major, well-known work by Foucault to cover
virtually any concepts associated with Foucault, even if the book in question may not be the
work of Foucault most closely associated with the concept in question. So, for example,
Archaeology is frequently used as a general placeholder for the concept of Discourse; but so is
Discipline and Punish. Similarly, Archaeology sometimes appears to be used as a placeholder for
Foucault’s ideas about the relationship between power and knowledge, which were indeed
starting to appear in Archaeology (and more so in the slightly later Discourse on Language), but
are perhaps more clearly associated with Power/Knowledge or Discipline and Punish. If this is
indeed a trend, it would appear to be a trend ultimately favoring Discipline and Punish as the
universal catch-all placeholder for Foucauldian concepts (including any such concepts more
closely associated with Archaeology or other works).107 Notably, though, even if there is such a

106

Foucault, The Order of Things, at p. 422.

107

Anthropologist and Order-user F. Allan Hanson, in an e-mail message, communicated his impression that
scholars were generally shifting toward using and citing mostly just Discipline and Punish. Although this study did
not undertake a fine-grained analysis of LIS scholars’ use of Discipline and Punish, the study results generally
seemed to point in a similar direction—of Discipline and Punish becoming increasingly dominant and gradually
tending to crowd out other works. Of course, in the new, post-9/11 digital economy and security environment,

65

trend, it would appear that those scholars who are especially concerned with classification tend
to know that Order is really the “right” or best Foucault work to cite for that concept.
If Discipline and Punish is in fact tending to gradually crowd out Archaeology and other
works by Foucault, that may raise a question whether a similar sort of crowding-out process
might be inevitable, or at least probable, any time there are multiple works on a topic offering
parallel insights, but readers pressed for time tend to gravitate only toward the one that is best
known? At any rate, a similar phenomenon might have happened in the archival arena, and not
just involving works by Foucault. Not only does there seem to be the same growing tendency
among archivists to prefer Discipline and Punish to Archaeology (and especially Order), but
also, strikingly, among the relatively few visible substantial uses of Foucault by archivists
identified in this study, two of them—Richard Brown’s 1991 and 1995 articles in Archivaria—
notably predated the appearance of Jacques Derrida’s Archive Fever in 1995.108 Since then, some
archival scholars have addressed Foucault’s concept of the archive,109 either in conjunction with
or separate from discussion of Derrida—but the traffic in Foucault’s ideas on the archive is
minute compared to the discussion of Derrida. It appears that Archive Fever may have crowded
out Archaeology’s section on the archive.
Archaeology and Order may also be, to some extent, victims of a chronological process
of crowding out based upon both when they became available in English and when they were

surveillance and “Panopticism” are perennial hot topics (and may perhaps lead toward some degree of topical
crowding out, also, as such?).
108

Jacques Derrida, Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996 [English
language translation of an original version in French]). Earlier translated versions appeared in Anglophone journals
in 1995. See, e.g., Derrida with Eric Prenowitz (transl.), “Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression,” Diacritics, vol.
25, no. 2 (Summer 1995): 9-63.
109

And, as noted in an earlier section, they are almost the only LIS scholars who do, even though, as other
disciplines have recognized, Foucault’s concept of the archive is not necessarily only limited to the context of actual
archives.

66

discovered by the LIS field. Although Order, Archaeology, and Discipline and Punish first
appeared in French in 1966, 1969, and 1975 respectively, their appearance in English was more
compressed: 1970, 1972, and 1977. Order thus did not have long to circulate in the Anglophone
world before Archaeology in a sense landed on top of it, and neither had all that long before
Discipline and Punish was available for scholars to turn to as their single, or at least primary,
source of Foucault.
This compressed publication process may not have mattered so much for the LIS field,
which mostly shows relatively little sign of awareness of Foucault or any other postmodernist
writers before about 1990, except to the extent that LIS incorporation of Foucault may have (and
probably actually) reflected the appropriation patterns of neighboring disciplines that became the
main conduits for transmission of Foucauldian ideas into LIS. Instead, though, for LIS, a relative
latecomer to poststructuralist theory in general,110 all of Foucault’s works in effect may have
appeared at the same time, on top of each other, with Discipline and Punish already available to
start crowding out other works from the outset. This might partly help to explain not only why
Archaeology casts such an obvious shadow over Order, but why Discipline and Punish appears
to overshadow both of them to the extent it does.
Returning to the matter of secondary sources, but also touching on the question of tertiary
use addressed in this study: the seeming pattern of some degree of avoidance of Foucault’s
original works and preference for more accessible secondary sources also seems to surface in the
tertiary use of secondary articles that make very substantial use of Archaeology or Order. That
is, it appears that frequently, those sources that delve especially deeply into Foucault and explore
his ideas in relatively great detail are visibly used and cited far less often than articles that focus
110

See, e.g., Cronin and Meho, “Receiving the French,” supra note 2, at p. 407 (finding LIS scholars “more laggards
than early adopters” regarding postmodernist ideas and sources).

67

less on Foucault but provide more readily accessible exposure to more generalized Foucauldian
ideas as filtered through secondary sources.
This overall pattern perhaps appears most starkly by comparing the reception of Day’s
2005 article in ARIST to the reception of Frohmann’s 1992 and 1994 articles (particularly the
1992 article). And here it should be acknowledged that, as anybody who takes even a very
amateur excursion into citation analysis is bound to observe, even popular articles often take
some time to build “citation momentum” (to coin a phrase, if somebody else hasn’t done so
already), so the date of publication can matter a great deal, and obviously, articles published in
the early 1990s have a long head start in building citation momentum over ones published in the
twenty-first century. At the same time, though, there are bound to be plenty of articles from the
1990s that never gained much citation traction (such as Hannabuss (1996), which delved into
Foucault deeply), and there are articles from the early twenty-oughts that already have been cited
dozens of times (such as Jacob’s 2004 article, which barely mentions Foucault but has, in the
citation race, far outstripped her 1998 and 2001 articles that discuss Foucault at greater length).
At any rate, Frohmann’s 1992 and 1994 articles, which barely mention Foucault although they
generally, and energetically, explore Foucauldian discourse, have been embraced by a good
many LIS scholars; Day’s 2005 article seemingly mostly has not been.111
As noted in a previous section, Day’s 2005 article in ARIST has been cited 17 times so far
in the Web of Science, seven of those by scholars with a demonstrated interest in Foucault’s
ideas. Also as noted at various points previously, Day’s article is among the richest explorations
of Foucault’s ideas yet to appear in the LIS journal literature. But it is not an easy article to read
and process. Day accurately reflects the complexity of Foucault’s thought, and as such, his
111

See also the relative reception of Elin Jacobs’ articles that dig into Foucault compared to one that only mentions
him, supra note 96.

68

article demands a significant amount of effort and patience to wrap one’s mind around it.112 The
comparatively modest rate of citation of Day’s article suggests that most readers may not have
expended that effort.
By contrast, Frohmann’s 1992 and 1994 articles—particularly the especially influential
1992 article—mostly steer clear of the sometimes tangled actual complexity of Foucault’s
thoughts and writings and introduce readers to the Foucauldian concept of discourse in a much
more accessible manner that relies less on Foucault and more on secondary discussions of
Foucault or of Foucauldian ideas. The 1992 article is clear, concise, forcefully written, and
includes an exciting, almost bomb-throwing aspect in its critique of other, non-critical, nonFoucauldian varieties of discourse analysis.113 The 1994 article is similarly punchy, announcing
at the outset how “The kind of discourse analysis practiced by Michel Foucault and his followers
is a useful research method in [LIS],” but thereafter spending relatively little time or attention on
Foucault and never getting bogged down in the details of Foucault’s specific thoughts. 114
In sum, although Day’s article and Frohmann’s two articles all provide excellent
exposure to concepts related to Foucault and discourse, Frohmann’s two more readily accessible
articles have been embraced and appropriated by the LIS community; Day’s article mostly has
not been (yet). The LIS market appears to have found Frohmann’s articles more readily
accessible and usable. Although Day perhaps helps readers to understand nuances of Foucault
112

The author of the present study freely confesses that he had to read the article twice, separated by time and other
authors’ discussion of postmodernist ideas, before he felt like he really “got it.” It is, moreover, a fairly lengthy
article, which along with its complexity means that it requires a significant investment of time. For the record, the
author also feels that Day’s article is an excellent contribution to the understanding of poststructuralist and
Foucauldian ideas in the LIS field; but it doesn’t come easily. As such, although Day’s fine article probably deserves
more attention and citations than it seems to have received, it is also perhaps understandable why it hasn’t.
113

Frohmann, “The Power of Images,” supra note 91. For the record, the author of the present study considers
Frohmann’s 1992 article to be stimulating, even brilliant in its challenge to then-conventional ideas within the LIS
field.
114

Frohmann, “Discourse Analysis as a Research Method,” supra note 7, at p. 119.

69

better than Frohmann’s early articles in which Foucault is mostly invisible, Frohmann apparently
helps to expose readers to ideas regarding critical and Foucauldian theory of discourse that they
can use and run with better than Day. And the LIS market, seemingly, has spoken.
Nor is the relative under-appreciation of Day’s valuable contribution the only example of
this phenomenon. As noted in an earlier section, both Stuart Hannabuss’ and Luke Tredinnick’s
valuable and extensive discussions of Foucault’s thought have received almost no citations.
Tredinnick’s article is even younger than Day’s, but Hannabuss’ is already almost twenty years
old, only four years younger than Frohman’s 1992 contribution. Although it might be argued that
Hannabuss and Tredinnick published in the “wrong” journal (Aslib Proceedings), they
nevertheless did publish, and their articles were quite findable for those who were looking. As
with Day, the general neglect of their significant contributions indicates that although LIS
scholars may be interested in discourse analysis, they are not necessarily interested in tracing
such analysis to its roots or in exploring Foucault’s specific ideas in much detail.115
The Radfords might seem to represent an exception to this observed pattern, in that,
cumulatively, their various articles addressing Foucauldian ideas have been cited relatively
frequently (a total of 129 times) even though each of these articles devotes considerable attention
specifically to Foucault.116 This could be partly because the Radfords are clearly masters of
catchy titles and topics that might stimulate interest beyond the usual limited audience for studies
regarding Foucault.117 The Radfords also manage to keep their discussion of Foucault and his

115

The same goes for the overall neglect and lack of citation traction regarding Malone and Elichirigoity’s 2001
article and Humphries’ 1998 article, discussed in the preceding section.
116

This citation tally also only includes the Radfords’ articles that address Archaeology, Order, or the Discourse on
Language, not others that do not.
117

E.g., “Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library,” “Power, Knowledge, and Fear: Feminism, Foucault,
and the Stereotype of the Female Librarian,” “Flaubert, Foucault, and the Bibliotheque Fantastique,” “Libraries,
Librarians, and the Discourse of Fear,” “Trapped in Our Own Discursive Formations,” and, perhaps most of all,

70

ideas relatively accessible and engaging for non-specialist readers, sometimes drawing on
Foucault more for illustrative examples rather than attempting systematic explanation. Finally,
with a series of articles that often address related topics, the Radfords also have an unusually
high rate of tertiary authors citing several of their articles in the same article—for instance,
Andersen and Skouvig cite five of the Radfords’ articles in their one article, Haider and Bawden
cite four in the same article, and four articles written or co-written by Buschman account for 11
of the 129 total citations (nearly ten percent)—along with a relatively high rate of self-citation
(18 out of 129).

F. Journal Presence and Penetration
Based on the findings in this study, attention to Foucault, and particularly to Archaeology
or Order, tends to be localized to certain journals in the LIS field. Notwithstanding this,
however, awareness of Foucault and his ideas nevertheless has spread broadly throughout the
LIS world, even surfacing in journals rather different from the “usual suspect” journals that
publish most commentary regarding Foucauldian ideas. As such, while there is a clear core
where most discussion of Foucault is located, there is also a notable dispersal to the periphery of
the LIS field.
As noted in an earlier section, there tends to be a pronounced concentration of Foucault
scholarship among particular journals on the list analyzed for this study. Moreover, the overall
pattern observed regarding direct use of Foucault tends to be confirmed by the tertiary use of
notable users of Foucauldian ideas.
Again, the roster of journals including most citations of Archaeology or Order reads as
“Librarians and Party Girls.” Perhaps notably, “Structuralism, Post-Structuralism, and the Library: De Saussure and
Foucault” has been less of a hit in the citation arena.

71

follows: 1. Archival Science; 2. JASIST; 3. Archivaria; 4. Library Quarterly; 5. Information &
Organization; 6. Information Research; 7. Journal of Documentation; 8. Library Trends; 9. First
Monday; 10. Information, Communication & Society; 11. Organization Science; 12. Library &
Information Science Review; 13. Ethics & Information Technology; 14. Information Processing
& Management; 15. Social Science Computer Review; 16. ARIST.
Adjusting this list to focus on those journals including the most significant use of
Archaeology or Order, the roster becomes: 1. Library Quarterly; 2. Journal of Documentation;
3. Archivaria; 4. Archival Science; 5. JASIST; 6. Library Trends; 7. ARIST; 8. Aslib Proceedings
[followed by several journals that each show one significant or substantial use, including LISR
and Information Research].
Although the Web of Science system unfortunately does not include Archival Science or
Archivaria, otherwise, the roster of journals showing the most extensive tertiary use of very
substantial secondary users of Archaeology or Order tracks the list for the most significant direct
use of Archaeology or Order fairly closely: 1. Library Quarterly; 2. Journal of Documentation;
3. ARIST; 4. JASIST; 5. LISR; 6. Information Research; 7. Library Trends.
The journals showing elevated concentrations of Foucault scholarship tend to be among
the intellectually “outward-looking” journals in the LIS field—those that hold open the door to
contact and communication with disciplines outside of LIS as well as with multiple subfields or
subdivisions within LIS. So, for instance, Archival Science is notable for hosting articles written
by non-archivists (including Bernd Frohmann’s 2001 article in the very first volume of the newly
founded journal), while Library Quarterly and the Journal of Documentation similarly have
hosted articles written by archivists about archival issues. These journals also generally show a
heightened interest in theory, including critical theory, unlike various other LIS journals that may
72

have a more practical focus concerning their respective particular areas of interest.
Among those journals that were found in this study to show no visible interest in
Foucault whatsoever, whether early or late or even a passing name reference, such journals often
have a relatively obvious and practical special focus—for example, Journal of Cheminformatics,
Journal of Chemical Information and Modeling, Journal of Business and Finance Librarianship,
Journal of Web Librarianship, Library Management, Library Resources and Technical Services,
Science and Technology Libraries. The same generally applies to the substantial number of
journals that included no citations of Archaeology or Order.118 Notably regarding this latter
group, though, although these journals showed no visible interest in Archaeology or Order, all of
them did include citations of other works or at least name references to Foucault—in most cases
only one or two, but Behavioral and Social Sciences Librarian and Serials Librarian both have
six apiece, while Reference Librarian had seven. Such journals thus do not show a total lack of
interest or awareness regarding Foucault, though some of them may reflect the overall shift of
interest toward later Foucault noted in this study.119
Perhaps somewhat strikingly, also, the study results found Foucault and Archaeology or
Order spreading far beyond the “core” journals listed above and showing up occasionally in
some of the same sorts of journals that might have been expected to be non-users, like those
mentioned in the preceding paragraph. So, for instance, various relatively practically focused
118

For instance, Behavioral and Social Sciences Librarian, Collection Building, Education & Information
Technologies, Health Information and Libraries Journal, Information Retrieval, Journal of Interlibrary Loan (etc.),
Library Collections, Acquisition & Technical Services, Library Hi Tech, Library Hi Tech News, Reference
Librarian, Serials Librarian, Serials Review, and Technical Services Quarterly (among others).
119

One journal on this latter list that perhaps warrants special mention is Scientometrics, which had no citations of
Archaeology or Order but had eleven articles mentioning Foucault. These typically did not involve writers using
Foucault’s works or ideas in any way to craft arguments as in a typical journal article, but rather were usually related
to bibliometric monitoring of Foucault’s citation footprint and impact, usually among many other authors. At any
rate, Foucault is unquestionably a bibliometric presence on the scholarly landscape, and Scientometrics and its
contributing authors are aware of him.

73

journals each showed one article citing Archaeology or Order.120 In a few cases—Electronic
Library, IEEE Transactions, and Online Information Review—this was the lowest category of
visible use, “Bibliography Only,” but the Journal of Information Technology actually included
one of the rare Very Substantial uses (Brooke 2002). Also notably, as with some of the journals
alluded to in the preceding paragraph, most of the journals referred to in this paragraph evinced a
significantly more active interest in other, later Foucault. Thus, for example, the Government
Information Quarterly showed nine articles using other, probably later Foucault or otherwise
mentioning him, possibly related to Foucault’s exploration of “governmentality” and
surveillance along with, perhaps, power/knowledge; Information Technology & People showed
thirteen other articles, many of them probably interested in some of the same topics. Reference
and User Services Quarterly also particularly stands out, with a dozen articles that do not cite
Archaeology or Order along with the one that does. Even Collection Management, IEEE
Transactions, and the Journal of Library Administration each showed three additional articles
not citing Archaeology or Order along with one that did.
Thus there seems to be a rather interesting core-periphery pattern taking shape regarding
the use of Archaeology or Order, with the core represented by a cluster of relatively high-profile,
academically oriented journals covering a wide range of LIS issues and interests, including
critical theory, while the periphery is occupied mostly by more practically specialized and
focused journals of the type most immediately valuable to various sorts of specialized LIS
practitioners who generally may not have the time or inclination for theoretical ruminations. Yet
notwithstanding the clustering of most of the use of Archaeology or Order among the

120

These included Collection Management, Electronic Library, Government Information Quarterly, IEEE
Transactions, Information Technology & People, Journal of Information Technology, Journal of Library
Administration, Online Information Review, and Reference and User Services Quarterly, among others.

74

academically oriented core journals, there has actually been a significant, perhaps even
surprising degree of penetration of the periphery by Archaeology or Order that appears to be
even more pronounced with regard to other works by Foucault. That is, Foucault and
Archaeology or Order are indeed showing up even in some relatively practical, focused journals
rather far from the “core.” This suggests that there has been significant and relatively broad
visible dispersal of Foucauldian ideas throughout the LIS arena—and the visible use of
Foucault’s name and works may, and likely does, represent only the visible tip of the iceberg of
even more extensive dispersal of Foucauldian ideas.
That is one way of viewing the core and the periphery. From another perspective,
however, the more practical, focused journals might perhaps be seen as in some ways closer to
the core, or heartland, of LIS, while the more academically oriented and theoretically broaderranging “outward-looking” journals may in a sense be more on the periphery, like port cities
where the insular territory of LIS reaches out to, and is penetrated by, the concepts and ideas
from other disciplinary cultures.
Whichever way the core and periphery may be construed, it seems clear that this study
mostly did not find what it set out in hopes of finding: relatively clear mapping of the boundaries
of a multi-lobed LIS field defined by differential use of Archaeology and Order. Perhaps the
closest it came to doing so was with the citation-specific results regarding use of particular
concepts, which found that archival scholars are virtually alone in LIS in drawing (fairly
infrequently) on Foucault’s concept of the archive, while archivists were also notable for making
little or no use of Archaeology or Order for the concept of discourse—which might indicate that
they, like other LIS scholars, are increasingly turning to Discipline and Punish or other later
works of Foucault for that concept if they use him at all, or else perhaps that archival scholars
75

may be tending to rely even more heavily than some other LIS scholars on secondary sources
regarding discourse analysis? Also, as previously discussed, it was seen that archivists,
particularly North American archivists, have made especially little use of Order. Aside from
those rather limited findings, the only other clear finding related to disciplinary mapping might
be that archivists appear to use page numbers in citations more religiously than other LIS
scholars.121

G. Tertiary Use
This study’s results regarding tertiary use of the most substantial secondary uses of
Archaeology or Order may help to illuminate how the core communicates with the periphery, as
well as with itself. As discussed in the preceding section, and with the fraction varying somewhat
depending upon which examples are included or not, roughly half of all the tertiary users who
showed up on Web of Science citation search lists were also already identified secondary users
of Archaeology or Order; in a significant fraction of these cases, relatively substantial users. In
some cases, this could indicate a reversed order of discovery of Foucault: that is, rather than an
author being already familiar with Foucault, then discovering an article making substantial
secondary use of Foucault, some authors might have been first introduced to Foucault by the
secondary article. Yet in many, probably most cases, as where, for instance, Radford uses
Frohmann, or Frohmann uses Radford, or Budd or Day use Frohmann or Radford or each other,
the tertiary author has more than enough personal familiarity with Foucault to draw upon
Foucault directly in order to work with Foucauldian ideas and concepts, yet nevertheless also
121

Another seeming pattern not studied or addressed in detail within the parameters of this study would appear to be
that even though all sectors of LIS may be shifting toward an overall preference for later works of Foucault, those
scholars and journals focused on information systems and technology, as well as on management and organization,
would appear to be particularly drawn toward surveillance, Panopticism, governmentality, power/knowledge, and
other ideas that mostly emerge in later Foucault.

76

draws upon other scholars’ secondary interpretations of those ideas. Thus, among the core
authors publishing in the core journals, secondary material is freely added to the general swirl of
Foucauldian ideas along with original material, and such ideas eddy and recirculate among the
core authors even as they also gradually disperse to other scholars outside the core. The visible
citation and usage patterns suggest that through this process, secondary interpretations can,
sometimes fairly quickly, become equal or even paramount to the original works even among the
core cognoscenti who are familiar with Foucault’s works; that is, after a certain time, the insiders
may be having their ongoing, recirculating discussion more about the secondary layers of
interpretation they have helped to create than about the original sources. Again, perhaps the
classic examples of this are Frohmann’s two early articles, which directly use and address
Foucault’s works rather little but nevertheless appear to have had a major impact on overall
understanding of Foucauldian discourse analysis in LIS, both within the core and outside of it.
If even the core cognoscenti happily rely on secondary materials to assist themselves with
determining how best to think about Foucauldian ideas, it is perhaps no surprise that subcognoscenti who are curious about Foucauldian ideas would also tend to grasp the secondary
interpretations in preference to the often heavy, complex, difficult original works. This would
help to account for both the limited and often generalized use of Archaeology or Order discussed
earlier, as well as the observed general pattern that tertiary uses outside the core cognoscenti,
admittedly judged rather summarily by their article titles in this study, tend to show little sign of
any reintensification of attention and interest specifically regarding Foucault and his works. That
is, at least in theory, tertiary users of secondary materials could use that exposure to discover, or
rediscover, and explore Foucault more intensively. If they did so and actually cited Archaeology
or Order, they would of course then appear in this study’s list of identified secondary users,
77

depending upon the journals in which they published—which may have happened in some cases,
as already noted. But tertiary users also might cite other works by Foucault, or they might
include his name or key, characteristically and recognizably Foucauldian concepts in their article
titles. But the Web of Science citation search lists showed little sign of any such process, aside
from occasional, usually very generic references to discourse or discourse analysis appearing in
article titles, usually in the context of applying discourse analysis to some specific practical
issue. The overall impression from the tertiary citation searches is that, outside the recirculation
of ideas among the cognoscenti, the signal specifically relating to Foucault only dissipates
further, and awareness of Foucault’s trademark ideas, especially the concept of discourse, while
dispersing and spreading farther, tends to grow progressively more general and largely detached
from Foucault himself. It almost appears as though the more Foucauldian discourse analysis gets
picked up, the more Foucault himself and his works may be left behind.
One implication from all this, which may be merely related to the general human
tendency to try to maximize impact while minimizing effort, would seem to be that scholars,
both on the individual level but especially at the group level, cumulatively tend to favor the most
readily accessible sources of ideas that are currently generating interest. Such more accessible
sources may tend, inexorably, to overshadow and crowd out more difficult, less accessible
sources, even if the latter sources might sometimes be richer and more in-depth regarding the
particular ideas in question. This would appear to happen in part due to the relative frequency
and rapidity of circulation of sources. A highly successful, accessible, widely circulated
secondary source gradually may tend to become something like a widely shared, established
account or version in the group mind of a scholarly community, while other, less popular or
accessible treatments will tend to remain relatively marginalized or ignored. To whatever degree
78

a popular secondary interpretation of original sources may sincerely intend to be about those
original materials, in actual practice, the popular secondary source may inevitably come to
replace the original materials and become itself the focus of attention and understanding.
Moreover, to the extent any one interpretation becomes relatively standard and established, most
scholars likely will feel little need to go back to original sources, and to undertake all the effort
that would entail. As tertiary scholarship appears that is based on secondary interpretations and
not the primary materials, any connection to the primary materials and their original author likely
will tend to become increasingly stretched and tenuous, with the original author perhaps
vanishing from the picture altogether, or else continuing to hover over it like a mythical
forefather, to be occasionally genuflected to dutifully but otherwise to be largely ignored.
This picture is, however, greatly oversimplified, even if it may be accurate enough in
some of its broad outlines. For as this study found, there remains a core of cognoscenti working
actively with both the original materials (to some extent) and with each others’ secondary
interpretations (perhaps to an even greater extent), and these scholars continue to produce new
secondary/tertiary treatments for circulation both to each other as well as to a potential wider
audience of scholars. Some of their products gain significant citation momentum and traction
(whether with each other or with the wider community); some don’t. Each one in effect
constitutes a bid to adjust any prevailing, mostly secondarily-derived understanding and perhaps
bend it in new directions. This in turn emphasizes that unlike the vision of a single, static
established secondary interpretation as presented in the paragraph above, in reality the
established interpretation is itself a dynamic process, constantly changing or at least always
capable of change, that arises from the interactions of the cognoscenti actively engaged in
interpretation both with each other and with the wider community of scholars who make use of
79

their secondary works (or not).
If this resulting, more complex picture resembles the leadership of the Roman Catholic
Church in its interactions with itself as well as its community of believers, or the theocratic
government of Iran, or indeed any other priesthood in any other community or civilization
throughout human history, that resemblance is probably not merely coincidental but rather a
reflection of the classic and recurring human psychological and sociological manifestations that
lie at the core of Foucault’s understanding of knowledge, meaning, and communication.

80

V. Conclusion
From some of the rambling discussion above, readers familiar with Foucault might sense
they are seeing the fuzzy outlines of one of the most archetypally Foucauldian concepts: a
discursive formation. And indeed, this study’s results seem to illuminate various aspects of a
process whereby Foucault himself has become something of a discursive formation within LIS—
a particular system of discourse involving a certain disciplinary community and a certain set of
issues and interests in which it becomes impossible to specifically identify either a beginning or
an ending, or even who if anyone is in control of the discourse; a “system of dispersion,” as
Foucault himself put it.122 Another key feature of discourse and discursive formations that
Foucault (along with Barthes) famously discussed is the disappearance of the subject/death of the
author, and, particularly with regard to Archaeology and Order and the ideas they contain, the
limited and general use of the books in LIS scholarship surveyed here shows a progressive
distancing of the discourse from the original works and author and their replacement by
intervening layers of secondary commentary that may originally have started out as secondary
commentary on the original works but gradually may tend to become mostly secondary
commentary on earlier secondary commentary, from which Foucault himself frequently largely
vanishes or hangs overhead like a mythical forefather.
In short, rather ironically, two of the most key books about discourse appear to be
vanishing into that discourse.
If this conversion of Foucault and his works into a discursive formation has indeed
happened or is happening, not only is it precisely what he would have predicted; it is also in a
sense precisely what he encouraged. Some of the LIS scholars who appear in this study’s

122

Foucault, Archaeology of Knowledge, p. 173.

81

database have quoted from an interview of Foucault conducted in 1974:
I would like my books to be a kind of tool-box which others can rummage through to
find a tool which they can use however they wish in their own area . . . . I would like
the little volume that I want to write on disciplinary systems to be useful to an
educator, a warden, a magistrate, a conscientious objector. I don't write for an
audience, I write for users, not readers.123
In other words, rather than later scholars being preoccupied with the correct finding of an
original true meaning to his words, which Foucault’s various writings declare to be an
impossible project anyway, he urged his “users” (not “readers”) to take his ideas and run with
them any way they felt like or could figure out. This sentiment, in turn, is in harmony with both
the principle of least effort and the seeming preference for easier, more accessible secondary
interpretations of Foucault and his ideas found in this study. The widespread dispersion of
Foucauldian-inspired discourse analysis in a variety of forms into many corners of LIS as well as
countless other disciplines, whether explicitly associated with Foucault and his work or not,
would appear to represent precisely the sort of activity Foucault encouraged.
In light of Foucault’s views on the discursive nature of human knowledge and meaning,
this study might appear to be in an incongruous relationship to Foucault’s overall project,
because to some extent, it makes an effort to trace specific origins and linkages in precisely the
way that Foucault declared to be both useless and impossible.124 The research approach used in
this study—full-text database searching—did not exist in Foucault’s day, and the research
findings of this study would indeed have been totally impossible without such new technology.

123

Michel Foucault, ‘Prisons et asiles dans le mécanisme du pouvoir,’ in Dits et Ecrits vol. 11 (Paris: Gallimard,
1974), at pp. 523-4. [This passage was translated by Clare O'Farrell.]
124

Foucault referred to such efforts to trace origins as “‘harmless enough amusements for historians who refuse to
grow up.’” Rachel Hardiman, “En mal d’archive: Postmodernist Theory and Recordkeeping,” Journal of the Society
of Archivists, vol. 30, no. 1 (April 2009): 27–44, at p. 35, fn. 80 (quoting Foucault, Archaeology of Knowledge, at p.
144).

82

And in theory at least, and in the hands of truly obsessed and obsessive individuals or perhaps
someday robots, tools such as full-text searching could provide ways of actually and
conclusively tracing some intellectual trends, concepts, indeed discourses, all the way back to
their origins.
Ironically, though, what this study and its use of full-text searching tend to reveal instead
is that human knowledge and understanding do indeed tend to evolve much as Foucault
described. Discourses do, over time, “systematically form the objects of which they speak,”
whatever those objects initially may have been; they take on a life of their own, with rhythms
and momentum of their own that seem to be largely free of identifiable agency or control, and
they promptly bury their own origins in a constructed, semi-remembered mythical past. The
discursive formation involving Foucault, The Archaeology of Knowledge, and The Order of
Things that has developed in the LIS field would appear to be no exception.
Regarding more specific findings in this study: contrary to one of the fundamental
preliminary assumptions underlying this research—that The Archaeology of Knowledge and The
Order of Things are so crucial to understanding Foucauldian discourse analysis that they must
both be used extensively and intensively by scholars concerned with discourse—this study’s
results indicate that at least in LIS journal literature, these two important works see relatively
little visible use, as measured both by raw citation tallies as well as analysis of the depth of use
of those citations. The Archaeology of Knowledge appears to be vastly overshadowed by other,
later works of Foucault; The Order of Things is, comparatively, almost invisible. A high
proportion of the identifiable uses of both works show relatively passing references only, often
general and without page numbers.
In place of visible, direct use of these works of Foucault, this study found evidence of a
83

seemingly strong overall preference for secondary sources discussing Foucauldian ideas rather
than Foucault’s original works, even among some of those scholars who are likely to be
unusually well-versed in Foucault. This study’s analysis of tertiary use of Foucault’s two works
(that is, secondary use of secondary uses of the original works) found that much of such tertiary
use is by scholars who are themselves already secondary users of the original works; it also
found evidence of a general preference for more accessible secondary uses that may touch upon
Foucault’s specific works and ideas only relatively briefly, as opposed to those secondary
sources that explore Foucault’s works in greater detail and depth.
To attempt to explain the relatively limited, general use of Foucault’s two works, this
study posits that widespread familiarity—or the assumption of such widespread familiarity—
with complex, difficult original works within a scholarly community may tend, perhaps
inevitably, to create a situation favoring display of general familiarity with the original works
without the need to demonstrate detailed and specific use of those works—a situation where
everybody already knows, or at least appears to know, what is in them. In such a situation, there
will be a reduced sense of need to leave careful signposts regarding particularized use of the
original sources for either contemporaneous or future scholars. Moreover, influential original
sources that generate enough excitement within a scholarly community to produce active
secondary commentary upon the originals, and then secondary commentary on the secondary
commentary, may be especially likely to become buried and obscured especially rapidly by the
proliferation of secondary commentary that becomes a surrogate for original works, or ultimately
even for earlier secondary sources. For all these reasons—rather ironically and perhaps counterintuitively—important, influential original works and their authors may be particularly fated to
effectively vanish from the very discussion and discourse they triggered surprisingly quickly.
84

Regarding both secondary and tertiary use of The Archaeology of Knowledge and The
Order of Things, this study found pronounced concentration of such use among a relatively small
circle of academically oriented, theoretically inclined LIS journals. Notwithstanding this overall
centralization of Foucauldian activity around a core of journals, though, use—sometimes
substantial or significant use—of Foucault’s two works also surfaced occasionally in journals
that usually might be seen as relatively far from that core and more practically focused,
indicating some gradual but ongoing visible penetration of Foucauldian ideas from the core
outward toward the periphery of the LIS field.
The preceding paragraphs described what this study accomplished (or attempted). There
are various other potential issues, angles, or topics for exploration, however, that the study did
not attempt (or accomplish).
Although collecting, compiling, and analyzing the data and databases used in this study
required substantial time and effort, notwithstanding that, the resulting picture presented in this
study of the LIS field’s use of Foucault’s important early works remains, in a sense, only a
snapshot, inherently incomplete and imperfect. Although the study involved searches of a large
number of journals, many others were left out just for lack of inclusion on the SCImago or other
lists that were used to select journals to search. Of the journals selected, a significant fraction of
these journals or articles in them also were effectively left out of the search process due either to
unavailability specifically at UCLA or general electronic unavailability, unsearchability, or
unidentifiability. As a reviewer of this thesis pointed out, moreover, some of the journals that
appear on the SCImago list and were searched are ones that may fairly clearly fall outside the
boundaries of the LIS field, even broadly conceived. Thus, for all the effort expended, this study
does not provide fully complete or accurate coverage even of LIS journal literature.
85

Nor is journal literature the only, or perhaps even the best, place to look for footprints of
use of Foucault’s works by LIS scholars. Experienced LIS scholars have suggested that much of
the most substantial delving into Foucault’s oeuvre might more likely be found among the
growing number of monographs exploring theoretical issues published by LIS scholars. Some
reverberations of such book-based discussions might perhaps be expected to show up alongside
references to Foucault’s works in journal articles, or perhaps might be caught by the study’s lessthan-perfect monitoring of tertiary use using the Web of Science citation index; but some such
use might escape detection altogether, particularly if, in practice, it mostly involved LIS scholars
addressing each others’ arguments in their respective monographs or in conference interactions
that may not result in journal articles, for example.
Beyond limitations such as these, however, lies a broader inherent shortcoming to this
study: it is necessarily limited to tracing clear, visible use of Foucault’s early works. In doing so,
the study identified a seeming overall mismatch between Foucault’s known, or at least generally
perceived and recognized, influence on LIS scholarship and the visible use of some of his key
works. Yet the visible use may not be the most important input contributing to Foucault’s
influence. To use another analogy, this study might be thought of as operating only within the
spectrum of visible light, and not covering even that whole visible spectrum, while leaving the
infrared and ultraviolet frequencies entirely unexamined. Yet much of the energy producing
Foucault’s influence may reside in the trans-visible spectrum.
To attempt to more fully explore either visible or non-/less-visible use of Foucault, there
are many possible directions future research might take. Some rather obvious ones already have
been alluded to above—such as, seek an even fuller, more accurate corpus of LIS journal
literature or trace use of Foucault also in monographic or other literature. With or without such
86

an expansion, the data reported in this study could be processed and analyzed in a more
sophisticated fashion. The present reporting of results regarding, for example, cumulative
citations of Foucault, and comparative ranking of journals based upon those totals, may tend to
conceal more significant and interesting relationships that might be revealed through more
sensitive measurements of relative frequency, density, and concentration of citations. For
example, the citation performance of the journal Archival Science, which only started publication
in 2001 and only appears twice a year, might actually be much more impressive on a
frequency/density basis than a journal with similar cumulative numbers that has been published
and is electronically available from the 1980s onward and might have up to twelve issues per
year. Thus a more sensitive and sophisticated comparative bibliometric approach would have to
attempt to account for and compare various additional factors, including the beginning and
ending dates for each journal’s respective window of electronic availability/searchability, the
total number of articles published within that window of availability as a comparative baseline,
and possibly other parameters or peculiarities particular to specific journals.
Certain potentially interesting, and perhaps obvious, additional angles of attack were left
out of this study due to time constraints. For instance, it would be possible to check all of the
tertiary uses that appeared on the Web of Science citation lists for the depth of use of the cited
secondary sources as well as the extent of visible application of recognizably Foucauldian ideas.
As was the pattern with other research results in this study, most such tertiary uses likely would
prove to be relatively in passing; yet it would be interesting to find exceptions to that rule. It also
might be possible to more carefully trace tertiary uses of monographs by specifically identifying
such works that make substantial use of Foucault’s early works, then tracing citations using the
Web of Science, Google Scholar, or possibly full-text journal databases.
87

This study did not attempt the sort of intensive, qualitative comparative analysis of
substantial secondary uses of Foucault’s work that such articles really deserve. An overview of
all such articles together suggests that they make use of The Archaeology of Knowledge or The
Order of Things in a surprisingly broad variety of mostly different ways. Yet more careful
analysis might reveal interesting points of comparison or observable trends—along with similar
intensive analysis of use of those works in monographs.
One relatively straightforward way to extend the research in this study would be to apply
the same frequency of citation and depth of use metrics to the rest of Foucault’s works, including
Discipline and Punish, Power/Knowledge, and The History of Sexuality among others. This
study only alluded to seeing such works very frequently cited and suggested, somewhat
impressionistically, that they may vastly overshadow Foucault’s earlier works. Such impressions
could be tested and confirmed (or not) more systematically. Any results might tend to confirm
the overall trends identified in this study, or they might illuminate potentially interesting
differences and nuances in LIS scholars’ use of later Foucault compared to earlier Foucault.
A more careful attention to the specific academic interests and backgrounds of the
authors who cite Foucault in LIS journals might be illuminating as well, since a number of the
contributing authors in the study are not LIS scholars, for example. It might be interesting to
explore the extent to which such ambassadors from other disciplines publish in LIS journals,
why they choose to do so, and what effect this cross-disciplinary fertilization has upon LIS
scholarship. This would appear to be potentially yet another interesting aspect of the sort of portcity penetration of the LIS realm by “foreign” ideas and concepts noted in an earlier section.
To seek to transcend the various technical shortcomings of the present study and explore
additional nuances more fully, a variety of other research methods might fruitfully be applied:
88

for example, discourse analysis, social network analysis, or interviews with key scholars, along
with more sophisticated bibliometric techniques.
Notwithstanding any shortcomings, though, it is hoped that this thesis has contributed in
a positive, concrete way to the wider ongoing discussion and exploration of scholarly citation
and what citation practices reveal about the nature of communication, meaning, and
understanding within scholarly communities—the sociology of citation. In particular, this thesis
offers a case study tending to confirm the classic postmodernist (and sociological) concept of the
disappearance of the author from discourse, along with some relatively close, detailed
examination of some of the specific mechanisms by which that disappearing act may take place.
That this (at least partial) erasure from the record involves the godfather of discourse himself,
Foucault, only adds to the irony and, hopefully, impact of this study.
This thesis also contributes to some aspects of the ongoing debate over the theoretical and
practical value of citation analysis. For citation analysis, traditionally, has tended to focus on
quantity of citations and assume their corresponding quality and significance.125 This study dug
down deeper to explore more intensively the quality of citations regarding two classic, influential
works by a towering figure upon a scholarly community or interrelated cluster of communities.
The overall results and data suggest that it may be dangerous to assume quality, measured as
visible use and demonstrated depth of understanding, simply from quantity of citations. For in
this case, the great majority of citations analyzed were brief, in passing, and of ambiguous
meaning and significance. That in turn raises questions about the precise meaning of other
statistics, such as Foucault being found to be the single author most cited by humanities scholars
125

The MacRobertses, among others, have long and vigorously challenged this propensity on the part of citation
analysis, among others. See, e.g., M.H. MacRoberts and B.R. MacRoberts, “Problems of Citation Analysis: A
Critical Review,” JASIST, vol. 40, no. 5 (1989): 342-349; MacRoberts and B.R. MacRoberts, “Problems of Citation
Analysis,” Scientometrics, vol. 36, no. 3 (1996): 435-444; MacRoberts and MacRoberts, “Problems of Citation
Analysis: A Study of Uncited and Seldom-Cited Influences,” JASIST, vol. 61, no. 1 (2010): 1-13.

89

in 2007. In particular, the observed vague generality of co-citations of either or both of
Foucault’s works with other works or other authors tends to call into question the significance of
co-citations in general.126
Which is not to say that Foucault and his (seemingly) relatively neglected early works
may not be continuing to have a powerful influence, both in LIS and elsewhere; only that such
influence may be expressed in ways that may not register on citation analysis’ radar screen as
they are supposed to according to traditional assumptions. This study suggests that such
influence may have gone underground, to some extent, and may be expressed more through its
largely invisible continuing pull on more visibly and actively used secondary sources and the
whole bubbling broth of secondary and tertiary interpretations described earlier. As such, this
study also hopefully contributes somewhat to the literature on Mertonian obliteration by
incorporation—“‘the obliteration of the sources of ideas, methods, or findings by their being
anonymously incorporated in current canonical knowledge,’” or in other words, influential and
impactful ideas becoming so commonplace that their specific origins are forgotten and ignored,
and their sources are cited less frequently than their impact warrants.127 To the extent that
Mertonian obliteration may have a somewhat different face in humanistic and social scientific
disciplines than in the sciences where it more often has been studied, this thesis offers a glimpse
of that face, and of some of the processes by which its features may be erased, like Foucault’s
famous face in the sand at the edge of the sea.

126

For an early challenge to the validity of co-citation analysis, see, e.g., David Edge, “Why I Am Not a CoCitationist,” Essays of an Information Scientist, vol. 3 (1977-1978): 240-246 (a reprint of an earlier-published
version), available at http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/essays/v3p240y1977-78.pdf.
127

Katherine W. McCain, “Eponymy and Obliteration by Incorporation: The Case of the ‘Nash Equilibrium,’”
JASIST, vo. 62, no. 7 (2011): 1412-1424, at p. 1413 (quoting R.K. Merton, “The Matthew Effect in Science II:
Cumulative Advantage and the Symbolism of Intellectual Property,” ISIS, vol. 79 (1988): 606-623, at p. 622).

90

Appendix 1: Unavailable, Unsearchable, and Zero-Results Journals
Unavailable: (6)
European Journal of Information Systems
International Journal of Data Mining & Bioinformatics
Journal of Electronic Resources in Medical Libraries
Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning
Knowledge Management Research & Practice
VINE
Unsearchable: (6)
Advances in Librarianship
Canadian Journal of Information & Library Science
Cybermetrics
Insights
Journal of the Medical Library Association
Program
Zero Results for Foucault: (24)
Bottom Line
College & Undergraduate Libraries
College & Research Libraries News
Communications in Information Literacy
Computers in Libraries
Computers in the Schools
Information Systems Management
Information Technology & Libraries
Interlending & Document Supply
Issues in Science & Technology Librarianship
Journal of Access Services
Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship
Journal of Cheminformatics
Journal of Classification
Journal of Enterprise Information Management
Library Resources & Technical Services
Malaysian Journal of Library & Information Science
Medical Reference Services Quarterly
New Review of Academic Librarianship
OCLC Systems & Services
Performance Measurement & Metrics
Public Library Quarterly
Science & Technology Libraries
World Patent Information

91

Appendix 2: Bibliography of 188 Articles Citing Archaeology or Order in This Study’s
Database
[Alphabetically by Author]

1. Alvarado, Felix. “Concerning Postmodernity and Organizations in the Third World: Opening
a Debate and Suggestions for a Research Agenda.” Organization Science, vol. 7, no. 6 (Nov.Dec., 1996): 667-681.
2. Andersen, Jack. Review of Ylva Lindholm–Romantschuk, Scholarly Book Reviewing in the
Social Sciences and Humanities. The Flow of Ideas Within and Among Disciplines (Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press, 1998). JASIST, vol. 50, no. 13 (1999): 1259-1261.
3. Andersen, Jack, and Laura Skouvig. “Knowledge Organization: A Sociohistorical Analysis
and Critique.” Library Quarterly, vol. 76, no. 3 (July 2006): 300-322.
4. Anderson, Scott R., and Robert B. Allen. “Envisioning the Archival Commons.” American
Archivist, vol. 72 (Fall/Winter 2009): 383-400.
5. Barzilai-Nahon, Karine. “Gatekeeping: A Critical Review.” ARIST, vol. 43, no. 1 (2009): 1–
79.
6. Bassett, Elizabeth H., and Kate O’Riordan. “Ethics of Internet Research: Contesting the
Human Subjects Research Model.” Ethics and Information Technology, vol. 4 (2002): 233-247.
7. Bastian, Jeannette A. “The Records of Memory, the Archives of Identity: Celebrations, Texts
and Archival Sensibilities.” Archival Science, vol. 13 (June 2013): 121-131.
8. Beagle, Donald. “Visualizing Keyword Distribution Across Multidisciplinary C-Space.” DLib Magazine, vol. 9 no. 6 (June 2003).
9. Beaven, Brian P. N. “Macro-Appraisal: From Theory to Practice.” Archivaria 48 (Fall 1998):
154-198.
10. Berg, Elisabeth, Christina Mörtberg, and Maria Jansson, “Emphasizing Technology: SocioTechnical Implications.” Information Technology & People, vol. 18, no. 4 (2005): 343-358.
11. Berger, Stefan. “The Role of National Archives in Constructing National Master Narratives
in Europe.” Archival Science, vol. 13 (2013): 1-22.
12. Bowker, Geoffrey C. “The History of Information Infrastructures: The Case of the
International Classification of Diseases.” Information Processing & Management, vol. 32, no. 1
(January 1996): 49-61.

92

13. Brännström, Inger. “Gender and Digital Divide 2000–2008 in Two Low-Income Economies
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Kenya and Somalia in Official Statistics.” Government Information
Quarterly, vol. 29 (2012): 60–67.
14. Brooke, Carole. “What Does It Mean to Be ‘Critical’ in IS Research?” Journal of
Information Technology, vol. 17 (2002): 49–57.
15. Brothman, Brien. “Perfect Present, Perfect Gift: Finding a Place for Archival Consciousness
in Social Theory.” Archival Science, vol. 10 (2010):141–189.
16. Brothman, Brien. “Archives, Life Cycles, and Death Wishes: A Helical Model of Record
Formation.” Archivaria, vol. 61 (Spring 2006): 235-269.
17. Brothman, Brien. “The Past that Archives Keep: Memory, History, and the Preservation of
Archival Records.” Archivaria, vol. 51 (Spring 2001): 48-80.
18. Brothman, Brien. “The Limits of Limits: Derridean Deconstruction and the Archival
Institution.” Archivaria, vol. 36 (Autumn 1993): 205-230.
19. Brown, Richard. “Macro-Appraisal Theory and the Context of the Public Records Creator.”
Archivaria, vol. 40 (Fall 1995): 121-172.
20. Brown, Richard. “Records Acquisition Strategy and its Theoretical Foundation: The Case
for a Concept of Archival Hermeneutics.” Archivaria, vol. 33 (Winter 1991-92): 34-56.
21. Budd, John M. “Discourse Analysis and the Study of Communication in LIS.” Library
Trends, vol. 55, no. 1 (Summer 2006): 65-82.
22. Budd, John M. “A Critique of Customer and Commodity.” College & Research Libraries,
vol. 58 (July 1997): 309-320.
23. Budd, John M., and Douglas Raber. “The Cultural State of the Fin De Millénaire Library.”
Library Quarterly, vol. 68, no. 1 (January 1998): 55-79.
24. Budd, John M., and Douglas Raber. “Discourse Analysis: Method and Application in the
Study of Information.” Information Processing & Management, vol. 32, no. 2 (March 1996):
217-226.
25. Buschman, John. “Transgression or Stasis? Challenging Foucault in LIS Theory.” Library
Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 1 (January 2007): 21-44.
26. Carter, Rodney G. S. “Of Things Said and Unsaid: Power, Archival Silences, and Power in
Silence.” Archivaria, vol. 61 (Spring 2006): 215-233.
27. Carusi, Annamaria, and Giovanni De Grandis. “The Ethical Work that Regulations Will Not
Do.” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 15, no. 1 (2012): 124-141.
93

28. Chelton, Mary K. “Behavior of Librarians in School and Public Libraries with Adolescents:
Implications for Practice and LIS Education.” Journal of Education for Library and Information
Science, vol. 40, no. 2 (Spring, 1999): 99-111.
29. Clark, Nigel. “Materializing Informatics: From Data Processing to Molecular Engineering.”
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 1, no. 1 (1998): 70-90.
30. Clarke, Juanne. “Portrayal of Childhood Cancer in English Language Magazines in North
America: 1970–2001.” Journal of Health Communication, vol. 10, no. 7 (2005): 593-607.
31. Coll, Sami. “Power, Knowledge, and the Subjects of Privacy: Understanding
32. Cook, Terry. “Archival Science and Postmodernism: New Formulations for Old Concepts.”
Archival Science, vol. 1(2001): 3-24.
33. Dafermos, George, and Michel J.G. van Eeten. “Images of Innovation in Discourses of Free
and Open Source Software.” First Monday, vol. 19, no. 12 (December 2014).
34. Dalbello, Marija, and Anselm Spoerri. “Statistical Representations from Popular Texts for
the Ordinary Citizen, 1889–1914.” Library & Information Science Review, vol. 28, no. 1 (Spring
2006): 83-109.
35. Daniel, Dominique. “Archival Representations of Immigration and Ethnicity in North
American History: From the Ethnicization of Archives to the Archivization of Ethnicity.”
Archival Science, vol. 14 (2014):169–203.
36. Darms, Lisa. “The Archival Object: A Memoir of Disintegration.” Archivaria, vol. 67
(Spring 2009): 143-155.
37. Day, Mark Tyler. “Transformational Discourse: Ideologies of Organizational Change in the
Academic Library and Information Science Literature.” Library Trends, vol. 46, no. 4 (Spring
1998): 635-667.
38. Day, Ronald E. “Poststructuralism and Information Studies.” ARIST, vol. 39, no. 1 (2005):
575–609.
39. Day, Ronald E. “Community as Event.” Library Trends, vol. 52, no. 3 (2004): 408-426.
40. Day, Ronald E. “The ‘Conduit Metaphor’ and the Nature and Politics of Information
Studies.” JASIST, vol. 51, no. 9 (2000): 805–811.
41. Day, Ronald E. “Tropes, History, and Ethics in Professional Discourse and Information
Science.” JASIST, vol. 51, no. 5 (2000): 469–475.

94

42. Denegri-Knott, Janice, and Jacqui Taylor. “The Labeling Game: A Conceptual Exploration
of Deviance on the Internet.” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 23, no. 1 (Spring 2005): 93107.
43. Dennis, Dion, and Jabbar Al-Obaidi. “Vanguard, Laggard or Relic? The Possible Futures of
Higher Education after the Epistemic Revolution.” First Monday, vol. 15, no. 3 (March 2010).
44. Dervin, Brenda. “Information Democracy: An Examination of Underlying Assumptions.”
JASIST, vol. 45, no. 6 (July 1994): 369–385.
45. Dervin, Brenda, CarrieLynn D. Reinhard, and Fei C. Shen. “Beyond Communication:
Research as Communicating. Making User and Audience Studies Matter—Paper 2.” Information
Research, vol. 12, no. 1 (October 2006).
46. Dever, Maryanne. “Archiving Feminism: Papers, Politics, Posterity.” Archivaria, vol. 77
(Spring 2014): 25-42.
47. Dilevko, Juris, and Kalina Crewal. “Neutrality and Media Literacy at the Reference Desk: A
Case Study.” Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 24, no. 1 (January 1998): 21-32.
48. Dong , Dong, Tsan-Kuo Chang, and Dan Chen. “Reporting AIDS and the Invisible Victims
in China: Official Knowledge as News in the People's Daily, 1986–2002.” Journal of Health
Communication, vol. 13, no. 4 (2008): 357-374.
49. Douglas, J. Yellowlees. “Social Impacts of Computing: The Framing of Revolutionary for
Whom?” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 11, no. 4 (December 1993): 417-428.
50. Duff, Wendy M., and Verne Harris. “Stories and Names: Archival Description as Narrating
Records and Constructing Meanings.” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002): 263-285.
51. Eastman, Wayne, and James R. Bailey. “Mediating the Fact-Value Antinomy: Patterns in
Managerial and Legal Rhetoric, 1890-1990.” Organization Science, vol. 9, no. 2 (March-April
1998): 232-245.
52. Ellis, David, Rachel Oldridge, and Ana Vasconcelos. “Community and Virtual Community.”
ARIST, vol. 38, no. 1 (2004): 145–186.
53. Ferraioli, Leatrice. “An Exploratory Study of Metadata Creation in a Health Care Agency.”
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, vol. 40, nos. 3-4 (2005): 75-102.
54. Fleming-May, Rachel A. “Concept Analysis for Library and Information Science: Exploring
Usage.” Library & Information Science Review, vol. 36, nos. 3-4 (October 2014): 203-210.
55. Fleming-May, Rachel A. “What Is Library Use? Facets of Concept and a Typology of Its
Application in the Literature of Library and Information Science.” Library Quarterly, vol. 81,
no. 3 (July 2011): 297-320.
95

56. Frické, Martin. “Reflections on Classification: Thomas Reid and Bibliographic Description.”
Journal of Documentation, vol. 69, no. 4 (2013): 507-522.
57. Frohmann, Bernd. “Subjectivity and Information Ethics.” JASIST, vol. 59, no. 2 (2008):
267–277.
58. Frohmann, Bernd. “Discourse and Documentation: Some Implications for Pedagogy and
Research.” Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, vol. 42, no. 1 (Winter,
2001): 12-26.
59. Frohmann, Bernd. “Documentation Redux: Prolegomenon to (Another) Philosophy of
Information.” Library Trends, vol. 52, no. 3 (Winter 2004): 387-407.
60. Gallagher, H. M. “Dr. Osborn’s 1941 ‘The Crisis in Cataloging’: A Shift in Thought toward
American Pragmatism.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, vol. 12, nos. 3-4 (1991): 3-33.
61. Garay, Kathleen, and Christl Verduyn. “Special Section on Taking a Stand!: Activism in
Canadian Cultural Archives.” Archivaria, vol. 67 (Spring 2009): 59-61.
62. Gilliland, Anne J. “Reflections on the Value of Metadata Archaeology for Recordkeeping in
a Global, Digital World.” Journal of the Society of Archivists, vol. 32, no. 1 (April 2011): 103–
118.
63. Girdwood, James R. S. “(Re)Conceptualising Mnemonic Technology in Light of
Hermeneutic Ontology.” Archival Science, vol. 9 (2009): 143–155.
64. Given, Lisa M., and Hope A. Olson. “Knowledge Organization in Research: A Conceptual
Model for Organizing Data.” Library & Information Science Review, vol. 25, no. 2 (Summer
2003): 157-176.
65. Golden-Biddle, Karen, and Karen Locke. “Appealing Work: An Investigation of How
Ethnographic Texts Convince.” Organization Science, vol. 4, no. 4 (Nov., 1993): 595-616.
66. Gomez, Pierre-Yves, and Brittany C. Jones. “An Interpretation of Deep Structure in
Organizations.” Organization Science, vol. 11, no. 6 (Nov.-Dec. 2000): 696-708.
67. Guttman, Nurit, and William Harris Ressler. “On Being Responsible: Ethical Issues in
Appeals to Personal Responsibility in Health Campaigns.” Journal of Health Communication,
vol. 6, no. 2 (2001): 117-136.
68. Haider, Jutta, and David Bawden. “Conceptions of ‘Information Poverty’ in LIS: A
Discourse Analysis.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 63 no. 4 (2007): 534-557.
69. Haider, Jutta, and David Bawden. “Pairing Information with Poverty: Traces of
Development Discourse in LIS.” New Library World, vol. 107, no. 9/10 (2006): 371-385.
96

70. Haikola, Simon, and Sara Jonsson. “State Surveillance on the Internet—The Swedish Debate
and the Future Role of Libraries and LIS.” Libri, vol. 57, no. 4 (April 2008): 209-218.
71. Hannabuss, Stuart. “Foucault’s View of Knowledge.” Aslib Proceedings, vol. 48, no. 4
(April 1996): 87-102.
72. Hanson, F. Allan. “Beyond the Skin Bag: On the Moral Responsibility of Extended
Agencies.” Ethics & Information Technology, vol. 11 (2009): 91-99.
73. Hardiman, Rachel. “En mal d’archive: Postmodernist Theory and Recordkeeping.” Journal
of the Society of Archivists, vol. 30, no. 1 (April 2009): 27–44.
74. Hatch, Mary Jo. “Irony and the Social Construction of Contradiction in the Humor of a
Management Team.” Organization Science, vol. 8, no. 3 (May-June 1997): 275-288.
75. Head, Randolph C. “Historical Research on Archives and Knowledge Cultures: An
Interdisciplinary Wave.” Archival Science, vol. 10 (2010): 191–194.
76. Head, Randolph C. “Mirroring Governance: Archives, Inventories and Political Knowledge
in Early Modern Switzerland and Europe.” Archival Science, vol. 7 (2007): 317–329.
77. Heizmann, Helena. “Workplace Information Practices among Human Resources
Professionals: Discursive Boundaries in Action.” Information Research, vol. 17, no. 3
(September 2012).
78. Herb, Ulrich. “Sociological Implications of Scientific Publishing: Open Access, Science,
Society, Democracy, and the Digital Divide.” First Monday, vol. 15, no. 2 (February 2010).
79. Higgins, Joan Wharf, and P. J. Naylor, Tanya Berry , Brian O'Connor and David McLean.
“The Health Buck Stops Where? Thematic Framing of Health Discourse to Understand the
Context for CVD Prevention.” Journal of Health Communication, vol. 11, no. 3 (2006): 343358.
80. Hill, Heather, and Marni Harrington. “Beyond Obscenity: An Analysis of Sexual Discourse
in LIS Educational Texts,” Journal of Documentation, vol. 70, no. 1 (2014): 62-73.
81. Hjørland, Birger. “Domain Analysis in Information Science.” Journal of Documentation,
vol. 58, no. 4 (2002): 422-462.
82. Horn, Jim. “Qualitative Research Literature: A Bibliographic Essay.” Library Trends, vol.
46, no. 4 (Spring 1998): 602-615.
83. Horner, David Sanford. “Frameworks for Technology Analysis and Classification.” Journal
of Information Science, vol. 18, no. 1 (February 1992): 57-68.
97

84. Hubbard, Taylor E. “Bibliographic Instruction and Postmodern Pedagogy.” Library Trends,
vol. 44, no. 2 (Fall 1995): 439-452.
85. Huber, Jeffrey T., and Mary L. Gillaspy. “Social Constructs and Disease: Implications for a
Controlled Vocabulary for HIV/AIDS.” Library Trends, vol. 47, no. 2 (1998): 190-208.
86. Humphries, Maria. “For the Common Good? New Zealanders Comply with Quality
Standards.” Organization Science, vol. 9, no. 6 (Nov.-Dec. 1998): 738-749.
87. Huvila, Isto. “The Unbearable Lightness of Participating? Revisiting the Discourses of
‘Participation’ in Archival Literature.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 71, no. 2 (2015): 358386.
88. Huvila, Isto. “The Politics of Boundary Objects: Hegemonic Interventions and the Making
of a Document.” JASIST, vol. 62, no. 12 (December 2011): 2528–2539.
89. Iivari, Netta. “Discursive Construction of ‘User Innovations’ in the Open Source Software
Development Context.” Information & Organization, vol. 20 (2010): 111–132.
90. Introna, Lucas D. “Maintaining the Reversibility of Foldings: Making the Ethics (Politics) of
Information Technology Visible.” Ethics & Information Technology, vol. 9, no. 1 (March 2007):
11-25.
91. Jacob, Elin K. “Classification and Categorization: A Difference that Makes a
Difference.” Library Trends, vol. 52, no. 3 (Winter 2004): 515-540.
92. Jacob, Elin K. “The Everyday World of Work: Two Approaches to the Investigation of
Classification in Context.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 57, no. 1 (2001): 76-99.
93. Jacob, Elin K., and Hanne Albrechtsen. “When Essence Becomes Function: PostStructuralist Implications for an Ecological Theory of Organizational Classification Systems.”
Information Research, (1998): 519-534. [Low-quality, non-OCR PDF scan with little
bibliographic information appears in Information Research search.]
94. Jacobs, Neil. “Information Technology and Interests in Scholarly Communication: A
Discourse Analysis.” JASIST, vol. 52, no. 13 (2001): 1122–1133.
95. Jashapara, Ashok. “Moving Beyond Tacit and Explicit Distinctions: A Realist Theory of
Organizational Knowledge.” Journal of Information Science, vol. 33, no. 6 (2007): 752–766.
96. Johannisson, Jenny, and Olof Sundin. “Putting Discourse to Work: Information Practices
and the Professional Project of Nurses.” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 2 (April 2007): 199-218.
97. Joyce, Steven. “The Creation of Bent Knowledge: How Lesbian, Gay, and Bisexual Youth
Negotiate and Reconfigure Homophobic and Heterosexist Discourse.” Information Research,
vol. 6, no. 2 (January 2001).
98

98. Kallas, John, and Apostolos Linardis. “A Question Documentation Model on the Needs of
Comparative Research.” Archival Science, vol. 10 (2010): 65-83.
99. Kallinikos, Jannis. “Computer-Based Technology and the Constitution of Work: A Study on
the Cognitive Foundations of Work.” Accounting, Management & Information Technology
(predecessor journal of Information & Organization), vol. 9 (1999): 261–291.
100. Kenix, Linda Jean. “In Search of Utopia: An Analysis of Non-Profit Web Pages.”
Information, Communication & Society, vol. 10, no. 1 (2007): 69-94.
101. Klein, Heinz K., and Rudy Hirschheim. “The Structure of the IS Discipline Reconsidered:
Implications and Reflections from a Community of Practice Perspective.” Information &
Organization, vol. 18, no. 4 (October 2008): 280–302.
102. Lilley, Simon. “Regarding Screens for Surveillance of the System.” Accounting,
Management & Information Technology, vol. 8 (1998): 63–105.
103. Lin, Chi-Shiou, and Yi-Fan Chen. “Examining Social Tagging Behaviour and the
Construction of an Online Folksonomy from the Perspectives of Cultural Capital and Social
Capital.” Journal of Information Science, (2012): 1-18.
104. Lincoln, Yvonna S. “Insights into Library Services and Users from Qualitative Research.”
Library & Information Science Review, vol. 24, no. 1 (2002): 3-16.
105. Lindh, Karolina, and Jutta Haider. “Development and the Documentation of Indigenous
Knowledge: Good Intentions in Bad Company?” Libri, vol. 60, no. 1 (April 2010): 1-14.
106. Lloyd, Annemaree. “Information Literacy: Different Contexts, Different Concepts,
Different Truths?” Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, vol. 37, no. 2 (June 2005):
82-88.
107. Lund, Niels Windfeld. “Document Theory.” ARIST, vol. 43, no. 1 (2009): 1–55.
108. MacNeil, Heather. “Contemporary Archival Diplomatics as a Method of Inquiry: Lessons
Learned from Two Research Projects.” Archival Science, vol. 4 (2004): 199-232.
109. Mak, Bonnie. “Archaeology of a Digitization.” JASIST, vol. 65, no. 8 (2014): 1515–1526.
110. Malone, Cheryl Knott, and Fernando Elichirigoity. “Information as Commodity and
Economic Sector: Its Emergence in the Discourse of Industrial Classification.” JASIST, vol. 54,
no. 6 (April 2003): 512-520.
111. Manninen, Ari. “The Problem and the Solution of Accounting in a Text.” Accounting,
Management & Information Technology, vol. 3, no. 1 (1993): 33-49.
99

112. Massanari, Adrienne L. “DIY Design: How Crowdsourcing Sites are Challenging
Traditional Graphic Design Practice.” First Monday, vol. 17, no. 10 (October 2012).
113. Mauws, Michael K., and Nelson Phillips. “Understanding Language Games.” Organization
Science, vol. 6, no. 3 (May-June 1995): 322-334.
114. Maynard, Steven. “Police/Archives.” Archivaria, vol. 68 (Fall 2009): 159-182.
115. McKenzie, Pamela J., and Rosamund K. Stooke. “Producing Storytime: A Collectivist
Analysis of Work in a Complex Communicative Space.” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 1
(January 2007): 3-20.
116. McSweeney, L. Brendan. “Accounting in Organizational Action: A Subsuming
Explanation or Situated Explanations?” Accounting, Management & Information Technology,
vol. 5, nos. 3-4 (1995): 245-282.
117. Millar, Laura. “Touchstones: Considering the Relationship between Memory and
Archives.” Archivaria, vol. 61 (Spring 2006): 105-126.
118. Miller, Thea. “Action, Transaction, and Vorgang: Gaining New Insights from an Old
Practice.” Archival Science, vol. 3 (2003): 413-430.
119. Milojević, Staša, Cassidy R. Sugimoto, Erjia Yan, and Ying Ding. “The Cognitive
Structure of Library and Information Science: Analysis of Article Title Words.” JASIST, vol. 62,
no. 10 (October 2011): 1933–1953.
120. Munro, Rolland. “Just When You Thought It Safe to Enter the Water: Accountability,
Language Games and Multiple Control Technologies.” Accounting, Management & Information
Technology, vol. 3, no. 4 (1993): 249-211.
121. Nakata, Martin. “Indigenous Knowledge and the Cultural Interface: Underlying Issues at
the Intersection of Knowledge and Information Systems.” IFLA Journal, vol. 28, nos. 5-6
(2002): 281-291.
122. Olsson, Michael. “Gently to Hear, Kindly to Judge: The Affective Information Practices of
Theatre Professionals and Journalists.” Information Research, vol. 18, no. 3 (September 2013).
123. Olsson, Michael R. “The Play's the Thing: Theater Professionals Make Sense of
Shakespeare.” Library & Information Science Review, vol. 32, no. 4 (October 2010): 272-280.
124. Olsson, Michael R. “All the World’s a Stage – the Information Practices and Sense-Making
of Theatre Professionals.” Libri, vol. 60 (September 2010): 241–252.
125. Olsson, Michael R. “Re-Thinking Our Concept of Users.” Australian Academic &
Research Libraries, vol. 40, no. 1 (2009): 22-35.
100

126. Olsson, Michael. “Power/Knowledge: The Discursive Construction of an Author.” Library
Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 2 (April 2007): 219-240.
127. Olsson, Michael. “Discourse: A New Theoretical Framework for Examining Information
Behavior in its Social Context.” Information Research, (1998): 136-149. [Low-quality, non-OCR
PDF scan with little bibliographic information appears in Information Research search.]
128. Page, Margaret, and Anne Scott. “Change, Agency and Women's Learning: New Practices
in Community Informatics.” Information, Communication & Society, vol. 4, no. 4 (2001): 528559.
129. Paling, Stephen. “Thresholds of Access: Paratextualily and Classification.” Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, vol. 43, no. 2 (Spring, 2002): 134-143.
130. Parrine, Mary Jane. “Modern Views of Marginality in Pre-Industrial Europe.” Collection
Management, vol. 15, nos. 3-4 (1992): 263-277.
131. Pawley, Christine. “Information Literacy: A Contradictory Coupling.” Library Quarterly,
vol. 73, no. 4 (Oct., 2003): 422-452.
132. Preston, Alistair M. “The ‘Problem’ In and Of Management Information Systems.”
Accounting, Management & Information Technology, vol. 1, no. 1 (1991): 43-69.
133. Qayyum, M. Asim. “Designing an Intercultural Training Framework for Information
Professionals.” Reference & User Services Quarterly, vol. 51, no. 3 (Spring 2012): GPR, no
134. Radford, Gary P. “Trapped in Our Own Discursive Formations: Toward an Archaeology of
Library and Information Science.” Library Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 1 (January 2003): 1-18.
135. Radford, Gary P. “Positivism, Foucault, and the Fantasia of the Library: Conceptions of
Knowledge and the Modern Library Experience.” Library Quarterly, vol. 62, no. 4 (October
1992): 408-424.
136. Radford, Gary P., and Marie L. Radford. “Structuralism, Post-structuralism, and the
Library: de Saussure and Foucault.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 61, no. 1 (2005): 60-78.
137. Radford, Gary P., and Marie L. Radford. “Libraries, Librarians, and the Discourse of Fear.”
Library Quarterly, vol. 71, no. 3 (July 2001): 299-329.
138. Radford, Gary P., Marie L. Radford, and Jessica Lingel. “Alternative Libraries as
Discursive Formations: Reclaiming the Voice of the Deaccessioned Book.” Journal of
Documentation, vol. 68, no. 2 (2012): 254-267.
139. Radford, Marie L. “Encountering Users, Encountering Images: Communication Theory and
the Library Context.” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, vol. 42, no. 1
(Winter, 2001): 27-41.
101

140. Radford, Marie L., and Gary P. Radford. “Power, Knowledge, and Fear: Feminism,
Foucault, and the Stereotype of the Female Librarian.” Library Quarterly, vol. 67, no. 3 (July
1997): 250-266.
141. Rajagopal, Indhu. “Does the Internet Shape a Disciplinary Society? The InformationKnowledge Paradox.” First Monday, vol. 19, no. 3 (March 2014).
142. Ramiller, Neil C. “The ‘Textual Attitude’ and New Technology.” Information &
Organization, vol. 11 (2001): 129–156.
143. Rayward, W. Boyd. “The Origins of Information Science and the International Institute of
Bibliography/International Federation for Information and Documentation (FID).” JASIST, vol.
48, no. 4 (1997): 289–300.
144. Rayward, W. Boyd. “The History and Historiography of Information Science: Some
Reflections.” Information Processing & Management, vol. 32, no. 1 (January 1996): 3-17.
145. Reece, Gwendolyn J. “Multiculturalism and Library Exhibits: Sites of Contested
Representation.” Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 31, no. 4 (July 2005): 366-372.
146. Refinetti, Roberto. “Information Processing as a Central Issue in Philosophy of Science.”
Information Processing & Management, vol. 25, no. 5 (1989): 583-584.
147. Rymarczuk, Robin, and Maarten Derksen. “Different Spaces—Exploring Facebook as
Hetertopia.” First Monday, vol. 19, no. 6 (June 2014).
148. San Segundo, Rosa. “A New Concept of Knowledge.” Online Information Review, vol. 26,
no. 4 (2002): 239 – 245.
149. Sanford, Clive, and Jeremy Rose. “Characterizing eParticipation.” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 27 (2007): 406–421.
150. Savolainen, Reijo. “Information Behavior and Information Practice: Reviewing the
‘Umbrella Concepts’ of Information‐Seeking Studies.” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 2 (April
2007): 109-132.
151. Scholz, Trebor. “Market Ideology and the Myths of Web 2.0.” First Monday, vol. 13, no. 3
(March 2008).
152. Seadle, Michael. “Sound, Image, Action.” Journal of Library Administration, vol. 30, no.
1-2 (2000): 139-155.
153. Sinclair, Kathy. “Victoria: The Keep-It-All State? The Impact on Archives of the Crimes
(Document Destruction) Act 2006 and the Evidence (Document Unavailability) Act 2006.”
Archivaria, vol. 69 (Spring 2010): 117-142.
102

154. Skibell, Reid. “The Myth of the Computer Hacker.” Information, Communication &
Society, vol. 5, no. 3 (2002): 336-356.
155. Sköld, Olle. “Documenting Virtual World Cultures.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 71,
no. 2 (2015): 294-316.
156. Sotto, Richard. “The Virtual Organisation.” Accounting, Management & Information
Technology, vol. 7, no. 1 (1997): 37-51.
157. Spraggins, Johnnie D. Review of Darren Tofts, Annemarie Jonson, and Alessio Cavallaro
(Eds.), Prefiguring Cyberculture: An Intellectual History (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003).
Social Science Computer Review, vol. 22, no. 4 (Winter 2004): 533-534.
158. Stade, Philip. “‘This Video Is Not Available in Germany’: Online Discourses on the
German Collecting Society GEMA and YouTube.” First Monday, vol. 19, no. 10 (October
2014).
159. Stoler, Ann Laura. “Colonial Archives and the Arts of Governance.” Archival Science, vol.
2 (2002): 87-109.
160. Sturges, Paul. Humanities Information Research: Proceedings of a Seminar: Sheffield,
1980.” Social Science Information Studies, vol. 2 (1982): 39-45.
161. Sukovic, Suzana, David Litting, and Ashley England. “Playing with the Future: Library
Engagement and Change.” Australian Academic & Research Libraries, vol. 42, no. 2 (2011): 7087.
162. Talja, Sanna. “Analyzing Qualitative Interview Data: The Discourse Analytic Method.”
Library & Information Science Review, vol. 21, no. 4 (November 1999): 459-477.
163. Talja, Sanna. “Constituting ‘Information’ and ‘User’ as Research Objects: A Theory of
Knowledge Formations as an Alternative to the Information Man-Theory.” Information
Research, (1996). [Low-quality, non-OCR PDF scan with little bibliographic information
appears in Information Research search.]
164. Talja, Sanna, and Pamela J. McKenzie. “Editors’ Introduction: Special Issue on
Discursive Approaches to Information Seeking in Context.” Library Quarterly, vol. 77, no. 2
(April 2007): 97-108.
165. Talja, Sanna, Kimmo Tuominen, and Reijo Savolainen. “‘Isms’ in Information Science:
Constructivism, Collectivism and Constructionism.” Journal of Documentation, vol. 61, no. 1
(2005): 79-101.

103

166. Tennis, Joseph T. and Stuart A. Sutton. “Extending the Simple Knowledge Organization
System for Concept Management in Vocabulary Development Applications.” JASIST, vol. 59,
no. 1 (January 2008): 25–37.
167. Thelwall, Mike. “Interpreting Social Science Link Analysis Research: A Theoretical
Framework.” JASIST, vol. 57, no. 1 (January 2006): 60–68.
168. Tredinnick, Luke. “Post-Structuralism, Hypertext, and the World Wide Web.” Aslib
Proceedings, vol. 59, no. 2 (2007): 169-186.
169. Truex, Duane, Richard Baskerville, and Julie Travis. “Amethodical Systems Development:
The Deferred Meaning of Systems Development Methods.” Accounting, Management &
Information Technology, vol. 10 (2000): 53–79.
170. Tuominen, Kimmo, Sanna Talja, and Savolainen, Reijo. “Multiperspective Digital
Libraries: The Implications of Constructionism for the Development of Digital Libraries.”
JASIST, vol. 54, no. 6 (April 2003): 561–569.
171. Tuominen, Kimmo, and Reijo Savolainen. “A Social Constructionist Approach to the
Study of Information Use as Discursive Action.” Information Research, (1996). [Low-quality,
non-OCR PDF scan with little bibliographic information appears in Information Research
search.]
172. Turner, Deborah, and Warren Allen. “Investigating Oral Information.” Information
Research, vol. 15, no. 3 (September 2013).
173. Unsworth, Kristene. “Ethical Concerns of Information Policy and Organization in National
Security.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly, vol. 47, no. 7 (2009): 642-656.
174. Upward, Frank, and Sue McKemmish. “Teaching Recordkeeping and Archiving
Continuum Style.” Archival Science, vol. 6 (2006): 219-230.
175. Vuorinen, Jukka. “Ethical Codes in the Digital World: Comparisons of the Proprietary, the
Open/Free and the Cracker System.” Ethics & Information Technology, vol. 9, no. 1 (2007): 2738.
176. Wake, Paul. “Writing from the Archive: Henry Garnet’s Powder-Plot Letters and Archival
Communication.” Archival Science, vol. 8 (2008): 69-84.
177. Wallmannsberger, Josef. “Poridge: Postmodern Rhizomatics in Digitally Generated
Environments—Do We Need a Metatheory for W3?” Electronic Library, vol. 12, no. 6
(December 1994): 345-351.
178. Walton, Geoff, and Jamie Cleland. “Information Literacy in Higher Education Empowerment or Reproduction? A Discourse Analysis Approach.” Information Research, vol.
104

19, no. 4 (December 2014).
179. Wareham, Evelyn. “From Explorers to Evangelists: Archivists, Recordkeeping, and
Remembering in the Pacific Islands.” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002): 187-207.
180. Wersig, Gernot. “Information Science: The Study of Postmodern Knowledge Usage.”
Information Processing & Management, vol. 29, no. 2 (March-April 1993): 229-239.
181. White, Michele. “Regulating Research: The Problem of Theorizing Community on
LambdaMOO.” Ethics & Information Technology, vol. 4, no. 1 (2002): 55-70.
182. Wiegand, Wayne A. “Out of Sight out of Mind: Why Don't We Have Any Schools of
Library and Reading Studies?” Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, vol.
38, no. 4 (Fall, 1997): 314-326.
183. Wiegand, Wayne A. “Introduction: The Library Bill of Rights.” Library Trends, vol. 45,
no. 1 (Summer 1996): 1-6.
184. Willcocks, Leslie P. “Michel Foucault in the Social Study of ICTs—Critique and
Reappraisal.” Social Science Computer Review, vol. 24, no. 3 (Fall 2006): 274-295.
185. Withers, Charles W. J., and Andrew Grout. “Authority in Space?: Creating a Digital Webbased Map Archive.” Archivaria, vol. 61 (Spring 2006): 27-46.
186. Zeggio Martinez, J. “Teacher Education and Miseducation: An Experience from a
Community of English Teacher Educators in Brazil.” IEEE Proceedings (2013 IEEE 63rd
Annual Conference International Council for Educational Media (ICEM)): 1-7.
187. Zhang, Guo, and Elin K. Jacob. “Understanding Boundaries: Physical, Epistemological and
Virtual Dimensions.” Information Research, vol. 18, no. 3 (September, 2013).
188. Zwick, Detlev, and Nikhilesh Dholakia. “Consumer Subjectivity in the Age of Internet:
The Radical Concept of Marketing Control through Customer Relationship Management.”
Information & Organization, vol. 14 (2004): 211–236.

105

Appendix 3: Journals with Articles Citing Archaeology, Order, Both, or the Discourse on
Language, with Depth of Use, Plus Citations of Other Foucault Works
Journals with Foucault Works Cited

American Archivist
Archival Science
Archivaria
ARIST
Aslib Proceedings
Australian Academic & Research Lib’s
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly
Collection Management
College & Research Libraries
D-Lib Magazine
Electronic Library
Ethics & Information Technology
First Monday
Government Information Quarterly
IEEE Transactions
IFLA Journal
Information & Organization (AM&IT)
Information Communication & Society
Information Processing & Mgmt.
Information Research
Information Technology and People
International Journal of Info. Mgmt.
JASIST
Journal of Academic Librarianship
Journal of Documentation
Journal of Education for Librarianship
Journal of Health Communication
Journal of Information Science
Journal of Information Technology
Journal of Librarianship & Info. Sci.
Journal of Library Administration
Journal of the Society of Archivists
Library & Information Sci. Research
Library Quarterly
Library Trends
Libri
New Library World
Online Information Review
Organization Science
Reference and User Services Quarterly
Social Science Computer Review
Totals:

(Other)

Arch.

3
7
10
4
1
2
3

1
13
14
4

1

3
5
1

27
36
1
10
5
4
14

6
5
2
7

2
12
7

Both

D. on L.

Brief Use

1
13
11
2

3

2
2
2
1
1
1

25
28
2
3

6
2
2
4
1
1
3

Order

1

1
2
3
1

2
9
2
6
2
4

5
1
3
3
1

1
1

1

3

1

1
1

3
1

1

1

3
1
1

15
5
246

2
123

3
3
2
2

1

1
1
2

2
6
1

1
1

5
8
6
3
1
1
2

2
3
1
1
1
1
5
7
1
1
1
11
5
5
9
1
2
12
2
4
4
4
3

Substantial Use

2

3
2
37

2
1
5
1

2
1
0
25

1

0
3

1
1
1
5
8
7
2
1
6
1
4
150

1
1
6
2
1
1
1
0
38

[For journals that cite only “Other” Foucault works but not works relevant to this study, see Appendix 3a
on the next page.]

106

Appendix 3a: Journals with Known Citations Only to “Other” Foucault
Other
Foucault

Total
References

Unavailable Online

Accountability in Research

1

2

0

Archives & Manuscripts

3

6

0

Education & Information
Technologies

1

4

2

Information Science Research

4

7

0

International Info. & Library Review

1

1

0

Serials Review

3

6

0

Totals:

13

26

2

Journals with "Foucault" Results

107

Appendix 4: Top Journals for Use of “Other” Foucault
Journals with “Foucault” Search Results
Information Communication & Society
First Monday
Information & Organization
Ethics & Information Technology
Organization Science
JASIST
Library Quarterly
Archivaria
Information Research
Archival Science
Library Trends
Journal of Documentation
Social Science Computer Review
Information Technology & People
ARIST
Journal of Information Science
International Journal of Information Mgmt.
Information Science Research
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly
IEEE Transactions
American Archivist
Journal of Library Administration
Serials Review
Archives & Manuscripts
Library & Information Science Research
Journal of Education for Librarianship
Journal of Health Communication
Australian Academic & Research Libraries
Government Information Quarterly

Other
36
28
27
25
15
14
12
10
10
7
7
6
5
5
4
4
4
4
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
2
2
2
2

Arch/Order/Both
6
8
12
5
7
14
14
14
11
16
9
10
4
1
4
3
2
3
1
1
1

6
5
4
2
1

Total References
67
56
54
43
37
65
76
52
44
41
52
33
32
20
14
19
9
7
9
58
9
4
6
6
12
10
9
8
10

[All journals after these 29 have only one use of “Other” Foucault or less (only eight journals show just
one use; 21 show none). Cumulative uses of Arch/Order/Both/D.onL. and total references to Foucault are
included for comparison. Again, it is important to remember that articles listed as citing Archaeology or
Order frequently also cite other Foucault works; articles listed as citing “Other” only do not cite
Archaeology or Order.]

108

Appendix 5: Top Journals for Use of Archaeology, Order, or Both
Journals with “Foucault” Results
Arch/Order/Both
Archival Science
16
JASIST
14
Library Quarterly
14
Archivaria
14
Information & Organization
12
Information Research
11
Journal of Documentation
10
Library Trends
9
First Monday
8
Organization Science
7
Information Communication & Society
6
Library & Information Science Research
6
Ethics & Information Technology
5
Journal of Education for Librarianship
5
Information Processing & Management
5
Social Science Computer Review
4
ARIST
4
Journal of Health Communication
4
Journal of Information Science
3
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly
3
Libri
3
International Journal of Information Mgmt.
2
Australian Academic & Research Libraries
2
Aslib Proceedings
2
Journal of the Society of Archivists
2
Journal of Academic Librarianship
2

Other
7
14
12
10
27
10
6
7
28
15
36
2
25
2
1
5
4
2
4
3
4
2
1

Total References
41
65
76
52
54
44
33
52
56
37
67
12
43
10
9
32
14
9
19
9
8
9
8
10
14
14

[All journals after these 26 have only one use of Arch/Order/Both/D.onL. or less (15 additional journals
show one use; 27 show none). Uses of “Other” Foucault and total references to Foucault are included for
comparison. Again, it is important to remember that articles listed as citing Archaeology or Order
frequently also cite other Foucault works; articles listed as citing only “Other,” however, do not cite
Archaeology or Order.]

109

Appendix 6: Very Substantial Uses of Archaeology, Order, or Both

Author(s) of Articles

Journal

Work(s) Used

Year

Brooke (2002)

Journal of Information Technology

Arch

2002

Day, R. (2005)

ARIST

Arch

2005

Frohmann (2001)

Journal of Education for Librarianship

Both

2001

Hannabuss (1996)

Aslib Proceedings

Both

1996

Humphries (1998)

Organization Science

Both

1998

Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998)

Information Research

Order

1998

Malone & Elichirigoity (2003)

JASIST

Arch

2003

Radford & Radford (1997)

Library Quarterly

Arch & DoL

1997

Radford & Radford (2001)

Library Quarterly

Both & DoL

2001

Radford & Radford (2005)

Journal of Documentation

Arch

2005

Radford et al. (2012)

Journal of Documentation

Both

2012

Radford, G. (1992)

Library Quarterly

Both & DoL

1992

Radford, G. (2003)

Library Quarterly

Both

2003

Talja (1999)

Library & Information Science Research

Arch

1999

Tredinnick (2007)

Aslib Proceedings

Both

2007

110

Appendix 7: Substantial Uses of Archaeology, Order, or Both

Author(s) of Articles

Journal

Work(s) Used

Year

Andersen & Skouvig (2006)

Library Quarterly

Arch & DoL

2006

Brothman (2010)

Archival Science

Arch

2010

Brown (1991)

Archivaria

Arch

1991

Brown (1995)

Archivaria

Arch

1995

Budd & Raber (1998)

Library Quarterly

DoL only

1998

Budd (2006)

Library Trends

Both

2006

Clark (1998)

Information Communication & Society

Order

1998

Cook (2001)

Archival Science

Both

2001

Frohmann (2008)

JASIST

DoL only

2008

Gilliland (2011)
Haider & Bawden (2006)

Journal of the Society of Archivists
New Library World

Both
Arch & DoL

2011
2006

Haider & Bawden (2007)

Journal of Documentation

Arch & DoL

2007

Haikola & Jonsson (2007)

Libri

Arch & DoL

2007

Head (2007)

Archival Science

Arch

2007

Herb (2010)

First Monday

Arch

2010

Hubbard (1995)

Library Trends

Arch

1995

Huvila (2015)

Journal of Documentation

Arch

2015

Introna (2007)
Jacob (2001)

Ethics & Information Technology
Journal of Documentation

Order
Both

2007
2001

Lund (2009)

ARIST

Arch

2009

Maynard (2010)

Archivaria

Arch

2010

Sotto (1997)
Talja et al. (2005)

Information & Organization
Journal of Documentation

Order
Arch

1997
2005

Zhang & Jacob (2013)

Information Research

Order

2013

111

Appendix 8: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Work/Depth of Use
Author(s) of Articles
Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998)
Sotto (1997)
Clark (1998)
Introna (2007)
Zhang & Jacob (2013)
Lilley (1998)
Jacob (2004)
Berg et al. (2005)
Frické (2013)
Budd & Raber (1998)
Frohmann (2008)
Radford, G. (1992)
Radford & Radford (2001)
Hannabuss (1996)
Humphries (1998)
Frohmann (2001)
Radford, G. (2003)
Tredinnick (2007)
Radford et al. (2012)
Cook (2001)
Jacob (2001)
Budd (2006)
Gilliland (2011)
Munro (1993)
Johannisson & Sundin (2007)
Girdwood (2009)
Radford & Radford (1997)
Talja (1999)
Brooke (2002)
Malone & Elichirigoity (2003)
Day, R. (2005)
Radford & Radford (2005)
Andersen & Skouvig (2006)
Haider & Bawden (2006)
Haider & Bawden (2007)
Haikola & Jonsson (2007)
Brown (1991)

Work(s)
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
DoL only
DoL only
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch

Depth of Use
Very Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial

112

Brown (1995)
Hubbard (1995)
Talja et al. (2005)
Head (2007)
Lund (2009)
Brothman (2010)
Herb (2010)
Maynard (2010)
Huvila (2015)
Carusi & De Grandis (2012)
Budd (1997)
Buschman (2007)
Hill & Harrington (2014)
Alvarado (1996)
Budd & Raber (1996)
Talja (1996)
Andersen (1999)
Skibell (2002)
Stoler (2002)
Given & Olson (2003)
Zwick & Dholakia (2004)
Clarke (2005)
Denegri-Knott & Taylor (2005)
Reece (2005)
Brothman (2006)
Carter (2006)
Millar (2006)
Withers & Grout (2006)
McKenzie & Stooke (2007)
Savolainen (2007)
Klein & Hirschheim (2008)
Darms (2009)
Iivari (2010)
Sinclair (2010)
Turner & Allen (2010)
Walton & Cleland (2014)
Sköld (2015)

Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch

Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant

113

Appendix 9: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Depth of Use/Year
Author(s) of Articles
Radford, G. (1992)
Hannabuss (1996)
Radford & Radford (1997)
Humphries (1998)
Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998)
Talja (1999)
Frohmann (2001)
Radford & Radford (2001)
Brooke (2002)
Malone & Elichirigoity (2003)
Radford, G. (2003)
Day, R. (2005)
Radford & Radford (2005)
Tredinnick (2007)
Radford et al. (2012)
Brown (1991)
Brown (1995)
Hubbard (1995)
Sotto (1997)
Budd & Raber (1998)
Clark (1998)
Cook (2001)
Jacob (2001)
Talja et al. (2005)
Andersen & Skouvig (2006)
Budd (2006)
Haider & Bawden (2006)
Haider & Bawden (2007)
Haikola & Jonsson (2007)
Head (2007)
Introna (2007)
Frohmann (2008)
Lund (2009)
Brothman (2010)
Herb (2010)
Maynard (2010)
Gilliland (2011)

Depth of Use
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial

Year
1992
1996
1997
1998
1998
1999
2001
2001
2002
2003
2003
2005
2005
2007
2012
1991
1995
1995
1997
1998
1998
2001
2001
2005
2006
2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2009
2010
2010
2010
2011

114

Work(s)
Both & DoL
Both
Arch & DoL
Both
Order
Arch
Both
Both & DoL
Arch
Arch
Both
Arch
Arch
Both
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Order
DoL only
Order
Both
Both
Arch
Arch & DoL
Both
Arch & DoL
Arch & DoL
Arch & DoL
Arch
Order
DoL only
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Both

Zhang & Jacob (2013)
Huvila (2015)
Munro (1993)
Alvarado (1996)
Budd & Raber (1996)
Talja (1996)
Budd (1997)
Lilley (1998)
Andersen (1999)
Skibell (2002)
Stoler (2002)
Given & Olson (2003)
Jacob (2004)
Zwick & Dholakia (2004)
Berg et al. (2005)
Clarke (2005)
Denegri-Knott & Taylor (2005)
Reece (2005)
Brothman (2006)
Carter (2006)
Millar (2006)
Withers & Grout (2006)
Buschman (2007)
Johannisson & Sundin (2007)
McKenzie & Stooke (2007)
Savolainen (2007)
Klein & Hirschheim (2008)
Darms (2009)
Girdwood (2009)
Iivari (2010)
Sinclair (2010)
Turner & Allen (2010)
Carusi & De Grandis (2012)
Frické (2013)
Hill & Harrington (2014)
Walton & Cleland (2014)
Sköld (2015)

Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant

2013
2015
1993
1996
1996
1996
1997
1998
1999
2002
2002
2003
2004
2004
2005
2005
2005
2005
2006
2006
2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010
2012
2013
2014
2014
2015

115

Order
Arch
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch & DoL
Order
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Order
Arch
Order
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch & DoL
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch-2dry
Order
Arch & DoL
Arch
Arch

Appendix 10: Very Substantial, Substantial, and Significant Uses, by Work/Year
Author(s) of Articles
Sotto (1997)
Lilley (1998)
Jacob & Albrechtsen (1998)
Clark (1998)
Jacob (2004)
Berg et al. (2005)
Introna (2007)
Zhang & Jacob (2013)
Frické (2013)
Budd & Raber (1998)
Frohmann (2008)
Radford, G. (1992)
Munro (1993)
Hannabuss (1996)
Humphries (1998)
Radford & Radford (2001)
Jacob (2001)
Frohmann (2001)
Cook (2001)
Radford, G. (2003)
Budd (2006)
Tredinnick (2007)
Johannisson & Sundin (2007)
Girdwood (2009)
Gilliland (2011)
Radford et al. (2012)
Brown (1991)
Hubbard (1995)
Brown (1995)
Talja (1996)
Budd & Raber (1996)
Alvarado (1996)
Radford & Radford (1997)
Budd (1997)
Talja (1999)
Andersen (1999)
Stoler (2002)

Work(s)
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
Order
DoL only
DoL only
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Both
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch

Year
1997
1998
1998
1998
2004
2005
2007
2013
2013
1998
2008
1992
1993
1996
1998
2001
2001
2001
2001
2003
2006
2007
2007
2009
2011
2012
1991
1995
1995
1996
1996
1996
1997
1997
1999
1999
2002

116

Depth of Use
Substantial
Significant
Very Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Substantial
Substantial
Very Substantial
Significant
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Very Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Very Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Very Substantial
Significant
Very Substantial
Significant
Significant

Skibell (2002)
Brooke (2002)
Malone & Elichirigoity (2003)
Given & Olson (2003)
Zwick & Dholakia (2004)
Talja et al. (2005)
Reece (2005)
Radford & Radford (2005)
Denegri-Knott & Taylor (2005)
Day, R. (2005)
Clarke (2005)
Withers & Grout (2006)
Millar (2006)
Haider & Bawden (2006)
Carter (2006)
Brothman (2006)
Andersen & Skouvig (2006)
Savolainen (2007)
McKenzie & Stooke (2007)
Head (2007)
Haikola & Jonsson (2007)
Haider & Bawden (2007)
Buschman (2007)
Klein & Hirschheim (2008)
Lund (2009)
Darms (2009)
Turner & Allen (2010)
Sinclair (2010)
Maynard (2010)
Iivari (2010)
Herb (2010)
Brothman (2010)
Carusi & De Grandis (2012)
Walton & Cleland (2014)
Hill & Harrington (2014)
Sköld (2015)
Huvila (2015)

Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch
Arch

2002
2002
2003
2003
2004
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2005
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2006
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2007
2008
2009
2009
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2010
2012
2014
2014
2015
2015

117

Significant
Very Substantial
Very Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Significant
Very Substantial
Significant
Very Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Substantial
Significant
Substantial
Substantial
Significant
Significant
Significant
Significant
Substantial

Supplemental Bibliography
[Note to readers: the principal bibliography for this study already appears in the quite lengthy Appendix
2: Bibliography of 188 Articles Citing Archaeology or Order in This Study’s Database, which appears at
pp. 92-105 above and will not be duplicated here. Because those 188 articles are the focus of this study,
constitute its primary data sources, and are closely linked to the various other appendices, it was seen as
appropriate and necessary to set them apart. This bibliography, however, provides information on various
other sources used or mentioned in this thesis.]

Anderson, Karen. “Proposed Journal Ranking List for Archives and Records Management”
(2009). Available at aeri2009.files.wordpress.com/2009/05/archival-journal-ranking-aeri.doc or
at http://ebook-free-downloads.com/ebook-doc-free-doc-download-journal-page-5.htm.
Aylesworth, Gary. “Postmodernism.” In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online, available
at http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/postmodernism/.
Brothman, Brien. “Declining Derrida: Integrity, Tensegrity, and the Preservation of Archives
from Deconstruction.” Archivaria, vol. 48 (Fall 1999): 64-88.
Brothman, Brien. “The Society of American Archivists at Seventy-Five: Contexts of Continuity
and Crisis, A Personal Reflection.” American Archivist, vol. 74 (Fall/Winter 2011): 387–427.
Burke, Colin. “History of Information Science,” ARIST, vol. 41 (2007): 3-53.
Buschman, John, and Richard A. Brosio. “A Critical Primer on Postmodernism: Lessons from
Educational Scholarship for Librarianship,” Journal of Academic Librarianship, vol. 32, no. 4
(2006): 408-418, at 408.
Cook, Terry. “Electronic Records, Paper Minds: The Revolution in Information Management
and Archives in the Post-Custodial and Post-Modernist Era.” Archives & Manuscripts, vol. 22,
no. 2 (November 1994): 300-328.
Cook, Terry. “Fashionable Nonsense or Professional Rebirth: Postmodernism and the Practice of
Archives.” Archivaria, vol. 51 (2001): 14-35.
Cook, Terry. “Macroappraisal in Theory and Practice: Origins, Characteristics, and
Implementation in Canada, 1950–2000.” Archival Science, vol. 5 (2005): 101-161.
Cronin, Blaise. “The Sociological Turn in Information Science.” Journal of Information Science,
vol. 34, no. 4 (August 2008): 465-475.
Cronin, Blaise, and Lokman I. Meho. “Receiving the French: A Bibliometric Snapshot of the
Impact of ‘French Theory’ on Information Science.” Journal of Information Science, vol. 35
(2009): 398-413.
118

Cusset, Francois. French Theory: How Foucault, Derrida, Deleuze & Co. Transformed the
Intellectual Life of the United States (J. Fort, translator). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press, 2008.
Day, Ronald E. The Modern Invention of Information: Discourse, History, and Power.
Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press, 2001.
Derrida, Jacques. Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression (Eric Prenowitz, transl.). Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1996. [English language translation of an original version in
French, Paris: Éditions Galilée, 1995.]
Dick, Archie L. “Epistemological Positions and Library and Information Science.” Library
Quarterly, vol. 69, no. 3 (July 1999): 305-323.
Dick, Archie L. “Library and Information Science as a Social Science: Neutral and Normative
Conceptions.” Library Quarterly, vol. 65, no. 2 (April 1995): 216-235.
Dreyfus, Hubert L., and Paul Rabinow. Michel Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and
Hermeneutics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1983.
Duff, Wendy M., and Verne Harris, “Stories and Names: Archival Description as Narrating
Records and Constructing Meanings.” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002): 263-285.
Edge, David. “Why I Am Not a Co-Citationist.” Essays of an Information Scientist, vol. 3 (19771978): 240-246. Available at http://www.garfield.library.upenn.edu/essays/v3p240y1977-78.pdf.
Foucault, Michel. The Archaeology of Knowledge. New York: Pantheon Books, 1972.
Foucault, Michel. The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception. New York:
Vintage, 1975.
Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. New York: Vintage, 1979.
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality, vol. 1: An Introduction. New York: Vintage, 1980.
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality, vol. 2: The Use of Pleasure. New York: Vintage,
1985.
Foucault, Michel. The History of Sexuality, vol. 3: The Care of the Self. New York: Vintage,
1986.
Foucault, Michel. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. New
York: Vintage, 1988.
Foucault, Michel. The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences. New York:
Vintage, 1970.
119

Foucault, Michel. Power/Knowledge: Selected Interviews and Other Writings, 1972-1977 (Colin
Gordon, ed.). Brighton, UK: Harvester Press, 1980.
Foucault, Michel. “Prisons et asiles dans le mécanisme du pouvoir” (Clare O'Farrell, transl.). In
Dits et Ecrits, vol. 11. Paris: Gallimard, 1974.
Frohmann, Bernd. “Discourse Analysis as a Research Method in Library and Information
Science.” Library & Information Science Research, vol. 16 (1994): 119-138.
Frohmann, Bernd. “Documentary Ethics, Ontology, and Politics.” Archival Science, vol. 8
(2008): 165-180
Frohmann, Bernd. “Knowledge and Power in Library and Information Science—Toward a
Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint.” In Vakkari & Cronin, eds., Proceedings of the
International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science: Historical,
Empirical and Theoretical Perspectives, Tampere, Finland, August 16, 28, 1991 (Tampere,
1992), at pp. 135-148.
Frohmann, Bernd. “The Power of Images: A Discourse Analysis of the Cognitive Viewpoint.”
Journal of Documentation, vol. 48, no. 4 (1992): 365-386.
Furner, Jonathan. “Philosophy and Information Studies.” ARIST, vol. 44 (2010): 161-200.
Gutting, Gary. “Michel Foucault.” In Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Online, available at
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/foucault/.
Harris, Verne. “Against the Grain: Psychologies and Politics of Secrecy.” Archival Science, vol.
9 (2009): 133-142.
Harris, Verne. “Antonyms of Our Remembering.” Archival Science, vol. 14 (2014): 215-229.
Harris, Verne. “The Archival Sliver: Power, Memory, and Archives in South Africa.” Archival
Science, vol. 2 (2002): 63-86.
Lopez, Jose, and Garry Potter, eds. After Postmodernism: An Introduction to Critical Realism.
New York: Athlone, 2001.
MacRoberts, M.H., and B.R. MacRoberts. “Problems of Citation Analysis: A Critical Review.”
JASIST, vol. 40, no. 5 (1989): 342-349.
MacRoberts, M.H., and B.R. MacRoberts. “Problems of Citation Analysis.” Scientometrics, vol.
36, no. 3 (1996): 435-444.
MacRoberts, M.H., and B.R. MacRoberts. “Problems of Citation Analysis: A Study of Uncited
and Seldom-Cited Influences.” JASIST, vol. 61, no. 1 (2010): 1-13.
120

McCain, Katherine W. “Eponymy and Obliteration by Incorporation: The Case of the ‘Nash
Equilibrium.” JASIST, vo. 62, no. 7 (2011): 1412-1424.
McKechnie, Lynne, et al. “Dancing Around the Edges: The Use of Postmodern Approaches in
Information Behaviour Research as Evident in the Published Proceedings of the Biennial ISIC
Conferences, 1996-2010.” Information Research, vol. 17, no. 4 (December 2012).
“Most Cited Authors of Books in the Humanities, 2007.” Times Higher Education online, March
26, 2009, available at http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/405956.article.
Nixon, Judith M. “Core Journals in Library and Information Science: Developing a Methodology
for Ranking LIS Journals.” College & Research Libraries, vol. 75, no. 1 (January 2014): 66-90.
Poster, Mark. Foucault, Marxism, and History: Mode of Production Versus Mode of
Information. Cambridge and New York: Polity Press, 1984.
Rabinow, Paul, ed. The Foucault Reader. New York: Pantheon Books, 1984.
Radford, Gary P. “Flaubert, Foucault, and the Bibliotheque Fantastique: Toward a Postmodern
Epistemology for Library Science.” Library Trends, vol. 46, no. 4 (Spring 1998): 616-634.
Radford, Marie L., and Gary P. Radford. “Librarians and Party Girls: Cultural Studies and the
Meaning of the Librarian.” Library Quarterly, vol. 73, no. 1 (January 2003): 54-69.
Schwartz, Joan M., and Terry Cook. “Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of Modern
Memory.” Archival Science, vol. 2 (2002):1-19.
SCImago Journal and Country Rank, Top 100 LIS Journals, 2013. Available at
http://www.scimagojr.com/journalrank.php?category=3309.
Viires, Piret. “End of Irony? Estonian Literature after Postmodernism.” Interlitteraria, vol. 16,
no. 2 (2011): 451-463.
Wikipedia contributors. “Michel Foucault.” In Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault.
Wilson, Patrick. “Bibliographic Instruction and Cognitive Authority.” Library Trends, vol. 39,
no. 3 (1991): 259-270.

121

