PREDICTORS OF ELECTRONIC PERSONAL HEALTH RECORD
ADOPTION AMONG HEALTH CARE CONSUMERS:
A CASE FOR “MEANINGFUL USE” ENGAGEMENT
by
Lisa Marie Daulby
MEREDITH WEISS, PhD, Faculty Mentor and Chair
CLIFFORD BUTLER, PhD, Committee Member
GLENN BOTTOMLY, PhD, Committee Member
Sue Talley, EdD, Dean, School of Business and Technology

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy

Capella University
June 2015

UMI Number: 3712236

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3712236
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Lisa Marie Daulby, 2015

Abstract
On February 17, 2009, the United States (U.S.) Government enacted the Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, which created
funding opportunities for the implementation of electronic health record technologies. In
order to participate in the financial incentive programs, eligible professionals, hospitals,
and critical access hospitals must demonstrate meaningful use of certified electronic
health record technologies. According to meaningful use mandates, eligible health care
providers and hospitals must provide functionality to allow health care consumers
(HCCs) to view online, download, and transmit their own health information that is
stored on physician and or hospital electronic record systems. Furthermore, health care
providers and hospitals can also make available optional system functionality for health
care consumers (HCCs) to submit electronically patient-generated data and request
amendments to their health records. The use of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs) can assist eligible provider and hospitals meet meaningful use mandates,
however, very little is known about the HCCs’ perceptions and attitudes towards specific
ePHR technologies, and their intentions to adopt and continually use them for personal
individual purposes and or to share with health care providers or other designated
recipients. This research endeavored to address this gap in the literature. The perceived
attributes of diffusion of innovations theory (relative advantage, complexity (simplicity),
trialability, observability, compatibility) as described by Rogers (2003) in Diffusion of
innovations establish potential predictors for ePHR adoption and use among HCCs
(Rogers, 2003). This research utilized a non-experimental, quantitative research design.
The researcher conducted a web-based, self-administered in-depth survey against a

randomly selected population of English speaking/reading adults residing in the United
States (U.S). The survey data was analyzed using descriptive univariate, bivariate and
inferential hypotheses testing statistics. Results of the research indicate that
approximately half of the sample reported that they currently use or intend to use ePHRs,
while the remaining half do not currently use or intend to adopt ePHRs. Overall,
respondents stated they were more likely to view ePHRs than to transmit, submit, or
amend them. Univariate comparisons indicated that relative advantage, complexity
(simplicity), observability, and compatibility relate significantly to adoption and use. The
proposed regulations around meaningful use require further study to ensure that
meaningful use is meaningful to both HCCs and providers.

Dedication
This work is dedicated to my two Liverpool granddads:
Thomas Henry Daulby
Christopher Reeves
What is a granddaughter? Look into Lisa’s eyes, to those like my own self who have not
the liveliness and truth in one knowing. Such as the child to the most ordinary sense, but
a gift endowed by love and dreams for Lisa’s maturity. From what I know, Lisa is a name
of joy - for all and never to lose to a moments of despair for just ask her of life as she has
now to know it - and when sad to see her face your dream yes, Lisa shows it ~ Joseph
Arrigo

iii

Acknowledgments
It would have been enormously difficult to embark on this doctoral journey
without the assistance and support of my friends, colleagues, instructors, students, and
family. I would like to take this opportunity to offer my heartfelt thanks to you all. I
would first like to acknowledge the men to whom this work is dedicated, my late
granddads Thomas Henry Daulby and Christopher Reeves. Although they were not with
me while I completed this journey, there contributions are reflected in my motivation and
inspiration – both taught me the value of hard work, the importance of family history, and
the significance of love, faith, and generosity - the dedication page is SWALK. I would
also like to extend my gratitude to my BFF of over 39 years Maria DeGirolamo to whom
I owe much love and thanks. You enthusiastically listen to my ideas, endlessly support
my ventures, and generously share your wine. It is my privilege to share in this rich
friendship with you.
I would also like to extend my appreciation to my PhD faculty committee
members Dr. Meredith Weiss, Dr. Clifford Butler, and Dr. Glenn Bottomly - this work
developed in an atmosphere of abundant support, wise academic counsel, and thoughtful
scholarly criticism. A special thank-you to my faculty mentor and chair, Dr. Meredith
Weiss for her encouragement, patience, and intellectual inspirations.
I have reserved my final and most affectionate expression of gratitude for my
Mum and Dad -Nora and Tommy Daulby. I owe more to these two people than can easily
be acknowledged and expressed in words. Memorizing timetables and continental
geographic locations while preparing me for weekly grade school spelling tests sparked
my academic development and continued scholastic pursuits (although I may not have
iv

appreciated it at the time). You are remarkable parents who taught their only daughter to
be passionate, generous and to never forget where she came from. Thank-you for your
infinite love, selfless support, and endless humour. Together we have achieved this YNWA!

v

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments

iv

List of Tables

viii

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction to the Problem

1

Background of the Study

5

Statement of the Problem

9

Purpose of the Study

10

Rationale

11

Research Questions

13

Significance of the Study

15

Definition of Terms

16

Assumptions and Limitations

18

Theoretical/Conceptual Framework

20

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

24

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

25

Health Care Consumer (HCC) Electronic Personal Health Records (ePHR)
Perceptions and Attitudes Literature

27

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

41

Research Design

41

Sample

43

Instrumentation/Measures

45

Data Collection

49
vi

Data Analysis

51

Validity and Reliability

53

Ethical Considerations

60

CHAPTER 4. RESULTS

62

Introduction

62

Description of the Population and Sample

65

Summary of Results

67

Details of Analysis and Results

69

Conclusion

83

CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS

84

Introduction

84

Summary of Results

84

Discussion of the Results

87

Implications of the Study Results

89

Limitations

93

Recommendations for Further Research

94

Conclusion

96

REFERENCES

99

APPENDIX A. SURVEY INSTRUMENT

110

vii

List of Tables
Table 1. Perceived Attributes of an Innovation

23

Table 2. Structure and Outline of the Survey Instrument Questions and Constructs

47

Table 3. Eigenvalues and Percentages of Variance Associated With Each Component 55
Table 4. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items

55

Table 5. Frequencies and Percentages for Categorical Demographic Variables

67

Table 6. Frequencies and Percentages of Adopters, Intenders, and Rejecters

71

Table 7. Distribution for Behavioral Intentions

73

Table 8. Frequency Distribution for Behavioral Intentions by Current, Intended, or
Rejected Adoption of ePHRs

77

Table 9. Summary of Statistical Analyses for Behavioral Intentions by Adoption,
Intended Adoption, or Rejection of ePHRs

78

Table 10. Perceived Attributes by Use of ePHRs

81

viii

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the Problem
Advances and innovations in information and communication technologies have
fundamentally transformed how individuals and organizations communicate information
and transact services. The global digital economy, sophisticated electronic infrastructures,
and the proliferation and increased use of data in all forms have profoundly affected
traditional data management use, viewpoints, and behaviors (Bilbao-Osorio, Dutta &
Lanvin, 2013). Since 2009, the health care industry in the United States (U.S.) has been
undergoing transitional change and advancement in the delivery and adoption of health
information technology (Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology, 2012; Blumenthal, 2011a; Blumenthal, 2011b). On February 17, 2009, the
United States (U.S.) Government enacted the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.
The Act contained provisions for the Health Information Technology for Economic and
Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, which created funding opportunities for the
implementation of electronic health record technologies (American Recovery and
Reinvestment Act, 2009). Since 2009, there has been a firm increase in the use and
exchange of electronic health records for both physicians and hospitals (Furukawa, Patel,
Charles, Swain, & Mostashari, 2013; Hsiao et al., 2013; Hsiao & Hing, 2014). In
addition, U.S. health care policy directives indicate clear priorities in engaging patients

1

and families in their health through the use of electronic health records and related
technologies (Ricciardi, Mostashari, Murphy, Daniel, & Siminerio, 2013).
The Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology
(ONC) under the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) is strategically
focused on enabling forms of health information exchange that will support coordinated,
high-quality, and efficient care (Williams, Mostashari, Mertz, Hogin, & Atwal, 2012).
The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid are offering incentive payments to eligible
professionals, hospitals, and critical access hospitals, who adopt, implement, upgrade, or
demonstrate meaningful use of certified electronic health record technologies (Centers for
Medicare & Medicaid Services, 2014a). The ONC with the Centers for Medicare and
Medicaid Services define and continue to redefine meaningful use objectives and
measures through an open and public rule making processes (Blumenthal, & Tavenner,
2010). Although the adoption and use of electronic health record technologies by health
care providers and hospitals has increased since the implementation of HITECH in 2009,
the acceptance and adoptions of related consumer electronic health record tools by Health
Care Consumers (HCCs) has been measured; specifically when considering the use of
electronic personal health records (ePHRs) (California Healthcare Foundation, 2010;
Markle Foundation, 2008; Markle Foundation, 2011).
An electronic personal health record (ePHR) is an entry point to an
application/tool through which an individual can access, manage and share their health
information or the information of others (Tang, Ash, Bates, Overhage, & Sands, 2006;
Tang & Lee, 2009). EPHRs can take the form of commercially available
applications/devices ranging from stand-alone systems to web-based applications/portals
2

where consumers enter, access and maintain personal health data to secure internet
portals that enable patients to access information in their provider’s records (Archer,
Fevrier-Thomas, Lokker, McKibbon, & Straus, 2011). The functionality of the ePHR
technologies provide health care consumers (HCCs) with the potential to e-mail message
their providers, access test results, track medications, schedule appointments, monitor
their personal health data, and participate in unique disease management programs
(Ricciardi, et al., 2013). While the use of electronic health records technologies appears
to be on the rise for health care providers and hospitals, the adoption and use of related
ePHRs technologies by HCCs continues to be strewn with low penetration and diffusion
rates (Bates & Wells, 2012; Blumenthal, 2011a; California Healthcare Foundation, 2010;
Markle Foundation, 2008; Markle Foundation, 2011).
U.S. health policy makers should consider the views and opinions of Health Care
Consumers (HCCs) given U.S. health care policy directives involving patient
engagement, and sophisticated electronic exchanges. This survey-based research
examined health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions and attitudes towards specific
electronic personal health record (ePHR) technologies, and discussed their behavioral
intention to adopt and continually use them for personal individual purposes and or to
share with health care providers or other designated recipients. This research constituted
an effort to better understand ePHR adoption and use among HCCs in the U.S. within the
diffusion of innovations theoretical framework. For a technology to be effectively and
extensively adopted it must be seen by potential adopters as having defined attributes.
The perceived attributes of diffusion of innovations theory (relative advantage,
complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, compatibility) establish potential
3

predictors for ePHR adoption and use among HCCs (Rogers, 2003). The goal of this
exploratory research project was to gain an overall understanding of the extent of
electronic personal health record (ePHR) adoption and intended use by health care
consumers (HCCs) in the U.S. The research also sought to determine if relationships
existed between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions and attitudes towards
electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes and their adoption.
The insights and findings gained from this research will be of importance to
scholar-practitioners including care providers, health organizations administrators, U.S.
health policy makers, and health information technology (IT) service providers within the
e-health industry. Since patients hold a measureable role in the management of their care,
health care professionals, and organizations need to understand ePHR adoption and use
patterns in order to promote positive perceptions for potential future HCC use and
engagement. In addition, health IT professionals may be interested in HCCs’ perception
and attitudes towards ePHRs in order to potentially offer services and additional system
functionality that are more patient centric and responsive to HCC needs. Finally, U.S.
health care policy makers must recognize and identify with how HCCs wish to participate
in the meaningful use of ePHRs given U.S. health care policies priorities for engaging
patients and families in their health through the use of electronic health records and
related technologies. This research will contribute to the ongoing research in the
specialized field of HCC IT adoption and use, as well as add to the growing literature on
perceptions and attitudes towards specific Health IT functional attributes and HCC
behavioral intentions.

4

Background of the Study
Implementing electronic health record technologies has become a national health
care priority in the United States (U.S.) (Blumenthal, 2010; Williams et al., 2012;
Ricciardi et al., 2013). Heath information technologies include a suite of support systems
that collectively drive and manage patient health care including decision support systems,
collaboration tools, administrative processing, and reporting/scheduling tools (ONC,
2011). Health information technologies containing consumer health care information can
take many different forms. The electronic health record (EHR) is one such technology.
The EHR encompasses all patient health care information and can serve as the primary
source for recording and documenting a patient’s demographics, medical history,
diagnoses, medications, treatment plans, immunization dates, allergies, radiology images,
and laboratory and test results (ONC, n.d.-a). EHRs contain and supply information that
enables providers to perform critical patient care. Health care providers and organizations
can use EHRs to conduct a significant amount of their core business not only in
maintaining patient records, but in also ensuring the records reflect current evidence
based-decisions and diagnoses of conditions for critical patient care (ONC, n.d.-a).
A related technology, known as an electronic personal health record (ePHR) can
also capture and manage health information. An ePHR is an entry point to an
application/tool through which an individual can access, manage, and share their health
information or the information of others (Tang et al., 2006; Tang & Lee, 2009). One of
the primary distinctive features of an ePHR is the platform by which it is delivered.
Architecturally, ePHRs can take numerous forms. EPHRs can exist as commercially
available applications/devices ranging from stand-alone systems to web-based
5

applications/portals where only the consumer enters, accesses and maintains personal
health data; these applications are known at untethered systems (Archer et al., 2011).
EPHRs can also be associated with a subset of information provided by organizations that
maintain patient data electronically (Archer et al., 2011). This ePHR functionality can be
provided by allowing patients to view their own health information that is stored in the
information systems of physicians, health plan providers, hospitals, and/or employers;
these applications are known as tethered systems (Archer et al., 2011). The functionality
of the ePHR technologies provide health care consumers (HCCs) with the potential to email message their providers, access test results, track medications, schedule
appointments, monitor their personal health data, and participate in unique disease
management programs (Ricciardi, et al., 2013). EPHRs can be drawn from numerous
sources but are managed, shared, and controlled by the consumer; the locus of control
distinguishes ePHRs from EHRs, which are controlled by providers, hospitals, insurers
and other stakeholders (Fetter, 2009). Both EHRs and ePHRs have the key feature and
capability of being shared across across different health care settings through networkconnected enterprise-wide information systems and other national, regional, and state
electronic health information exchanges (Williams, Mostashari, Mertz, Hogin, & Atwal,
2012).
On February 17, 2009, the United States (U.S.) Government enacted the
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act. The Act contained provisions for the Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health (HITECH) Act, which created
funding opportunities for the implementation of electronic health record technologies
(American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 2009). Under the Department of Health and
6

Human Services (DHHS), two key agencies: (a) the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services (CMS) and (b) the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information
Technology (ONC) are responsible for implementing the multifaceted provisions of the
HITECH Act (Blumenthal, 2010). The HITECH Act also shaped the development of two
ONC advisory committees the: (a) Health Information Technology Policy Committee
(HITPC) and the (b) Health Information Technology Standards Committee (HITSC)
(Blumenthal, 2011b). Each committee is comprised of numerous sub-committees and
working groups.
A federal EHR incentive program is also authorized through HITECH. The
purpose of HITECH’s financial stimulus and incentives are to increase the use of health
care technologies to support current government directives for a sophisticated electronic
health data exchange program (Williams et al., 2012). In order to participate in the
financial incentive programs, eligible professionals, hospitals, and critical access
hospitals must demonstrate meaningful use of certified electronic health record
technologies (Skipper, 2012). The HITECH Act endeavors to remedy the economic
barriers relating to the implementation of health information technology by providing
billions of dollars in extra Medicare and Medicaid incentive payments to health
professionals and institutions that become meaningful users of electronic health records
(Blumenthal, 2011a). The strategic goal of the HITECH Act is not simply to adopt a new
technology infrastructure, but to use the technology as a tool for significant and
continuous health care improvements in care (Blumenthal & Tavenner, 2010).
The ONC and CMS define, and continue to redefine, meaningful use objectives
and measures through an open and public rule making processes (Blumenthal, &
7

Tavenner, 2010). The HITPC Meaningful Use Subcommittee (working rroup) is
responsible for making recommendations on how to define provider and hospital use of
EHRs (ONC, n.d.-b). The concept of meaningful use rests on several U.S. policy
priorities for health outcomes including improving quality, safety, efficiency, and
reducing health disparities; engaging patients and families in their health; expanding care
coordination; advancing population and public health; and protecting the privacy and
security of personal health information (Blumenthal, 2010a; ONC, n.d.-c). Each policy
priority has defined meaningful use core and elective (menu) objectives and measurement
criteria for eligible provides and hospitals relating to EHR technology functions and
usage.
To date, the meaningful use working group has defined the criteria for meaningful
use in a series of three evolving stages for adoption between 2010 and 2016 and beyond.
Specifically for the policy priority for engaging patients and families in their healthcare,
current stage 1 and 2 core objectives require eligible professionals and hospitals provide
patients with online access to their health information with the ability to view, download
and transmit to a third party (CMS, 2014b; CMS, 2014c; CMS, 2014d; CMS, 2014e). In
March of 2014, the Meaningful Use Workgroup published stage 3 draft recommendations
for forthcoming meaningful use criteria for 2016 and beyond. Stage 3 meaningful use
core objectives and measures require eligible providers and hospitals to continue to
provide patients with the ability to view online, download, and transmit their electronic
health information in addition to also providing patients with the option to submit
electronically patient-generated data and request amendments to their health records
online (Health Information Technology Policy Committee, 2014).
8

Giving HCCs access to their health information can better position them to
participate more fully in their care, to self-manage their condition, coordinate care across
multiple providers, and improve communication with their care teams (Ricciardi et al.,
2013). The use of ePHR solutions, both provider-based and individually controlled, could
foreseeably assist eligible professionals, and hospitals demonstrate compliance with
meaningful use mandates. However, very little is known about the HCCs’ perceptions
and attitudes towards specific ePHR technologies, and their intentions to adopt and
continually use them for personal individual purposes and or to share with health care
providers or other designated recipients. This research endeavored to address this gap in
the literature.
Statement of the Problem
Health care provider-, hospital-, and patient-generated health information has the
capability of being stored and shared across different health care settings through
network-connected, enterprise-wide information systems and other electronic health
information exchanges. According to meaningful use mandates, functionality must be
provided to allow health care consumers (HCCs) to view online, download, and transmit
their own health information that is stored on physician and or hospital electronic record
systems (CMS, 2014b; CMS, 2014c; CMS, 2014d; CMS, 2014e). Furthermore, health
care providers and hospitals can also make available optional system functionality for
health care consumers (HCCs) to submit electronically patient-generated data and request
amendments to their health records. HCCs can capture and store health data on personally
controlled, commercially available web-based tools and/or mobile applications that can
be transmitted and shared. A number of viable methods for engaging patients in their care
9

exist under policy directives however; do these established obligations and directives
meet the expectations and desires of the average HCC?
Previous research has shown that ePHR adoption and use has seen relatively slow
acceptance rates even when prevailing notions of their benefits to patient care exists
(California Healthcare Foundation, 2010; Markle Foundation, 2008; Markle Foundation,
2011). Unidentified challenges in understanding HCCs’ attitudes towards and perceptions
of ePHRs exist. This study explores the motivational factors of HCCs and the attributes
or characteristics of ePHRs that promote adoption and use. It is not clear if HCCs
currently want to view online, download, or transmit their health data as directed under
existing meaningful use stage one and two core objectives; or of they will want to submit
health care information they generate to a provider and or amend the records of their
provider as proposed under stage 3 meaningful use menu objectives. This research also
examines the nature of financial incentive programs for EHR that rely in the behavioural
intention of HCCs. This research constituted an effort to better understand ePHR
adoption and use among HCCs in the U.S. The goal of this exploratory research project
was to gain an overall understanding of the extent of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs) adoption and intended use by health care consumers HCCs in the U.S. as well as
determine if relationships existed between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions
and attitudes towards electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes and their
adoption.
Purpose of the Study
U.S. health policy makers should consider the views and opinions of Health Care
Consumers (HCCs), given U.S. health care policy directives involving patient
10

engagement, and sophisticated electronic health information exchanges. This research
constituted an effort to better understand ePHR adoption and use among HCCs in the
U.S. within the diffusion of innovations theoretical framework. For a technology to be
effectively and extensively adopted it must be seen by potential adopters as having
defined attributes. The perceived attributes of diffusion of innovations theory (relative
advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, compatibility) establish
potential predictors for ePHR adoption and use among HCCs (Rogers, 2003). The
purpose of this research was to test the diffusion of innovations theoretical principles that
relate to adoption, intended adoption, or rejection of ePHRs and the perceived attributes
of an innovation while also determining ePHR continued use by HCCs for personal
individual purposes and or to share with health care providers or other designated
recipients.
Rationale
Health care is a complex and information intensive process in which data
concerning the health and medical conditions of individuals are stored and used for
clinical care. If HCCs adopt ePHR system functionality on a large scale, health care
professionals, and organizations, enhance their abilities to meet regulatory meaningful
use mandates directed under HITECH (Wilson, Murphy & Newhouse, 2012). The health
care theoretical body of knowledge is generally constrained in its understanding of the
attitudes and perceptions of HCCs toward ePHR adoption; a gap reflected in the existing
academic literature. For this reason, this study seeks to enhance the scholarly literature by
contributing to this underdeveloped area of research. By measuring the public perceptions
of ePHRs, this research will provide a depth of understanding not previously realized and
11

will help to compile a more holistic view of ePHR adoption and rejection from the
perspective of the HCC. Eligible professionals, hospitals, and policy makers need to
understand HCC adoption of ePHRs in order to prepare for proposed meaningful use
objectives and measures. Tethered or untethered ePHR (web-based or mobile application)
currently offer a viable method for HCC engagement for stage 1-3 directives and beyond.
As health care providers and organizations continue to increase the use of EHR
technologies, and owing to the potential projected growth of these applications for
potential ePHR adoption, researchers should direct serious consideration and attention to
this important issue/topic.
EPHR use by HCCs has the potential to reform health care organizations to make
them more patient-centered, results-oriented, responsive, and cost effective (Wilson et al.,
2012. Krist and Wolf (2011) state that the acceptance of information technology by
HCCs will languish until a new generation of systems are designed that are more patient
centric and do more than manage and provide access to patient information. Information
technology holds the promise of empowering patients to manage their health, yet the
patients must become the focus of the design if the technology is to be used or fulfill its
potential (Krist & Wolf, 2011). Little is known about the attitudes and perceptions of
HCCs within this ePHR debate given the important role they could potentially possess
within the meaningful use debate. No research exists on HCCs’ views on the need to
download and transmit their electronic health information; this could be an example of
health care policy requirements exceeding patient desires and abilities (Kannry, Beuria,
Wang, & Nissim, 2012). Findings from this investigation will address voids in the health
care industry’s understanding of HCCs’ perceptions of and attitudes toward ePHR
12

adoption and continued use. It is critical that the perceptions and attitudes of HCCs be
understood as a means to support and improve health care in light of President Obama’s
vision of a sophisticated electronic health data exchange. The proposed regulations
around meaningful use require further study to ensure that meaningful use is meaningful
to both HCCs and providers (Kannry, Beuria, Wang, & Nissim, 2012). The insights
gained from this research will be of importance to health care providers, health
organizations, health information technology IT service providers, and policy makers
given the potential for ePHR adoption and use under HITECH meaningful use policies.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
To comprehend the contextual framework relating to electronic personal health
record (ePHR) adoption and perceived attributes, preliminary information relating to the
extent of health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adopt, intended adopt, or rejection (nonadoption) and subsequent intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend are required.
This inquiry investigated the following research questions:
Research Question 1
Is there a difference between health care consumers (HCCs) who adopt, intend to
adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs) and their
intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them?
Research Question 2
Is there a relationship between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions of
and attitudes towards electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes (as measured by
relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility)
and their adoption, intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption)?
13

This research study investigated the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1
H01 (Null Hypothesis) there is no difference between health care consumers
(HCCs) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them.
HA1 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a difference between health care consumers
(HCCs) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them.
Hypotheses 2-6
H02 (Null Hypothesis] there is no relationship between perceived relative
advantage (perceived attribute 1) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
HA2 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived relative
advantage (perceived attribute 1) and a Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
H03 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived complexity
(simplicity), (perceived attribute 2) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA3 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived complexity
(simplicity), (perceived attribute 2) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,

14

intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
H04 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived trialability (perceived
attribute 3) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended adoption, or
rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA4 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived trialability
(perceived attribute 3) and a health care consumers (HCCs’) adoption, intended adoption,
or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
H05 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived observability
(perceived attribute 4) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA5 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived observability
(perceived attribute 4) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
H06 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived compatibility
(perceived attribute 5) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA6 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived compatibility
(perceived attribute 5) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
Significance of the Study
The insights and findings gained from this research will be of importance to
scholar-practitioners including care providers, health organizations administrators, U.S.
15

health policy makers, and health information technology (IT) service providers within the
e-health industry. Since patients hold a measureable role in the management of their care,
health care professionals, and organizations need to understand ePHR adoption and
rejection patterns in order to promote positive perceptions for potential future HCC use
and engagement. In addition, health IT professionals may be interested in HCCs’
perception and attitudes towards ePHRs in order to potentially offer services and
additional system functionality that are more patient centric and responsive to HCC
needs. Finally, U.S. health care policy makers must recognize and identify with how
HCCs wish to participate in the meaningful use of ePHRs given U.S. health care policies
priorities for engaging patients and families in their health through the use of electronic
health records and related technologies. This research will contribute to the ongoing
research in the specialized field of HCC IT adoption and use, as well as contribute to the
growing literature on perceptions and attitudes towards specific Health IT functional
attributes and HCC behavioral intentions.
Definition of Terms
The following terms were derived from the study’s theoretical framework, U.S. health
care policy, and the relevant scholarly literature.
Adopt/Adoption. A decision to make full use of an innovation as the best cause of
action (Rogers, 2003). Defined as the decision to adopt or potentially adopt electronic
personal health records (ePHRs).
Reject/Rejection (Non-Adoption). A decision to actively rejection which consists
of considering adoption of ePHRs but the deciding not to adopt it and passive rejections
which consists of never really considering the use of ePHRs (Rogers, 2003).
16

Electronic Personal Health Record (ePHR). An entry point to an application/tool
through which an individual can access, manage and share their health information or the
information of others (Tang, Ash, Bates, Overhage, & Sands, 2006; Tang & Lee, 2009).
Heath Care Consumer (HCC). Patients, families, and proxy caregivers, regardless
of health status, whether actively receiving health care services or not (Ricciardi, et al.,
2013).
Perceived Attributes. The characteristics of an innovation as perceived by
individuals (as measured by relative advantage, compatibility, complexity (simplicity),
trialability, and observability) (Rogers, 2003).
Relative Advantage. The degree to which an innovation is perceived as
advantageous to potential adopters (financially, socially, etc.) (Rogers, 2003).
Complexity (Simplicity). The degree to which an innovation is perceived as being
difficult to understand and use by potential adopters (Rogers, 2003; Atkinson, 2007).
Trialability. The degree to which an innovation may be experimented with on a
limited basis by potential adopters (Rogers, 2003).
Observability. The degree to which the results of an innovation can be observed
by potential adopters (Rogers, 2003).
Compatibility. The degree to which an innovation is perceived as consistent with

existing values, past experiences and the needs of potential adopters (Rogers, 2003).
View. Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) (or authorized representative) intention to
consult or examine health information contained in an electronic personal health record
(ePHR). The health information can be both derived from an electronic health record

17

(EHR) and or Health Care Consumer (HCC) generated (CMS, 2014b; CMS, 2014c;
CMS, 2014d; CMS, 2014e).
Transmit. Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) intention to pass on health
information contained in an electronic personal health record (ePHR) to a designated
recipient. The health information is derived from an electronic health record (EHR)
(CMS, 2014b; CMS, 2014c; CMS, 2014d; CMS, 2014e).
Submit. Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) intention to provide or pass on health
information contained in an electronic personal health record (ePHR) to a designated
recipient. The health information is Health Care Consumer (HCC) generated (Health
Information Technology Policy Committee, 2014).
Amend. Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) intention to alter or modify health
information (corrections, additions, updates) contained in an electronic personal health
record (ePHR). The health information is Health Care Consumer (HCC) generated
(Health Information Technology Policy Committee, 2014).
Assumptions and Limitations
Assumptions
The research design, acknowledges two assumptions: (a) participant assumptions,
and (b) research plan assumptions. For participant assumptions, an expectation existed
that study participants were accurately selected and sampled from an identified
population. It was assumed that survey respondents were knowledgeable about the topic
under investigation and provided complete and honest answers to all survey questions. In
addition, it was implied that instructions, questions, terms, and definitions within the
survey instrument were clearly understood by all participants. Further assumptions
18

involved the established research plan of the study including the selected method,
instrument, and theoretical framework. The selection criteria and sample size was
representative of the population, and the research instruments were successfully deployed
in previous studies. The survey method accurately aligned with the research questions,
and the study centered on a well-established theoretical framework. The research design
and plan followed established guidance of existing research at the SOBT.
Limitations
Limitations in social science research exist. The acknowledged research
constraints of the study were those attributed to (a) theoretical limitations and (b)
sample/respondent limitations. Theoretical limitations include those associated with the
use of diffusion of innovations theory as a theoretical framework. Diffusion of
innovations theory leans towards the presumption that all innovation are desirable and
must be adopted, thus, imposing a pro innovation and individual non-adoption biases
(Rogers, 2003). A foundational aspect of this research accepts that ePHRs are innovative
and should be diffused and adopted by all members of a social system. Furthermore,
diffusion of innovations theory relies on respondent self-reported recall when asked to
remember the time at which they adopted (or did not adopt) an innovation thus leading to
potential recall inaccuracies in the data. The second research limitation of this study is
associated with the sample frame selection, non-probability sampling, and the use of a
third-party survey panel. Survey respondents self-elected to participate in the panel, as
such, the sample selection may not be completely representative of the entire U.S.
population. The survey participants may have included a disproportionate number of
respondents who had computer access and were interested in volunteering to be a survey
19

panelist. The researcher acknowledged and accepted the limitations as presenting
minimal risk to the overall research design.
Theoretical/Conceptual Framework
This research was framed within the diffusion of innovations theoretical
discipline. Diffusion of innovations theory is an important theoretical model that provides
scholar-practitioners with a well-developed, broad, versatile, and robust theoretical model
for investigating numerous academic research questions relating to the acceptance and/or
rejection of an expanded range of innovations. Everett Rogers best expressed this theory
in his seminal monograph, Diffusion of Innovations, originally published in 1962, now in
its fifth edition. Rogers (2003) synthesized 60 years of scholarly diffusion research and
presented it as a comprehensive set of general principles and concepts that explains how a
new idea or innovation disseminates or diffuses in a social system.
Rogers (2003) defined diffusion as, “the process in which an innovation is
communicated through certain channels, over time, among members of a social system”
(p. 5). An innovation can be ideas, technologies, products, information, and/or processes
that are perceived as new by its audience (Rogers, 2003). Diffusion of innovations
research encompasses one or more of the following four main elements: (a) the
innovation, (b) time, (c) communication, and (d) social systems. This research utilized
the, the innovation component of the model for the theoretical framework.
Diffusion of innovations theory explores how innovations evolve over time.
During the diffusion process an individual, will pass from gaining information and
knowledge about an innovation, to formulating an attitude toward the innovation, to
making a decision to adopt or reject the innovation, to confirming and implementing the
20

innovation (Rogers, 2003). Diffusion of innovations scholars have long recognized that
decisions surrounding adoption are not immediate. The process occurs over time and
consists of a series of different actions (Rogers, 2003). During the implementation stage,
an individual advances through the process of putting an innovation into practice. An
innovation may be rejected during any stage of the adoption process. Rogers (2003)
defined rejection as a decision not to adopt an innovation. There are two types of
rejection: (a) decision to reject after considering the innovation, called active rejection;
and (b) passive rejection, which consists of not considering the innovation at all.
Rejection is not to be confused with discontinuance. Discontinuance is a rejection that
occurs after having previously adopted the innovation (Rogers, 2003). Innovation
discontinuance can occur when an innovation is superseded by an improved or enhanced
innovation or because of dissatisfaction with the innovation (Rogers, 2003).
Within diffusion theory, not all innovations diffuse equally; some innovations are
adopted in a relatively short timeframe, while others take many years or even decades to
diffuse. The characteristics or attributes of an innovation, as perceived by individuals,
assist in defining the different rates of adoption. Rogers (2003) identified five
characteristics that have been linked to diffusion: relative advantage, complexity
(simplicity), trialability, observability, compatibility (Rogers, 2003). An innovation is
more readily adopted when it provides a relative advantage and is perceived to improve
or enhance what currently exists. An innovation that is simple to understand and has less
complexity is adopted more rapidly than an innovation that requires the potential adopter
to develop new skills and understandings. An innovation that is experienced, tested, and
assessed on a limited basis before full implementation (trialability) is more readily
21

adopted as it represents less uncertainty to potential adopters. An innovation that can be
observed (observability) with visible results is more likely to be adopted than if were not
viewed. Finally, an innovation is compatible if it aligns with the existing experiences,
value systems, and adopter needs. Table 1 defines and outlines these attributes.
One important area in diffusion of innovations research that is of interest to most
organizational policy and decision makers is why certain information and communication
technologies are diffused and adopted by people, organizations and society as a whole,
while others are not (Tidd, 2010). Diffusion of information technology innovations
theory is a subfield within the broader diffusion of innovations theoretical framework.
Under this research paradigm, the diffusion and adoption of new information
technologies is examined. Technology diffusion and adoption is a complex function with
many interrelated issues and interactions between organizations their clients, employees
and cultural environments. The primary research questions underpinning most studies of
information technology diffusion revolve around how, why and when people adopt a
given innovation (Rogers, 2003). Diffusion of innovations theory can be successfully
employed to provide a suitable theoretical and conceptual framework to study ePHR use
and adoption.
Diffusion of innovations theory has been used extensively in the health care
academic disciplines to study numerous health innovations (Greenhalgh, Robert, Bate,
Macfarlane, & Kyriakidou, 2005). Specifically, the theory has been utilized to investigate
EHRs in the context of adoption, system implementation, and specific physician and
nursing practices (Geibert, 2006; Greenhalgh et al., 2008; Greiver, Barnsley, Glazier,
Moineddin, & Harvey, 2011; Hsu, Liu, Weng, & Chen, 2013; Miller & Tucker, 2009).
22

Table 1. Perceived Attributes of an Innovation
________________________________________________________________________
Attribute

Definition

Relative Advantage

The degree to which an innovation is perceived
as advantageous to potential adopters
(financially, socially, etc.). The greater the
degree of perceived advantage, the more rapid
its rate of adoption.

Complexity (Simplicity)

The degree to which an innovation is perceived
as being difficult to understand and use by
potential adopters. Innovations that are simple
to understand are adopted more rapidly than
innovations that require the potential adopter
to develop new skills and understandings.

Trialability

The degree to which an innovation may be
experimented with on a limited basis by
potential adopters. An innovation that is
trialable represents less uncertainty to potential
adopters. The greater the degree of trialability,
the more rapid its rate of adoption.

Observability

The degree to which the results of an
innovation can be observed by potential
adopters. The easier it is for potential adopters
to see the results of an innovation, the more
likely they will adopt it. The greater the degree
of observability, the more rapid its rate of
adoption.

Compatibility

The degree to which an innovation is perceived
as consistent with existing values, past
experiences and the needs of potential
adopters. The greater the degree of
compatibility, the more rapid its rate of
adoption.

________________________________________________________________________
Note: Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: Free Press.

23

The diffusion of innovations theory research paradigm possesses a deep and cumulative
tradition and authors from across multiple academic disciplines continue to cultivate the
theory’s principles.
This research will utilized Rogers’s diffusion of innovations theory as the
theoretical bases for the study of the perceived attributes as predictors of ePHR current
adoption, intended adoption and rejection among HCCs. This study is one of the first to
utilize diffusion theory to study ePHRs as an innovation from the perspective of the
HCC. A study conducted by (Emani et al., 2012) utilized diffusion of innovations theory
to investigate the perception of ePHRs between users and non-users. Emani et al.’s
(2012) exploratory study concluded that diffusion of innovations model could be
successfully employed to provide a suitable theoretical and empirical framework to study
ePHRs. This research differed from the Emani study with regard to research purpose,
approach, methodology, and population under investigation.
Organization of the Remainder of the Study
With the conclusion of Chapter 1, the remainder of this study is organized into a
series of four chapters. Chapter 2 provides a review of the pertinent literature by focusing
on the most relevant and significant works of scholars published in academic peerreviewed journals. Chapter 3 defines the selected research methodology that was used to
measure the individual hypotheses. Data collection and analysis is presented in Chapter 4.
Finally, the results of the data analysis, derived conclusions, and contribution and
recommendations for future research are considered and discussed in Chapter 5.

24

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction
To understand the complexities associated with health care consumers’ (HCCs’)
attitudes towards, and perceptions of electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes
and their behavioral intention to adopt and subsequently view, transmit, submit, and
amend them, a review of the pertinent literature is required. Focusing on the most
relevant and significant works of scholars published in English-language academic peerreviewed journals this review examined the literature on ePHRs and HCCs’ perceptions
and attitudes relating to adoption and use. The literature review evaluated and
synthesized the scholarly research views and assessments of authors, as well as identified
leading themes and concepts. Collectively, the reviewed investigations provided a
foundational knowledge base to support and complement this research.
Much has been written on the management and use of electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) (Ammenwerth, Schnell-Inderst, P., & Hoerbst, 2012; Archer, FevrierThomas, Lokker, McKibbon, & Straus, 2011; Goldenweig et al., 2013; Kaelber, Jha,
Johnston, Middleton, & Bates, 2008; Kim, Jung, & Bates, 2011; Saparova, 2012; Urowitz
et al., 2012). The research characteristically delineates the benefits and challenges
associated with implementing, adopting, using, managing, and accessing ePHRs.
Practitioners, academics, and providers within the health care disciplines have engaged in
numerous research initiatives to explore various aspects of ePHRs including but not
25

firmly limited to: (a) ePHR system attributes architecture, characteristics, design and
functionality (Archer et al., 2011; Kaelber et al., 2008); (b) the function of ePHRs in
education, motivational health self-management, provider communications, health
literacy, and self-efficacy (Archer et al., 2011; Saparova, 2012; Urowitz et al., 2012); (c)
ePHRs and adoption, acceptance, use, and satisfaction (Archer et al., 2011; Goldenweig
et al., 2013; Kaelber et al., 2008); and (d) ePHRs and the effect on clinical health
outcomes, health benefits, and process changes in patient care (Ammenwerth et al., 2012;
Archer et al., 2011; ). This review sought to build upon the preceding scholarship at a
time when ePHRs are central in significant studies within the health care and information
technology research and practitioner communities.
Due to the breath of academic research on the subject of electronic personal
health records (ePHRs), the scope of this review required the latitude of focus to consider
individual health care consumer (HCC) self-reporting studies conducted in the United
States (U.S.). The studies are broadly defined as research that focused on HCCs’
perceptions, attitudes, views opinions, experiences, preferences, and beliefs relating to
ePHRs and other personally controlled, patient focused, internet/web-based
health/medical record technologies such as patient portals and shared patient accessible
electronic health information exchanges. Given the primary focus of this research was to
understand the complexities associated with HCCs’ attitudes and perceptions of ePHRs
within the meaningful use context in the U.S., this review intentionally limited the
inclusion of research to works published after 2009, the year the federal meaningful use
incentive programs were implemented.

26

Health Care Consumer (HCC) Electronic Personal Health Record (ePHR)
Perceptions and Attitudes Literature
The principle findings from the health care consumer (HCC) perceptions and
attitudes literature, focused on the mechanisms that fostered, facilitated and contributed
to ePHR satisfaction, adoption, acceptance, use, and/or non-use. The research studies
identified meaningful and influential factors that strategically supported ePHR use from
the self-reporting perspective of HCCs’. The research literature also assessed HCCs’
views and opinions relating to ePHR system functionality and features with the goal of
providing insights to support technology design, development, and implementation
success. The overall objectives of the investigations were to improve health information
access, empower HCC engagement, and advance health care outcomes.
Factors Supporting Electronic Personal Health Record (ePHR) Adoption and Use
Within the HCC and ePHR perceptions and attitudes literature, the research
extended to the factors or determinants that predict HCCs’ intentions or perceived
intentions to adopt and use ePHRs (Agarwal et al., 2013; Or et al., 2011; Silvestre, Sue,
& Allen, 2009; Whetstone & Goldsmith, 2009). Research demonstrated that usefulness,
and perceived ease of use, predict HCCs’ behavioural intentions to adopt (Lam et al.,
2013; Or et al., 2011; Silvestre et al., 2009; Whetstone & Goldsmith, 2009). Similar
studies also established a positive association with ePHR perceived quality, value, benefit
and relevance as a tool and adoption and continuity of use (Agarwal et al., 2013; Kerns,
Krist, Longo, Kuzel, & Woolf, 2013; Silvestre et al., 2009; Weitzman, Kelemen, Kaci, &
Mandl, 2012). This suggests that HCCs are more likely to adopt ePHRs if they believe
that the technology has low effort expectancy, and perceive that using some form or
27

feature will be useful in conveying health benefits and or facilitating health selfmanagement.
Since ePHRs have the ability to promote effective patient-provider encounters and
communications, a number of research studies found that HCC adoption and use directly
related to the level of provider engagement in integrating the tools into care management
(Agarwal et al., 2013; Kern et al., 2013; Lam et al., 2013; Wade-Vuturo, Mayberry &
Osborn, 2013). HCCs emphasized the critical role that communication served in the
decision to adopt and use ePHRs (Agarwal et al., 2013; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013).
Results indicated that encouraging and endorsing the use of ePHR technologies was an
important differentiator between HCC adoption and rejection (Lam et al., 2013). HCCs
reported that low provider involvement with ePHR tools reduced their intention to adopt
(Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013). A related theme from the literature associated HCC
education and training with enhanced ePHR adoption and use. In a series of studies
conducted by Lam et al., (2013), Naun et al., (2014) and Or et al., (2011), researchers
found that building the skills and educating HCCs about ePHRs increased adoption and
use. The research supported the need for interventions in provider advocacy for ePHRs
and HCC knowledge and training.
Determining HCC interest in and satisfaction levels with ePHR use was a
prominent construct measured in numerous research studies. Most investigations reported
HCC interest in, and positive attitude towards ePHRs (Delbanco et al., 2012; Haun et al.,
2914; Kahn et al., 2010; Kerns et al, 2013; Kim et al., 2009; Lam et al., 2013; Luque et
al., 2013; Mishuris et al., 2014; Naun et al., 2014; Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi, Hogan,
McInnes, Woods, & Graham, 2013; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Osborn, Mayberry, Wallston,
28

Johnson, & Elasy, 2013; Patel et al., 2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; Tom,
Mangione-Smith, Solomon, & Grossman, 2012; Turvey et al., 2014;Wade-Vuturo et al.,
2013; Wagner, Howard, Bentley, Seol, & Sodomka, 2010; Wald et al., 2010; Weitzman,
Kelemen, Kaci, & Mandl, 2012; Wen, Kreps, Zhu, & Miller, 2010; Woods et al., 2013;
Zarcadoolas, Vaughon, Czaja, Levy, & Rockoff, 2013). Interest in, and satisfaction with,
ePHRs were facilitators of HCC adoption and or intended adoption.
A number of research investigations recounted HCCs perceived benefits and
positive health outcomes relating to ePHR adoption and use specifically in the areas of
health self-management, health care knowledge, provider communications and quality of
care. HCCs reported that ePHRs had the potential to improve self-management behaviors
such as adherence to care plans and medications (Delbanco et al., 2012; Nazi et al.,
2013). By encouraging HCCs to participate in the management of their care, ePHRs
increased their sense of control and empowerment in coordinating care (Kim et al., 2009;
Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013). HCCs maintained that
ePHR participation motivated them (Wagner, et al., 2010) and enhanced their
contribution to care (Woods et al., 2013). HCCs valued the enhanced accessibility,
availability, and operational efficiencies associated with ePHR use (Haun et al., 2914;
Wagner, et al., 2010; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013). Research studies also established that
the use of ePHR technologies provided HCCs with a greater understanding of their health
and care history (Delbanco et al., Patel et al., 2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012;
Turvey et al., 2014). This enhanced knowledge provided HCCs with more autonomy
(Weitzman et al., 2012) and an increased ability to make informed decisions regarding
their own medical care (Patel et al., 2011b).
29

HCCs reported that ePHR use positively affected communications with their
providers and primary care teams (Haun et al., 2914; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Patel et al.,
2012; Wagner, et al., 2010; Wald et al., 2010; Woods et al., 2013). HCCs experienced
being better prepared for provider office visits (Delbanco et al., 2012; Kim et al., 2009;
Wald et al., 2010) resulting in improved appointment quality (Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013).
The partnership with physician, by way of ePHR use, also enhanced provider-patient
relations (Wagner, et al., 2010). Perhaps the most important HCC reflection documented
in the literature, is the perception that ePHR use assisted in the management of health
care conditions and improved satisfaction with quality of care (Dimitropoulos et al.,
2011; Kahn et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2009; Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; Patel et al.,
2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Wald et al., 2010; Woods et al.,
2013).
Health Care Consumers’ Views Relating to System Functionality
The research literature also assessed HCCs’ views and opinions relating to ePHR
system functionality and features with the goal of providing insights to support
technology design, development and implementation success. The research proactively
surveyed HCCs’ perspectives on ePHR system utility and functionality as an element in
examining existing systems and in capturing preferences for forthcoming development.
In describing HCC preferences and facilitators for use of system elements, a number of
comparable design themes emerged. Overwhelmingly HCCs valued having access to
view their medical information (Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; O’Donnell et al.,
2011; Patel et al., 2012; Walker et al., 2009) and securely communicate (message) their
health care provider (Nazi et al, 2010; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et
30

al., 2012; Walker et al., 2011). User perceptions were also positive about features that
increased convenience such as viewing, scheduling and changing appointments (Luque et
al., 2013; Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; WadeVuturo et al., 2013; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013), as well as fulfilling prescription requests,
refills, and reauthorizations (Haggstrom et al., 2011; Osborn, et al., 2013; Patel et al.,
2012; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013).
HCCs expressed a desire to view medication lists and prescription histories (Kahn
et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; Osborn et al., 2013; Wagner et al, 2010), laboratory and
test results (Kahn et al., 2010; Luque et al., 2013; Patel et al., 2011b) and immunizations
records (Patel et al., 2011a). HCCs also valued convenient, serviceable, and user-friendly
navigation features and user interfaces (Haun et al., 2914; Wagner et al, 2010). Several
research studies demonstrated HCC interest in ePHRs having linkages to educational and
other health literacy informational resources (Kahn et al., 2010; Wagner et al, 2010;
Walker et al., 2011).
When HCCs were invited to envision and offer recommends for future ePHR
functional design opportunities, the proposals were exceedingly visionary (Walker et al.,
2009; Weitzman et al., 2012). HCCs visualized ePHR tools that would transform
interactions within the health care system and be proactive in providing health care needs.
HCC expressed a desire for a highly dynamic, personalized platform with embedded
searches, tailored communications, and access to self-populated and clinical data
(Weitzman et al., 2012). HCCs favoured having a truly personal experience with
customizable access to health information with self-care functionality and links to
monitoring tools (Walker et al., 2009). Researchers concluded that HCC suggestions and
31

feedback on specific system design utilities and functionality could be incorporated into
forthcoming installations of ePHR applications (Haggstrom et al., 2011; Wagner et al.,
2010). The research highlighted the strengths of user centered design collaboration
between HCCs and IT experts.
Adoption and Use Perceived Privacy, Security, Confidentiality, and Accuracy
Within the academic literature, HCC adoption and use of ePHRs was often
associated with perceived privacy, security, confidentiality, and accuracy concerns.
While HCCs desired having access to health information online, certain risks exist
surrounding the protection, misuse, and trustworthiness of information that could
potentially limit ePHR adoption and use. The research studies focused on understanding
HCCs views and attitudes towards specific ePHR privacy, security (Delbanco et al.,
2012; Dimitropoulos et al., 2011; Haun et al., 2014; Vodicka et al., 2013; Weitzman.,
2012) as well as accuracy and trust concerns (Burkhard, et., 2010; Haggstrom et al.,
2011; Kahn et al., 2010; Kerns et al., 2013). Although privacy, security, confidentiality,
and accuracy were concerns among HCCs, studies consistently demonstrated that the
apprehension did not impair or prejudice perceived adoption and use. These findings
suggestion that the potential benefits of online access to personal information/records
outweighed the perceived risks (Dimitropoulos et al., 2011; Weitzman et al., 2012).
Closely associated to the privacy, security, and confidentially literature, is the
research that explored HCC attitudes and perceptions regarding ePHR exchange and
sharing preferences. Research indicated that HCCs valued the ability to share ePHR
resources with health care providers and caregivers to support care (Delbanco et al.,
2012; Kim et al., 2009; O’Donnell et al., 2011 Patel et al., 2011a; Patel et al., 2011b;
32

Patel et al., 2012; Weitzman, et al., 2012; Zulman et al., 2011). However, HCCs also
desired the capability to selectively share access to their ePHRs with designated persons
(Dhopeshwarkar et al., 2012; Zulman et al., 2011). The paralleled consent preferences
would permit HCCs to also specifying what information the designated person can view
and what activities the designate can performs on their behalf of (Dhopeshwarkar et al.,
2012; Zulman et al., 2011). Safe guard mechanisms to control the types of information
and degree of access that is shared should be incorporated into ePHR design
functionality.
Disadvantages and Challenges Associated with Adoption and Use
Despite the growing literature on the potential benefits and identified positive
aspects of ePHRs, a number of research studies acknowledged the disadvantages and
potential challenges associated with adoption and use. A number of studies centered the
research focus on the failed use of ePHRs and HCC non-adoption and rejection, (Goel et
al., 2011; Hsiao et al., 2011) while other investigations captured individual and technical
barriers. The most prevailing limitation to ePHR adoption and use was limited or lack of
existing or prior knowledge of ePHRs (Haun et al., 2014; Mishuris et al., 2014; Osborn,
Mayberry, Wallston, Johnson, & Elasy, 2013; Turvey et al., 2014; Wagner, et al., 2010).
HCCs reported that inadequate information about the ePHR system had been provided,
resulting in low familiarity and awareness.
The HCC and ePHR literature also indicated that perceived system complexity
and usability were barriers to satisfaction, adoption, and use. HCCs described complex
visual layouts, poor usability features, difficult terminology, and language use
(Zarcadoolas et al., 2013). HCCs reported that ePHR systems were technically difficult,
33

cumbersome, overwhelming, inconvenient, time consuming to use and lacked personal
connectivity (Hsiao et al., 2011; Tom et al., 2012; Wagner, et al., 2010). HCCs also
raised concerns related to the logistical computer related barriers to ePHR adoption and
use including limited home computer/internet access and other connectivity issues (Goel
et al, 2011; Luque et al., 2013; Mishuris et al., 2014; Osborn et al., 2013).
A number of HCC self-reporting, personal positions, and characteristics that
hindered ePHR use and adoption were summarized within the literature. HCCs reported
possessing negative preconceived viewpoints about ePHR usefulness (Burkhard et al.,
2010; Goel et al., 2011), reliability (Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013) and locus of responsibility
given the distributed nature of the data sources (Weitzman et al., 2012). HCCs also
shared that they had limited computer knowledge (Luque et al., 2013), lacked motivation
(Goel et al., 2011) and had anxiety and fear over ePHR use (Kim et al., 2009). In one
study, HCCs felt a small amount of stress, discomfort and confusion about seeing their
health information openly online (Woods et al., 2013). Finally, HCCs reported that they
had no medical issues and therefore did not need to use ePHRs (Tom et al., 2012) in
addition to feeling satisfied with the current and more traditional methods of
communication with health care teams and providers (Mishuris et al., 2014).
Disadvantaged, Vulnerable, Under-Represented and Disabled Communities
Although the HCCs’perceptions and attitudes literature focused on the
mechanisms that fostered, facilitated and contributed to ePHR satisfaction, adoption,
acceptance, use and/or non-use, certain studies considered the constructs within the
context of specific HCC populations. Specific studies emphasised the perspectives of
disadvantaged, vulnerable, and under-represented HCC populations as well as those
34

living with a disability or chronic disease condition. Researchers hypothesized that the
targeted groups shared different attitudes and perspectives relating to ePHRs and
consequently required a distinct study participant focus.
Studies that centred on the disadvantaged, vulnerable, and under-represented
HCC communities suggested that the adoption and use of ePHRs varied based on specific
socio-economic characteristics including age, income, education, and race/ethnicity (Kim
et al., 2009; Patel et al., 2011b; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013). Vulnerable populations may
reside in communities with poor computer and internet access; therefore, HCCs would
not have the same access to ePHRs as the general U.S. population (Patel et al. (2011b).
Given that studies have shown a significantly lower rates of ePHR adoption and use
among specific vulnerable, and under-representative patient populations, Patel et al.
(2011b) suggested that a “digital divide” may exists along economic, and racial ethnic
lines as those who are employed, with higher incomes are more likely to use ePHRs.
HCCs from vulnerable populations may benefit the most from using ePHRs, however,
they may be the population least able to adopt them and thus may not garner their
potential benefits (Kim et al., 2009). Although the views and opinions of HCCs from
vulnerable populations did not significantly differ from other participants investigated in
the reviewed literature, researchers concluded that ePHRs must be culturally relevant
with multi lingual content in order to serve linguistically divers populations (Kim et al.,
2009; Patel et al., 2011b). Furthermore, researchers recommended that continued
consideration be given to the views and opinions of HCCs from disadvantaged,
vulnerable, and under-represented communities in order to monitor disparities in access

35

to ePHRs with the goal of eliminating health care inequalities in the future (Kim et al.,
2009; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013).
While most of the research within the literature did not associate ePHR use and
adoption with any health condition or health status, a number research studies considered
the constructs within the context of a specific HCC population living with a disability
(Lafky, & Horan, 2011) and chronic disease condition such as cardio vascular disease,
respiratory disease, diabetes, cancer, hypertension and human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) (Beckjord et al., 2011; Hsiao et al., 2011; Kahn et al., 2010; Luque et al., 2013;
Mishuris et al., 2014; Or et al., 2011; Osborn et al., 2013; Tom et al., 2012; Wade-Vuturo
et al., 2013). Again, the views and opinions of HCCs from these populations did not
significantly differ from other participants investigated in the reviewed literature except
in one area. HCC with chronic illnesses showed stronger preference for, and are more
willing to share health care information electronically between providers (Beckjord et al.,
2011; Lafky, & Horan, 2011). Researchers suggested that HCCs affected by chronic
illness may be among those that access health care services more frequently, therefore,
ePHR use may be greater given the complexity of health care needs (Beckjord et al.,
2011; Lafky & Horan, 2011). The designated use of ePHRs could assist and serve in the
disease management of certain chronic health conditions and the associated symptoms
and treatments (Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013).
Theoretical and Methodological Review
Within the HCC ePHR perceptions and attitudes literature, the theoretical bases
underlying most research was either not present or was not reported as a fundamental
element in the study’s research design. Only six studies described using a theoretical
36

framework to ground the research and explain the individual factors of the phenomena
(Agarwal et al., 2013; Naun et al., 2014; ODonnell et al., 2011; Or et al., 2011; Silvestre
et al., 2009; Turvey et al., 2014; Whetstone & Goldsmith, 2009). The behavioral theories
integrated several implementation science models including: The technology acceptance
model (TAM) (Naun et al., 2014; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Silvestre et al., 2009;
Whetstone & Goldsmith, 2009), theory of planned behavior (TPB) (Naun et al., 2014),
the uniﬁed theory of acceptance and use of technology (UTAUT) (Or et al., 2011; Turvey
et al., 2014) and social cognitive theory (Agarwal et al., 2013). Use of the models
generally demonstrated strong predicative power of the selected integrated variables in
each of the studies. The researchers described how the technology acceptance models
successfully increased their understanding of the issues related to ePHR adoption and
continuity of use and concluded that the theoretical frameworks should continue to be
used in future research.
A balanced cross section of qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods research
designers formed the foundational basis of the research literature. Various research
methods were utilized to collect and analyze the data; yet most studies demonstrated a
preponderance for the use of the survey/questionnaire method (Agarwal et al., 2013;
Beckjord, et al., 2011; Burkhard, et al., 2010; Delbanco et al., 2012; Dhopeshwarkar et
al., 2012; Dimitropoulos et al., 2011; Goel et al., 2011; Kahn et al., 2010; Lam et al.,
2013; Luque et al., 2013; Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Or
et al., 2011; Patel et al., 2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; Silvestre et al.,
2009; Turvey et al., 2014; Vodicka et al., 2013; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Wald et al.,
2010; Walker et al., 2009; Weitzman et al., 2012; Wen et al., 2010; Whetstone &
37

Goldsmith, 2009). Focus groups (Kerns et al., 2013; Luque et al., 2013; Osborn et al.,
2013; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Walker et al., 2009; Weitzman et al., 2012; Woods et
al., 2013; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013), interviews (Haun et al., 2914; Hsiao et al., 2011;
Mishuris et al., 2014; Osborn et al., 2013; Wagner et al., 2010; Weitzman et al., 2012;
Zulman et al., 2011) observational studies (Haggstrom et al., 2011; Kim et al., 2009),
quasi-experimental trials (Delbanco et al., 2012; Vodicka et al., 2013) and contentanalysis (Goel et al., 2011; Mishuris et al., 2014; Naun et al., 2014; Weitzman et al.,
2012) were also identified as dominant research approaches within the literature. The
studies provided as comprehensive methodological framework for future evaluations of
HCCs and ePHRs adoption and use.
The research on HCCs’ perceptions of and attitudes towards ePHRs generally
took the form of two diverse perspectives including both retrospective and prospective
studies. Retrospective studies investigated HCCs that had previous experience using
ePHRs (Agarwal et al., 2013; Delbanco et al., 2012; Haun et al., 2014; Kim et al., 2009;
Lam et al., 2013; Nazi et al., 2013; Nazi et al., 2010; Or et al., 2011; Silvestre et al.,
2009; Vodicka et al., 2013; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Wald et al., 2010; Weitzman, et
al., 2012; Woods et al., 2013). With retrospective studies, HCCs were often provided
with access to ePHRs and then asked to provide their views and opinions after they have
used the tool for a certain amount of time, as a result, HCC attributes and perspectives are
a measurable value. Conversely, prospective research explored HCCs that has little to no
experience with, or had not yet adopted ePHRs in order to better understand the potential
behaviour intentions to adopt or reject (Goel et al., 2011; Haggstrom et al., 2011; Hsiao et
al., 2011; Zarcadoolas et al., 2013). Prospective studies solicited the views and opinions
38

of HCCs who have no experiences using ePHRs therefore, HCC attributes and
perspectives are considered perceived values. Prospective studies are important as
behavioral intentions to adopt and use can predict future adoption (Rogers, 2003). A
number of research studies in the review combined the perspective of both user and nonuser populations (Beckjord et al., 2011; Burkhard et al., 2010; Dhopeshwarkar et al.,
2012; Dimitropoulos et al. 2011; Kerns et al, 2013; Lafky, & Horan, 2011; Luque et al.,
2013; Mishuris et al., 2014; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Osborn et al., 2013;Patel et al.,
2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; Tom et al., 2012; Turvey et al., 2014;
Wagner et al., 2010; Walker et al, 2019; Walker et al., 2011; Wen et al., 2010;Whetstone
& Goldsmith, 2009). The varying behavioural intentions concerning ePHR use is an
important factor when reviewing perception studies. Combined, adopters, non-adopters,
and rejecters represent important perspectives from which to understand ePHR adoption
and use.
In synthesizing the HCC ePHR perceptions and attitudes literature, it is clear that
adoption and sustained continuity of use are essential in leveraging health care benefits to
capacity. The science of marketing, implementation, dissemination, and sustaining
patient facing e-health technologies has not been perfected; understating HCC needs is
central to intervening and remediating any barriers to adoption and sustained use of
ePHR technologies (Haun et al., 2014). It is clear from this review of the literature that
the future potential research avenues to acknowledge and explore in the area electronic
personal health records are abundant. Cumulatively, the works referenced for this
analysis provided the foundation for investigating meaningful use within the context of
ePHR adoption and rejection by HCCs. With the advent federal mandates and incentives
39

programs focusing intensely on facilitating HCCs’ access to their records, the
environment is suitable for continued research in this specific domain. Despite the
proliferation and the extensive breadth of analysis found in the personal health records
literature, to date, limited research has focused on ePHRs as it relates to the specific
criteria established in meaningful use directives. It is especially important to note that no
authors have yet considered researching the specific meaningful use criteria of providing
patients with online access to their health information with the ability to view, download
and transmit to a third party in addition to also providing patients with the option to
submit electronically patient-generated data and request amendments to their health
records online. The subject matter has not received any direct attention or consideration
in the academic literature specifically when considering the perceptions and attitudes of
HCCs. This deficiency may be reflected in circumstance, as recently published
meaningful use core objectives and measures are new, and many have yet to be
considered in a specific manner. This field of inquiry requires the infusion of some
reasoned academic research.

40

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
This research utilized a non-experimental, quantitative research design. The
researcher conducted a web-based, self-administered in-depth survey against a randomly
selected population of English speaking/reading adults residing in the United States
(U.S). The survey data was analyzed using descriptive univariate, bivariate and
inferential hypotheses testing statistics. The goal of this exploratory research project was
to gain an overall understanding of the extent of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs) adoption and intended use by health care consumers HCCs in the U.S. The
research also sought to determine if relationships existed between health care consumers’
(HCCs’) perceptions and attitudes towards electronic personal health records (ePHRs)
attributes and their adoption. This chapter outlines the research project’s design, sampling
strategy, data collection methodology, instrument design validity and reliability, data
analysis approach and ethical considerations.
Research Design
This research design originated from the quantitative, post-positivist research
tradition. Positivist research seeks out facts in terms of relationships among variables and
focuses upon quantitative methods to test and verify hypotheses (Swanson, 2005). From
an ontological perspective, this investigation examined health care consumers’ (HCCs’)
perceptions and attitudes towards specific electronic personal health record (ePHR)
technologies, and discussed their behavioral intention to adopt and continually use them
41

for personal individual purposes and or to share with health care providers or other
designated recipients. One method of collecting information from a population is to
question the study participants directly. Quantitative survey investigations attempt to
gather personal data from a sample group of individuals for the purpose of soliciting
responses about their social attitudes (Fowler, 2009). This research used the survey
methodology to test the existence of theoretically predicted relationships from the
diffusion of innovations research tradition.
This research design was structured as a non-experimental, quantitative study.
The researcher conducted a web-based, self-administered survey with a randomly
selected population of English speaking adults residing in the United States (U.S). The
survey results were statistically quantified to reveal relationships between variables from
among the study participants. All data was calculated and analyzed according to
documented established statistical criteria including: univariate, bivariate, and inferential
hypotheses testing statistics.
Survey research is frequently used to investigate topics in the social and
behavioral sciences that cannot directly be observed (Fowler, 2009). For this reason, the
research design is positioned to be the most appropriate approach and methodology to
quantify the variables, test the hypotheses, and answer the research questions under
investigation. This research builds upon previous attitude and adoption studies which
utilized the survey method as the primary data collection method (Agarwal et al., 2013;
Beckjord, et al., 2011; Burkhard, et al., 2010; Delbanco et al., 2012; Dhopeshwarkar et
al., 2012; Dimitropoulos et al., 2011; Goel et al., 2011; Kahn et al., 2010; Lam et al.,
2013; Luque et al., 2013; Nazi et al., 2010; Nazi et al., 2013; O’Donnell et al., 2011; Or
42

et al., 2011; Patel et al., 2011a; Patel et al., 2011b; Patel et al., 2012; Silvestre et al.,
2009; Turvey et al., 2014; Vodicka et al., 2013; Wade-Vuturo et al., 2013; Wald et al.,
2010; Walker et al., 2009; Weitzman et al., 2012; Wen et al., 2010; Whetstone &
Goldsmith, 2009).
Sample
How well a sample represents a population depends on the sample frame, sample
size and the specific design of the selection procedures (Fowler, 2009). The demographic
inclusion criteria for the target population for this research were English speaking/reading
persons over the age of 18 residing in the United States. It was not feasible to survey all
U.S. adult English speaking/reading residents about their attitudes and perceptions
relating to ePHR adoption and rejection, as such, a sampling of the population from the
sample frame was required. Due to the large participant numbers required for this study’s
sample frame to be representative of the adult, English speaking/reading U.S. population,
a recognized third-party survey panelist recruitment firm served as both the population
and the sample frame for this study.
Survey Monkey Audience recruited volunteer members of the sample frame.
Survey Monkey Audience retains a database of over one million panelists to participate
in on-line surveys (Survey Monkey, 2015). Survey Monkey’s panelists served as the
sample frame. The sample frame encompassed participants who completed a profile that
met the criteria of the target population. The sample frame was representative and
corresponded to the characteristics of the target population under study. A random
probability sampling technique was used which removed any form of bias from the
selection process.
43

Fowler (2009) suggested that the sample size should be based on the purpose and
objectives of the study. The nature of the research questions required that a large
population be sampled from the sample frame. The sample size calculation was based on
(a) known population size, (b) determined margin of error, and (c) desired confidence
interval. For the purposes of this research, the optimal sample size was determined to be
300 participants. The research participants were randomly selected from the study’s
sample frame. Response rates were monitored to ensure a total sample target of a
minimum of 300 participants was achieved. To participate in the study, the selected
participants may or may not have used ePHRs or received health care services from a
health care provider. Given that the survey respondents were members of a survey
panelist recruitment firm, they all had access to a computer and internet services. All
members of the sample frame had an equal opportunity of being selected for the sample,
a factor that reflects the ethics of justice according to the Belmont Principles (Fowler,
2009).
The external validity of this study’s findings was dependent on the
representativeness of the population of interest in the sample frame and sample. The
purpose of this research design was to sample individuals from a population with a view
towards making statistical inferences about the characteristics of the larger target
population as a whole. As this research was interested in the perceptions of health care
consumers (that is, English/speaking/reading adults residing in the U.S.), the sample
selection procedures and the sample size were consistent with current survey design
methodologies as outlined by Fowler (2009). The third-party panelist recruitment firm
permitted the recruitment and selection of a large sample population that was
44

representative of the adult U.S. population, which would otherwise have been
inaccessible. The sampling design was feasible for the focus of this study and yielded
valid results and conclusions to address effectively the research problem. The rigorous
sampling approach was appropriate to investigate the research questions under
investigation.
Instrumentation/Measures
The data collection instrument and measurement tool was comprised of a selfadministered survey that participants read and responded to. The survey instrument
included 54 questions and was logically organized into four sections, including Section 1,
the Introduction; Section 2, the Perceived Attributes Scale; Section 3, the Behavioral
Intentions Scale; and Sections 4, the Demographics. The survey instrument is presented
in Appendix A. All questions were structured as closed-ended and specific response
categories were provided. Within Section 1, participants were provided with the Informed
Consent Form (referenced as Question 1 in the survey design) and a comprehensive
definition of an ePHR with three accompanying images of varying types and examples
(referenced as Question 2 in the survey design).
Section 2 encompassed the central perceived attributes scale. The section
questions were based on a combination of two existing validated scales and instruments
utilized in previous studies including Moore and Benbasat’s (1991) adoption of
information technology innovation survey and Atkinson’s (2007) perceived attributes
questionnaire. Together the preceding studies each provided five perceived attribute
constructs based on Roger’s diffusion of innovations theory including (a) relative
advantage, (b) complexity (simplicity), (c) trialability, (d) observability, and (e)
45

compatibility. A total of 42 questions were presented, 18 from Moore and Benbasat
(1991) and 24 from Atkinson (2007).Three duplicate questions were removed from the
original scale leaving 39 items. Moore and Benbasat’s (1991) factors captured 63% of the
variance with internal consistency reliability ranging from .71. – 92, while Atkinson’s
(2007) factors accounted for 44.4% of the variance with internal consistency reliability
ranging from .66 - .91. Question statements taken from the studies were utilized with
small modifications including changing the object of the study and verb tense. A 7-point
Likert scale was used to indicate participant level of agreement with the instrument
statements including Strongly Disagree, Disagree, Somewhat Disagree Neither Agree nor
Disagree, Somewhat Agree, Agree, and Strongly Agree. Permissions to use each survey
instruments were obtained.
Section 3 contained the central behavioral intention scale. The section questions
were based on meaningful use mandates for electronic health record system functionality
with statements relative to the four behavioural intentions (view, transmit, submit, and
amend). Meaningful use mandates require that physician and or hospital electronic record
systems must provide HCCs with the functionality to view online, download, and
transmit their own health information and optionally permit HCCs to submit
electronically patient-generated data and request amendments to their health records. A 5point Likert scale was used to indicate participant level of agreement with the instrument
statements including: Very Unlikely, Unlikely, Not Sure, Likely and Very Likely.
Finally, Section 4 incorporated the seven demographic information scale items including
gender, age, income, geographic location, education, ethnicity/race, and, health status.
The basic demographic information was included for recordkeeping purposes and was
46

not used for any level of hypotheses testing. Table 2 presents the structure and outline of
the survey instrument with scale/subscale questions and related constructs. Why not use
them as possible moderators.

Table 2. Structure and Outline of the Survey Instrument Questions and Constructs
________________________________________________________________________
Section / Description
Section 1 Introduction

Section 2 Perceived Attributes Scale

Question
Number

Construct

1-2
1
2

CONSENT
ADOPTION

3-41

Section 3 Behavioral Intentions Scale

Sections 4 Demographics

3-13
14-22
23-28
29-35
36-41

RELATIVE
ADVANTAGE
SIMPLICITY
TRIALABILITY
OBSERVABILITY
COMPATIBILITY

42-47
42
43-44
45
46
47

ADOPT
VIEW
TRANSMIT
SUBMIT
AMEND

48-54
48
49
50
51
52
53
54

AGE
GENDER
STATE
INCOME
RACE/ETHNICITY
EDUCATION
HEALTH

________________________________________________________________________
47

No field-testing was performed as a part of instrument development process
however, prior to the publication and distribution of the survey, a pilot study was
conducted. The pilot study consisted of 152 participants randomly selected from a third
party survey panelist service (Survey Monkey). The objective of the pilot study was to
systematically and critically test the usability of the instrument, and cognitively confirm
that respondents consistently comprehended the survey statements and questions. Three
minor changes were made to the survey instrument as a result of the pilot survey. To
begin, visual image examples of hospital, health care provider, and commercially
available web-based or mobile applications ePHRs were provide to strengthen the
definition provided in question 2. Additionally, the phrase “I think” was inserted into
each question/statement within the central perceived attributes scale items to strengthen
the fact that the questions related to participant perceptions and attitudes towards ePHRs.
Finally, the choice of “nether agree or disagree” was added to the Likert scale for the
perceived attribute instrument items to provide participants with the additional option
when not definitively convinced if they somewhat agreed or disagreed with the statement
presented. With these minor revisions, it was determined that the survey instrument
provided a valid measure for the constructs under investigation. The pilot study data was
not used in the final analysis. The construct validity and reliability of the survey
instrument were statistically tested using Cronbach’s alpha and Exploratory Factor
Analysis (Principle Component Analysis). All sub-scale items on the perceived attributes
scale including: relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability,
and compatibility were subjected to an internal reliability analysis to determine the
reliability of the scale items.
48

Data Collection
Data collection is complex and involves many aspects of the survey research
process including sampling, type of population, question form, question content, response
rate, available facilities, and length of data collection (Fowler, 2009). This research
applied a single data collection method. Data was collected utilizing a self-administered,
online web-based survey instrument. The researcher created the online design of the
survey. The survey instrument was made available to a random sample of the sample
frame on the first day the survey opened. Email invitations were sent to all participants
through the third part survey panel alerting potential participants of the survey’s
availability. The survey was housed in a secure web portal. Participants were invited to
participate in the survey by means of a link imbedded in an email notification.
Respondents directly entered responses into the web-based data entry form. Each study
participant completed one survey. Details about the study were provided to study
participants prior to commencing the survey. Each study participant electronically signed
consent forms prior to beginning the survey. The survey pacing allowed participants to
consider each question carefully prior to responding. Participants had the opportunity to
validate their responses after they had been selected prior to final submission. Responses
to questions were calculated as participants complete the survey within the survey
panelist software tool.
The Informed Consent Form, required participants to attest that they meet the
inclusion criteria (i.e. English speaking/reading adults over the age of 18 residing in the
United States). Basic demographic information relating to the age and geographical
location of the participant was captured. Incomplete survey responses received were
49

removed from the data analysis and research process. The third-party online survey firm
also provided verification and validation of the age and location of survey panelists. In
accordance with criteria established in the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
(COPPA), the third party online survey firm does not permit minors under the age of 13
to register with the service or participate as a panelist.
The survey was made available to participants for a period of two weeks. The
survey took approximately 10-20 minutes to complete. One reminder was sent to all
participants who had not yet completed the survey after the first 1-week period.
Participants were able to respond to the survey at their convenience in a suitable physical
location of their choice. Participants were required to answer all scale questions before
proceeding through the survey. Demographic questions were not mandatory. No followup interviews with survey participants were required and were not consider as an
elements of the research design.
To obtain consent, study participants were presented with an online Informed
Consent Form (referenced as Question 1 in the survey design). After the study
participants reviewed the Informed Consent Form, they were required to attest that they
agreed to participate in the study by selecting the "Yes, I agree and wish to participate"
radial button. A date stamp indicated agreement to participate and obtained consent.
Participants were also presented with an option not to participate in the study.
Participants who selected the “No, I do NOT wish to participate” radial button were
immediately released and removed from survey participation.
To begin the survey, participants were provided with a comprehensive definition
of an ePHR and were presented with 3 images of varying types and examples of ePHRs
50

including 1) a web-based record that can be accessed only by a patient to access and
maintain personal health information; 2) a web-based record that is provided to a patient
by a hospital or health care provider where both the provider and patient can access and
maintain personal health information; 3) a mobile application that can be used on devices
such as smartphones and tablets to access and maintain personal health information.
Participants were then questioned about their current use of ePHRs. Participants were
given the option to select the YES or NO radial button to the following question “I
currently use Electronic Personal Health Records to manage information about my
health” (referenced as Question 2 in the survey design). No definition was provided for
extent of use. Participants who selected YES were presented with an instrument with
scale phrased in the current use present tense. Participants who selected NO were
presented with the same instrument with scale phrased in the future use tense. All
participants answered the same behavioural intention and demographic scale items.
Response rates were periodically calculated and validated to ensure that a minimum of
300 respondents participated in the survey.
Data Analysis
The survey results were statistically quantified to reveal relationships between
variables from among the study participants. All data was calculated and analyzed
according to documented established statistical criteria including: univariate, bivariate,
and inferential hypotheses testing statistics. To begin, univariate exploratory data analysis
was conducted for the all variables in each of the four sections of the survey. The
categorical (discrete) variables distributions were calculated with frequencies (counts)
and percentages of respondents, while mean and standard deviations were calculated for
51

the continuous variables. It was determined that the adoption, behavioral intentions, and
all demographic variables with the exception of age were considered to be categorical
variable, while the perceived attribute variables were deemed to be continuous variables.
For the first phase of the analysis, demographic descriptive statistics for the
categorical variables gender, income, geographic location, education, ethnicity/race, and,
health status were calculated with frequencies and percentages of respondents, while
mean and standard deviations were calculated for continuous variable age. Descriptive
analyses for the behavioural intentions categorical variables (view, transmit, submit, and
amend) were calculated with frequencies and percentages of respondents, while mean and
standard deviations were calculated for the perceived attributes continuous variables
(relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility)
for those that adopted, intended to adopt, or rejected ePHRs.
For the second phase of the analysis, The behavioural intentions categorical
variables (view, transmit, submit, and amend) were then analyzed with Welch’s F test to
determine if there were any differences in rank according to level of use of ePHRs. Level
of use consisted of three groups, the Adopt group, the Intend to Adopt group, and the
Reject group. For the third phase, univariate comparisons of the perceived attributes were
conducted between HCC adopters, intended adopters, and rejecters of ePHRs. An alpha
level of .05 was used as a decision point for statistical significance. Analyses were
conducted using SPSS v.22.0.
For the purposes of this research, the optimal sample size was determined to be
300 participants. Prior to survey execution, a A priori power analysis was conducted
using G*Power version 3.1.9.2 to determine the minimum sample size required to find
52

significance with a desired level of power set at .95, an α-level at .05. Preliminary
determination for potential multifaceted analysis for statistical tests determined that some
correlation examinations were to commence to make predictive calculations between two
groups of participants. Based on the analysis, it was determined that a minimum of 300
participants were required to ensure adequate power for the correlation analysis.
z tests - Correlations: Two independent Pearson r's
Analysis:
A priori: Compute required sample size
Input:
Tail(s)
= Two
Effect size q
= 0.50
α err prob
= 0.05
Power (1-β err prob)
= 0.95
Allocation ratio N2/N1
= 1.5
Output:
Critical z
= 1.9599640
Sample size group 1
= 90
Sample size group 2
= 134
Total sample size
= 224
Actual power
= 0.9510657
(Faul, Erdfelder, Buchner, & Lang, 2009).
Validity and Reliability
The construct validity and reliability of the survey instrument were statistically
tested using Cronbach’s alpha and exploratory factor analysis (principle component
analysis). All sub-scale items on the perceived attributes scale including: relative
advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility were
subjected to an internal reliability analysis to determine the reliability of the scale items.
Results revealed that the eleven relative advantage items demonstrated excellent
reliability (α = .971), as did the nine complexity (simplicity) items (α = .936) and the six
compatibility items (α = .941). The six trialability items also demonstrated good interitem reliability (α = .873). The seven observability items also appeared to have good
53

internal consistency (α = .826); however, inspection of the item-total statistics indicated
that Question 35: I have difficulty explaining why using Electronic Health Records is
beneficial, had a small and negative corrected item-total correlation (r = - .073) indicating
an almost negligible relationship between the item and the remainder of the scale. As
such, this item was deleted from the scale construction. The remaining six observability
items demonstrated excellent internal consistency (α = .911).
Additionally, all 39 sub-scale items on the perceived attributes scale including: relative
advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility were
subjected to exploratory factor analysis (principle component analysis) to determine the
structure and construct validity of the scale items. To begin, two empirical indices
regarding the sample’s correlation matrix revealed that it was suitable for factor-analytic
procedures: The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure of sampling adequacy was highly
acceptable with KMO. = . 965 and Bartlett's Test of Sphericity was significant with p <
.000. Using a varimax (orthogonal) rotation, the results revealed a 5-factor solution.
Factors with eigenvalues greater than 1.00 were retained. The five-factor solution
accounted for 75.83% of the total variance. Table 3 presents the total eigenvalues and
percentages of variance for each component.
Items with factor loadings less than .30 as well as items that loaded on multiple
factors were examined. Table 4 presents the results of the final rotated factor analysis. All
eleven Relative Advantage items loaded on Factor 1. All nine Simplicity items loaded on
Factor 2. Six out of the seven Observability items loaded on Factor 3.and four of the six
Trialability items loaded on Factor 4. Four Compatibility items loaded on Factor 1, with
the remaining Compatibility item loading on Factor 3. The remaining two Trialability
54

items loaded on Observability. One final Observability item loaded independently; as
discussed above, this item was removed from the scale due to low correlations with the
remaining items. Although several sub-scale items did not load on their expected factors,
the internal reliability estimates of the original scales were excellent. The survey
instrument was not altered and was considered valid and reliable. The survey questions
were considered to be a good measurement of the constructs under study.

Table 3. Eigenvalues and Percentages of Variance Associated with Each Component
________________________________________________________________________
Component Total

% of Variance

Cumulative %

1
2
3
4
5

56.049
7.119
5.609
4.341
2.717

56.049
63.168
68.776
73.117
75.834

21.859
2.776
2.187
1.693
1.060

________________________________________________________________________
Table 4. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items
________________________________________________________________________
Original
Scale*
RA
RA

Item
I think Electronic Records
make it easier to manage
information about my health.
I think Electronic Records
enhance my effectiveness in
managing information about
my health.

1

.843

.828

55

2

3

4

5

Table 4 continued. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items.
Original Item
Scale*
RA

RA

RA

RA

RA
RA
RA
RA
RA

CB

I think Electronic Records
offer me real advantages over
the way I manage information
about my health.
I think Electronic Records
make managing information
about my health a better
experience than I would have
otherwise.
I think Electronic Records
enable me to manage
information about my health
more quickly.
I think Electronic Records are
better than using paper based
records to manage information
about my health.
I enjoy using Electronic
Records to manage
information about my health.
I think Electronic Records
improve the quality of my
health information.
I think Electronic Records give
me greater control over my
health information.
I think people should use
Electronic Records to manage
information about their health.
I think Electronic Records are
more interesting than other
materials I have used to
manage information about my
health.
Using Electronic Health
Records fits into how I like to
seek information about my
health.

1

2

3

.820

.792

.320

.783

.309

.757

.372

.755

.306

.754
.752
.742

.333
.328

.714

.664

56

.334

.462

4

5

Table 4 continued. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items.
Original
Scale*
CB

SM
SM
SM

SM

SM
SM
SM
SM
SM
OB

Item
I think that using Electronic
Records fits well with the way
I like to manage my health
information.
I have no difficulty
understanding how to navigate
Electronic Health Records.
I have no difficulty getting
various Electronic Health
Record functionality to work.
I have no difficulty getting
Electronic Health Record
technology to work on my PC
or mobile device.
I have no difficulty
understanding how Electronic
Health Records technically
work.
I think my interaction with
Electronic Health Records is
clear and understandable.
Learning to use Electronic
Records is easy for me.
I have no difficulty finding
information about my health
when I use Electronic Records.
Overall, I think Electronic
Records are easy to use.
I think it is easy to get
Electronic Health Records to
do what I want them to do.
I think people are able to tell
that I know more about my
health information when I use
Electronic Health Records.

1

2

3

.635

.357

.521

.840
.818

.319

.773

.762

.455

.722

.438

.719

.318

.704

.469

.700

.409

.663

.303

57

.362

.726

4

5

Table 4 continued. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items.
Original
Scale*
TR

TR
OB

CB

CB

OB
CB

CB

OB

Item
Electronic Personal Health
Records are often called ePHR.
The name ePHR made me
want to use Electronic Records
to manage information about
my health.
I am more likely to want to use
Electronic Records because of
being part of this survey.
I think other people seem
interested in using Electronic
Health Records when they see
me using them.
I have no difficulty in telling
others how Electronic Records
have improved my overall
health and well-being.
I think using Electronic
Records makes information
about my health seem more
relevant to me.
I think other people who could
use Electronic Health Records
would like using them.
I think Electronic Records help
me to learn more about myself
while also being able to
manage information about my
health.
I think Electronic Records are
compatible with all aspects of
how I like to manage my
health information.
The results of using Electronic
Health Records are apparent to
me.

1

2

3

4

5

.685

.684

.649

.339

.617

.614

.525

.463

.372

.612

.581

.579

.546

.395

.564

.398

.339

.542

58

.358

.327

Table 4 continued. Final Rotated Factor Loadings for Perceived Attribute Scale Items.
Original Item
Scale*
OB

OB

TR

TR

TR

TR

OB

1

I think I could communicate
the consequences of using
Electronic Health Records to
others.
I have no difficulty telling
others about the results of
.343
using Electronic Health
Records.
I was permitted to use
Electronic Records on a trial
basis long enough to see what
they could do.
Before deciding whether to use
Electronic Records, I was able
to properly try them out on a
trial basis.
Being able to try out
Electronic Records was
.314
important in my decision to
use them.
Being able to try out
Electronic Records was
important in my decision to
purchase them.
I might have difficulty
explaining why using
Electronic Health Records
would be beneficial.

2

.418

3

4

5

.495

.348

.399

.457

.362

.882

.879

.760

.340

.755

.802

________________________________________________________________________
Note. *RA=Relative Advantage, CB=Compatibility, SM=Simplicity, TR=Trialability, and
OB=Observability.

In addition to the statistical tests conducted for construct validity and reliability of
the survey instrument, the theoretical and methodological foundations for this research
were comprehensively sound. The diffusion of innovations theoretical framework was a
relevant and accurate selection to investigate the constructs of the topic under
59

examination. In addition, the methodology was appropriate to the problem being
investigated and the instruments used were reliable and valid.
Ethical Considerations
Interactions with human beings during social science research can raise ethical
considerations. No ethical issues or conflicts of interest were identified during the course
of this research. The privacy and confidentiality of all participants was protected at all
times. Participants remained anonymous to the researcher. In addition, all survey
responses and accompanying research data was safely stored and protected. All paperbased research information was kept in a locked cabinet in the doctoral learner’s office
and all electronic based research information will be encrypted and stored in a passwordprotected computer. Data collected will be maintained electronically for question
management and data analysis purposes for a period of 7 years post-dissertation
publication date, at which time all paper documentation will be securely destroyed
(shredded) and all electronic based research information will be securely deleted and
scrubbed (including all security back-ups). Data on the third-party survey panelist
website will be deleted upon completion of the dissertation.
Study participants were not exposed to situations that could have resulted in
physical or psychological anxiety or harm. The civil and human rights of all study
participants were protected at all times. The study participants were volunteers and were
not identified as being associated with a vulnerable population. Each study participant
was fully informed of the nature, intent and purpose of the study and all understood the
objectives and the nature of the investigation. Permission from the study participant
volunteers were solicited before the survey process began and online informed consent
60

forms were registered. No coercion or undue influence to participate in the study took
place during the recruitment and selection phase of this research project. Study
participants were all treated fairly and equitable. Capella’s Learner Code of Conduct,
Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative
(CITI) procedures were followed and adhered to. In addition, all research was conducted
in accordance with external criteria established in Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter
45, part 46 (45 CFR 46) - Common Rule Section and Belmont Report.

61

CHAPTER 4. RESULTS
Introduction
This chapter outlines the results of the research study. The purpose of this chapter
is to present the findings of the research based on the methodology and data collection
procedures described in Chapter 3. This chapter begins by providing a review of the
sampling strategy including sample size and power analysis. A comprehensive
demographic description of the sample population follows the review. Significant
findings were identified throughout the detailed statistical analysis of the data, as such; a
summary of the results, anchored within the original research questions and hypotheses is
also presented in this chapter. Finally, a comprehensive explanation and presentation of
the results with analysis techniques concludes the chapter. The purpose of this study was
to investigate the following research questions and associated hypotheses:
Research Question 1
Is there a difference between health care consumers (HCCs) who adopt, intend to
adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs) and their
intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them?
Research Question 2
Is there a relationship between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions of
and attitudes towards electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes (as measured by

62

relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility)
and their adoption, intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption)?
This research study investigated the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1
H01 (Null Hypothesis) there is no difference between health care consumers
(HCCs) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them.
HA1 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a difference between health care consumers
(HCCs) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intentions to view, transmit, submit and amend them.
Hypotheses 2-6
H02 (Null Hypothesis] there is no relationship between perceived relative
advantage (perceived attribute 1) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
HA2 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived relative
advantage (perceived attribute 1) and a Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
H03 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived complexity
(simplicity), (perceived attribute 2) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).

63

HA3 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived complexity
(simplicity), (perceived attribute 2) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
H04 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived trialability (perceived
attribute 3) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended adoption, or
rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA4 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived trialability
(perceived attribute 3) and a health care consumers (HCCs’) adoption, intended adoption,
or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
H05 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived observability
(perceived attribute 4) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA5 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived observability
(perceived attribute 4) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
H06 (Null Hypothesis) there is no relationship between perceived compatibility
(perceived attribute 5) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).
HA6 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a relationship between perceived compatibility
(perceived attribute 5) and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption, intended
adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records (ePHRs).

64

Description of the Population and Sample
Data was collected utilizing a self-administered, online web-based survey
instrument. The survey instrument was made available to a random sample of the sample
frame on the first day the survey opened. Email invitations were sent to all participants
through the third part survey panel alerting potential participants of the survey’s
availability. Participants were invited to participate in the survey by means of a link
imbedded in an email notification. 392 survey panelists selected the imbedded survey
link. Of those, 11 chose not to participate further leaving 381 who were presented with
the Informed Consent Form. Of the 381, 32 did not consent to participate and were
released from participation immediately. 349 participants agreed to the Informed Consent
Form (referenced as Questions 1 in the survey design). Participants were given the option
to select the YES or NO radial button to the following question “I currently use
Electronic Personal Health Records (ePHR) to manage information about my health”
(referenced as Question 2 in the survey design). Of these 349, 109 said YES to electronic
personal health record (ePHR) use and 240 said NO. Of the 109 that selected YES to
ePHR use, 4 did not complete the entire survey and were removed from analysis. 105
participants completed all the Likert scale survey questions. Of the 240 that selected NO
to ePHR use, 18 did not complete the entire survey and were removed from analysis. 222
completed all the Likert scale survey questions. A total of 327 participants responded to
the full survey and the responses were included for analysis.
For the first phase of the analysis, demographic descriptive statistics for the
categorical variables gender, income, geographic location, education, ethnicity/race, and,
health status were calculated with frequencies and percentages of respondents, while
65

mean and standard deviations were calculated for continuous variable age. When
respondents were asked about Electronic Personal Health Record (ePHR) Current Use
(Question 2), the majority of participants reported not currently using ePHRs 222
(67.8%), while 105 (32.1%) reported currently using ePHRs. Table 5 displays the
frequencies and percentages of respondents for categorical demographic variables. The
sample was relatively evenly distributed amongst males and females; there were slightly
more females n = 172 (52.6%) than there were males n = 155 (47.4%). The sample
showed much variation in income levels, with the largest group making an income
ranging from $50,000 to $74,999 n = 85 (26.0%). Many participants had received some
graduate school or a graduate degree n = 133 (40.7%). In addition almost one-quarter of
the sample had a Bachelor’s degree n = 74 (22.6%). One-tenth of participants had a high
school education or less n = 33 (10.1%). Additionally, the majority of participant report
having a good n = 175 (53.5%) and very good n = 98 (30.0) health status.
Approximately one quarter of the respondents reported their primary resident state
location as Texas n =85 (26%), and one tenth of the sample was from California n = 33
(10.1%). Other states that were well represented in the sample included Florida n = 21
(6.4%), New York n = 17 (5.2%), Ohio n = 12 (3.7%), Illinois n = 11 (3.4%), Michigan n
= 11 (3.4%), Wisconsin n = 11 (3.4%), and Pennsylvania n = 10 (3.1%). Participants’
ages ranged from 19 years (born in 1995) to 75 years (born in 1939) (M = 42.17 (born
1971.83), SD = 12.784). The majority of participants identified themselves as
racially/ethnically White n = (75.5%), the remaining participants were evenly distributed
amongst Black, Hispanic, and Asian.

66

Table 5. Frequencies and Percentages for Categorical Demographic Variables
________________________________________________________________________
N

%

Gender
Male
Female

155
172

47.4
52.6

Income
Less than $20,000
$20,000 to $34,999
$35,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $74,999
$75,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $149,000
$150,000 or More

57
33
43
85
54
36
19

17.4
10.1
13.1
26.0
16.5
11.0
5.8

Education
Some High School
High School Degree or Equivalent
Some College
Associate Degree
Bachelor Degree
Some Graduate Work
Graduate Degree

4
29
57
30
74
30
103

1.2
8.9
17.4
9.2
22.6
9.2
31.5

Categorical Demographic Variable

Health Status
Very Bad
2
.6
Bad
8
2.4
Fair
44
13.5
Good
175
53.5
Very Good
98
30.0
________________________________________________________________________
Summary of Results
The survey results were statistically quantified to reveal relationships between
variables from among the study participants. All data was calculated and analyzed
according to documented established statistical criteria including: univariate, bivariate,
67

and inferential hypotheses testing statistics. Participants were classified into mutually
exclusive groups according to their current or intended use of ePHRs. Specifically, those
who currently used ePHRs were classified as Adopters, respondents who stated they were
likely or very likely to adopt ePHRs were classified as Intenders, and respondents who
did not fall into either of these categories were classified as Rejecters.
To answer Research Question 1, is there a difference between health care
consumers’ (HCCs’) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic
personal health records (ePHRs) and their intention to view, transmit, submit and amend
them? To comprehend the context framework relating to electronic personal health record
(ePHR) adoption and perceived attributes, preliminary information relating to the extent
of health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adopt, intended to adopt, or rejection (non-adoption)
and subsequent intention to view, transmit, submit and amend is required. Results
indicate that approximately half of the sample reported that they currently use or intend to
use ePHRs, while the remaining half do not currently use or intend to adopt ePHRs.
Overall, respondents stated they were more likely to view ePHRs than to transmit,
submit, or amend them. Analyses of behavioral intentions according to the groups of
ePHR users indicated higher levels of agreement/likelihood for Adopters and Intenders in
comparison to the Rejecters group. Adopters and Intenders did not differ in their
distributions for any of the behavioral intentions. To answer Research Question 2, is there
a relationship between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions of and attitudes
towards electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes (as measured by relative
advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility) and their
adoption, intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption)? Descriptive statistics of the
68

perceived attributes were calculated according to the groups of ePHR users. Univariate
comparisons indicated that relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), observability, and
compatibility were significantly higher for the Adopt and Intend group than for the Reject
group. The Adopt and Intend group did not differ from each other on these attributes. The
exception was for trialability -- this perceived attribute had a higher mean in the Intend
group than either the Adopt or Reject groups. Thus, Adopters and Intenders tended to
report similar perceived attitudes toward ePHR attributes, and their ratings were higher
than those who did not intend to adopt ePHRs. However, trialability was rated as an
important attribute for Intenders only.
Details of Analysis and Results
Analyses of these survey data yielded a number of interesting and germane
findings. This section begins with a descriptive analysis of the behavioral intentions of
respondents overall, followed by an analysis of the differences in behavioral intentions
between adopters, those intending to adopt, and rejecters (non-adopters). Then the
perceived attributes are described and the means compared according to the level of
ePHR adoption (i.e., adoption, intention, non-adoption).
To begin, univariate exploratory data analysis was conducted for the all variables
in each of the four sections of the survey. The categorical (discrete) variables
distributions were calculated with frequencies (counts) and percentages of respondents,
while mean and standard deviations were calculated for the continuous variables. It was
determined that the adoption, behavioral intentions, and all demographic variables with
the exception of age were considered to be categorical variable, while the perceived
attribute variables were deemed to be continuous variables.
69

For the first phase of the analysis, demographic descriptive statistics for the
categorical variables gender, income, geographic location, education, ethnicity/race, and,
health status were calculated with frequencies and percentages of respondents, while
mean and standard deviations were calculated for continuous variable age. Descriptive
analyses for the behavioural intentions categorical variables (view, transmit, submit, and
amend) were calculated with frequencies and percentages of respondents, while mean and
standard deviations were calculated for the perceived attributes continuous variables
(relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility)
for those that adopted, intended to adopt, or rejected ePHRs.
Current and Intended Uses and Rejections of ePHRs
To begin the survey, participants were provided with a comprehensive definition
of an ePHR and were presented with three images of varying types and examples of
ePHRs. Respondents were then questioned about their current use of ePHRs, formally
assessed by selecting either the YES or NO option to the question: “I currently use
Electronic Personal Health Records to manage information about my health”. To answer
Research Question 1, to what extent are health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adopting,
intending to adopt, or rejecting (non-adopting) electronic personal health records
(ePHRs), results revealed that of the 327 respondents in the sample, 105 (32.1%)
responded affirmatively and 222 (67.9%) reported that they did not currently use ePHRs;
thus the majority of participants reported not currently using ePHRs.
To assist with the analysis of the data, participants were classified into three
mutually exclusive groups according to their current or intended use of ePHRs. Of the
222 participants that reported not currently using ePHRs, 71 (32.0%) stated that they
70

were likely or very likely to adopt the use of ePHRs in the future (i.e., intend to adopt).
Note that the survey item pertaining to intention to adopt ePHRs was only administered
to the respondents who stated they did not currently use ePHRs (n = 222). A 5-point scale
was used to assess respondents’ agreement with the statements. Table 6 provides the
distribution of responses.

Table 6. Frequencies and Percentages of Adopters, Intenders and Rejecters
________________________________________________________________________
Adopter Category
Adopter
Intender (Intention to Adopt)
Rejecter

N

%

105

32.1%

71

21.7%

151

46.1%

_______________________________________________________________________
Furthermore, responses of Likely (4) or Very Likely (5) were grouped and classified as
those who showed “Intent” to adopt or engage in the behaviors pertaining to ePHR use;
in contrast, the group of respondents who reported low likelihood of behavioral intent to
continue not to adopt or use ePHRs were classified as “Rejecters” (ratings of Very
Unlikely (1) to Not Sure (3). For the purpose of this investigates, those who currently
used ePHRs were classified as Adopters (n = 105; 32.1%), respondents who stated they
were likely or very likely to adopt ePHRs were classified as Intenders (n = 71; 21.7%),
and respondents who did not fall into either of these categories were classified as
Rejecters (n = 151; 46.1%).

71

When calculated together, scores for participants’ current adoption (n = 105;
32.1%), and intentions to adopt ePHRs (n = 71; 21.7%), result in a total of 176
participants (53.8 %), while the remaining 151 (46.1 %) participants currently and
continue to reject ePHRs. The sample is almost equally divided and undecided about the
adoption of ePHRs.
Behavioral Intentions Relating to ePHRs
To comprehend the contextual framework relating to electronic personal health
record (ePHR) adoption and perceived attributes, preliminary information relating to the
extent of health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adopt, intended to adopt, or rejection (nonadoption) and subsequent intention to view, transmit, submit and amend was required.
Section three of the survey contained the central behavioral intention scale. The section
questions were based on meaningful use mandates for electronic health record system
functionality with statements relative to (a) intention to adopt ePHRs and (b) the four
behavioral intentions of view (2 items), transmit, submit, and amend (1 item each). The
extent to which the sample as a whole (i.e., including adopters and non-adopters)
intended to view, transmit, submit, and amend ePHRs is also shown in Table 7. A 5-point
scale was used to assess respondents’ agreement with the statements. Intention was
defined the proportions of participants responding Likely (4 on the scale) and Very
Likely (5 on the scale); while non-intending was defined as the proportions of
participants responding Very Unlikely to Not Sure (1-3 on the scale). For the intent to
view ePHRs (either personal or from health care provider) Likely was the predominate
choice, with substantial proportions also reporting that they were Very Likely to view
their ePHRs. Overall, 61.8% and 77.1% of respondents intended to view
72

Table 7. Distribution for Behavioral Intentions
________________________________________________________________________
Behavioral
Intention
View
Personal
ePHRs
View
ePHRs
from HCP
Transmit
ePHRs
from HCP
Submit
Personal
ePHRs
Amend
ePHRs
from HCP

Very
Unlikely
(1)

Unlikely
(2)

Not Sure
(3)

Likely
(4)

Very Likely
(5)

Intend
(4 & 5)

16

30

79

133

69

202

(4.9%)

(9.2%)

(24.2%)

(40.7%)

(21.1%)

(61.8%)

16

11

48

141

111

252

(4.9%)

(3.4%)

(14.7%)

(43.1%)

(33.9%)

(77.1%)

33

27

111

107

49

156

(10.1%)

(8.3%)

(33.9%)

(32.7%)

(15.0%)

(47.7%)

33

41

112

100

41

141

(10.1%)

(12.5%)

(34.3%)

(30.6%)

(12.5%)

(43.1%)

33

50

138

77

29

106

(10.1%)

(15.3%)

(42.2%)

(23.5%)

(8.9%)

(32.4%)

_______________________________________________________________________
their personal and health care provider (HCP) ePHRs, respectively. With regard to the
intention to transmit or submit ePHRs, approximately one-third of the sample was not
sure, and an additional third was likely to either transmit or submit ePHRs. Overall,
47.7% and 43.1% of the sample intended to transmit and submit ePHRs, respectively.
Thus, the sample as a whole showed no clear intention or non-intention to engage in these
73

behaviors pertaining to ePHRs. Finally, almost half the sample (42.2%) stated they were
not sure with regard to their intention to amend their ePHRs from their health care
provider. The proportion showing intention to amend ePHRs was 32.4% which is
significantly fewer than half the sample and less that the other behavioral intentions.
With respect to the four behavioral intentions, significantly more than half the
participants intended to view their personal ePHR or the ePHR created from their health
care provider (estimates of 61.8% and 77.1%, respectively). However, participants were
undecided about their intentions to submit or transmit ePHRs. The proportions of
participants reporting intention v. non-intention to submit or transmit ePHRs were
approximately equal. Finally, fewer than half the participants (32.4%) reported intention
to amend their ePHR from their HCP.
Behavioral Intentions by Current, Intended Adoption, and Rejections of ePHRs
For the second phase of the analysis, and to answer Research Question 1, is there
a difference between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) who adopt, intend to adopt, or
reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs) and their intention to
view, transmit, submit and amend them, the behavioural intentions categorical variables
were then analyzed with Welch’s robust F test to determine if there were any differences
in rank according to level of use of ePHRs. As described in the previous section,
respondents were categorized into three groups according to their current and intended
adoption of ePHRs: the Adopt group (current users), the Intend group (those who intend
to adopt the use of ePHRs), and the Reject group (those who do not intend to adopt the
use of ePHRs). Statistics were calculated to examine the behavioral intentions with
respect to these groups. Table 8 reports the frequency distributions of the behavioral
74

intentions by current, intended, or rejected adoption categories. There appeared to be a
trend whereby respondents in the Adopt and Intend group reported higher likelihood of
engaging in the behaviors than respondents in the Reject group. This pattern appeared
evident in intentions with overall high likelihood (e.g., View) as well as intentions with
lower likelihood (e.g., Amend). For all intentions, the percentage of Likely and Very
Likely respondents in the Adopt or Intend groups was approximately double or more that
of the Reject group. The distributions of responses in the Adopt and Intend groups did not
show any major differences; although, it appeared that Adopt respondents were more
prone to select Very Likely than any other group, whereas there were very high
frequencies of Likely responses in the Intend group.
Given the three independent levels of the predictor and the ordinal nature of the
responses, further descriptive analysis of the behavioral intentions were conducted using
the ranking of mean, medium and standard deviations. The results revealed significantly
different variances by group. To test further the association, Welch’s F tests were
conducted to evaluate the association between the intentions to view, submit, transmit, or
amend ePHRs and the respondents’ status with respect to adoption of ePHRs. The Welch
F test is used to evaluate differences on the rank scores instead of a parametric ANOVA
test when data is not distributing normally and when the variances are unequal.
As observed in Table 9, that the pattern of mean ranks or means follows what
would be expected given the frequency distributions presented above. The variance was
smallest for the Intend group, which was also the group with the smallest sample. All
Welch F tests were statistically significant at p < .001. A consistent pattern for all

75

Table 8. Frequency Distribution for Behavioral Intentions by Current, Intended, or
Rejected Adoption of ePHRs
Behavioral
Intention Group

Very
Unlikely
(1)

Unlikely
(2)

Not Sure
(3)

Likely
(4)

Very
Likely
(5)

4&5

View
Adopt
(personal)

2.9%
(3)

11.4%
(12)

8.6%
(9)

41.0%
(43)

36.2%
(38)

77.1%
(81)

Intend

0.0%
(0)

0.0%
(0)

7.0%
(5)

67.6%
(48)

25.4%
(18)

93.0%
(66)

Reject

8.6%
(13)

11.9%
(18)

43.0%
(65)

27.8%
(42)

8.6%
(13)

36.4%
(55)

Adopt

1.9%
(2)

1.0%
(1)

2.9%
(3)

38.1%
(40)

56.2%
(59)

94.3%
(99)

Intend

0.0%
(0)

1.4%
(1)

5.6%
(4)

54.9%
(39)

38.0%
(27)

93.0%
(66)

Reject

9.3%
(14)

6.0%
(9)

27.2%
(41)

41.1%
(62)

16.6%
(25)

57.6%
(87)

Adopt

10.5%
(11)

4.8%
(5)

19.0%
(20)

36.2%
(38)

29.5%
(31)

65.7%
(69)

Intend

0.0%
(0)

4.2%
(3)

26.8%
(19)

56.3%
(40)

12.7%
(9)

69.0%
(49)

Reject

14.6%
(22)

12.6%
(19)

47.7%
(72)

19.2%
(29)

6.0%
(9)

25.2%
(38)

View
(HCP)

Transmit

76

Table 8. Frequency Distribution for Behavioral Intentions by Current, Intended, or
Rejected Adoption of ePHRs
Very
Unlikely
(1)

Unlikely
(2)

Not Sure
(3)

Likely
(4)

Very
Likely
(5)

4&5

Adopt

10.5%
(11)

13.3%
(14)

14.3%
(15)

36.2%
(38)

25.7%
(27)

61.9%
(65)

Intend

1.4%
(1)

5.6%
(4)

23.9%
(17)

54.9%
(39)

14.1%
(10)

69.0%
(49)

Reject

13.9%
(21)

15.2%
(23)

53.0%
(80)

15.2%
(23)

2.6%
(4)

17.9%
(27)

Adopt

12.4%
(13)

17.1%
(18)

25.7%
(27)

23.8%
(25)

21.0%
(22)

44.8%
(47)

Intend

2.8%
(2)

12.7%
(9)

35.2%
(25)

43.7%
(31)

5.6%
(4)

49.3%
(35)

Reject

11.9%
(18)

15.2%
(23)

57.0%
(86)

13.9%
(21)

2.0%
(3)

15.9%
(24)

Behavioral
Intention Group
Submit

Amend

Note. Cell counts are in parentheses. Adopt n = 105, Intend n = 71, Reject n = 151.

behavioral intentions emerged: the Adopt and Intend group did not differ, but both were
significantly higher than the Reject group. In addition, systematically the Reject group
had the lowest mean values, and Adopt group had the highest. In terms of the size of the
effects, the smallest effect was observed between group and the responses for Amend (F
= 11.91) compared to the highest effect for View (Personal) (F = 47.48).
In summary, analyses were conducted to examine the association between current
or intended use and rejection of ePHRs and the behavioral intentions. Respondents who
had adopted ePHRs or were intending to adopt ePHRs showed higher scores

77

Table 9. Summary of Statistical Analyses for Behavioral Intentions by Adoption, Intended
Adoption, or Rejection of ePHRs
Intention
VIEW
(Personal)

VIEW
(HCP)

Statistic
M
Mdn
SD

Adopt
3.96
4
1.08

F

47.48

M
Mdn
SD

4.46
5
.77

F

35.49

TRANSMIT M
Md
SD

SUBMIT

AMEND

3.70
4
1.24

F

29.45

M
Mdn
SD

3.53
4.00
1.29

F

33.69

M
Mdn
SD

2.79
3
.90

F

11.91

Analyses of Group
Intend
4.18
4
.54

Reject
3.16
3
1.03

4.30
4
.64

3.50
4
1.12

3.77
4
.72

2.89
3
1.07

3.75
4.00
.82

2.77
3.00
.96

3.37
3
.88

3.24
3
1.30

(representing greater likelihood) of engaging in the behavioral intentions, than did
respondents who rejected the use of ePHRs. As a result, with respect to H01 (Null
Hypothesis) there is no difference between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) who adopt,
78

intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs) and
their intention to view, transmit, submit and amend them and HA1 (Alternative
Hypothesis) there is a difference between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) who adopt,
intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health records (ePHRs) and
their intention to view, transmit, submit and amend them, direct deductions can be drawn
from the data. The analysis suggests that the observed data is inconsistent with the
assumption that the null hypothesis is true as Adopted and Intended Adoption differed
from those that rejected and thus that hypothesis must be rejected and the alternative
hypothesis is accepted as true.
Perceived Attributes and Current, Intended Use and Rejections of ePHRs
For the third and final phase of analysis, and to answer Research Question 2, is
there a relationship between health care consumers’ (HCCs’) perceptions of and attitudes
towards electronic personal health record (ePHR) attributes (as measured by relative
advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility) and their
adoption, intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) univariate comparisons of the
perceived attributes were conducted between HCC adopters, intended adopters, and
rejecters of ePHRs to predict the level of adoption, intended adoption, or rejection of
electronic personal health records (ePHRs) using the main predictors (relative advantage,
complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability, and compatibility).
As described in the previous chapter, the perceived attributes scale assessed
perceptions and attitudes towards ePHRs attributes, including relative advantage,
simplicity (complexity), trialability, observability, and compatibility. Items were rated on
a 7-point Likert scale from Strongly Disagree (1) to Strongly Agree (7). Each perceived
79

attribute score was created by averaging the items. Analyses were conducted to determine
to what extent there were any associations between the perceived attributes and the use of
ePHRs, according to the grouping of variables defined above.
Table 10 displays the means, mediums, standard deviations, minimums, and
maximums for the perceived attribute variables by user groups. The maximum observed
value for almost all attributes and groups was the maximum of 7. However, the minimum
score was generally above 1 for the Adopt and Intend groups, indicating that their scores
were shifted towards the higher end of the scale range and there were no participants in
these groups strongly disagreeing with the statements. Nonetheless, minimum values of 1
were seen in the Reject group. The Reject group appeared to have a lower mean the
Adopt or Intend groups for relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), observability, and
compatibility. The means of the Adopt and Intend group appeared similar for these four
attributes. For trialability, the mean of the Intend group appeared higher than that for
either the Adopt or Reject group. The standard deviation in the Intend group appeared
smaller than in the other groups.
Descriptive statistics of the perceived attributes were calculated according to the
groups of ePHR users. Univariate comparisons indicated that relative advantage,
complexity (simplicity), observability, and compatibility were significantly higher for the
Adopt and Intend group than for the Reject group. The Adopt and Intend group did not
differ from each other on these attributes. The exception was for trialability – this
perceived attribute had a higher mean in the Intend group than either the Adopt or Reject
groups. Thus, Adopters and Intenders tended to report similar perceived attitudes toward
Table 10. Perceived Attributes by Use of ePHRs
80

Perceived
Attribute
Rel. Adv.

Simplicity

Trialability

Adopt

Intend

Reject

M

5.91

6.09

4.87

Md

6.00

6.00

5.27

SD

.88

.64

1.40

Min

3.23

4.73

1.00

Max

7.00

7.00

7.00

M

5.78

5.73

4.80

Md

5.89

5.89

5.11

SD

.95

.79

1.37

Min

2.64

3.67

1.00

Max

7.00

7.00

7.00

M

4.73

5.61

4.82

Md

5.00

5.83

5.17

SD

1.45

.69

1.29

Min

1.00

3.30

1.00

Max

7.00

7.00

6.83

5.42

5.67

4.57

Md

5.67

5.83

4.83

SD

.99

.58

1.21

Min

2.37

3.91

1.00

Max

7.00

6.83

7.00

5.68

5.75

4.49

Md

6.00

6.00

4.67

SD

.98

.65

1.32

Min

2.83

3.66

1.00

Max

7.00

7.00

7.00

Observability M

Compatibility M

ePHR attributes, and their ratings were higher than those who did not intend to adopt
ePHRs. However, trialability was rated as an important attribute for Intenders only.
81

The relationship between perceived attributes and the groups of ePHR users
speaks to RQ2. Taken together, there were significant univariate relationships between
the perceive predictors and the use, and intended use of ePHRs with means ranging from
(4.73 - 5.91) for the Adoption group and Intend group (5.75 - 6.09) indicating that these
groups were in the agreement on the scale items. To summarize, as predicted from
inspection of the descriptive statistics, the mean scores for relative advantage, complexity
(simplicity), observability, and compatibility were significantly lower in the Reject group
than either the Intend or Adopt groups (which did not differ). For trialability, a different
pattern was observed – the Intend group had the highest mean, which was significantly
higher than in either the Adopt or Reject groups (which did not differ). As a result, with
respect to H02 H03 H04 H05 H06 (Null Hypotheses) there is no relationship between
perceived relative advantage (perceived attribute 1), complexity (simplicity) (perceived
attribute 2), trialability (perceived attribute 3), observability (perceived attribute 4),
compatibility (perceived attribute 5), and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs) and HA2 HA3 HA4 HA5 HA6 (Alternative Hypotheses) there is a relationship
between perceived relative advantage (perceived attribute 1), complexity (simplicity)
(perceived attribute 2), trialability (perceived attribute 3), observability (perceived
attribute 4), and compatibility (perceived attribute 5), and a Health Care Consumers’
(HCCs’) adoption, intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal
health records (ePHRs) direct deductions can be drawn from the data. The analysis
suggests that the observed data is inconsistent with the assumption that the null
hypotheses are true, as there is a strong relationship between adoption and intended
82

adoption, the perceived attributes, thus the hypotheses must be rejected, and the
alternative hypotheses are accepted as true.
Conclusion
This chapter outlined the results of the research study and presented the findings
of the research based on the methodology and data collection procedures described in
Chapter 3. This chapter began by providing a review of the sampling strategy including
sample size and power analysis. Comprehensive demographic description of the sample
population follow the review. The chapter also presents a summary of the results
anchored within the original research questions and hypotheses. Finally, a comprehensive
explanation and presentation of the results with analysis techniques concluded the
chapter. With the conclusion of Chapter 4, within Chapter 5, the analysis and
interpretation of the results will be outlined and the study’s limitations and research
constraints will be provided together with recommendations for future research.

83

CHAPTER 5. DISCUSSION, IMPLICATIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS
Introduction
This concluding chapter provides a comprehensive summary of the research
study. The purpose of this chapter is to review and discuss the results of the research
based on the detailed findings and analytics presented in Chapter 4. This chapter begins
by providing a summary of the results in view of the research problem, methodology
used, and study’s significance. An analysis and interpretation of the results are outlined in
this chapter in an effort to explain and provide insights into the study’s findings. The
research discussion is combined with an analysis of the study’s results as they relate to
the relevant body of scholarly literature and conceptual framework. The implications of
the study’s results for scholars and practitioners is followed with an acknowledgement of
the study’s limitations and research constraints. Finally, the chapter concludes with
recommendations for future research.
Summary of Results
According to meaningful use mandates, eligible health care providers and
hospitals must provide functionality to allow health care consumers (HCCs) to view
online, download, and transmit their own health information that is stored on physician
and or hospital electronic record systems. Furthermore, health care providers and
hospitals can also make available optional system functionality for health care consumers
(HCCs) to submit electronically patient-generated data and request amendments to their
84

health records. A number of viable methods for engaging patients in their care exist under
meaningful use policy directives however; do these established obligations and directives
meet the expectations and desires of the average HCC?
Previous research has shown that ePHR adoption and use has seen relatively slow
acceptance rates even when prevailing notions of their benefits to patient care exists
(California Healthcare Foundation, 2010; Markle Foundation, 2008; Markle Foundation,
2011). Unidentified challenges in understanding HCCs’ attitudes towards and perceptions
of ePHRs exist. What motivates HCCs to adopt or consider adopting ePHR? Do HCCs
currently want to view online, download, or transmit their health data as directed under
existing meaningful use stage 1 and 2 core objectives? Will HCCs want to submit health
care information they generated to a provider and or amend the records of their provider
as proposed under stage 3 meaningful use menu objectives? What ePHR attributes or
characteristics promote ePHR adoption and use? Should financial incentive programs for
EHRs rely in the behavioural intention of HCCs? This research constituted an effort to
better understand ePHR adoption and use among HCCs in the U.S.
The insights and findings gained from this research are of importance to scholarpractitioners including care providers, health organizations administrators, U.S. health
policy makers, and health information technology (IT) service providers within the ehealth industry. Since patients hold a measureable role in the management of their care,
health care professionals, and organizations need to understand ePHR adoption and
rejection patterns in order to promote positive perceptions for potential future HCC use
and engagement. In addition, health IT professionals may be interested in HCCs’
perception and attitudes towards ePHRs in order to potentially offer services and
85

additional system functionality that are more patient centric and responsive to HCC
needs. Finally, U.S. health care policy makers must recognize and identify with how
HCCs wish to participate in the meaningful use of ePHRs given U.S. health care policies
priorities for engaging patients and families in their health through the use of electronic
health records and related technologies. This research contributed to the ongoing research
in the specialized field of HCC IT adoption and use, as well as contribute to the growing
literature on perceptions and attitudes towards specific Health IT functional attributes and
HCC behavioral intentions.
Results of the research indicate that approximately half of the sample reported
that they currently use or intend to use ePHRs, while the remaining half do not currently
use or intend to adopt ePHRs. Overall, respondents stated they were more likely to view
ePHRs than to transmit, submit, or amend them. Analyses of behavioral intentions
according to the groups of ePHR users indicated higher levels of agreement/likelihood for
Adopters and Intenders in comparison to the Rejecters group. Adopters and Intenders did
not differ in their distributions for any of the behavioral intentions. Univariate
comparisons indicated that relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), observability, and
compatibility were significantly higher for the Adopt and Intend group than for the Reject
group. The Adopt and Intend group did not differ from each other on these attributes. The
exception was for trialability -- this perceived attribute had a higher mean in the Intend
group than either the Adopt or Reject groups. Thus, Adopters and Intenders tended to
report similar perceived attitudes toward ePHR attributes, and their ratings were higher
than those who did not intend to adopt ePHRs. However, trialability was rated as an
important attribute for Intenders only.
86

Discussion of Results
The results of this research established both affirmative and inconclusive results
relating to the original research questions and hypotheses. To comprehend the contextual
framework relating to electronic personal health record (ePHR) adoption and perceived
attributes, preliminary information relating to the extent of health care consumers’
(HCCs’) adopt, intended to adopt, or rejection (non-adoption) and subsequent intention to
view, transmit, submit and amend is required. The sample was almost equally divided
and undecided about the adoption of ePHRs.Results indicate that approximately half of
the sample reported that they currently use or intend to use ePHRs, while the remaining
half do not currently use or intend to adopt ePHRs. The sample was somewhat distributed
about their perceptions relating to viewing, transmitting, submitting and amending
ePHRs. The results suggest that the observed data was inconsistent with the assumption
that the null hypothesis is true, for the intention to view (both personal and HCP) and
thus the hypothesis must be rejected and the alternative hypothesis is accepted as true.
Alternatively, the observed data was consistent with the assumption that the null
hypothesis is true, for the intention to transmit, submit, and amend, thus the alternative
hypothesis must be accepted as false. Overall, respondents stated they were more likely
to view ePHRs than to transmit, submit, or amend them.
Hypothesis 1
H01 (Null Hypothesis) there is no difference between health care consumers’
(HCCs’) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intention to view, transmit, submit and amend them.

87

HA1 (Alternative Hypothesis) there is a difference between health care consumers’
(HCCs’) who adopt, intend to adopt, or reject (non-adoption) electronic personal health
records (ePHRs) and their intention to view, transmit, submit and amend them.
The sample was definitive in their ePHR behavioral intention differences. The analysis
suggests that the observed data was inconsistent with the assumption that the null
hypothesis was true as Adopted and Intended Adoption differed from those that rejected
and thus that hypothesis must be rejected and the alternative hypothesis was accepted as
true. Analyses of behavioral intentions according to the groups of ePHR users indicated
higher levels of agreement/likelihood for Adopters and Intenders in comparison to the
Rejecters group. Adopters and Intenders did not differ in their distributions for any of the
behavioral intentions.
Hypotheses 2-6
H02 H03 H04 H05 H06 (Null Hypotheses) there is no relationship between
perceived relative advantage (perceived attribute 1), complexity (simplicity) (perceived
attribute 2), trialability (perceived attribute 3), observability (perceived attribute 4),
compatibility (perceived attribute 5), and a health care consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs).
HA2 HA3 HA4 HA5 HA6 (Alternative Hypotheses) there is a relationship between
perceived relative advantage (perceived attribute 1), complexity (simplicity) (perceived
attribute 2), trialability (perceived attribute 3), observability (perceived attribute 4), and
compatibility (perceived attribute 5), and a Health Care Consumers’ (HCCs’) adoption,
intended adoption, or rejection (non-adoption) of electronic personal health records
88

(ePHRs). The sample was definitive in their ePHR adoption and use and their perceived
attributes. The analysis suggests that the observed data is inconsistent with the
assumption that the null hypothesis is true, as there is a strong relationship between
adoption and intended adoption and the perceived attributes, thus the hypothesis must be
rejected, and the alternative hypothesis is accepted as true. Adopters and Intenders tended
to report similar perceived attitudes toward ePHR attributes, and their ratings were higher
than those who did not intend to adopt ePHRs. However, trialability was rated as an
important attribute for Intenders only. To summarize, For H01, HA1, and H02-6, HA2-6,
the assumption that the null hypotheses were true must be rejected, and the alternative
hypotheses were accepted as true.
Implications of the Study Results
The results of this study tie to the larger body of ePHR perceptions and attitudes
literature and the diffusion of innovations perceived attributes theoretical framework. In
support of Research Question 1, the results of this research indicate that almost 70% of
the sample reported that they did not currently use ePHRs; yet 30% intended to adopt and
use them in the future. When calculated together, scores for participants’ current adoption
and intended adopt of ePHRs resulted in a total just under 50% while the remaining 50%
of participants currently and continue to reject ePHRs. When summarizing ePHR
adoption and use amongst HCCs in the U.S., the results indicate an almost equal divide
between use and non-use. The results support the literature on electronic health record
technologies and consumer adoption and use rates. Although the adoption and use of
electronic health record technologies by health care providers and hospitals has increased
since the implementation of HITECH in 2009, the acceptance and adoptions of related
89

consumer electronic health record tools by Health Care Consumers (HCCs) has been
measured; specifically when considering the use of electronic personal health records
(ePHRs) (California Healthcare Foundation, 2010; Markle Foundation, 2008; Markle
Foundation, 2011).
Once more, in support of Research Question 1, with respect to the four behavioral
intentions, together, significantly, more than half the participants intended to view their
personal ePHR or the ePHR created from their health care provider. However,
participants were undecided about their intentions to submit or transmit ePHRs. The
proportions of participants reporting intention v. non-intention to submit or transmit
ePHRs were approximately equal. Finally, fewer than half the participants (32.4%)
reported intention to amend their ePHR from their HCP. According to meaningful use
mandates, eligible health care providers and hospitals must provide functionality to allow
health care consumers (HCCs) to view online, download, and transmit their own health
information that is stored on physician and or hospital electronic record systems.
Furthermore, health care providers and hospitals can also make available optional system
functionality for health care consumers (HCCs) to submit electronically patient-generated
data and request amendments to their health records. The results of the research clearly
illustrate that HCCs are content to view their personal ePHR or the ePHR created by their
health care provider; however they are undecided about transmitting and submitting their
own health information and are even less comfortable in requesting amendments. In
exploring these outcomes, perhaps not all meaningful use policy directives and
established obligations meet the expectations and desires of the average HCC. Therefore,

90

financial incentive programs for electronic health record technologies should not rely in
the behavioral intention of HCCs.
In support of Research Question 1, respondents who had adopted ePHRs or were
intending to adopt ePHRs showed higher scores (representing greater likelihood) of
engaging in the behavioral intentions, than did respondents who rejected the use of
ePHRs. Understating HCC needs is central to intervening and remediating any barriers to
adoption and sustained use of ePHR technologies (Haun et al., 2014). This research
provided the foundation for investigating meaningful use within the context of ePHR
adoption and rejection by HCCs. The research suggests that if HCC adopt or plan to
adopt ePHR they are positively predisposed to want to also view, transmit, submit, and
even amend them.
For a technology to be effectively and extensively adopted it must be seen by
potential adopters as having defined attributes. In support of Research Question 2, as
predicted from the theoretical framework, the perceived attributes of diffusion of
innovations theory (relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability,
compatibility) establish potential predictors for ePHR adoption and use among HCCs.
The mean scores for relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), observability, and
compatibility were significantly lower in the Reject group than either the Intend or the
Adopt groups (which did not differ). For trialability, a different pattern was observed –
the Intend group had the highest mean, which was significantly higher than in either the
Adopt or Reject groups (which did not differ). This is an expected and rational outcome,
in that HCC intending to adopt ePHRs would place a higher value on the ability to try the
technology before adoption and use. The results support the HCC and ePHR perceptions
91

and attitudes literature. Research demonstrated that usefulness, and perceived ease of use,
predict HCCs’ behavioral intentions to adopt (Lam et al., 2013; Or et al., 2011; Silvestre
et al., 2009; Whetstone & Goldsmith, 2009). Similar studies also established a positive
association with ePHR perceived quality, value, benefit and relevance as a tool and
adoption and continuity of us (Agarwal et al., 2013; Kerns, Krist, Longo, Kuzel, &
Woolf, 2013; Silvestre et al., 2009; Weitzman, Kelemen, Kaci, & Mandl, 2012). This
suggests that HCCs are more likely to adopt ePHRs if they believe that the technology
has low effort expectancy, and perceive that using some form or feature will be useful in
conveying health benefits and or facilitating health self-management.
The results of this research demonstration that interrelated challenges exist when
illustrating the reality of ePHR adoption and use by HCCs. To begin, the acceptance and
adoption of ePHR by HCCs has been measured, however, HCCs are willing to view their
personal ePHRs yet are undecided about transmitting and submitting their own health
information and are even less comfortable in requesting amendments. Conversely, if
HCCs do adopt, or intend to adopt ePHRs, they are positively predisposed to want to also
view, transmit, submit, and even amend them. Encouragingly, the perceived attributes of
diffusion of innovations theory (relative advantage, complexity (simplicity), trialability,
observability, compatibility) establish potential predictors for ePHR adoption and use
among HCCs.
The science of marketing, implementation, dissemination, and sustaining patient
facing e-health technologies has not been perfected. The primary solution offered, within
the confines of this research, is that the Office of the National Coordinator for Health
Information Technology (ONC), with the Department of Health and Human Services
92

(DHHS), embark on an aggressive awareness campaign to promote ePHR adoption and
use with the consequence of advancing adoption to assist eligible health care providers
and hospitals meet meaningful use mandates. In addition, ONC should be mindful that
potential concerns arose within the confines of this research, perhaps not all meaningful
use policy directives and established obligations meet the expectations and desires of the
average HCC. Therefore, financial incentive programs for electronic health record
technologies should not rely in the behavioral intention of HCCs.
Limitations
Limitations in social science research exist. The acknowledged research
constraints of the study were those attributed to (a) theoretical limitations and (b)
sample/respondent limitations. Theoretical limitations include those associated with the
use of diffusion of innovations theory as a theoretical framework. Diffusion of
innovations theory leans towards the presumption that all innovation are desirable and
must be adopted thus imposing a pro-innovation and individual non-adoption biases
(Rogers, 2003). A foundational aspect of this research accepts that ePHRs are innovative
and should be diffused and adopted by all members of a social system. Furthermore,
diffusion of innovations theory relies on respondent self-reported recall when asked to
remember the time at which they adopted (or did not adopt) an innovation thus leading to
potential recall inaccuracies in the data. The second research limitation of this study is
associated with the sample frame selection, non-probability sampling, and the use of a
third-party survey panel. Survey respondents self-elected to participate in the panel, as
such, the sample selection may not be completely representative of the entire U.S.
population. The survey participants may have included a disproportionate number of
93

respondents who had computer access and were interested in volunteering to be a survey
panelist. The researcher acknowledged and accepted the limitations as presenting
minimal risk to the overall research design.
Recommendations for Further Research
It is clear from the results of this research, that the potential research opportunities
to explore in the area electronic personal health records are abundant. From a theoretical
perspective, diffusion of innovations theory provides additional constructs to explore that
effect the rate of innovation adoption including innovation communication channels and
the existence of change agents and opinion leaders. According to Rogers (2005),
communication is the process by which participants create and share information with
one another in order to reach a mutual understanding. Communication channels are the
means by which information gets from one individual to another (Rogers, 2005). Mass
media channels are more effective in creating knowledge of innovations, whereas
interpersonal channels are more effective in forming and changing attitudes toward a new
idea, and in influencing the decision to adopt or reject a new idea (Rogers, 2005).
Another crucial concept in understanding the nature of the diffusion process is the role
and presence of the change agents and opinion leaders. Change agents and opinion
leaders are individuals who, formally and informally, attempt to influence innovation
adoption decisions and attitudes in a direction that is deemed desirable (Rogers, 2005).
Future investigations could potentially explore elements of mass media, the nature of
interpersonal communications, and the role of changes agents and opinion leaders and
ePHR adoption. Given the need to support and stimulate ePHRs adoption and use, it
would be interesting to understand if creating awareness and knowledge of ePHR through
94

various diffusion communication channels and advocating ePHRs through the
contributions of key individuals influence adoption and use in various environments and
organizational settings.
From an advanced technology adoption modelling perspective, other perceived
attributes exist that move beyond the Rogers defined five (i.e. relative advantage,
complexity (simplicity), trialability, observability and compatibility). Diffusion of
innovations theory is a theoretically supported technology adoption model however; other
approaches to understanding the psychology of user acceptance exist including the
technology acceptance model (TAM), the unified theory of acceptance and use of
technology (UTAUT), the theory of reasoned action and the theory of planned behavior.
By utilizing another technology acceptance model there may be other ePHR adoption
variables to explore and consider when examining HCC attitudes and behaviors.
The meaningful use working group defined meaningful use core and elective
(menu) objectives and measurement criteria for eligible provides and hospitals relating to
electronic health records technology functions and usages. From a U.S. Health care
policy perspective, further studies focusing on meaningful use and the mandated existing
and forthcoming electronic health record system functional requirements (core and menu
items), presents several future research avenues to explore. This research focused on 4
requirements from stage 2 and 3 core and menu items (i.e. the ability to view, transmit,
submit and amend). Numerous other core and menu items exist that eligible health
professional and hospitals must consider when implementing an electronic health record
system including e-prescriptions, patient reminders, medical histories, email (emessaging) functionality, medication recording, demographic statistics (smoking, mental
95

illness, etc..) and providing prevention care education materials etc... Investigations that
explore HCC perceptions and attitudes towards and the adoption and use of many of the
other core and menu functional elements would offer investigators the opportunity to
continue to contribute to the meaningful use debate.
Finally, this research utilized an exploratory quantitative, non-experimental
research design and the results were based on survey data collection methodologies and
statistical data analysis techniques. Possible opportunities exist in exploring similar
research questions, from a qualitative viewpoint utilizing focus groups, interviews, and or
case study methodologies. Perhaps in-depth insights can be gained from conducting
comprehensive qualitative analysis that go beyond the exploratory nature of this study.
Exploring ePHRs adoption and use and HCC perceptions and attitudes from any of the
alternative avenues present above, would yield interesting results not yet explored in the
academic literature.
Conclusion
Findings from this investigation addressed the voids in the health care industry’s
understanding of HCC perception of and attitude toward ePHR adoption and continued
use. It is critical that the perceptions and attitudes of HCCs be understood as a means to
support and improve health care in light of President Obama’s vision of a sophisticated
electronic health data exchange. While the use of electronic health records technologies
appears to be on the rise for health care providers and hospitals, the adoption and use of
related ePHRs technologies by HCCs continues to be strewn with low penetration and
diffusion rates. The science of marketing, implementation, dissemination, and sustaining
patient facing e-health technologies has not been perfected. The primary solution offered,
96

within the confines of this research, is that the Office of the National Coordinator for
Health Information Technology (ONC), with the Department of Health and Human
Services (DHHS), embark on an aggressive awareness campaign to promote ePHR
adoption and use with the consequence of advancing adoption to assist eligible health
care providers and hospital meet meaningful use mandates. In addition, ONC should be
mindful that potential concerns arose within the confines of this research, perhaps not all
meaningful use policy directives and established obligations meet the expectations and
desires of the average HCC. Therefore, financial incentive programs for electronic health
record technologies should not rely in the behavioral intention of HCCs.
As health care providers and organizations continue to increase the use of EHR
technologies, and owing to the potential projected growth of these applications for
potential ePHR adoption, researchers should direct serious consideration, and attention
to this important issue/topic. Information technology holds the promise of empowering
patients to manage their health, yet the patients must become the focus of the design if
the technology is to be used or fulfill its potential. The proposed regulations around
meaningful use require further study to ensure that meaningful use is meaningful to both
HCCs and providers.
This concluding chapter provided a comprehensive summary of the research
study. The purpose of this chapter was to review and discuss the results of the research
based on the detailed findings and analytics presented in Chapter 4. This chapter began
by providing a summary of the results in view of the research problem, methodology
used, and study’s significance. An analysis and interpretation of the results was also
outlined in this chapter in an effort to explain and provide insights into the study’s
97

findings. The research discussion was combined with an analysis of the study’s results as
they relate to the relevant body of scholarly literature and conceptual framework. The
implications of the study’s results for scholars and practitioners were followed with an
acknowledgement of the study’s limitations and research constraints. Finally, the chapter
concluded with recommendations for future research.

98

REFERENCES
Agarwal, R., Anderson, C., Zarate, J., & Ward, C. (2013). If we offer it, will they accept?
Factors affecting patient use intentions of personal health records and secure
messaging. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15 (2), e43.
doi:10.2196/jmir.2243
Ahern, D. K., Woods, S. S., Lightowler, M. C., Finley, S. W., & Houston, T. K. (2011).
Promise of and potential for patient-facing technologies to enable meaningful use.
American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 40(5), S162-S172.
doi:10.1016/j.amepre.2011.01.005
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, H. R. 112—165, 111th Cong. (2009).
Ammenwerth, E., Schnell-Inderst, P., & Hoerbst, A. (2012). The impact of electronic
patient portals on patient care: A systematic review of controlled trials. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 14(6), e162. doi:10.2196/jmir.2238
Archer, N., Fevrier-Thomas, U., Lokker, C., McKibbon, K. A., & Straus, S. E. (2011).
Personal health records: A scoping review. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18(4), 515-522. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000105
Atkinson, N. L. (2007). Developing a questionnaire to measure perceived attributes of
eHealth innovations. American Journal of Health Behavior, 31(6), 612-621.
doi:10.5993/AJHB.31.6.6
Bates, D.W., & Wells, S. (2012). Personal health records and health care utilization. The
Journal of the American Medical Association, 308(19), 2034-2036.
doi:10.1001/jama.2012.68169
Beckjord, E. B., Rechis, R., Nutt, S., Shulman, L., & Hesse, B. W. (2011). What do
people affected by cancer think about electronic health information exchange?
Results from the 2010 LIVESTRONG electronic health information exchange
survey and the 2008 health information national trends survey. Journal of
Oncology Practice, 7(4), 237-241. doi:10.1200/JOP.2011.000324
Bilbao-Osorio, B., Dutta, S., & Lanvin, B. (2013). The global information technology
report 2013. Retrieved from
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GITR_Report_2013.pdf
99

Blumenthal, D. (2010). Launching HITECH. The New England Journal of Medicine,
362(5), 382-385. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0912825
Blumenthal, D. (2011a). Wiring the health system--origins and provisions of a new
federal program. The New England Journal of Medicine, 365(24), 2323-2329.
doi:10.1056/NEJMsr1110507
Blumenthal, D. (2011b). Implementation of the federal health information technology
initiative. The New England Journal of Medicine, 365(25), 2426-2431.
doi:10.1056/NEJMsr1112158
Blumenthal, D., & Tavenner, M. (2010). The “meaningful use” regulation for electronic
health records. The New England Journal of Medicine, 363(6), 501-504.
doi:10.1056/NEJMp1006114
Burkhard, R. J., Schooley, B., Dawson, J., & Horan., T. A. (2010). Information systems
and healthcare XXXVII: When your employer provides your personal health
record - exploring employee perceptions of an employer-sponsored PHR system.
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 27, 323-338.
Retrieved from http://aisel.aisnet.org/cais/vol27/iss1/19
California Healthcare Foundation. (2010). Consumers and health information
technology: A national survey. Retrieved from
http://www.chcf.org/publications/2010/04/consumers-and-health-informationtechnology-a-national-survey?view=print
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014a). EHR incentive program.
Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/index.html?redirect=/ehrincentivep
rograms/
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014b). Eligible professional
meaningful use core measures measure 11 of 13 stage 1 (2014 definition).
Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/11_Patient_Electronic_
Access-.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014c). Eligible hospital and
critical access hospital meaningful use core measures measure 10 of 11 stage 1
(2014 definition). Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/Downloads/10_Patient_Electronic_
Access.pdf

100

Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014d). Eligible professional
meaningful use core measures measure 7 of 17 Stage 2. Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/downloads/Stage2_EPCore_7_Pati
entElectronicAccess.pdf
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS). (2014e). Eligible hospital and
critical access hospital meaningful use core measures measure 6 of 16 stage 2.
Retrieved from http://www.cms.gov/Regulations-andGuidance/Legislation/EHRIncentivePrograms/downloads/Stage2_HospitalCore_6
_PatientElectronicAccess.pdf
Cooper, C. R., & Schindler, P. S. (2011). Business research methods. New York, NY:
McGraw-Hill.
Delbanco, T., Walker, J., Bell, S. K., Darer, J. D., Elmore, J. G., Farag, N., Feldman, H.
J., Mejilla, R., Ngo, L., Ralston, J. D., Ross, S. E., Trivedi, N., Vodicka, E., &
Leveille, S.G. (2012). Inviting patients to read their doctors' notes: A quasiexperimental study and a look ahead. Annals of Internal Medicine, 157(7), 461470. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-157-7-201210020-00002
Department of Health and Human Services (HSS). (2013). Office of the National
Coordinator for Health Information Technology Health Information Technology;
HIT Policy Committee: Request for comment regarding the stage 3 definition of
meaningful use of electronic health records (EHRs). Retrieved from
http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/hitpc_stage3_rfc_final.pdf
Dhopeshwarkar, R. V., Kern, L. M., O'Donnell, H. C., Edwards, A. M., & Kaushal, R.
(2012). Health care consumers' preferences around health information exchange.
Annals of Family Medicine, 10(5), 428-434. doi:10.1370/afm.1396
Dimitropoulos, L., Patel, V., Scheffler, S. A., & Posnack, S. (2011). Public attitudes
toward health information exchange: Perceived benefits and concerns. The
American Journal of Managed Care, 17(12), SP111-SP124. Retrieved from
http://www.ajmc.com/journals/issue/2011/2011-12-vol17-SP/Public-AttitudesToward-Health-Information-Exchange-Perceived-Benefits-and-Concerns/
Emani, S., Yamin, C. K., Peters, E., Karson, A. S., Lipsitz, S. R., Wald, J. S., Bates, D.
W. (2012). Patient perceptions of a personal health record: A test of the diffusion
of innovation model. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 14(6), e150.
doi:10.2196/jmir.2278
Faul, F., Erdfelder, E., Buchner, A., & Lang, A. G. (2009). Statistical power analyses
using G*Power 3.1: Tests for correlation and regression analyses. Behavior
Research Methods, 41, 1149-1160. doi:10.3758/BRM.41.4.1149
101

Fetter, M. (2009). Personal health records. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 30(10), 652.
doi:10.1080/01612840902722161
Fowler, F. (2009). Survey research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Furukawa, M. F., Patel, V., Charles, D., Swain, M., & Mostashari, F. (2013). Hospital
electronic health information exchange grew substantially in 2008–12. Health
Affairs, 32(8), 1346-1354. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0010
Geibert, R. C. (2006). Using diffusion of innovation concepts to enhance implementation
of an electronic health record to support evidence-based practice. Nursing
Administration Quarterly, 30(3), 203-210. Retrieved from
http://journals.lww.com/naqjournal/pages/default.aspx
Goel, M. S., Brown, T. L., Williams, A., Cooper, A. J., Hasnain-Wynia, R., & Baker, D.
W. (2011). Patient reported barriers to enrolling in a patient portal. Journal of the
American Medical Informatics Association, 18(Suppl 1), i8-i12.
doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000473
Goldzweig, C. L., Orshansky, G., Paige, N. M., Towfigh, A. A., Haggstrom, D. A.,
Miake-Lye, I., Beroes, J.M., & Shekelle, P. G. (2013). Electronic patient portals:
Evidence on health outcomes, satisfaction, efficiency, and attitudes: A systematic
review. Annals of Internal Medicine, 159(10), 677-687. Retrieved from
http://annals.org/
Greenhalgh, T., Robert, G., Bate, P., Macfarlane, F., & Kyriakidou, O. (2005). Diffusion
of innovations in health service organisations: A systematic literature review.
Great Britain: Wiley-Blackwell.
Greenhalgh, T., Stramer, K., Bratan, T., Byrne, E., Mohammad, Y., & Russell, J. (2008).
Introduction of shared electronic records: Multi-site case study using diffusion of
innovation theory. British Medical Journal, 337, 1786-1796.
doi:10.1136/bmj.a1786
Greiver, M., Barnsley, J., Glazier, R. H., Moineddin, R., & Harvey, B. J. (2011).
Implementation of electronic medical records: Theory-informed qualitative study.
Canadian Family Physician, 57(10), 390-397. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3192105/
Health Information Technology Policy Committee (HITPC). (2015). HITPC meaningful
use stage 3 final recommendations. Retrieved from
http://www.healthit.gov/facas/sites/faca/files/HITPC_MUWG_Stage3_Recs_2014
-04-01.pdf

102

Haggstrom, D. A., Saleem, J. J., Russ, A. L., Jones, J., Russell, S. A., & Chumbler, N. R.
(2011). Lessons learned from usability testing of the VA’s personal health record.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 18(Suppl 1), i13-17.
doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2010-000082
Haun, J. N., Lind, J. D., Shimada, S. L., Martin, T. L., Gosline, R. M., Antinori, N.,
Stewart, M., & Simon. S. R. (2014). Evaluating user experiences of the secure
messaging tool on the Veterans Affairs’ patient portal system. Journal of Medical
Internet Research, 16(3), e75. doi:10.2196/jmir.2976
Hsiao, A. L., Bazzy-Asaad, A., Tolomeo, C., Edmonds, D., Belton, B., & Benin, A. L.
(2011). Secure web messaging in a pediatric chronic care clinic: A slow takeoff of
“kids' airmail” Pediatrics, 127(2), e406 -e413. doi: 10.1542/peds.2010-1086)
Hsiao, C., Jha, A. K., King, J., Patel, V., Furukawa, M. F., & Mostashari, F. (2013).
Office-based physicians are responding to incentives and assistance by adopting
and using electronic health records. Health Affairs, 32(8), 1470-1477.
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2013.0323
Hsiao, C., & Hing, E. (2014). Use and characteristics of electronic health record systems
among office-based physician practices: United States, 2001–2013. NCHS Data
Brief, No 143. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. Retrieved
from http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/databriefs/db143.htm
Hsu, S., Liu, C., Weng, R., & Chen, C. (2013). Factors influencing nurses’ intentions
toward the use of mobile electronic medical records. Computers, Informatics,
Nursing, 31(3), 124-132. Retrieved from
http://journals.lww.com/cinjournal/pages/default.aspx
Kaelber, D. C., Jha, A. K., Johnston, D., Middleton, B., & Bates, D. W. (2008). A
research agenda for personal health records (PHRs). Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 15(6), 729-736. doi:10.1197/jamia.M2547
Kahn, J. S., Hilton, J. F., Van Nunnery, T., Leasure, S., Bryant, K. M., Hare, C. B., &
Thorn, D. H. (2010) Personal health records in a public hospital: Experience at the
HIV/AIDS clinic at San Francisco General Hospital. Journal of the American
Medical Informatics Association, 17, 224-228. doi:10.1136/jamia.2009.000315
Kannry, J., Beuria, P., Wang, E., & Nissim, J. (2012). Personal health records:
Meaningful use, but for whom? The Mount Sinai Journal of Medicine, 79(5), 593602. doi: 10.1002/msj.21334
Kerns, J. W., Krist, A. H., Longo, D. R., Kuzel, A. J., & Woolf, S. H. (2013). How
patients want to engage with their personal health record: A qualitative study.
BMJ Open, 3(7), e002931. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002931
103

Kim, E., Stolyar, A., Lober, W. B., Herbaugh, A. L., Shinstrom, S. E., Zierler, B. K., Soh,
C. B., & Kim, Y. (2009). Challenges to electronic personal health record by a
low-income elderly population. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11(4), e44.
doi:10.2196/jmir.1256
Kim, J., Jung, H., & Bates, D. W. (2011). History and trends of "personal health record"
research in PubMed. Healthcare Informatics Research, 17(1), 3–17.
doi:10.4258/hir.2011.17.1.3
Krist, A. H., & Woolf, S. H. (2011). A vision for patient-centered health information
systems. Journal of the American Medical Association, 305(3), 300-301.
doi:10.1001/jama.2010.2011
Lafky, D. B., & Horan, T. A. (2011). Personal health records: Consumer attitudes toward
privacy and security of their personal health information. Health Informatics
Journal, 17(1), 63-71. doi:10.1177/1460458211399403
Lam, R., Lin, V. S., Senelick, W. S., Tran, H., Moore, A. A., & Koretz, B. (2013). Older
adult consumers' attitudes and preferences on electronic patient-physician
messaging. The American Journal of Managed Care, 19(10), SP7-SP11.
Retrieved from http://www.ajmc.com/journals/issue/2013/2013-11-vol19SP/Older-Adult-Consumers-Attitudes-and-Preferences-on-Electronic-PatientPhysician-Messaging/
Logue, M. D., & Effken, J. A. (2012). An exploratory study of the personal health
records adoption model in the older adult with chronic illness. Informatics in
Primary Care, 20(3), 151-169. doi:10.14236/jhi.v20i3.21
Luque, A. E., van Keken, A., Winters, P., Keefer, M. C., Sanders, M., & Fiscella, K.
(2013). Barriers and facilitators of online patient portals to personal health records
among persons living with HIV. Journal of Medical Internet Research - Research
Protocols, 2(1), e8. doi:10.2196/resprot.2302
Markle Foundation. (2008). Connecting for health. Retrieved from
http://www.markle.org/sites/default/files/ResearchBrief-200806.pdf
Markle Foundation. (2011). Health in a networked life. Retrieved from
http://www.markle.org/health/public-opinion-surveys/latest-surveys
Miller, A. R., & Tucker, C. (2009). Privacy protection and technology diffusion: The case
of electronic medical records. Management Science, 55(7), 1077-1093.
doi:10.1287/mnsc.1090.1014

104

Mishuris, R. G., Stewart, M., Fix, G. M., Marcello, T., McInnes, D. K., Hogan, T. P.,
Boardman, J. B., & Simon, S. R. (2014). Barriers to patient portal access among
veterans receiving home-based primary care: a qualitative study. Health
Expectations. Advanced online publication. doi:10.1111/hex.12199
Moore, G., & Benbasat, I. (1991). Development of an instrument to measure the
perceptions of adopting an information technology innovation. Information
Systems Research, 2(3), 192-222. doi:10.1287/isre.2.3.192
Nazi, K. M. (2010). Veterans' voices: Use of the American Customer Satisfaction Index
(ACSI) Survey to identify My HealtheVet personal health record users'
characteristics, needs, and preferences. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 17(2), 203-211. doi:10.1136/jamia.2009.000240
Nazi, K. M., Hogan, T. P., McInnes, D. K., Woods, S. S., & Graham, G. (2013).
Evaluating patient access to electronic health records: Results from a survey of
veterans. Medical Care, 51(3), S52-S56. doi:10.1097/MLR.0b013e31827808db
O’Donnell, H. C., Patel, V., Kern, L. M., Barrón, Y., Teixeira, P., Dhopeshwarkar, R., &
Kaushal, R. (2011). Healthcare consumers’ attitudes towards physician and
personal use of health information exchange. Journal of General Internal
Medicine, 26(9), 1019-1026. doi:10.1007/s11606-011-1733-6
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (n.d.-a).
What is an electronic health record (EHR)? Retrieved from
http://www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/faqs/what-electronic-healthrecord-ehr
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (n.d.-b).
Meaningful use. Retrieved from http://www.healthit.gov/facas/health-it-policycommittee/hitpc-workgroups/meaningful-use
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (n.d.-c).
EHR incentives & certification: Meaningful use definition & objectives. Retrieved
from http://www.healthit.gov/providers-professionals/meaningful-use-definitionobjectives
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (2011).
Federal health information technology strategic plan 2011 – 2015. Retrieved
from http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/utility/final-federal-health-itstrategic-plan-0911.pdf
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC). (2012).
ONC electronic health record adoption and utilization. Retrieved from
105

http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/highlights_accomplishments_ehr_adopt
ionsummer2012_2.pdf
Or, C. K. L., Karsh, B., Severtson, D. J., Burke, L. J., Brown, R. L., & Brennan, P. F.
(2011). Factors affecting home care patients' acceptance of a web-based
interactive self-management technology. Journal of the American Medical
Informatics Association, 18(1), 51-59. doi:10.1136/jamia.2010.007336
Osborn, C. Y., Mayberry, L. S., Wallston, K. A., Johnson, K. B. , & Elasy, T. A. (2013).
Understanding patient portal use: Implications for medication management.
Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(7), e133. doi:10.2196/jmir.2589
Patel, V. N., Abramson, E., Edwards, A. M., Cheung, M. A., Dhopeshwarkar, R. V., &
Kaushal, R. (2011a). Consumer attitudes toward personal health records in a
beacon community. The American Journal of Managed Care, 17(4), 104-120.
Retrieved from http://www.ajmc.com/journals/issue/2015
Patel, V. N., Dhopeshwarkar, R. V., Edwards, A., Barron, Y., Likourezos, A., Burd, L., &
Kaushal, R. (2011b). Low-income, ethnically diverse consumers' perspective on
health information exchange and personal health records. Informatics for Health
and Social Care, 36(4), 233-252. doi:10.3109/17538157.2011.554930
Patel, V. N., Dhopeshwarkar, R. V., Edwards, A., Barrón, Y., Sparenborg, J., & Kaushal,
R. (2012). Consumer support for health information exchange and personal health
records: A regional health information organization survey. Journal of Medical
Systems, 36(3), 1043-1052. doi:10.1007/s10916-010-9566-0
Ricciardi, L., Mostashari, F., Murphy, J., Daniel, J. G. & Siminerio, E. P. (2013). A
national action plan to support consumer engagement via e-health. Health Affairs,
32(2), 376-384. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2012.1216
Rogers, E. (2003). Diffusion of innovations. New York, NY: Free Press.
Saparova, D. (2012). Motivating, influencing, and persuading patients through personal
health records: A scoping review. Perspectives in Health Information
Management / American Health Information Management Association,
9(Summer), Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3392953/
Silvestre, A. L., Sue, V. M., & Allen, J. Y. (2009). If you build it, will they come? The
Kaiser Permanente model of online health care. Health Affairs, 28(2), 334–344.
doi:10.1377/hlthaff.28.2.334

106

Skipper, J. (2012). Individual’s access to their own health Information: ONC policy brief.
Retrieved from http://www.healthit.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/individual-access06-03-2012.pdf
Survey Monkey. (2015). How do Academics use survey monkey audience? Retrieved
from http://help.surveymonkey.com/articles/en_US/kb/How-do-Academics-useSurveyMonkey-Audience
Swanson, R. A. (2005). The process of framing research in organizations. In R. A
Swanson & E. F. Holton, (Eds.), Research in organizations: Foundations and
methods of inquiry (pp. 11-28), San Francisco, CA: Berrett-Koehler.
Tagalicod, R., & Reider, J. (2013). Progress on adoption of electronic health records.
Retrieved from
http://www.cms.gov/eHealth/ListServ_Stage3Implementation.html
Tang P. C., & Lee, T. H. (2009). Your doctor’s office or the Internet? Two paths to
personal health records. The New England Journal of Medicine, 360(13), 1276–
1278. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0810264
Tang, P. C., Ash, J. S., Bates, D.W., Overhage, J. M., & Sands, D. Z. (2006). Personal
health records: Definitions, benefits, and strategies for overcoming barriers to
adoption. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 13(2), 121126. doi:10.1197/jamia.M2025
Tidd, J. (2010). Gaining momentum: Managing the diffusion of innovations. New Jersey:
River Edge.
Tom, J. O., Mangione-Smith, R., Solomon, C., & Grossman, D. C. (2012). Integrated
personal health record use: Association with parent-reported care experiences.
Pediatrics,130, e183-190. doi:10.1542/peds.2011-1786
Turvey, C., Klein, D., Fix, G., Hogan, T., Woods, S., Simon, S. R., Charlton,
M.,Vaughan-Sarrazin, M., Zulman, D. M., Dindo, L., Wakefield, B., Graham, G.,
& Nazi, K. (2014). Blue Button use by patients to access and share health record
information using the Department of Veterans Affairs’ online patient portal.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association. Advance online
publication. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2014-002723
Urowitz, S., Smith, K., Alkazaz, N., Apatu, E., Quartey, N. K., & Wiljer, D. (2012).
Patient accessible electronic health records for the chronically ill: A review of the
literature. Journal of Hospital Administration, 1(2), 64-72.
doi:10.5430/jha.v1n2p64

107

Vodicka, E., Mejilla, R., Leveille, S. G., Ralston, J. D., Darer, J. D., Delbanco, T.,
Walker, J., & Elmore, J. G. (2013). Online access to doctors' notes: Patient
concerns about privacy. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(9), e208.
doi:10.2196/jmir.2670
Vogt, W. P. (2007). Quantitative research methods for professionals. Boston, MA:
Pearson.
Wade-Vuturo, A. E., Mayberry, L. S., & Osborn, C. Y. (2013). Secure messaging and
diabetes management: Experiences and perspectives of patient portal users.
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 20, 519-525.
doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2012-001253
Wagner, P. J., Howard, S. M., Bentley, D. R., Seol, Y., & Sodomka, P. (2010).
Incorporating patient perspectives into the personal health record: Implications for
care and caring. Perspectives in health information management. American
Health Information Management Association, 7, 1e. Retrieved from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2966356/
Wagner, P. J., Dias, J., Howard, S., Kintziger, K. W., Hudson, M. F., Seol, Y., &
Sodomka, P. (2012). Personal health records and hypertension control: A
randomized trial. Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association,
19(4), 626–634. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000349
Wald, J. S., Businger, A., Gandhi, T. K., Grant, R. W., Poon, E. G., Schnipper, J. L.,
Volk, L. A., & Middleton, B. (2010). Implementing practice-linked pre-visit
electronic journals in primary care: Patient and physician use and satisfaction.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 17(5), 502-506.
doi:10.1136/jamia.2009.001362
Walker, J., Ahern, D. K., Le L. X., & Delbanco, T. (2009). Insights for internists: "I
want the computer to know who I am". Journal of General Internal Medicine,
.24(6), 727-732. doi:10.1007/s11606-009-0973-1
Walker, J., Leveille, S. G., Ngo, L., Vodicka, E., Darer, J. D., Dhanireddy, S., Elmore, J.
G., Feldman, H. J., Lichtenfeld, M. J., Oster, N., Ralston, J. D., Ross, S. E., &
Delbanco, T. (2011). Inviting patients to read their doctors’ notes: Patients and
doctors look ahead patient and physician surveys. Annals of Internal Medicine,
155(12), 811-819. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-157-7-201210020-00002
Weitzman, E. R., Kaci, L., & Mandl, K. D. (2009). Acceptability of a personally
controlled health record in a community-based setting: Implications for policy and
design. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 11(2), e14. doi: 10.2196/jmir.1187

108

Weitzman, E. R., Kelemen, S., Kaci, L., & Mandl, K. D. (2012). Willingness to share
personal health record data for care improvement and public health: A survey of
experienced personal health record users. BMC Medical Informatics and Decision
Making, 12(1), e39. doi:10.1186/1472-6947-12-39
Wen, K., Kreps, G., Zhu, F., & Miller, S. (2010). Consumers' perceptions about and use
of the Internet for personal health records and health information exchange:
Analysis of the 2007 health information national trends survey. Journal of
Medical Internet Research, 12(4), e73. doi:10.2196/jmir.1668
Whetstone, M., & Goldsmith, R. (2009). Factors influencing intention to use personal
health records. International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare
Marketing, 2(1), 8-25.doi:10.1108/17506120910948485
Williams, C., Mostashari, F., Mertz, K., Hogin. E., & Atwal. P. (2012). From the office
of the national coordinator: The strategy for advancing the exchange of health
information. Health Affairs, 31(3), 527-536. doi:10.1377/hlthaff.2011.1314
Wilson, M. L., Murphy, L. S., & Newhouse, R. P. (2012). Patients’ access to their health
information: a meaningful-use mandate. Journal of Nursing Administration,
42(11), 493-496. doi:10.1097/NNA.0b013e3182714538
Woods, S. S., Schwartz, E., Tuepker, A., Press, N. A., Nazi, K. M., Turvey, C., & Nichol,
P. (2013). Patient experiences with full electronic access to health records and
clinical notes through the My HealtheVet personal health record pilot: Qualitative
study. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 15(3): e65. doi:10.2196/jmir.2356
Zarcadoolas, C., Vaughon, W. L., Czaja, S. J., Levy, J., & Rockoff, M. L. (2013).
Consumers' perceptions of patient-accessible electronic medical records. Journal
of Medical Internet Research, 15(8), e168. doi:10.2196/jmir.2507
Zulman, D. M., Nazi, K. M., Turvey, C. L., Wagner, T. H., Woods, S. S., & An, L. C.
(2011). Patient interest in sharing personal health record information: A webbased survey. Annals of Internal Medicine, 155(12), 805-810. doi:10.7326/00034819-155-12-201112200-00002

109

APPENDIX C. SURVEY INSTRUMENT
1
Informed Consent Form
2
Health information can be captured, collected, and stored within an electronic personal
health record. An electronic personal health record is a tool that is accessed, managed,
and maintained by you and other authorized users, such as your doctor.
The data maintained in an Electronic Personal Health Record varies from one person to
another, but a typical record might include information on:
• Visits to health care professionals
• Allergies
• Laboratory tests
• Family medical history
• Immunizations
• Conditions or diseases
• Medications
• Records of hospitalization
• Previous surgeries or procedures
Samples of electronic personal health records include:
• Commercially available web-based or mobile applications where only you access,
record, and maintain your personal health information.
• Web-based portals or mobile applications that are supplied by a hospital or health care
provider to be shared with you.
Both individually controlled and provider-based electronic records have the capability of
being shared across different health care settings.

110

This is an example of an online electronic personal health record. This type of electronic
health record can be accessed only by a patient to maintain his or her personal health
information.

111

This is an example of an online electronic personal health record that is provided to a
patient by a hospital or health care provider. Both the provider and patient can access and
maintain this type of electronic health record.

112

This is an example of a personal health record mobile application. This type of electronic
health record can be used on devices such as smartphones and tablets.

2
I currently use Electronic Personal Health Records (ePHR) to manage information about
my health.
Yes
No
113

Please rate your level of agreement with the following statements on Personal Electronic
Health Records.
Neither
Strongly
Somewhat
Somewhat
Strongly
Disagree
Agree nor
Agree
Disagree
Disagree
Agree
Agree
Disagree
A= YES B=NO
3
A. I think Electronic Records are better than using paper based records to manage
information about my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would be better than using paper based records to manage
information about my health.
4
A. I think Electronic Records are more interesting than other materials I have used to
manage information about my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would be more interesting than other materials I have used
to manage information about my health.
5
A. I think Electronic Records make managing information about my health a better
experience than I would have otherwise.
B. I think Electronic Records would make managing information about my health a better
experience than I would have otherwise.
6
A. I enjoy using Electronic Records to manage information about my health.
B. I think I would enjoy using Electronic Records to manage information about my
health.
7
A. I think Electronic Records offer me real advantages over the way I manage
information about my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would offer me real advantages over the way I manage
information about my health.
8
A. I think people should use Electronic Records to manage information about their
health.
B. I think people should use Electronic Records to manage information about their health.
9
A. I think Electronic Records enable me to manage information about my health more
quickly.
114

B. I think Electronic Records would enable me to manage information about my health
more quickly.
10
A. I think Electronic Records improve the quality of my health information.
B. I think Electronic Records would improve the quality of my health information.
11
A. I think Electronic Records make it easier to manage information about my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would make it easier to manage information about my
health.
12
A. I think Electronic Records enhance my effectiveness in managing information about
my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would enhance my effectiveness in managing information
about my health.
13
A. I think Electronic Records give me greater control over my health information.
B. I think Electronic Records would give me greater control over my health information.
14
A. I have no difficulty finding information about my health when I use Electronic
Records.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty finding information about my health if I used
Electronic Records.
15
A. I have no difficulty understanding how to navigate Electronic Health Records.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty understanding how to navigate Electronic Health
Records.
16
A. I have no difficulty understanding how Electronic Health Records technically work.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty understanding how Electronic Health Records
technically work.
17
A. I have no difficulty getting Electronic Health Record technology to work on my PC or
mobile device.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty getting Electronic Health Record technology to
work on my PC or mobile device.
18
115

A. I have no difficulty getting various Electronic Health Record functionality to work.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty getting various Electronic Health Record
functionality to work.
19
A. I think my interaction with Electronic Health Records is clear and understandable.
B. I think my interaction with Electronic Health Records would be clear and
understandable.
20
A. I think it is easy to get Electronic Health Records to do what I want them to do.
B. I think it would be easy to get Electronic Health Records to do what I want them to do.
21
A. Overall, I think Electronic Records are easy to use.
B. Overall, I think Electronic Records would be easy to use.
22
A. Learning to use Electronic Records is easy for me.
B. I think learning to use Electronic Records would be easy for me.
23
A. Being able to try out Electronic Records was important in my decision to purchase
them.
B. Being able to try out Electronic Records would be important in my decision to
purchase them.
24
A. Being able to try out Electronic Records was important in my decision to use them.
B. Being able to try out Electronic Records would be important in my decision to use
them.
25
A. I am more likely to want to use Electronic Records because of being part of this
survey.
B. I think I would be more likely to want to use Electronic Records because of being part
of this survey.
26
A. Electronic Personal Health Records are often called ePHR. The name ePHR made me
want to use Electronic Records to manage information about my health.
B. Electronic Personal Health Records are often called ePHR. The name ePHR makes me
want to use Electronic Records to manage information about my health.
27
116

A. Before deciding whether to use Electronic Records, I was able to properly try them out
on a trial basis.
B. Before deciding whether to use Electronic Records, I would want to properly try them
out on a trial basis.
28
A. I was permitted to use Electronic Records on a trial basis long enough to see what they
could do.
B. I would want to use Electronic Records on a trial basis long enough to see what they
could do.
29
A. I think other people seem interested in using Electronic Health Records when they see
me using them.
B. I think other people would be interested in using Electronic Health Records if they saw
me using them.
30
A. I think people are able to tell that I know more about my health information when I
use Electronic Health Records.
B. I think people would be able to tell that I know more about my health information if I
used Electronic Health Records.
31
A. I think other people who could use Electronic Health Records would like using them.
B. I think other people who could use Electronic Health Records would like using them.
32
A. I have no difficulty telling others about the results of using Electronic Health Records.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty telling others about the results of using Electronic
Health Records.
33
A. I think I could communicate the consequences of using Electronic Health Records to
others.
B. I think I would communicate the consequences of using Electronic Health Records to
others.
34
A. The results of using Electronic Health Records are apparent to me.
B. I think the results of using Electronic Health Records would be apparent to me.
35
A. I might have difficulty explaining why using Electronic Health Records would be
beneficial.
117

B. I might have difficulty explaining why using Electronic Health Records would be
beneficial.
36
A. I think using Electronic Records makes information about my health seem more
relevant to me.
B. I think using Electronic Records would make information about my health seem more
relevant to me.
37
A. I think Electronic Records help me to learn more about myself while also being able to
manage information about my health.
B. I think Electronic Records would help me to learn more about myself while also being
able to manage information about my health.
38
A. I have no difficulty in telling others how Electronic Records have improved my
overall health and well-being.
B. I don’t think I would have difficulty in telling others how Electronic Records might
improve my overall health and well-being.
39
A. I think Electronic Records are compatible with all aspects of how I like to manage my
health information.
B. I think Electronic Records would be compatible with all aspects of how I like to
manage my health information.
40
A. I think that using Electronic Records fits well with the way I like to manage my health
information.
B. I think that using Electronic Records would fit well with the way I like to manage my
health information.
41
A. Using Electronic Health Records fits into how I like to seek information about my
health.
B. Using Electronic Health Records would fit into how I like to seek information about
my health.
Please rate the likelihood of each statement about Electronic Personal Health Records
below.
Very Unlikely Unlikely
Not Sure
Likely
Very Likely
42
118

I intend to adopt Electronic Records to manage information about my health.
43
I intend to view the Electronic Records that I personally create.
44
I intend to view the Electronic Records that are created by my Health Care Provider.
45
I intend to pass on the Electronic Records that are created by my Health Care Provider to
a designated recipient.
46
I intend to pass on the Electronic Records that I personally create to a designated
recipient.
47
I intend to amend or change the Electronic Records that are created by my Health Care
Provider.
48
In what year were you born? (enter 4-digit birth year; for example, 1976)
49
What is your gender?
Female
Male
50
Please select the State of your primary residence.
51
Which of the following best describes your annual salary?
Less than $20,000
$20,000 to $34,999
$35,000 to $49,999
$50,000 to $74,999
$75,000 to $99,999
$100,000 to $149,999
119

$150,000 or More
52
Which of the following best describes your ethnicity? Select all that apply.
White
Black
American Indian
Alaskan Native
Asian
Pacific Islander
Hispanic
Other (please specify)
53
What is the highest level of education you have completed?
Some High School
High School Degree or Equivalent
Some College
Associate Degree
Bachelor Degree
Some Graduate Work
Graduate Degree
54
How is your health in general?
Very Bad

Bad

Fair

120

Good

Very Good

