BABY BOOMERS AND TECHNOLOGY: FACTORS AND CHALLENGES IN UTILIZING
MOBILE DEVICES
by
Renee Bennett-Kapusniak

A Dissertation Submitted in
Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of

Doctor of Philosophy
in Information Studies
at
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
December 2015

ProQuest Number: 3746717

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 3746717
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT
BABY BOOMERS AND TECHNOLOGY: FACTORS AND CHALLENGES IN UTILIZING
MOBILE DEVICES
by
Renee Bennett-Kapusniak
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2015
Under the Supervision of Professor Iris Xie, PhD

This exploratory dissertation study reports an investigation of Baby Boomers utilizing
mobile technology to determine how Baby Boomers were utilizing mobile devices and if there
were any types of challenges and affecting factors some Baby Boomers could face when
searching for information in an online mobile environment. Fifty Baby Boomer participants were
recruited by a purposive snowball sampling method and were divided into two groups, twentyfive Younger Boomers and twenty-five Older Boomers to look for comparisons and differences
among the Baby Boomers in regards to mobile technology usage, search activities,
environmental context, frequency and duration of search activities, as well as the factors and
challenges they could encounter while using a mobile device since the age range spans nineteen
years. The study was designed to answer two research questions: How are Baby Boomers
utilizing a mobile device to search for information in terms of the mobile device types, the
environmental contexts and the types of information searched?; and What are the challenges
concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in searching for information and their
affecting factors? This exploratory dissertation study used a qualitative methods approach based
in grounded theory to analyze the data. Participants were given a choice of using print or

ii

electronic instruments to participate in the study. Multiple collection methods were used to
gather the data, consisting of a questionnaire and solicited diaries that were kept for a period of
seven days with follow-up interviews given to all participants. The grounded theory approach
created a coding scheme of ten types of challenges representing five major categories and
twenty-three affecting factors. The comparison and interpretation of the search activities, the
types of challenges and the affecting factors led to the development of the Baby Boomer Mobile
Device Information Searching Model. Theoretical, methodological and practical implications
that include system design and library services have been discussed providing suggestions to
system designers, researchers and information professionals within and outside the Library and
Information Science field.

iii

© Copyright by Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, 2015
All Rights Reserved

iv

To
my husband Rich,
and especially my children Amanda and Nick

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PAGE
List of Figures……………………………………………………………………………….…..ix
List of Tables………………………………………………………………………………….….x
List of Abbreviations…………………………………...…………………………………….…xi
Acknowledgements……………………………………………………………………….........xiv
Chapter 1. Introduction…………………...…………………………………………………….1
1.1 Background……………………………………..…..…………………………………1
1.2 Significance of the Study……………………………………………………………...3
1.3 Research Problem, Questions and Goals……………………………………………...4
1.4 Definitions of Terms…………………………………………………………………..6
1.4.1 Information Technology…………………………………………………….6
1.4.2 Information Technology Mobile Devices…………………………………...7
1.4.3 Information Technology Users……………………………………………...8
1.4.4 Information Technology User Skills…………………….…………………..9
1.5 Research Design………………………………………………………….……………9
1.6 Dissertation Structure……………………………………………………….………..11
1.7 Chapter Summary……………………………………………………………………11
Chapter 2. Literature Review………………………………………….………………….…...12
2.1 Introduction…………………………………………………………………………..12
2.2 Information Retrieval………………………………………………………………...12
2.2.1 Information Searching and Retrieval Theories, Approaches and Models....13
2.2.2 Information Seeking Theories and Models………………………………...32
2.3 Information Retrieval Constructs…………………………………………………….40
2.3.1 User Information Behaviors and Associated Variables……………….…...40
2.3.2 Systems and Associated Variables……………………………………..…..46
2.3.3 Context……………………………………………………………………..56
2.4 Mobile Technology…………………………………………………………………..57
2.4.1 Types……………………………………………………………………….58
2.4.2 Issues and Challenges……………………………………………………...59
2.4.3 User Studies………………………………………………………………..60
2.5. Adults Midlife and Older ……………………………………………………………63
2.5.1 Special Needs………………………………………………………………64
2.5.2 Information Use and Information Behaviors………………………………66
2.5.3 Utilization of Information Technology/Mobile Technology ………...……70
2.5.4 Digital Divide………………………………………………………………73
2.6 Chapter Summary……………………………………………………………………74
Chapter 3. Research Methodology……………………………….…………………….……...79
3.1 Introduction………………………………………………………………....………..79
3.2 Rationale for Qualitative Methodology……………………………………………...79
3.3 Research Questions…………………………………………………………………..81
3.4 Sampling……………………………………………………………………………..81
vi

3.5 Data Collection………….…………………………………………………………...84
3.5.1 Methods…………………………………………………………………….84
3.5.2 Setting……………………………………………………………………...91
3.5.3 Pilot Test…………………………………………………………………...91
3.6 Data Analysis………………………………………………………………………...92
3.6.1 Grounded Theory…………………………………………………………..93
3.6.2 Coding Process and Coding Scheme…………………………...………….95
3.6.3 Field Notes………..………………………………………………………..98
3.6.4 Descriptive Analysis…………………………………………………….....99
3.7 Trustworthiness and Research Validity……………………………………………...99
3.8 Ethical Issues……………………………………………………………………….101
3.9 Chapter Summary…………………………………………………………………..103
Chapter 4. Results………………………………………………….………...………………..104
4.1 How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to retrieve information in terms
of the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of
information searched?..........................................................................................105
4.1.1 Types of Mobile Devices………………………………………………....105
4.1.2 Types of Environments…………………………………………………...109
4.1.3 Types of Information ………………...…………………………………..111
4.2 What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in
searching for information and their affecting factors?.........................................120
4.2.1 Inability to Initiate Search Activity………….…………………………..124
4.2.2 Instability of Connection………………….……………………………..129
4.2.3 Inability to Perform the Search …………………………..……………..130
4.2.4 Inability to Solve the Problem………..…………………………………134
4.2.5 Inability to Find Information/Solution …………………………………..135
Chapter 5. Discussion………………………….………………………………………….......137
5.1 Theoretical Implications……………………………………………………………137
5.1.1 The Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model….…….146
5.2 Practical Implications ……………………………………………............................159
5.2.1 Design Implications………………………………………………………159
5.2.2 Library Service Implications……………………………………………...163
5.3 Methodological Implications ………………………………………………………166
5.4 Limitations………………………………………………………………………….167
Chapter 6. Conclusion…………………………………………..……………….……………170
6.1 Key Findings……………………………………………………………….……….170
6.2 Contributions………………………………………………………………...……..176
6.3 Future Research……………..……………………………………...………………176
REFERENCES…………………………………………………………………………..……..181
APPENDICES……………………………………………………..…………………………...211
Appendix A: Study Flyer……………………………….……………………………...211

vii

Appendix B:
Appendix C:
Appendix D:
Appendix E:
Appendix F:

Email Letter………………………….…………………………………..212
Questionnaire…………………….…………………………....................213
Diary Questions………………………………………………………….214
IRB Approval Letter……………………………………………………..215
Interview Questions……………………………………………………...216

CURRICULUM VITAE……………………………………………………………………….218

viii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 3.1 Grounded Theory Process…………………………………………………………...96
Figure 4.1 Mobile Device Usage……………………………………………………..………...106
Figure 4.2 Frequency Distribution of Cellphone Usage………………………………………..107
Figure 4.3 Frequency Distribution of Tablet Usage………………………...……….…………107
Figure 4.4 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Mobile Device Usage Comparison………….108
Figure 4.5 Reasons for Mobile Device Usage………………………………………………….109
Figure 4.6 Mobile Device Usage Environment Comparison……………………….…………..110
Figure 4.7 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Environment Comparison…………………...111
Figure 4.8 Indicated Search Activities from the Questionnaire………………….……………..112
Figure 4.9 Mobile Device Usage per Day……………………………………………………...113
Figure 4.10 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Mobile Device Usage per
Day………………………………………...……………………………………….114
Figure 4.11 Diary Performed Search Activities………………………………………………...115
Figure 4.12 Questionnaire and Diary Search Activity Comparison……………………………116
Figure 4.13 Frequency Distribution of Diary Search Activities………………………………..118
Figure 4.14 Number of Different Types of Challenges …………………………………..……122
Figure 5.1 Baby Boomer Model of Challenges & Affecting Factors………………….…...…..146
Figure 5.2 Categorical Factors and Types of Challenges………………………………………148
Figure 5.3 The Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model…………...…......149

ix

LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1 Summary of the Most Cited Theories, Models, and Approaches……………………..16
Table 2.2 Summary of Macro Level Theories, Models and Approaches…………………..……21
Table 2.3 Summary of Micro Level Theories, Models and Approaches………………………...26
Table 2.4 Summary of Macro/Micro Level Theories, Models and Approaches………………...30
Table 2.5 Summary of Information Seeking Theories and Models……………………………...36
Table 2.6 List of Mobile Technologies………………………………………………………….59
Table 3.1 Descriptive Statistics of Participants’ Characteristics…………………..…………….86
Table 3.2 Participants by State…………………………………………………………………..87
Table 3.3 Data Collection and Analysis Plan……………………………………………………93
Table 3.4 Coding Sheet………………………………………………………..…………………97
Table 3.5 Coding Scheme: Examples of Main Categories………………………………………97
Table 4.1 Number of Days Participants Recorded Diary Entrees……………………………...105
Table 4.2 Comparison of Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Range of Search Activities
for 7 Days……………….……………...…………………………………………….117
Table 4.3 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Search Activities…………….119
Table 4.4 Minutes Utilizing Mobile Device(s) for 7 Days…….…………………………….....119
Table 4.5 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Number of Minutes for
Search Activities…………………………...…..……………………………………120
Table 4.6 Categories and Types of Challenges………………………………………………...121
Table 4.7 Types of Factors and Definitions…………………………………………………….123
Table 5.1 Predisposing, Intermediary and Transactional Factors………………………………148
Table 5.2 Summary of Types of Challenges, Affecting Factors and Design Implications….…160

x

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ALA

American Library Association

AMO

Adults Midlife and Older

ASK

Anomalous State of Knowledge

ACRL

Association for College and Research Libraries

BA

Behavior Activity

BI

Behavior Intention

CL

Comfort Level

DA

Device Application

DB

Database

DC

Device Convenience

DD

Device Design

DE

Device Ease-of-Use

DK

Domain Knowledge

DL

Digital Library

DP

Device Performance

DS

Device Security

ED

Education

ELIS

Everyday Life Information Seeking

ES

Economic Situation

FCC

Federal Communication Commission

HCI

Human-Computer Interaction

ICT

Information and Communication Technology

xi

IR

Information Retrieval

IRB

Institutional Review Board

IS&R

Information Seeking & Retrieval

ISP

Information Search Process

LIS

Library & Information Science

OB

Older Boomers

OPAC

Online Public Access Catalog

PEW

Pew Research Center

PA

Physical Ability

PC

Personal Context

PE

Previous Experience

PL&I

Public Library & Internet

PP

Personal Perception

RK

Retrieval Knowledge

SA

Social Ageism

SE

Self-Efficacy

SK

System Knowledge

SP

Social Perception

TAM

Technology Acceptance Model

TC

Task Complexity

TR

Task Requirement

TT

Task Type

US

United States

xii

YB

Younger Boomers

xiii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost, I want to thank the Institute of Museum and Library Services Laura
Bush 21st Century Library Program for sponsoring the fellowship grant at the University of
Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Information Studies Overcoming Barriers to Information
Access (B2A) that provided me the opportunity to go back to school and further my education.
Most importantly, I wish to thank my advisor and mentor, Dr. Iris Xie and also Dr. Dietmar
Wolfram, the B2A principal advisor and dissertation committee member. Their knowledge,
exceptional guidance, unwavering support and encouragement throughout my doctoral studies
enabled me to believe in myself and complete my dissertation. I would also like to thank my
other dissertation committee members, Dr. Jin Zhang, Dr. Jessica Moyer and Dr. Marcia Bates,
for all of your valuable advice and suggestions, which helped to improve the quality of my work.
In addition, I would like to thank the SOIS faculty and staff for all your help while
pursuing my degree. I am grateful for my SOIS doctoral colleagues who provided support and
encouragement. Especially, Adriana McCleer and Jennifer Thiele, whose help, support and
endearing friendship kept me going through my hardships and triumphs. I am especially grateful
for my participants in this study who contributed their time and valuable information to further
my research. I would also like to thank all my friends for supporting me throughout this long
endeavor.
Finally, I wish to thank my family both near and far for their unconditional love. They
have always believed in me and encouraged me to pursue my goals. I would like to thank my
daughter Amanda. She is a source of inspiration and unbelievable joy in my life. I thank my
husband Rich, for his support, patience, encouragement, and unwavering love. Most importantly,
I wish to thank my son Nick, who passed away last year. His love for his family, his exuberance

xiv

for life and his passion to achieve gave me the strength to continue on and finish my doctoral
degree. Thank you all for your thoughts and prayers.

xv

Chapter 1. Introduction
1.1 Background
The world population has been aging and living longer due to improved health and
technology. Research conducted on adults midlife and older (AMO) has been needed especially
in regards to information technology and how they access and retrieve information. Many
researchers have studied information retrieval (IR) and information seeking behavior among
various populations of students and adults. These studies have produced theories, approaches and
models that have identified different aspects of information seeking and retrieval.
User-oriented approaches in IR have been gaining in popularity to study user needs in
seeking information. Taylor (1967) was a primary researcher to study user information needs and
how different factors could affect the information seeking process. Prior research studies
explored the different aspects of the dynamic interaction between an individual and an online
system. Some earlier models examined this interaction by looking at the system performance of
relevance and feedback (Spink, 1997) and the interaction between the user and the interface
(Ingwersen and Jarvelin, 2005; Saracevic, 1997). The interface could play a key role in how easy
it would be to retrieve online information. The ease of locating and retrieving electronic
information could have an effect on the way an individual interacts with the information.
A user-system interaction has been important in the IR process. An individual’s cognitive
aspects could play a role when interacting with a system. Users could exhibit different types of
behaviors such as anxiety or uncertainty that could affect the search process (Kuhlthau, 1991;
Vakkari, 2001; Wilson, Ford, Ellis, Foster & Spink, 2002). In addition, ALA Digital Literacy
Task Force (2011) mentioned how it was important for users to have the knowledge and digital

1

literacy skills to effectively access and retrieve information as well as having a satisfying
experience with the system.
Furthermore, different types of tasks could play a role in the IR process. For instance,
work tasks and roles could affect the interaction and the sources used to retrieve information
(Fidel & Pejtersen, 2004; Pharo, 2004). Users have performed different strategies and have used
different types of systems to find information. Research scholars have noted that the IR process
is not straightforward but could go in different directions depending on the strategies
implemented by the users (Bates, 1989; Xie, 2008).
Information technology has been changing daily and has been an important mode to
access and retrieve information. Desktop computer ownership has been decreasing as laptops and
other mobile devices to access and retrieve information have been increasing dramatically
(Griffey, 2010b; Smith, 2010). In addition, mobile technology has gained in popularity, though
usage by AMO has been small compared to younger aged individuals. The popularity of online
information has also increased. Therefore, the access and retrieval of online information from a
mobile device could be important since mobile devices would allow access and retrieval of
information from anywhere and at any time. AMO have been an increasing demographic due to
the Baby Boomer generation (Federal Interagency Forum on Aging Statistics, 2012). As the
population ages, more individuals may want access to information at their fingertips, due to a
more active lifestyle that take users away from a standard desktop computer. However, there
could be challenges among AMO when utilizing mobile technology while accessing and
retrieving information.
New research conducted on Baby Boomers would provide an opportunity to investigate
whether established theories and models are applicable to the Baby Boomer generation,

2

especially when utilizing mobile technology. New research could identify ways in which the
models would be updated or refined, or the research could spawn the creation of a new model for
this unique and large population. This study was intended to fill a gap in the field of research in
Library & Information Science (LIS) by investigating the information needs of Baby Boomers. It
addressed the question of how Baby Boomers located and used information from a mobile
technological device as well as the factors that could affect the utilization of mobile technology
and the challenges Baby Boomers might face in seeking online information. Chu (2003) stated
information searching, information seeking and information accessing could be considered
synonyms when discussing IR within an electronic system, though at times could have different
focuses (as cited in Xie, 2008, p. viii). In this dissertation, the terms were used interchangeably
unless otherwise noted.
1.2 Significance of the study
Characteristics of AMO have varied and therefore, perception, access and retrieval of
technological information by this age group could vary. There were limited studies researching
AMO, especially concerning IR and access of information in different types of environments
with different undefined tasks conducted by real users. AMO have been researched in other
fields of study such as gerontology and other health related fields but research has been limited
in the LIS field. This exploratory dissertation study was conducted to help contribute to Baby
Boomer research and create awareness of the utilization, unique factors and challenges some
Baby Boomers could face when searching for information in an online mobile environment.
Baby Boomers could be considered digital immigrants since they were born in a period where
certain types of information technologies had not yet been created or used as frequently as those
born more recently. This could create a digital divide with AMO in the understanding and usage

3

of mobile technology that could make it difficult for them to retrieve relevant information. In
addition, it could create a divide between individuals who could be afraid to learn new
information technology and those who embrace it as part of their daily lives. This comfort level
could vary among this age group and as more information becomes available online, could cause
issues and challenges. This dissertation study provided unique new knowledge and created more
awareness of Baby Boomers in relation to their use of mobile devices. This information would be
valuable to inform library communities, system designers and other groups who provide services
and assistance to Baby Boomers.
Various models, approaches, theories, and applications have been developed to
understand the information search process. They have greatly contributed to the understanding of
the complex and active process of information searching. However, there was not a model,
approach or theory that specifically examined Baby Boomers. Building on the contributions of
previous research, this study provided a proposed model that could be used in future studies to
aid in researching Baby Boomers and their IR needs.
1.3 Research problem, questions and goals
Baby Boomers have diverse characteristics. Some Baby Boomers have been exposed to
information technologies while others have little or no training with computerized systems. In
addition, age related changes, such as physical or cognitive issues, could affect some Baby
Boomers and their interactions with information technology. However, there has been a lack of
research specifically looking at Baby Boomers and their use of information technology, which
called for a need to investigate this particular age group and how they retrieve information. In
addition, with the increase in the popularity of mobile technology, there have been few research
studies examining the growing population of Baby Boomers using mobile devices. This

4

exploratory dissertation study intended to understand how Baby Boomers effectively used,
accessed and searched for information from a mobile technological device. This study was
designed to address the following research questions and goals:
R1) How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to search for information in terms
of the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of information
searched?
The first research goal examined how Baby Boomers were using mobile devices and
whether they were finding different types of information unique to their specific age group. It
examined where and when Baby Boomers accessed information. Frequency and time spent
searching and retrieving information were measured to understand user engagement in the search
process. This information determined whether Baby Boomers were spending a longer period of
time finding information and whether they were accessing information more or less frequently
than other aged adults.
R2) What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in
searching for information and their affecting factors?
The second research goal explored whether this age group had any challenges when
accessing and retrieving information from a mobile device and examined the factors that Baby
Boomers experienced while using and searching for information on a mobile device. Since this
user group has various characteristics, different factors played a role in the IR process. Different
factors were discovered from the qualitative data about Baby Boomers that were not previously
discovered in quantitative research studies. Additionally, past research studies on Baby Boomers
and previous older adult studies were mainly limited to examining usage with non-mobile

5

desktop computer devices, and few studies pertaining to mobile technology usage with AMO
participants.
By answering the above research questions, this exploratory dissertation study provided
important contributions and filled in a gap in research about AMO using mobile devices and
specifically about Baby Boomers.
1.4 Definitions of terms
An overview of terms and their definitions found within this dissertation study has been
presented below and has been divided into four areas: Information technology, Information
technology mobile devices, Information technology users, and Information technology user
skills. These definitions were created to understand how each term was considered in the
dissertation study. Chapter 3 has additional explanations of information technology skills
assessment.
1.4.1 Information technology
•

Information access: The ability of a user to reach data stored on a computer or a
computerized system and obtaining the information needed. This could include the
Broadband connection as well as the system utilized to find the information.

•

Information retrieval: A broad concept limited to users interactions with systems. This
could include searching, seeking and/or browsing for information in an online system as
well as the user’s knowledge, search skills or experience.

•

Information searching: The behaviors of users when interacting with different systems
that would consist of search moves, strategies, patterns, and factors. This sometimes
could be tied to specific searching techniques such as keyword searching by inputting
words in a search box.

6

•

Information seeking: The active or passive behaviors of users acquiring information from
systems or non-system sources such as print materials or personal communication with
individuals to satisfy a goal, task or need. This would cover more categories such as
users’ cognitive, perceptual, and behavioral factors as well as the environment or social
aspects of finding information.

•

Information technology: According to the Dictionary for Library and Information Science
(ABC-CLIO, 2015), information technology is defined as a broad term that encompasses
all aspects of management and processing of information by a computer including the
hardware and software to access the information. In the context of this dissertation,
information technology is defined as ways in which a user accesses information by
computers and other electronic devices for creating, storing, retrieving, and exchanging
information electronically.
1.4.2 Information technology mobile devices

•

E-book reader or E-reader: An electronic mobile device designed primarily to read
books downloaded in digital format with some devices having the functions of Internet
access, text-to-speech capabilities and other functions (ex. Amazon Kindle & Kindle Fire,
Barnes & Noble Nook, Google Nexus, etc.).

•

Internet enabled cellphone or Smartphone: A mobile cellular telephone that has more
capabilities than a basic phone with built-in applications/functions and Internet
access (ex. Apple iPhone, Samsung Galaxy, Android, Blackberry, AT&T
GoPhone, etc.).

7

•

iPod Touch: A mobile touch screen device from Apple that has combined wireless
Internet connectivity and other functions such as music, videos, and gaming. The device
does not have a cellular signal for data connectivity.

•

Mobile technological device/mobile technology: A small, handheld mobile
computing device that typically has a display screen and/or a miniature keyboard (ex.
Internet enabled cellphone, tablet, e-reader, iPodTouch, etc.)

•

Tablet: A general-purpose mobile computer contained in a touch-screen panel
operated by the fingers and/or stylus pen typically smaller than a notebook
computer but larger than a smartphone (ex. Apple iPad, Amazon Kindle Fire,
Barnes & Noble Nook, etc.).
1.4.3 Information technology users

•

Baby Boomers : The Pew Internet Generations Online (2009) defined AMO using
different target groups: Younger Boomers (YB) (Born 1955-1964), Older Boomers (OB)
(Born 1946-1954), the Silent Generation (Born 1937-1945), and the GI generation (Born
-1936). According to the Library of Congress Authorities 2012 records, the American
Heritage Dictionary defined older people as, “…someone between middle and advanced
age.” For the purpose of this dissertation study, AMO, who comprise Baby Boomers ages
50-69, were considered and referred to as Baby Boomers throughout the paper. Please
note that any prior research conducted on adults over age 50 referred to in this
dissertation study typically labeled this age group as Baby Boomers, midlife adults,
and/or older adults and these terms were used dependent on the study cited throughout
this dissertation.

8

•

Digital immigrant: An individual who has not been previously exposed to certain types of
information technology, has adopted it to some extent later in life and has less of a
comfort level using it.

•

Digital native: An individual born during or after the general introduction of most
information technologies and through interacting with the technologies from an early age
has a greater comfort level using it.
1.4.4 Information technology user skills

•

Expert user: An individual who has skills or experience utilizing various information
technologies to access and retrieve information online with little or no issues.

•

Intermediate user: An individual who has some skill using various information
technologies to access or retrieve information online though still has issues and/or
challenges.

•

Novice user: An individual who has little or no experience or skill using various
information technologies to access or retrieve information online.

1.5 Research design
The researcher conducted an exploratory user study with 50 diverse participants to
answer the research questions. The participants were divided into two groups consisting of YB
and OB with an age range of 50-69 years or born between 1946 and 1964. The participants filled
out a short questionnaire that included demographic information (age, gender and education),
information technology experience and mobile device ownership. After filling out the
questionnaire, participants kept a diary and documented all the times that he/she used a mobile
device to access, searched and retrieved information online. Participants recorded their
information searching activities while utilizing a mobile device throughout a 7-day period.

9

During that period of time, the participant documented a maximum of 5 different typical search
activities per day while using a mobile device for a total that could be up to 35 activities.
Answers to the following questions were documented for the 5 different activities per day:
1) What type of mobile device did you use? 2) Where were you? 3) What type of information did
you look for? Why? 4) How long did you use the mobile device to find your information? 5) Did
you find what you were looking for? Why or why not? 6) Did you encounter any problems? 7)
Did anyone help you? Who was it? 8) Why did you choose to use that mobile device to find your
information? Subsequent search activities that were the same as the 5 activities that had answers
to the above questions were recorded in a tally sheet marking that the search activity was
repeated during that same day but detailed information pertaining to the questions about that
activity was not documented after the first initial documentation. The researcher interviewed all
of the participants after the participant diaries were completed and field notes were kept
throughout the dissertation study. No specific search task was pre-determined by the researcher.
However, the participants were provided a series of questions to guide the diary entries (see
Appendix D). The grounded theory method was used in this dissertation study since there could
have been valuable variables discovered or themes of interest pulled from the qualitative data
that have not been revealed in previous quantitative research studies. The quantitative data in this
study looked at the types of mobile devices and environments, the frequency of device usage and
search activities as well as the duration of the search activities when participants were interacting
with the mobile IR system. The qualitative data also identified factors and challenges the
participants faced in utilizing a mobile device.

10

1.6 Dissertation structure
To answer the research questions, the researcher examined a wide range of theoretical
and practical relevant literature to acquire a basis for this exploratory dissertation study, which is
explained in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 outlines the sampling, theoretical and the methodological
approach as well as detailing the data collection and data analyses procedures. Chapter 4
contains the analysis of the results and synopsis of the findings. Chapter 5 is a discussion of the
findings, the Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model and the theoretical,
practical and methodological implications as well as unique and associated information. Chapter
6 summarizes the key findings and future directions of prospective research.
1.7 Chapter summary
This chapter highlighted this exploratory dissertation study that investigated Baby
Boomers utilizing a mobile device in searching online information. This research was undertaken
due to a dearth of research conducted about Baby Boomers in the LIS information retrieval and
access area. This study utilized a qualitative methodological approach to gain further insight than
previous quantitative research studies. Two research questions were developed to investigate
Baby Boomer IR and access needs as they pertained to mobile technology. This dissertation has
reported on a study of 50 diverse Baby Boomer participants mobile information needs over the
course of 7 days. The researcher examined the types of participant information needs, mobile
device(s) used, how long the participants used the device to conduct the search, how often they
used the device to search for information and whether there were any challenges and affecting
factors encountered during the IR process. Findings from the data gathered created the Baby
Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model that identifies the factors and challenges
Baby Boomers face when searching for information using a mobile device.

11

Chapter 2. Literature Review
2.1 Introduction
The previous chapter focused on the initial introduction, research questions and goals
accomplished in this exploratory dissertation user study. This chapter examines prior research
laying a foundation for the study.
Information searching has evolved from the user searching for information manually in a
physical environment to searching for information with an electronic information retrieval (IR)
system (Xie, 2010). IR and access have been important aspects of searching for and finding
information effectively. Some users today have accessed and retrieved information with a mobile
device. Mobile technology has evolved over the last few years and gained in popularity with
users due to the convenience of access to information at their fingertips. Adults over age 50,
specifically Baby Boomers, have a variety of characteristics and capabilities in regards to
information technology. Some have been digital immigrants and not digital natives who grew up
among different technological devices. Accessing and retrieving information online could be
challenging due to these varying characteristics. However, this age group has not been readily
considered for services and programming at public libraries or researched extensively in the
Library & Information Science (LIS) field. The following literature review explored research on
IR and IR constructs, mobile technology, and information on adults over 50 years of age. This
provided a foundation on how individuals access and retrieve information in an online system.
2.2 Information retrieval
IR research has focused on system-oriented and user-oriented approaches. The systemoriented approach examined IR as a match between a query and a set of documents typically
dealing with the precision and recall of a system. The user-oriented approach examined users’

12

cognitive aspects and the interaction with the information source when seeking information
(Cool & Belkin, 2011). The LIS field has used user-oriented approaches more frequently in IR
research since the 1980s (Wilson, 2000). Wilson (1999) stated there was a distinction among
scholars between information searching and information seeking. However, it could be difficult
to differentiate information searching, information seeking, and IR models since some
information seeking models involved search components and processes. For the purpose of this
dissertation study, the terms were divided into two separate sections. The first section illustrates
theories, approaches and models with the terms information searching and information seeking
used interchangeably and classified by the IR research scholars. The second section identified
other information seeking theories and models that have not been classified into the macro,
micro or macro/micro levels of IR. Each section has been summarized in a table with the main
focuses of IR, information searching and information seeking bolded for easy reference.
2.2.1 Information searching and retrieval theories, approaches and models
2.2.1.a Most cited and influential IR models
Taylor (1967) was an initial researcher to study information seeking utilizing a useroriented approach in IR. He discussed information seeking when the user had a specific or an
unconscious need for information. Taylor’s Levels of Information Need Approach identified 4
types of information needs: visceral (unconscious) need, conscious need (but the need is
unclear), formalized need (when a user can express it) and a compromised need (when the user
modified the question so the system could understand it) that represented a flow of activity.
Additionally, the information need could be influenced by internal or external factors that
affected the information seeking process. These 5 factors were subject definition, objective and
motivation, inquirer personal characteristics, the relationship of inquiry description to file

13

organization and anticipated or acceptable answers. Negotiations between the user and the
librarians helped form an effective query aiding the information seeking process (Ruthven &
Kelly, 2011).
Building on Taylor’s (1967) types of needs, Belkin (1980) developed a cognitive
communication system for IR. The ASK (anomalous state of knowledge) Hypothesis illustrated
how the user had an uncertainty or gap in knowledge that prevented the user from accomplishing
a goal. The user tried to fill the gap by seeking information causing an interaction between the
user and the information source associated with text or a combination of texts. The interactions
would take place over time with the user engaged in the cognitive processes of navigation,
representation, comparison, presentation or visualization dependent on the specific goal, task or
problem. In this cognitive communication system, information would be forming knowledge
(Case, 2002).
In 1972, Dervin developed the Sense-Making Approach to seeking information. This
approach has been utilized often in research studies in the Communication and LIS fields. The
sense-making model examined variables (situations, gaps and users) searching for patterns in
user behaviors while interacting with information. The approach identified procedures and
behavioral moves that changed during the process of seeking information. The information
seeking process assisted the user to understand or make sense of the world. Internal as well as
external factors could influence the process as the user moves through time and space to bridge a
gap in their knowledge (Dervin, 1983; 1992).
Kuhlthau (1991) incorporated Taylor’s (1967) Levels of Needs and Belkin’s (1980) ASK
Hypothesis along with George Kelly’s (1963) Personal Construct Theory (as cited in Fisher,
Erdelez & McKechnie, 2005, p. 230) and developed the Information Search Process Approach

14

(ISP) model. The model revealed how information searching has physical actions with cognitive
thoughts and feelings playing a role in accomplishing the task. The ISP would be initiated by
uncertainty and has six stages: initiation, selection, exploration, formulation, collection and
presentation. Each stage has the possibility of uncertainty, anxiety, relief, or clarity that would
influence the information search. The search process has a sequence of events based on four
criteria, task, time, interest and availability with user emotions playing an important role in
bridging the gap in the information search process.
Rasmussen, Pejtersen, and Goodstein (1994) created the Cognitive Work Analysis
Approach that examined the interaction of the user’s cognitive activity, work domains, social
activities and subject preferences (as cited in Xie, 2008, p. 15). This approach was guided by
Pejtersen (1979) earlier work on the Cognitive Task Analysis Approach that illustrated how the
user, the librarian and the system interacted together. The interaction strategies (browsing,
known item search, analytical searching, empirical search and similarity search) were a part of
the information seeking process. Based on Rasmussen et al. (1994) approach, Fidel and Pejtersen
(2004) later developed the Cognitive Work Analysis Framework. This conceptual framework
was based on the behavior of users in a work environment depicting the individuals as actors
involved in a work related action. It focused on the task, the environment, the actor’s goals and
cognitive attributes, workplace organization, task analysis and the strategies used in the search
process.
Wilson (1996) modified an earlier 1981 model and developed the Model of Information
Behavior to accommodate the development of new contexts such as the World Wide Web. This
model illustrated how in the course of information seeking, users interacted with information
systems, information sources or have information exchanges with other individuals (Wilson,

15

1999). These interactions could be formal or informal resulting in success or failure in finding
relevant information. The model suggested the perceived need would be bounded in context
according to stress theory, though the need alone may not activate user actions. Intervening
variables could either cause barriers or support information seeking activities. Risk/reward
theory and social learning theory could also play a role with user information seeking behaviors
(active, passive or ongoing). A feedback loop could occur when users evaluate information to
determine further actions. The user would search and find information or the user would stop
looking and the process ends. The activity would end with the success/satisfaction or failure/no
satisfaction with the information seeking process. The most cited IR models have been
summarized in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1.
Summary of the Most Cited Theories, Models, and Approaches
Theory
Taylor
(1967)

Model
Levels of
Information
need
approach

Dervin
(1972,
1983)

Sensemaking
method

Summary
The approach laid the groundwork for useroriented approaches. It identified four types of
information needs that were influenced by five
internal or external factors. Negotiations of the
factors between the user and the librarians
helped form queries important to understand
an individual’s knowledge through
communication or the social context. The
model started with the task and matched the
need to the document. It would indicate
problems within IR systems. The approach
was examined with a study of interviews with
librarians.
This method studied information seeking in
everyday life. It has a three way process
involving situations, gaps, and uses. The
information bridged the gap of uncertainty the
user was feeling and the need was satisfied by
active searching or by other means. This
method provided a framework that looked at
the behavioral moves during the process and
points to problems with system design. This
method was a turning point to more useroriented approaches. Time-line interviews
were conducted and still used with studies
today.

16

Weakness
The approach has not
been tested in different
digital environments. It
also did not examine the
behaviors affecting the
process, the strategies or
moves in information
seeking.

This method did not
examine the strategies
involved in bridging the
gap in the user’s
knowledge, the actual
problem or the different
behaviors affecting the
situation.

Belkin
(1980)

ASK
(anomalous
state of
knowledge)
Hypothesis

This hypothesis looked at the uncertainty or
gap when resolving a problem. It involved a
cognitive process where information forms
knowledge. It could specifically indicate
problems with IR systems by the user’s
interaction with text after the identified tasks.

Kuhlthau
(1991)

ISP
Information
search
process
approach

Rasmussen
Pejtersen
&
Goodstein
(1994)

Cognitive
work
analysis
approach

Fidel &
Pejtersen
(2004)

Cognitive
work
analysis
framework

Wilson
(developed
in 1996)

Model of
Information
Behavior

This approach examined the user feelings,
cognitive thoughts and physical actions as well
as how they all play a role in accomplishing a
task. The specified stages of the information
process have a sequence of events where the
active search process is trying to bridge a gap.
The approach integrated models of
information searching and information
seeking. The researcher examined students’
behaviors while writing a research proposal for
a master’s thesis. It has been widely tested by
others in different digital environment.
Guided by Pejtersen’s (1980) cognitive task
analysis approach, the cognitive work analysis
approach examined the interaction and the
strategies as part of information seeking
process where cognitive activity, work
domains, social activities and subject
preferences all interact together.
The framework was based on the1994 model
examining the user behaviors in a work
environment. The task, the environment, goals,
organization of the workplace, strategies used
and user cognitive attributes all interact in the
process. This framework could be used to help
design better systems for information
seeking.
This model expanded Wilson’s 1981 model
and examined the user need with uncertainty a
part of the information seeking process.
Intervening variables cause barriers or support
with stress theory, risk/reward theory or social
learning theory possibly being an important
factor. Other individuals could influence the
process. It has a problem solving process
driven by behavior with a feedback loop. This
model has integrated models of information
searching and information seeking.

17

The hypothesis did not
examine the seeking
strategies, the social
context, the patterns and
the behaviors. It also has
not been tested in
different digital
environments.
The approach did not
examine the type of need
the user has and the
information sources to
satisfy that need. It has a
general approach to the
search process.

The framework did not
examine the factors
behind the moves in the
process or the user
thoughts and feeling
during the process. It has
been also difficult to
generalize the results to
other groups.

The model did not
examine how the context
could play a role, how
barriers could affect user
motivation, the seeking
strategies or patterns of
the process. The model
only depicts a sequential
process.

2.2.1.a Summary
The above user-oriented models have made a significant impact in research studies in the
LIS field (Xie, 2008) and have continued to influence and inspire future user-oriented research.
Taylor’s (1967) levels of information need approach noted how it was important to understand
an individual’s knowledge through communication or the social context in the information
seeking process. Taylor’s experiences in the field and interviews with librarians led to the model
development (Fidel, 2012). Taylor laid the groundwork and influenced future IR user-oriented
approaches. Belkin’s (1980) ASK hypothesis looked at the gap in the individual’s knowledge.
By examining the user’s interaction with text, it could indicate problems with IR systems.
Kuhlthau’s (1991) ISP model was based on empirical research and has been tested in subsequent
studies providing strength to its validity. It was the first model to study the information seeking
process empirically (Fidel, 2012) analyzing user tasks and examining how the task performance
affected information seeking (Vakkari & Järvelin, 2005). Dervin’s (1983) sense-making
approach focused on the concept of making sense of information. It assumed that life entailed
making sense of the environment and one’s experiences, which required a user to express his or
her information need. Dervin’s approach pointed more at the problem with system design and the
lack of communication between the system and the user (Wang, 2011).
Adults midlife and older (AMO), similar to other age groups, have searched for
information due to a specific need or an anomalous state of knowledge. Taylor’s (1967) and
Belkin’s (1980) approaches could be utilized to study the types of needs AMO could have when
seeking out information sources. However, neither approach had been tested in any type of
digital information technology environment. Furthermore, the models did not look at user-system
interaction, such as the behaviors behind the strategies user’s would have in seeking information.

18

Similarly, Dervin’s (1983) model also did not examine the behaviors and strategies involved in
bridging the gap in the user’s knowledge nor the actual problem itself.
Kuhlthau’s (1991) ISP model would be a better choice to utilize in examining AMO since
it incorporated Taylor’s (1967) and Belkin’s (1980) models together providing richer detail about
user needs. This has been considered a general model since it draws attention to user feelings
during the user system interaction (Wilson, 1999) and could be beneficial to understanding what
an AMO felt about seeking information from different digital environments. However, the ISP
model has limitations since it did not consider the type of need the user has and the information
sources to satisfy that need. Research studies have shown computer anxiety to be correlated with
age, with older participants experiencing more anxiety than younger participants about
computers (Karavidas, Lim & Katsikas, 2005). Wilson’s (1999) model incorporated other
theoretical behavior models and considered information seeking as a problem-solving event
driven by behavioral activities. Wilson also noted the importance of the social context in the
process (Nichols & Twidale, 2011). This model would be an appropriate model to use to look at
AMO behaviors especially if the researcher explored anxiety or self-efficacy of users
information seeking. However, the model has a significant drawback since it illustrated a
sequential process and information seeking sometimes moves in different directions depending
on the strategies and the information received. Additionally, Fidel and Pejtersen’s (2004)
cognitive work analysis offered a unique framework to examine human behavior in a work
environment, though the model’s purpose was towards designing better information systems.
Some AMO have continued to work even after retirement age, so the model would be beneficial
in looking at work goals and the information seeking strategies. However, it did not explain the
factors behind the strategies and the model would be better if combined with a behavioral model.

19

2.2.1.b Macro level
The LIS research field has cited extensively the following three traditional approaches.
These approaches identified factors that affected the user-system interaction and guided the
development of other user-oriented models, theoretical frameworks and approaches.
Ingwersen’s (1992) Cognitive Model of interaction closely resembled Wilson’s (1999)
model that illustrated seeking information as an active search process and the cognitive
communication of Belkin’s (1980) cognitive communication system. Ingwersen’s (1992) model
had the user as the central component in the social organizational environment’s cognitive space.
Recent research by Ingwersen and Jarvelin (2005) resulted in the Interactive Information Seeking
Retrieval (IS&R) and Behavioral Model, a revision of an earlier model that identified users as
cognitive actors interacting with a system. The model illustrated a four-way interaction between
the social, cultural and organizational context, information objects, information technology and
the system interface with the user(s) or cognitive actor(s) in the center of the process. The task
(work, daily life, or interest) was important in the model with uncertainty, a goal or a problem
starting the information seeking process and the user interacted via the system interface. Each
part of the interaction influenced the other.
Belkin’s (1996) Episode Model with Text was developed to understand the interactions
between the user and the system, what types of goals lead to the interaction and how the
retrieved information affected the interaction. With the interaction as the model’s center point,
the user (goals, tasks, knowledge, problem or uses) and the information retrieved (text) affected
the interaction. Various processes supported the interaction: comparison, representation,
navigation, presentation and visualization. The user (actor) played a significant role and based on
relevance judgments, guided the search process.

20

Saracevic’s (1997) Stratified Interaction Model identified the user interacting with the
system. The queries made, the user’s knowledge, the situation and the environment interacted
with the system and then adapted to the system output. The model revealed six types of
interactions between the user and the system. According to Saracevic, three user elements or
levels occurred in the interaction. The cognitive level: when users interacted with texts making
relevance judgments about the retrieved texts, which could change the user’s state of knowledge;
the affective level: what motivated the user to interact with the system, which could include a
user’s beliefs and intentions; and the situational level; the problem, or situation that led the user
interacting with the system. The system also had three levels. The engineering level: the system
design and operation; the processing level: when the user dealt with the software or underlying
system algorithms; and the content level: how reliable and relevant the retrieved resources were
after analyzing the given information. The information seeking process involved five different
types of feedback (content relevance, term relevance, magnitude, tactical review and term
review) that played a critical part in the interactions. This model illustrated an active and
complex information seeking process (Xie, 2008). The IR macro level models have been
summarized in Table 2.2.
Table 2.2
Summary of Macro Level Theories, Models and Approaches
Theory
Ingwersen
(1992)
Ingwersen &
Jarvelin
(2005)

Belkin
(1996)

Model
Cognitive
Model
Interactive
information
seeking
retrieval and
behavioral
model
(IS&R)
Episode
model of
interaction

Summary
The user would be the central component in the
dynamic process. It has a four-way interaction
involving the social, cultural and organization
context, system objects, technology and the
system interface. The active search began with
a task and the user’s uncertainty could play a
role in the process. This has been a useful
model for system design.

Weakness
The models did not
illustrate the role of
feedback in the process,
the moves involved or
the shifts in information
seeking. The model has
not been used in a largescale study.

This model was based on the earlier ASK
model. It has the interaction with the system as
the central point. The information retrieved

The model did not
include the behaviors
behind the strategies the

21

with text

Saracevic
(1997)

Stratified
interaction
model

affected the interaction. The process started
with a goal/tasks and the user played a role on
the relevance judgment of information and the
interaction with interface. The model helped
suggest how to design systems.
This model included 6 types of interactions
cognitive, affective, situational, engineering,
processing and content level. The process
involved five different types of feedback. The
model showed the IR process as active and
complex with user and system changing and
adapting as they interact with the interface.

user would utilize in
seeking information or
the patterns of behaviors
and did not look at other
contexts besides text.
The model did not
examine the interaction
with other contexts than
text, user behaviors
seeking strategies or the
patterns involved in the
process.

2.2.1.b Summary
Ingwersen’s (1992) cognitive model incorporated different interactive processes other
than query modification as well as looking at user behaviors and system design issues. Ingwersen
and Jarvelin’s (2005) modified IS&R model could be used with other cognitive actor(s) not just
information seekers and their interactions with other social, organizational and cultural contexts.
It would be a useful model for designing a good IR system. Belkin’s (1996) episode model,
based on his ASK hypothesis (1980), illustrated the information need as a problem and the
problem guided the strategies used. It provided a framework for information search strategies
and it examined user interactions with texts. Saracevic’s (1997) stratified interaction model
illustrated how information seeking is continuous and interrelated consisting of users
multitasking (Spink & Cole, 2005). The model could be used in depicting general goals and
plans of everyday user information seeking as well as investigating some of the interactive IR
issues by identifying factors that affect the interaction.
Ingwersen and Jarvelin’s (2005) Belkin’s (1996), and Saracevic’s (1997) models looked
at the system and user interface interaction. The interface design has been considered an
important aspect of the interaction between the system and the user especially for AMO. Czaja et
al. (2006) discussed that interface design needed to be easy to use, requiring less mental effort

22

for an older adult user. However, Ingwersen’s (1992) model did not provide for testability
(Wilson, 1999) or look at how or when to make a move in the search process. Additionally,
Ingwersen and Jarvelin’s (2005) modified IS&R model framework did not show shifts in user
behaviors during the information seeking process. Saracevic’s (1997) model would be more ideal
to use when studying AMO since the model provided a framework that incorporated different
factors affecting the interaction though, the model did not expand beyond this process.
Saracevic‘s and Belkin’s models also have limitations since they were based only on the
interactions with texts and not with other contexts such as videos or music. In addition, the
models did not look at user behaviors associated with seeking information.
2.2.1.c Micro level
Bates’ (1989) classical Berry-Picking Evolving Approach illustrated how the user’s
search queries could change in the information seeking process. The model illustrated how
multiple techniques were used as well as the process of accessing different retrieved sources to
acquire information. This information seeking process was not straightforward but could go in
many different directions, much the same as picking berries out in a field. Bates stated how Ellis’
(1989) and Kuhlthau’s (1988) studies of academic behaviors characterized a berry-picking
evolving process when searching for information. Users typically engaged in six strategies when
seeking information: footnote chasing, citation searching, a journal run, area scanning or
browsing, subject searches and author searching. Users adapted to the strategy that they needed
at the time of the search.
Ellis’ (1989) Information-Seeking Behavior Framework identified users displaying
different types of behaviors when information seeking. Ellis’ research on scholars’ information
searching behaviors concluded a user experienced certain features while seeking information.

23

These six features or characteristics: starting (gathering information), chaining (following the
connections between materials), browsing (self-directed or structured), differentiating (the user
compares and finds the differences in the resources), monitoring (user checks specific resources
for information), and extracting (the user is making judgments about the received information)
could vary in sequence during the interactive search process. Ellis’ subsequent study added more
search behavior activities: verifying and ending, to the search process (Ellis, Cox & Hall, 1993).
Additionally, Ellis and Haugan (1997) interviewed 23 engineers and research scientists
investigating their search behaviors utilizing the information-seeking behavior framework. The
results illustrated there were differences in the participant’s information seeking patterns.
However, all participants’ behaviors were similar or identical clarifying results from earlier
research studies.
Spink’s (1997) research on 40 academic users’ online search transactions resulted in the
Interactive Feedback and Search Process Model. Findings illustrated how users’ search strategies
consisted of one or more cycles depending on the users’ interpretations and judgments of
retrieved information. The model involved one or more moves between the user and the IR
system that directly related to the situation and the user’s cognitive state at the time of the search.
The interactive feedback could be the content relevance, term relevance used, the relevance of
the amount of information retrieved from the query, the review of terms and strategies, and past
search histories. The user engaged in the cognitive process of strategic moves with the system by
query formulation or reformulation depending on the feedback the system. Later work by Spink
and Jansen (2004) explored human-computer interaction (HCI) in regards to Web searching.
After analyzing Web transaction logs, the researchers noted that human information behavior
could influence the search due to the technological, social and organizational Web contexts.

24

Wang, Hawk and Tenopir’s (2000) Multidimensional Model of User-Web Interaction
identified three components, the user, the interface and the Web. Influenced by Ellis’ (1989)
framework of information seeking behavior, this model was created from a study of 24 students
interacting with digital environments (Wang, 2011). The user-Web interaction had the user as the
first element in the process in which four different factors: situational (task, a need or user
knowledge), cognitive (thoughts, strategies), affective, (feelings that might change due to
interaction) and physical (hand-eye coordination, control) influenced the HCI. The interface
factors (access methods, navigational tools, access results, messages received if access fails, and
devices such as keyboard, mouse, etc.) played a role between the user and the system that
assisted in the process of seeking information. The Web factors included objects in any digital
format, activated objects in the search process, Web spaces, organization schemes and metadata
or description information.
Vakkari’s (2001) Theory of the Task-Based IR Process refined Kuhlthau’s (1991) ISP
model. Vakkari researched students’ behaviors while writing a master’s thesis research proposal.
The results assisted in the development of Vakkari’s theory that looked at the tasks of
information seeking as a series of stages connected to the types of information searched, the
terms used, the changes in the search tactics during the process and the user’s relevance
judgments of the information retrieved. The user’s level of uncertainty was an intervening factor
in the information seeking process and connected the search tactics used with the information
need (Jansen & Rieh, 2010). As the user progressed in the information search progress, the
degree of confidence grew as the focus for the search became clearer, causing less uncertainty
and terms and tactics increased resulting in a higher precision of search results. The IR micro
level models have been summarized in Table 2.3.

25

Table 2.3
Summary of Micro Level Theories, Models and Approaches
Theory
Bates
(1989)

Model
Berry-Picking
Evolving
Approach

Summary

Ellis
(1989)

Model of
information
seeking behavior
framework

Spink
(1997)

Interactive
Feedback and
Search Process
Model

This model indicated 6 features in
making judgments about received
information. Users engaged in
multiple strategies identifying
information seeking patterns that can
vary in sequence in the active search
process. The model has been tested
with academic social scientists by the
researcher and by other scholars.
The model examined how one or more
moves were related to the situation and
the user’s cognitive state specifically
the query formulation and/or
reformulation of keywords due to the
interactive feedback from the system
and user. A transaction log study was
conducted utilizing the model. The
user and the cognitive process played
active roles where the behavior could
influence the IR search based on the
user’s judgment of the relevance and
feedback.
The model examined how the user is
the first element in the search process.
Four different factors: situational,
cognitive, affective, and physical
could influence the HCI. The interface
and web factors played a role in
information searching. An
exploratory study of graduate students
interacting with the university website
gave verification to the model.
The theory refined Kuhlthau’s (1991)
model. The tasks have an impact on
the information search process. It

Spink &
Jansen
(2004)

Wang,
Hawk &
Tenopir
(2000)

Multidimensional
Model of UserWeb Interaction

Vakkari
(2001)

Theory of the
Task-Based IR
Process

This model showed a dynamic
search process where the search
queries could change during the
information seeking process with
users adapting to 6 strategies. The
system’s interface design facilitated
information seeking. The approach
showed limitations of traditional
models and set the foundation for
interactive IR between the system
and user.

26

Weakness
The approach did not examine
the different types of behaviors
or the thoughts and knowledge
of users influencing the process.

The model did not examine the
cognitive activities or relate
strategies to the search process
It was also based on paper
documents and not electronic
systems.

The model did not examine the
specific information need or the
user domain knowledge.

The model did not examine the
actions or user domain
knowledge.

The theory did not examine how
different environments could
affect the search process.

examined how the work environment
had a series of stages connected to the
types of information searched, terms
used, search tactics, and relevance
judgments with uncertainty as an
intervening factor. The process
connected the search tactics used with
the information need. The researcher
examined students’ behaviors while
writing a research proposal.

2.2.1.c Summary
Bates’ (1989) berry-picking model has been cited the most when depicting the search
process (Xie, 2012). It illustrated how information seeking sometimes was not a straight path,
especially when a user would browse for information. In addition, the model could determine
how to design a system interface to facilitate information seeking. Ellis’ (1989) behavioral
framework examined different characteristics of seeking information and exploring user behavior
patterns rather than the cognitive aspects and highlights the information seeking process. Spink’s
(1997) interactive feedback and search process model revealed how the different types of
feedback were influencing factors in the information seeking process. Wang et al.’s (2000)
multidimensional model illustrated how different factors influenced the HCI and related user
behaviors to the interface design. This model was different from all the others since it focused on
the specific environment and the Web. Vakkari ‘s (2001) theory of the task based IR process
illustrated information seeking in the work environment. This model focused on the task and
attributes of the user’s perception of the information problem.
Wang et al.’s (2000) model would be the most ideal to use when studying AMO since it
provided a framework that incorporated the physical skills needed for the interaction with the
system. However, the model did not focus on user knowledge or actions. Bates’ (1989) model
would be a good model to explore AMO browsing behaviors. However, it did not look at user’s

27

thoughts and knowledge variables that could influence browsing behaviors. User thoughts and
feelings when seeking information could be beneficial to understand what AMO would feel
about seeking information from different IR sources. Vakkari’s (2001) theory gave more detail
about user uncertainty and the interaction with the system. However, the theory did not look at
the environment, which could affect the information seeking process (Pettigrew, Fidel, & Bruce,
2001). Ellis’ (1989) model did not clearly relate any factors that could influence the search
process, such as anxiety, which AMO could experience when seeking information in a digital
environment. In addition, the model was based on paper documents not electronic resources
(Joseph, Debowski, & Goldschmidt, 2013). AMO could have cognitive issues when seeking
information from an IR system. Spink’s (1997) model did not look at the specific information
need or user domain knowledge in the search process, which would not give important
information on AMO since the model focused on system relevance and feedback.
2.2.1.d Macro/Micro level
The following three models fall in-between the macro and micro levels. Pharo’s (2004)
and Hert’s (1996) models were not considered macro-level models nor micro-level models but in
between the two types of levels. Xie’s (2008) model has a combination of macro-level and
micro-level approaches.
Pharo’s (2004) Search Situation and Transition Model of information behavior was
developed to discover the interplay between factors influencing information seeking or retrieval.
Pharo’s study focused on Web information searches and was influenced by a variety of earlier
models. Five main categories: work task, the searcher, the social organization environment, the
search task and the search process interacted with each other during the search process. The
search process has different transitions and situations that become factors interacting and

28

affecting the work or search task and the searcher. Pharo and Jarvelin (2004) conducted a study
with 13 students performing real searches and verified the interaction of the above factors in the
information search process.
Hert’s (1996) Model of IR Interaction illustrated how the user has a problem to solve or
goal to accomplish during the HCI. Hert explored user goals in relation to user interactions with
an online public access catalog (OPAC) system and found user goals were not usually modified.
The users actions could be affected by different elements: the situation, the problem or goal, the
actual user and the response from the system. The model revealed the IR interaction as a loop.
The information seeking time and the goal consisted of the macro-time-scale and the micro-timescale was the actual interaction time. When users interacted with a system, they were in the
micro-time-scale. When users finished the search, the macro-time-scale moved forward from the
results of the interaction. Then the process ended or another micro-time-scale would begin again
continuing the search process.
Xie (2008) developed the Planned Situational IR Model to integrate the macro and micro
levels of information seeking. Inspired by Bates’ (2007) and other earlier views (Fidel, 2012),
the model focused on the user’s search process moves. The interaction consisted of information
seeking strategies (interactive intentions, retrieval tactics) derived from a plan influenced by a
user’s goals and tasks, personal information and the situation. The information seeking strategies
affected the interface, which in turn influenced the system and the situation. Three types of
situations: routine (familiar), disrupted (distracted by something in the environment) and
problematic (rearrange existing or new knowledge) could determine where the interaction led in
the feedback loop that were dependent on the situation. The user or actor began the process

29

within the social, organizational context. The IR macro/micro models have been summarized in
Table 2.4.
Table 2.4
Summary of Macro/Micro Level Theories, Models and Approaches
Theory
Hert
(1996)

Model
Model of
IR
interaction

Pharo
(2004)

Search
Situation
and
Transition
Model

Pharo &
Jarvelin
(2004)

Xie
(2008)

Planned
Situational
IR Model

Summary
This model examined how the user has a
problem to solve or goal to accomplish where
the user’s actions would be affected by the
different elements associated with the
situation, the problem or goal, the user and the
response from the system. The interaction
loop illustrated by a macro-time-scale
(information seeking process time) and the
micro-time-scale (the interaction time).
This model examined how behavioral factors
influence information seeking or retrieval
and was influenced by a variety of earlier
models. Five main categories: work task, the
searcher, the social organization environment,
the search task and the search itself would be
involved in the process and interacted with
each other. The search process has different
transitions and situations that become factors
interacting and affecting the work or search
task and the searcher. The researchers
examined students performing real searches
resulting in verification of the interaction.
This model was developed to integrate the
macro and micro levels of information
seeking. Inspired by earlier models, it focused
on the user’s moves in the search process. It
examined how the interaction consisted of
information seeking strategies influenced by a
user’s goals and tasks, personal information
and the situation affecting the system. Three
types of situations: routine, disrupted and
problematic could determine where the
interaction leads in the feedback loop all
dependent on the situation. The user was the
actor that began the process within the social,
organizational context. The researcher’s study
of students researching an assignment gave
verification to the model.

30

Weakness
The model did not examine
different types of user group or
the behaviors that affect the
moves. It also has not been tested
on real types of tasks.

The model did not examine how
the different types of tasks play a
role or the user thoughts and
feeling during the process.

The model did not examine the
user thoughts and feelings in the
search process.

2.2.1.d Summary
Pharo (2004) as well as Pharo and Jarvelin’s (2004) search situation and transition model
illustrated the search process and related user information seeking behaviors. It looked at the
different work and search task roles in shaping users information behavior as well as how the
work task could be examined from different dimensions. Hert’s (1996) model of IR interaction,
based on a large-scale study of university students, looked at the system and user interaction with
the interface. Xie’s (2008) planned situational model incorporated many aspects of the
information seeking process. It examined the challenge of information seeking and observed how
users planned and shifted strategies in the process due to changes in thought (Wang, 2011). The
model focused on the user’s goals, strategies, and factors that could influence the interaction.
Xie’s (2008) model would be ideal to examine AMO seeking information in a digital
environment. However, the model did not look at user’s thoughts and feelings; such as computer
anxiety or self-efficacy, which could be important factors with this age group during a search
process. In addition, Hert’s (1996) model did not look at the behaviors that affect the search
moves in the search process. Pharo (2004) as well as Pharo and Jarvelin’s (2004) examined the
user goal or work task. As mentioned previously, it would be beneficial in looking at the work
goals and the strategies used in information seeking of AMO conducting work tasks. However,
these models would be better when combined with a behavioral model depicting the behaviors
behind the search process and some AMO have retired from the workforce.
2.2.1.e Information searching and retrieval summary
User-system interaction has been noted to be a dynamic process that involved many
factors that contribute to the overall information search process. The above IR theories, models
and approaches contributed different methods to examine the information search process. Each

31

model focused on different components to explore the interaction between the IR system and the
user. This exploratory dissertation study examined Baby Boomers who have varying abilities and
characteristics in seeking information from a mobile environment. Due to the age group’s
uniqueness, the aforementioned IR models were considered not to be the right fit to examine the
factors and challenges Baby Boomers faced when interacting with mobile technology. Even
though some covered several of the components a Baby Boomer could face, the models had
limitations that needed to be addressed with the age group. For instance, some models didn’t
address electronic information seeking, different user characteristics, and the behaviors affecting
the search, anxiety and comfort levels, or the environment. These would be just a few of the
actors that could be associated with Baby Boomers information searching.
2.2.2 Information seeking theories and models
This section covered other information seeking theories and models that were not
classified in the macro, micro or macro/micro levels of IR research. Information seeking has
been considered to be, “with respect to all the information that comes to a human being during a
lifetime, not just in those moments when a person actively seeks information” (as cited in Bates,
2002c, p. 3). Additionally, users could seek information from formal and informal sources with
the user dealing with great volumes of information (Case, 2012). Users could be aware or
unaware of gathering information and their information seeking behavior could include passive
and active information seeking in relation to the information sources. The most prominent
theories and models depicting information seeking behavior were discussed below to continue
laying the foundation for this dissertation study.
Krikelas’ (1983) model was an initial model that revealed information seeking behavior.
The model looked at the importance of uncertainty and the level of urgency as factors in seeking

32

information. The model portrayed 13 components that flowed downward with parts that do not
affect or encompass the other. The process started with the user gathering or providing
information due to a need-creating event/environment and led to a deferred or immediate need,
which determined whether the process returned in a feedback loop or moved downward. If the
need was immediate, the process moved on to an internal source (individual’s memory or direct
structured observations) or external source preference. Individual memory has been noted to
come from personal files that directly feedback to the memory. The information gathering
process could rely on user memory (personal files) and bypass any direct observations or
external sources. The external sources could be direct (interpersonal) contact or a recorded
(literature) source (Case, 2012).
Savolainen’s (1995) Everyday Life Information Seeking (ELIS) Model illustrated the role
of social and cultural factors in information seeking. The model illustrated how a user needed a
meaningful order of things to derive a mastery of life. Mastery of life was a way to approach
everyday problems and could involve passive or active behaviors. The mastery of life had four
types of behaviors: optimistic-cognitive, pessimistic-cognitive, defensive-affective and
pessimistic-affective which could determine how users seek information. Values, capital, social,
cultural and the user’s current situation could affect the cognitive mastery of life. Inspired by
Dervin’s (1983) sense-making approach model, Savolainen believed users had a cognitive order
and wanted to keep that order in their information seeking interests (Case, 2012). Savolainen
later developed the social cognitive model in which network competence would be affected by
the user’s self-efficacy, anxiety, experiences and outcome expectations (Savolainen, 2002).
Bystrom and Jarvelin (1995) looked at task complexity in information seeking. The more
difficult the task, the user would see the task as being more complicated. The theory of

33

Information Activities in Work Tasks began with the perceived task. The user determined an
information need analysis that was affected by personal factors (education, experience, attitude,
motivation and mood) and situational factors (time available to do the task). A user’s personal
style of seeking, and the organization where the user works could affect the course of action
chosen that identified sources and ranked them to satisfy the need. Once the action was chosen,
the results were evaluated. The need was satisfied and the task was completed or the need was
not satisfied and further action was needed. A feedback loop determined the need complexity
affected by the seeking style in organization. The researchers conducted an empirical study
examining civil servant workers that demonstrated the use of the model.
Leckie, Pettigrew and Sylvain’s (1996) Model of the Information Seeking of
Professionals revealed how professionals searched and used information while working at their
place of employment. It was similar to Krikelas’ (1983) model with a downward movement
flow, though there were some feedback loops that could change information need characteristics.
The process would begin with the professional work role that influenced the task and the
information need characteristics. The needs created an awareness of information and the sources
of information motivated the professional to seek out information. The outcomes affected the
sources and awareness with important variables (source familiarity, success, trustworthiness,
packaging, timeliness, cost, quality and accessibility) playing a role in the process (Case, 2012).
Johnson’s (1997) Comprehensive Model of Information Seeking flowed left to right and
began with four antecedent factors: demographics (age, gender, ethnicity education, occupation,
wealth), experience (knowledge, social aspects), salience (state of topic ignorance) and beliefs
(self-efficacy) that motivated the user to seek information. These factors would lead into the
information-carrier factors that were the characteristics and the utility of the information

34

channels (face-to-face interactions or print and media) selected by the user. Information actions
involved user choices and feelings, which affected the user’s behaviors and cognitive actions.
Johnson’s model was a sense-making approach influenced by context. The model has been tested
empirically in the health communication fields (Case, 2012).
Pettigrew (now Fisher) developed the Theory of Information Grounds from research
studies conducted in 1998, 1999 and 2000 (Fisher, Erdelez & McKechnie, 2005). The theory
maintained information needs, the providing of information, seeking information and the use of
information had a social context. Fisher, Durrance and Hinton (2004) derived seven key concepts
to information grounds: context rich, temporal setting, instrumental purpose, social types, social
interaction, informal and formal information flow, and alternative forms of information use.
Actor information behavior influenced by the social aspects of the information grounds or
environments affected the flow of information. The sharing of spontaneous and serendipitous
information emerged within the social atmosphere (Fidel, 2012).
Chatman’s (1999) Theory of Life in the Round was developed by Chatman’s research on
prison inmates. The theory maintained how users understood certain things about life, but there
was also a certain degree of uncertainty. The social world could influence the users and the
users’ meanings of information. The theory has four concepts: small world, social norms, social
types and worldview. In a small world, an individual determined what was and was not
important. In regards to information seeking, social norms dealt with acceptable behaviors in a
given context. Within that context, a person seeks information because of a common need. Social
types described the individuals. Worldview was the common beliefs, customs and language by
which the individual interprets the world. Life in the round theory maintained the information

35

behaviors were about making meaning of the information through the social context. The
information seeking theories and models have been summarized in Table 2.5.
Table 2.5
Summary of Information Seeking Theories and Models
Theory
Krikelas
(1983)

Model
Model
(information
seeking
behavior)

Savolainen
(1995)

Everyday Life
Information
Seeking (ELIS)
Model

Bystrom &
Jarvelin
(1995)

Theory of
Information
Activities in
Work Tasks

Leckie,
Pettigrew &
Sylvain
(1996)

Model of the
Information
Seeking Of
Professionals

Johnson
(1997)

Comprehensive
Model of
Information

Summary
This model looked at the uncertainty and
the level of urgency in seeking
information. The need and the user’s
perception of the need influenced the
activity. There were thirteen components
in gathering or providing information. This
was the first model to depict information
seeking as a dynamic, complex process.
Inspired by Dervin (1972), this model
illustrated the role of values, social and
cultural factors in information seeking.
Users have a cognitive order and they want
to keep that order in their information
seeking to derive a mastery of life. Four
types of behaviors: optimistic-cognitive,
pessimistic-cognitive, defensive-affective
and pessimistic-affective could be
involved in the strategy to solve a nonwork information seeking problem. The
researcher conducted an empirical study of
middle and working class users.
This theory looked at information seeking
by examining the activities that took place
during the work tasks. The information
sources used and the information sought
were important factors in information
seeking with the tasks divided into five
categories of complexity. As the
complexity increased, more sources would
be gathered. The researchers conducted an
empirical study of civil servant workers.
This model examined the professional’s
work role. The roles and the associated
tasks determined how the user seeks out
information. The user’s work role could be
a significant factor on how the user
approached the information seeking task.
This model has six major components and
shows the complexity of searching for
information in a work environment.
This model has 7 factors under three
headings that flow from left to right. The
antecedent factors could affect and

36

Weakness
This was a general
model of information
seeking and it only
looked at recorded
information or
documents. User
characteristics (age)
were also not considered.
The model did not
examine the connections
involved in seeking
information. The
approach has not been
tested in different digital
environments.

The theory did not
examine the users’
personal characteristics
and only looks at
professionals not general
users.

The general model did
not examine variables
that can affect the
information needs such
as professional’s age,
attitudes, and beliefs.
The importance or
context of the need also
was not explained.
The model did not have
any feedback loops
between the actions and

Seeking
Pettigrew
(1998,1999)

Theory of
information
grounds

Fisher,
Durrance &
Hinton
(2004)

Chatman
(1999)

Theory of Life
in the Round

Savolainen
(2002)

Social
cognitive
model

motivate the user’s information seeking
process. It has been the tested empirically
in the health communication fields.
This theory examined the information
needs, the providing of information,
seeking information and the use of
information having a social context. There
were 7 key concepts to information
grounds and the social aspects of the
information grounds affect the flow of
information, and influenced the actor’s
information behaviors. The sharing of
spontaneous and serendipitous information
could emerge within the social
atmosphere. Research studies gave the
theory verification.
This theory examined how users
understand certain things about life. The
user has a need but experiences a certain
degree of uncertainty. There were 4
concepts to the theory: small world, social
norms, social types and worldview social
norms that deal with acceptable behaviors
in a given context. User information
behaviors were about making meaning of
the information through the social context.
The researcher’s study with prison inmates
gave verification to the theory.
The model could be used when examining
network competence in information
seeking and identify problems of Internet
use. In the context of information seeking,
the user has perceived self-efficacy and
perceived network competence. The
network competence was affected by the
user’s self-efficacy. This would affect the
user’s anxiety or enjoyment, the outcome
expectations and the information seeking
experiences. The task context also played a
role in the belief of self-efficacy.

the antecedent factors.
This theory has not been
tested with users
interacting with online
systems.

This theory has not been
tested with users
interacting with online
systems

This theory has not been
tested with users
interacting with online
systems.

2.2.2 Information seeking summary
Behavior studies, stated in the previous section could be important when examining
AMO. Krikelas’ (1983) Model of information seeking behavior looked at user uncertainty when
seeking information. It illustrated information seeking as a complex and linear process.
However, the information seeking process usually does not follow a straightforward path. This
37

general model did not take into account other sources besides recorded information or
documents, and user characteristics were not considered in the process. Savolainen’s (1995)
ELIS model revealed that a person’s way of life such as their values, attitudes and interests
affected their information seeking (Rieh, 2007). It focused on everyday life information seeking
and was utilized in an empirical study on middle and working class users. However, it did not
show the connections to seeking online information. Bystrom and Jarvelin’s (1995) theory of
information activities in work tasks examined users conducting works tasks and the information
sources used in the information seeking process. However, the theory looked at work tasks and
not other tasks of information seeking. Likewise, Leckie et al.’s (1996) model of information
seeking of professionals examined the information seeking in a work environment. It specifically
looked at the different professional roles and did not consider other variables, such as age or
attitude that could affect the process. Johnson’s (1997) comprehensive model revealed different
factors that affected and motivated the user to seek information. However, it did not look at the
environmental context or that certain user actions could affect other factors when seeking
information. Fisher et al.’s (2004) empirical research on information seeking between different
groups gave strength to the information grounds theory and Chatman’s (1999) notable theory of
life in the round provided a deeper understanding of information behavior. Chatman felt
information was an integral part of our social lives, shaped by social and cultural conditions
(Fidel, 2012). Both theories examined the social aspect of information seeking. However, the
theories did not specifically look at the interaction between users and an IR online system.
Savolainen’s (2002) social cognitive model looked at the association of network competence and
self-efficacy. However, the model has not been used with users interacting with an online digital
environment.

38

Savolainen’s (1995) ELIS model would be a better choice to study AMO everyday life
information seeking strategies since the model examined different types of behaviors that could
affect information seeking. However, the model has not been used in any type of online
environment and this dissertation examined participant’s mobile technology usage. Savolainen’s
(1995), Wilson’s (1999), Chatman’s (1999), and Fisher et al.’s (2004) examined the social
factors affecting information seeking. All would be ideal to use when studying AMO, though this
would be only one aspect of information seeking studied and other factors could influence the
process. Bystrom and Jarvelin’s (1995) theory and Leckie et al.’s (1996) model examined users
in a work environment. As previously stated, some AMO have continued to work but other
individuals have retired, making the theory and model not the right fit for all Baby Boomers.
Johnson’s (1997) model examined different factors, such as user age and knowledge, which
could be important in the AMO information seeking process. However, the process, as stated
earlier, could vary and affect other factors during the information seeking process. Savolainen’s
(2002) social cognitive model would be a good model to examine AMO due to the concept of
self–efficacy and the users’ knowledge affecting the information seeking process. However,
other factors such as the environment, user characteristics or the search moves could also play a
role, especially with AMO.
Some Baby Boomers could be affected by the environment around them, which could
affect their self-efficacy when working with online information technology. This could have an
effect on anxiety levels and comfort in working with newer information technology such as a
mobile device.

39

2.3 Information retrieval constructs
This section covers areas that could affect the IR and access process. It has been divided
into the following sections: Information behaviors and associated variables, Systems and
associated variables, and Context. Different user studies are noted if applicable in the different
sections. However, AMO and Baby Boomers studies are placed in Section 2.5.
2.3.1 User information behaviors and associated variables
2.3.1.a Searching/browsing
Browsing, searching and navigating have been fundamental elements in the IR process
(Shiri, 2008). “Browsing is a retrieval process where the users navigate through the text
database by following links from one piece of text to the next, aiming to utilize two human
capabilities ... the greater ability to recognize what is wanted over being able to describe it and ...
the ability to skim or perceive at a glance. This allowed users to evaluate rapidly rather large
amounts of text and determine what is useful” (Hertzum & Frokjaer, 1996 p.3). Browsing has
been considered an informal or unplanned search behavior where serendipitous information
could be found. On the other hand, searching behavior could be more analytical and involve
more planning than browsing (Aula, 2005a) requiring more user cognitive load. Users need
cognitive resources to construct specific search terms related to the problem (Marchionini, 1995).
User searching and browsing behaviors have changed with the introduction of information
technology. Xie (2009) discussed how information searching has advanced from the user
searching for information manually in a physical environment to a user finding information with
an electronic IR system. Users have diverse needs when searching and browsing in online
systems (Borgman, 1986). Users have various searching and browsing behaviors that determine
the system used in the IR process (Hertzum & Frokjaer, 1996; Wolfram, Wang & Zhang, 2009).

40

2.3.1.b Uncertainty/anxiety
Various factors could influence users’ behavior such as the individual’s thoughts and
feelings. Kuhlthau’s (1983) ISP model examined uncertainty during an information search (as
cited in Kuhlthau, 1991 p.364). Kuhlthau’s study examined the behaviors of 26 high school
students researching a paper. Findings demonstrated how cognitive thoughts and feelings played
an important role in the search process. Uncertainty could cause confusion, frustration and
anxiety, which was associated with vague and unclear thoughts (Kuhlthau, 2005), putting more
demand on the cognitive load needed in the information seeking process. Wilson et al. (2002)
examined the concept of uncertainty in the information seeking process. Pre and post interviews
were conducted to determine participants’ feelings initially before and after the search process.
Results showed there was a greater feeling of uncertainty at the beginning stages of the search
and the level of uncertainty expressed depended on the degree of user knowledge. The greater
the domain knowledge, the less uncertainty expressed about the search process.
2.3.1.c Goal and/or task
In addition to user thoughts and feelings, users could have a task or goal that triggers the
IR process. A task or goal has a defined purpose that determines user motivation to seek
information. User behaviors could change over time, either increasing or decreasing the activity,
dependent on the information need or task (Cothey, 2002). Knowing about the task would assist
in query creation for the search (Ruthven & Kelly, 2011). Bystrom & Jarvelin (1995) found that
tasks could be simple or complex and as task complexity increases, the information need of the
user, the need for domain information and the problem-solving need, the share of general
purpose sources and the number of sources needed also increases. However, the success of the
information seeking as well as the number of fact-oriented sources could decrease as the task

41

complexity increases. Furthermore, a task could have a series of smaller subtasks that would be
undertaken towards a much larger goal (Vakkari, 2003). Xie’s (2000) mixed methods study of 40
participants explored the 4 levels of user goals while seeking information: 1) long-term goal, 2)
leading search goal, 3) current search goal and 4) interactive intention. Results concluded 4 types
of shifts of interactive intentions could occur: planned, assisted, supplemented or improved and 3
types of information seeking strategies: change of methods, change of resources and change of
both methods and resources clarified that the interactive intentions, the user’s information
seeking strategies and the user’s long-term sub-goals were important in the information seeking
process. Different types of searching could take place depending on the user task or goal and an
electronic resource was selected due to the different type of task that needed to be accomplished
(Jansen et al., 2008; Perley, Gentry, Fleming & Sen, 2007). Rieh (2007) investigated 244
information-seeking sessions of 24 participants examining how participants selected information
resources and whether the user’s goals or tasks affected the selection, if the resources were
online and the strategies used during the process. The results revealed participants had five types
of goals: personal information (the most frequent activity), academic, entertainment, problem
solving and routines. Similar to Xie (2000), depending on the goal, the participants chose
different resources with more than one resource utilized including information and human
resources in the process. Communication with others was an integral part of information seeking
either at the initial start of the search process, during the search or at the end to gain verification
from others. This illustrated that interaction with IR resources could have a social aspect that
affected the information seeking process.

42

2.3.1.d Skills, knowledge structure, cognitive style
Moreover, users have certain skills to effectively achieve goals when seeking and
searching for online information. The Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL)
(2014) stated that with the explosion of information output and information resources, the 21st
century was referred to as the Information Age. Digital literacy, therefore, would be important
for users to acquire due to the increase in digital content. Information literacy has been an
underlying presence in the definitions of digital literacy since literacy is important in language,
reading, and writing developmental skills (Byrnes & Wasik, 2009). Information literacy was
determined as a National Education Goals standard (ACRL, 1989). Literacy has been an
important concept in the Education (ED) and LIS fields. Lanham (1995), an initial researcher on
digital literacy in ED, stated literacy was “the ability to understand information however
presented” and to be digitally literate was “being skilled at deciphering complex images and
sounds as well as the syntactical subtleties of words” (as cited in Lankshear & Knobel, 2006, p.
12-13). Gilster (1997) took this concept further by saying digital literacy was “the ability to
understand and use information in multiple formats from a wide range of sources when it is
presented via computers” (as cited in Gilster, 1997 p. 1). Gilster believed it was an extension of
information literacy, with the information presented in technological form. Being able to
navigate through sources, critically evaluate, and make judgments to assemble reliable
information was important within an electronic environment. This definition was a good
representation for the time-period since most online information was via a computer. Gilster
believed the most important skill to acquire to be digitally literate was to be to be able to make
informed judgments about information found on the Internet, which started increasing in the
1990s (Internet Society, 2012). ED and LIS researchers have varying interpretations and

43

different words to represent digital literacy: computer literacy, digital literacy, information and
communications technology (ICT), information literacy, literacy, media education, media
literacy, multiliteracy, multimodal, new literacy, network literacy, and transliteracy (AASL &
AECT, 1998; ACRL, 2014; Bawden, 2008; Bruce, 1999; Coiro, Knobel, Lankshear & Leu,
2009; Cope & Kalantzis, 2000; Digital Transformation, 2002; Gilster, 1997; Hobbs, 2011; Jones
& Flannigan, 2006; Katz & Maklin, 2007; Koltay, 2011; Kress, 2003; Kuhlthau, Maniotes &
Caspari, 2007; Lanning, 2012; Lemke, 1998; Leu, Kinzer, Coiro & Cammack, 2004; Marcum,
2002; McClure, 1994; NAMLE, 2013; NEA, 2012; Thomas et al., 2007; Tyner, 2010).
Educational standards stated that to be digital literate was “to be able to function in
today’s media environment being an extension of traditional literacy with the skills and
knowledge to access, understand, be aware of, analyze, evaluate, create, reflect and participate in
a variety of formats. The original most cited version in the US includes access, analyze, evaluate
and produce communication and Hobbs (2011) also included comprehension, collaboration,
reflection and social action” (as cited in Scheibe & Rogow, 2012 p19-20). The National
Broadband Plan (2010) and the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) brought digital
literacy to national attention stating there was not a standardized definition for digital literacy
and declared digital literacy as “…a variety of skills associated with using ICT to find, evaluate,
create and communicate information” (as cited in Clark & Visser, 2011, p. 38). This definition
incorporated the ACRL information literacy skills and the AASL 21st century learner framework.
The American Library Association (ALA) affirmed that developing literacy skills including
digital literacy was essential for all users. According to the ALA Digital Literacy Task Force
(2011) digital literacy was “the ability to use information and communication technologies to

44

find, evaluate, create, and communicate information, requiring cognitive and technical skills” (as
cited in Roach, 2013, para. 3) and to be digitally literate, a user:
§

Possesses the variety of skills – technical and cognitive – required to find, understand,
evaluate, create, and communicate digital information in a wide variety of formats

§

Is able to use diverse technologies appropriately and effectively to retrieve information,
interpret results, and judge the quality of that information

§

Understands the relationship between technology, life-long learning, personal privacy,
and stewardship of information

§

Uses these skills and the appropriate technology to communicate and collaborate with
peers, colleagues, family, and on occasion, the general public

§

Uses these skills to actively participate in civic society and contribute to a vibrant,
informed, and engaged community
Furthermore, a user’s cognitive style determined how a user interacted with a system,

such as whether a user was more exploratory or used a more systematic approach in the
information seeking process. Domain knowledge about the search topic and technological skills
affected information searching and browsing within an online environment. For a user to perform
an effective information search, users have three types of knowledge: IR knowledge (user search
skills, strategies, or experience level of searching), domain knowledge (cognitive style of
searching, what the user understands and wants about the problem) and system knowledge
(users’ understanding about the system, features and functions) (cited in Xie, 2012, p. 35). Liu
and Yang (2004) conducted a study of 164 distance education students ranking primary IR
resources (DBs, OPACs, instructor printed materials, Internet, other). The findings concluded the
lack of familiarity or experience with a system was a determining factor in IR resource selection.

45

Besides a user’s cognitive style, users employed multiple searching techniques in the IR
process. Bates (1989) berry-picking model explained how searching evolved over time where the
user shifts and follows various leads while interacting with the system. Different search moves or
tactics would be conducted to aid the search process by providing new ideas and possible
solutions to the particular problem or task during the interaction (Bates, 1979a, 1979b;
Wildemuth, 2004; Xie & Joo, 2010). Depending on the task, a user would employ different types
of search strategies (Bilal, 2002). Users conducted multiple types of moves during a search in an
online environment that assisted them in acquiring and satisfying their information need (Bates,
1979b; Fidel, 1985; Vakkari, Pennanen & Serola, 2003; Xie, 2008). Users would perform
different search tactics during the search process and the interaction with the system codetermined the tactics used during the IR process. The strategies could shift depending on
whether the user changed the original search goal, the interactive intentions and the retrieval
tactics used in the search process (Xie, 2008). In addition, different behaviors and variables
could play a role that included searching and/or browsing for information to satisfy an
information need. These behaviors could be affected by the user’s thoughts and feelings or by the
particular task or goal that motivated the search. The user’s knowledge and digital literacy skills
could be a factor in how the user viewed or used the information technology or new information
technology. These cognitive factors and skills, as well as the environment around the user could
affect the search moves or patterns when searching in an online environment.
2.3.2 Systems and associated variables
Users could make use of different types of resources to search for information. This
section examines some of the different types of electronic online systems utilized when
searching for information as well as variables that could affect information access and retrieval.

46

2.3.2.a Accessibility
Accessing information electronically from different systems has been an important issue
for some users. Accessibility of information has grown due to the resources individuals utilize to
obtain information. However, access to information has varied with different regions having
limited access to Internet connections, the digital divides among information technology
available, and the qualified professionals who understand how to access online information
(Zwass, 2012). Most users access information electronically through a Broadband connection.
"Broadband refers to a high-speed, always-on connection to the Internet” (FCC, n.d.). Broadband
access according to the National Broadband Map, revealed most of the United States (US)
having Wireless connections, though there were still areas without Wireless capabilities and not
having a Wireline connection. Increasing Broadband connections to underserved and unserved
communities has become increasingly important in telecommunication policies (Saunders,
McClure & Mandel, 2012). Broadband access has been an important service for public libraries.
Library users have relied on the library to provide Internet and computer access for their
information needs. Broadband access has varied by state with libraries benefiting or struggling
with different issues on the amount and kind of access available for their users (Jaeger, Bertot,
McClure & Rodriguez, 2007). Communities have looked at libraries to provide online access to
information as content has become more prevalent on the Internet. A 2004 and 2006 Public
Library & Internet (PL&I) study comparison showed disparities of access among individual
states and between rural and urban libraries in terms of Internet access and Broadband
connectivity (Bertot, Jaeger, Langa & McClure, 2006; Bertot, McClure, & Jaeger, 2005; Jaeger,
Bertot, McClure & Rodriguez 2007). Recently, Bertot, Jaeger, McClure, Wright and Jensen
(2009) PL&I 2008-2009 survey revealed demand for Internet access was increasing, though

47

some libraries felt unable to provide these services because of a too slow Broadband connection.
These issues have made it difficult for libraries to meet their community needs. According to
Visser (2014), the FCC Chairman, Tom Wheeler, spoke on Digital Learning Day (February 4,
2014), and discussed how there needed to be greater focus on acquiring affordable rates for highcapacity Broadband connections for libraries and schools. ALA has continued efforts to ensure
libraries have access to Broadband (Wapner, 2014). In April 2014, the FCC developed an E-rate
funding program to help boost library and school broadband access (Wright, 2014). The
Broadband issue has been a continuing process, and changes on a daily basis. Access to
Broadband connections could be important to AMO users who might not be able to afford or
able to receive a home connection.
2.3.2.b Types of Systems
Users could be limited selecting the type of system used to access and gather information
if they do not have experience with different resources. Xie (2004) explained how users could
select an online resource due to content coverage. Resources selected first usually have the
content that is needed. There were typically four types of systems users accessed to search and
browse for information; digital libraries (DLs), online databases (DBs), OPACs, and online
search engines.
The International Federation of Library Associations, IFLA, (2013) defined a DL as “an
online collection of digital objects, of assured quality, that are created or collected and managed
according to internationally accepted principles for collection development and made accessible
in a coherent and sustainable manner, supported by services necessary to allow users to retrieve
and exploit the resources.” DLs house new materials created electronically or older materials
converted to an electronic format (Lesk, 2005). DLs have been developing more interactivity

48

between the system and the user, though this could pose challenges for some users since there
have not been universal standards in the creation of DLs. Therefore, the user has to learn each
unique system (Xie, 2008). Mead, Sit, Rogers, Jamieson and Rousseau (2000) compared older
and younger adults performing ten search tasks within an online digital environment. The
purpose was to determine whether age related cognitive issues placed novice users at a
disadvantage and whether users’ experience was an important variable for success. The results
concluded older computer participants who did not have computer experience did not complete
all of the tasks, had more errors, and were less likely to use the Boolean search operators when
conducting a search. This research showed that older users were disadvantaged in digital
environments especially if they were searching within different IR systems.
An online DB has been defined as “a database of either full-text documents or citations
and abstracts accessible via telephone or Internet connection” (as cited in Xie, 2008, p. 54).
Databases usually have a controlled vocabulary and would be indexed to assist in retrieval
initiated by user’s queries (Tedd, 1994). Griffiths and Brophy (2005) found OPACs and DBs
provided certain types of information and have become more interactive. However, they usually
did not support system ease of use and user control over the search process. This could affect the
search effectiveness for a novice or expert user (Xie, 2008). DBs have been usually housed
within an OPAC system. An OPAC has been defined as “a database composed of bibliographic
records describing the books and other materials owned by a library or library system…” (Reitz,
2014). OPACs changed the traditional card catalog system by incorporating a large amount of
data that could be retrieved electronically either within the existing library or remotely. OPAC
systems presented the tools to refine a search and deliver relevant documents dependent on the
interface and system software. However, Borgman (1986) pointed out how OPACs were hard to

49

use because queries were hard to input in the system to retrieve good results. This could pose a
challenge on a mobile OPAC, which could have limited resources and capabilities (Reddy, Raju
& Neerja, 2013) due to the device’s software or the screen size.
Moreover, Web search engines have provided an Internet service that allows searching of
a large DB of Web pages. Currently, there have been four types of search engines: spider-based
search engines (a DB of sites using spiders to find keywords or tags); directory-based search
engines (sites using human editors); metasearch engines and link-based search engines based on
hypertext links between sites and (Net Industries, 2015; Xie, 2008). A general search engine has
4 components: 1) the identification and gathering of the material (web pages, etc.) to be included
in the engine’s database; 2) an indexing program and the corresponding general indexes; 3) the
searching and ranking algorithms; and 4) the user interface (as cited in Hock, 2012, p. 302). Most
of today’s users have searched the Internet to look for information. Kim and Sin’s (2007) study
on undergraduate students concluded search engines were used most frequently due to the
familiarity and ease of accessibility to a variety of information. However, users could experience
cognitive overload from all the data retrieved from the Web in a given search (Bilal, 2000).
Zickuhr and Madden (2012) found in a recent Pew Research Center (PEW) survey that
53% of participants over age 65 were using the Internet, with 70% of those users going online
daily. Rainie (2012a) found over 77% of Baby Boomers were using the Internet, which has been
steadily increasing as the Baby Boomers age. This could be due to early Baby Boomers having
used computers in the workforce or in their daily lives and continuing to utilize them. Search
engine interfaces have been relatively simple to use (Xie, 2003). However, older adult users
could have problems with the Internet, which could discourage future use (Aula, 2005b).

50

2.3.2.c System variables
Different system variables could play a role in the success and use of an online system.
The most important factors in the IR process would be accessibility, convenience and whether
the system offered a dynamic interaction between the system and the user (Breeding, 2008;
Dewey, 2008; Mi & Weng, 2008; Sadeh, 2008). Different studies have examined the aesthetic
interface appearance, ease of use, interactivity between the user and the system, learnability,
navigation, satisfaction utilizing the system, item quality, accessibility, familiarity with the
system, and convenience of using the system (Ruthven & Kelly, 2011). The following section
examined some of these variables, which could be a factor in the IR and access process.
Interface design conceivably could play a role in how the user scans and analyzes the
information during the IR process (Saracevic, 1997). Eick (2001) explained how it was important
for the user to navigate a system and not get lost. The interface played an integral role in
navigating a system and the visual space construction would be a fundamental part of the
interface display (Wolfram & Zhang, 2001). Likewise, Parandjuk (2010) discussed how a library
interface design needed to have a structure for intuitive access to content. This structure would
then make the interaction easier for the user. The interaction with the visual interface gave the
user more control over the information process, resulting in greater satisfaction with the online
system (Enser, 2008; Koshman, 2006; Shiri, 2008; Xie, 2008). Additionally, visual interfaces
could have many different types of tools ranging from scatterplots, bar graphs, glyphs, icons,
symbols, metaphors, and maps. The interface could also have one, two or three-dimensional
images displayed as well, with variations in color and/or lines linking the information together to
aid the user in understanding the retrieved information. Koshman (2006) explained that the
visualization tools on the interface allowed the user to open icons to documents, see the

51

interrelationships between the documents and have more control over the IR process. By
representing information graphically, a user could visually see the initial results of materials,
narrow down or refine the results and examine associated concepts all on the primary interface
page. Information visualization has been an important element for users to discover data and
knowledge (Zhang & Nguyen, 2005). Stronge, Rogers and Fiske (2006) compared younger and
older adults’ strategies in seeking information on the Internet. The results illustrated the older
adult participants relied more on the system to aid in their search by utilizing more system tools
to find correct answers as compared to younger adult participants.
Some visualization systems have surrogates or metaphors (icons) to aid the user in the
searching process. Metaphors could entail a concept, such as language, color, shape, texture, and
sound, to explain another concept on the interface page, thus making navigation easier on the
user (Lakoff & Johnson, 1980; Zhang, 2008). A graphic metaphor would need to be specific and
understood by many types of users. Therefore, the metaphor would be a useful tool enabling
another avenue for users to navigate, search and browse an online system. Users typically
preferred graphic metaphors and a simple key word search box, especially those who do not have
extensive searching skills (Emmanuel & Kern, 2009; Mi & Weng, 2008). Mead et al. (2000)
examined the ease of use of a system to determine the effects of age on novice database search
performance. The results found older participants did not complete all the tasks and had more
errors than younger participants. These results suggested older adults needed simplified interface
pages to adequately access information. Mobile phone interfaces could be an issue for users
when searching for information. According to Ziefle and Bay (2005), the usability of a mobile
phone interface could be significantly more difficult to use due to the much smaller display. This
could cause a greater cognitive demand on users.

52

According to Bates (2002b), the interaction between the interface, the metadata, and the
indexing system played a significant role in the search process. The indexing and classifying of
items organized the information to make the access process easier for users. Users were satisfied
with the search if items were indexed properly and the system performed properly (Bates,
2002a). Electronic systems have utilized metadata to assist users in retrieving digital materials.
The term metadata has been defined as data about data or “…addresses data attributes that
describe, provide context, indicate the quality, or document other object (or data) characteristics”
(as cited in Greenberg, 2005, p. 20.) Systems have different types of indexing: text, image,
multimedia and in multiple languages dependent on the materials within the system.
There have been many metadata types from simple to complex that have assisted users in
finding information. Users typically would construct keyword queries and the system recalls
items dependent on whether the keywords matched the system program language. Classification
schemes have arranged items within a system to create a taxonomic grouping in a systematic
order. This arrangement would assist in subject field overview and aids in IR (Rowley & Farrow,
2000). Controlled vocabularies have been used as a type of authority control in indexing the
terms that assist users in retrieving materials (Fidel, 1991). They would be an organized
collection of words, phrases, and/or names, structured to show the relationships between terms
and concepts. They could range from a simple alphabetical list of approved terms to a complex,
carefully structured thesaurus, including broad, narrow and related concepts. The concepts would
need to be clear and comprehensive to ensure retrieval of items within the collection.
Furthermore, some users have utilized natural or plain language when conducting a search.
This type of search would use regular spoken language, such as English or other types of languages.
Social tags, a type of natural language, have been used in some online IR systems and could be used
as a type of metadata to enhance a catalog system to further aid the user in the IR process. Tags could

53

give the user more options to choose from and give more item information other than just the one
subject heading from a controlled vocabulary system. Tags could be found on social networks, such
as Facebook; business systems (e.g. Amazon), photo storage sites (e.g. Flickr), academic and public
libraries, and many other user systems.

2.3.2.d System interaction/usability
The ease of use of a system could help or hinder users in acquiring the information. This
could influence the users’ overall system satisfaction and whether the users would use the system
in the future (Malhotra & Galletta, 1999; Xie, 2008). Xie (2003) studied 40 participants
interacting with five electronic IR systems and concluded an IR system needed to be easy to use
and allow for user control over the information seeking process if it was an effective retrieval
system. Ferreira and Pithan (2005) investigated learnability, efficiency and effectiveness as well
as other interface design aspects of the DL InfoHab to determine the usability of the system. The
researchers examined the participants’ affective and cognitive actions when solving situations
looking at errors made while conducting tasks with the interface. The results concluded that even
though the participants were satisfied with learning the interface system, they still had difficulties
accomplishing the tasks. Users could be discouraged or disappointed with unsuccessful IR
system interactions (Xie, 2008). Therefore, the usability of a system would be an important
aspect of any interface design. Additionally, Tsakonas and Papatheodorou (2006) collected 43
questionnaire responses examining the usefulness and usability of different types of IR
resources. Results confirmed the most important attributes would be navigation, ease of use and
learnability for a successful interaction with an IR system. System usability would be important
for AMO seeking information since they could experience different health related issues that
could affect the interaction with the system interface (Fisk, Rogers, Charness, Czaja & Sharit,
2009; Lin, Neafsey & Strickler, 2009). Current research by Martyn and Gallant (2012) examined
54

how adults over the age of 50 were using social media to gather and look for information. Two
major themes emerged from the 98 surveys retrieved: the ease of use of the technology and
having personal contact to gather information. If AMO were using an electronic system to
gather information, they wanted the system to be easy to use.
System interactions have been based on user cognitive processes and behaviors, and the
particular system interface (Ingwersen & Jarvelin, 2005; Kuhlthau, 1991; Saracevic, 1997;
Vakkari, 2001). During the interaction, the user’s behavior could change from deciding initially
what to do, making various judgments during the process, then deciding when to stop whether an
answer is discovered or not based on the feedback given by the system (Belkin, 1996; Du &
Spink, 2011; Saracevic, 1997; Wang et al., 2000). Therefore, the dynamic IR process would be
dependent on the user’s needs and the interaction with the system. Xie’s (2003) study of Webbased online IR systems found that the system design needed to encourage the user to have a
more interactive role in the IR process with every feature making a difference in the overall
process. However, problems could be encountered retrieving information that could be due to the
individual users and the specific system (Borgman, 1986). Users have interacted with
information objects that are within the IR system software and hardware. Using different
multimedia technologies in the design would encourage more interaction between the user and
the interface (Xie, 2006). Brusilovsky, Ahn, and Rasmussen (2010) survey concluded the
interactive nature of a system is valued higher than the interface’s visual appeal. The interface
design and the information objects could affect the users’ information seeking strategies. For
instance, if an older adult has a physical and/or cognitive issue, different formats, such as icons,
larger texts, or audio formats, could be utilized to encourage a better interaction with the IR
system (Joseph, 2009).

55

When users search for information in an online environment, different systems and
system factors could affect the access and retrieval of information. If users have limited
Broadband connections, it could affect the use of the information technology. Users could also
have access to different types of systems. This could be a factor in the user’s digital literacy
skills needed in utilizing the various systems. This could cause challenges for some users due to
the different system variables to effectively access and retrieve information.
2.3.3 Context
Different social and cultural norms as well as the system structure could affect the
interaction between the user and the system when seeking information. Ingwersen & Jarvelin’s
(2005) IS&R model revealed the social, organizational and cultural contexts as major
components in the information seeking process. Ingwersen’s (1992) Cognitive Model of
interaction that had the user as the main element in the social, organizational, and environment’s
cognitive space closely resembled Wilson’s (1999) model that illustrated seeking information as
an active search process and the cognitive communication of Belkin’s (1980) cognitive
communication system. Xie (2010) discussed how the social-organizational context played a role
in the interaction with IR systems.
Rieh (2007) investigated information seeking strategies with 24 participants. The results
concluded information seeking was a form of social activity. Users communicated with others to
seek out information, engaged in information seeking for others, or verified found information.
This demonstrated how the social context could be a direct information source or play a
secondary role in the information seeking process. Ng (2007) examined how social motivation
was a factor in learning computer and other technologies. The researcher discovered older adult
motivation went up when there was encouragement and sharing of skills from peers, family

56

members and their tutors. Being encouraged to ask questions and practice skills built a positive
attitude for seeking information from computer technologies (Nycyk & Redsell, 2010). The
social environment could also improve and motivate the older adult to utilize and try new
information technologies to search for information.
A stereotype that has characterized AMO within the social context would be ageism.
Robert Butler (1969) identified ageism as a form of bigotry towards individuals because they
were old that has been perpetuated by society (Butler, 2005). Negative imaging in the media and
the widespread use of certain comments in everyday language has continued the existence of
ageism. “Baby Boomers are becoming quite comfortable using the term senior moment to cover
memory lapses” (as cited in Mates, 2003, p. 2). Ageism has been found among the younger and
older generations impacting attitudes and behaviors since the more it has been perpetuated by
society, the more AMO would believe the stereotypical information about themselves.
2.4 Mobile technology
Griffey (2010b) discussed how in the last ten years more information was being shared
among users than in any other time in history. Mobile technology has become the primary device
for individuals to communicate, access and retrieve information. It has been the fastest growing
and most widely adopted type of information technology today. Currently, there have been four
major mobile carriers in the US: AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile and Verizon that have different
technologies available and different capabilities as well as seven smaller carriers: Metropcs; U.S.
Cellular, Cricket, Boost Mobile, Southern Linc, TracFone and Virgin Mobile (Griffey, 2010a;
Phone Arena. 2014). With these carriers, users could utilize a mobile device every day to
immediately access and retrieve information.

57

Mobile technology has changed the IR process of where, how, when and why
information is accessed. It would involve any mobile device and mobile network available to
search for information. Eight out of ten adults have owned at least 2 or more technological
devices. However, adults under age 45 have owned most of the devices (Smith, 2010). As of
January 2014, 90% of adults over age 16 owned a cellphone, 58% owned a smartphone, 42%
owned a tablet computer and 32% owned an e-reader (PEW, 2014). Users today have searched
and browsed the Internet when near a cellular or Wi-Fi signal. The number of users accessing the
Internet has doubled since 2009. Sending and receiving texts or emails, downloading apps,
getting directions, recommendations and listening to music have been popular activities on a
mobile device (Duggan, 2013).
2.4.1 Types
Various types of mobile technologies could be utilized to access and retrieve information
online (see Table 2.6). According to O’Toole (2014), 55% of Americans accessed the Internet in
January 2014 on a mobile device. This exploratory dissertation study examined the following
mobile technological devices, e-readers, tablets, iPod Touch, and Internet enabled cellphones. Ereaders have been used to download electronic books (e-books), electronic PDF files and with
certain e-readers, videos and music. Depending on the e-reader, newspapers, magazines and
other printed documents such as websites or blogs could also be viewed (Educause, 2010).
Thirty-two percent of adults owned an e-reader device such as a Kindle or Nook. Adults ages 5064 were the second highest group (32%) compared to the highest (40% ages 30-49) owning the
device (Zickuhr & Rainie, 2014). Tablet computers, such as an iPad, were not owned as
prevalently as other devices. However, 30% of Baby Boomers did own a tablet (Rainie, 2012a).
Purch (2014) discussed how there were 26 types of tablets that have different capabilities and

58

features that assist diverse users in various ways to find information. An iPod Touch would be a
portable mobile device that downloads, plays and stores files as well as connect to the Internet
(Apple 2014). According to Smith (2010), 47% of Americans owned an iPod touch, which has
increased significantly since 2005. However, most owners were young adults under age 30.
Cellphone ownership has steadily increased with 90% of all adults having a cellphone and 58%
owning a Smartphone. Most owners were young adults, though there were a significant number
(88%) of Baby Boomers who have cellphones. Two-thirds of Americans (63%) accessed the
Internet from a cellphone and 34% mostly used it instead of utilizing other devices (PEW, 2014).
Table 2.6
List of Mobile Technologies
Mobile Technologies
Laptops/notebooks/netbooks (Dell, Apple, etc.)
Mobile game consoles (Gameboy, Nintendo DS, etc.)
Mobile media devices (iPod, iPod Touch, mp3 players, CD players, etc.)
Mobile phones (cellphones, smartphones etc.)
Mobile reading devices (Kindle, Nook, mp3 players, Playaways, etc.)
Mobile tablets (iPad, Galaxy, etc.)
Pagers (Motorola, etc.)
Personal digital assistant (PDA) (Palm-Pilots, etc.)
Personal navigation devices (Garmin, TomTom, etc.)
2.4.2 Issues and challenges
There have been hundreds of devices today that come in a variety of sizes, have various
functionalities, and have different browsers when accessing the Internet. This could cause
compatibility issues between certain websites and the software on the mobile device making
searching and browsing for information potentially difficult for users. The devices typically have
small screens, small buttons to manipulate, and low resolution, which could make operating and
navigating difficult especially for an AMO with or without any impairment (Wobbrock, 2006).
Some users have wanted the same type of experience as a desktop or laptop computer, which
could make it challenging on a mobile device. Additionally, connectivity could be an issue in

59

regards to slow Internet speeds to download materials on some devices or when utilizing a
cellphone, dropped calls or spam could be a factor (Boyles & Rainie, 2012). Privacy could also
be a concern, especially in regards to mobile phone use with certain apps that could track your
location and information. Boyles, Smith and Madden (2012) found that 57% of adults over age
50 decided not to install an app due to the concern of the app wanting personal information. This
was almost 10% higher than adults ages 18-29. These above challenges could be significant
factors in whether or not a mobile device would be utilized when retrieving information online.
2.4.3 User studies
Mobile technology user studies have mostly been conducted with student participants and
within an academic library environment. Church and Smyth (2009) conducted a study of
undergraduate, PhD and post-doctoral student’s age 20-60 examining the intent to use mobile
technology. Findings revealed that the location and time the information need took place was an
important factor in using the mobile technology. The top three user goals were 75% geographical
information, 65% personal information and 64% informational. Most mobile interactions took
place when the participants were mobile or outside of their home or work environment. Hu and
Meier (2011) found from 286 academic participant online surveys and interviews that 35%
searched for information several times a day stating the mobile device provided convenience of
looking up something right away. The research did find that 70% would rather read on a laptop
computer than on their mobile device, though a reason why was not reported in the study.
Similarly, Hanson’s (2011) study of 101 students at an academic library found the most common
participant activities conducted throughout the day on a mobile device were communication
(email, text), social networking (Facebook), information searching (news, library), entertainment
(music, video) and other (shopping, banking).

60

Along with user studies on how mobile technology has been used to search for different
types of information, Seeholzer and Salem (2011) examined 20 undergraduate and graduate
students expectations, perceptions and the use of the mobile Web. The results illustrated that
participants performed a variety of tasks from their mobile devices and the most common
websites visited were Facebook, email, weather information, directions and sport sites. In
addition, most participants utilized the library website from their mobile device to interact with
the library’s resources and services. One theme noted by the researchers was the design of site.
The participants were disappointed in the mobile website compared to the experience they had
with the regular site on the computer. The participants also wanted more space between links on
the mobile site to make navigation easier on the smaller screens. Cummings, Merrill and
Borrelli’s (2010) study of 206 faculty, graduate and undergraduate students found 58.4% of
participants who owned a mobile device would access the OPAC. The survey did not break
down the participants by age of who would use their mobile device to access the library website.
However, only 13% of participants were over the age of 46.
Mobile devices and the mobile websites could be important in how users search for
information and perform activities on the mobile device. Alzaza and Yaakub (2011) discussed
how mobile technology offered a new way of learning anywhere or anytime for the user. The
results from 261 Malaysian students under age 26 found half of the participants were aware of
the mobile services offered at the university. Interestingly, site usability on the mobile device and
training of how to use the device ranked lowest as a limitation of the mobile technology.
However, a recent ethnographic study by Mizrachi and Bates (2013), which examined
undergraduates age 18-22 personal academic information behaviors and tool preferences,
revealed a broad range of individuality among the students. The choice of using a specific format

61

or device, such as a cellphone, varied on the type of task. Cognitive and learning styles as well as
user personality traits also played a role. This illustrated that even among digital natives, there
were distinctions among the young adult age group depending on the type of search task that
needed to be accomplished. A mobile device user study examining a specific task was explored
by Stockwell (2010), who looked at vocabulary activities performed on mobile phones compared
to using a computer. The mixed method study on 175 participants from 2007-2009 explored the
amount of time the participants took to complete the activities and the scores they achieved on
the vocabulary activities. Results portrayed a larger portion of users in 2009 used the phone
rather than the computer compared to the previous two years. It was noted that the activities took
longer on the phone to complete, but there weren’t any differences in the scores achieved.
Nicholas, Clark, Rowlands and Jamall’s (2013) study in England of 70,000 user transaction log
interactions with a mobile device and the Europeana website found that information usage was
less interactive and less content was viewed per visit compared with a computer device. The
researchers believed this could be because a mobile visit was usually a faster interaction or fit
because of the different mobile device utilized to conduct the search. Mobile technology,
according to Stockwell (2010), has become more noticeable as a device to be used in the ED
field, which could be a reason for the various studies on students and academic libraries.
The above mobile technology user studies did not specify a model or application when
examining mobile device usage. The TAM or the Technology Acceptance Model has been one
of the most influential models in technology adoption research and the model constructs were
fairly general and universal to different types of computer systems and users. TAM looked at the
perceived usefulness and ease of use of a system as well how user attitude and behavior affect
adopting the system for use. However, the model did not look at the social influences for

62

technology adoption (Malhotra & Galletta, 1999). In addition, TAM was not explored in the
context of this dissertation study, since the model did not examine the how or why mobile
technology would be used for retrieval and access to information.
2.5 Adults midlife and older
Baby Boomers were born from 1946-1964 and they turned age 65 in 2011 (Decker 2010;
Eriksson-Backa 2010; Joseph 2009; Piper, Palmer & Xie, 2009). Adults over age 65 have
accounted for 13% of the U.S. population and were predicted to be 20% of the population by
2030 (Federal Interagency Forum on Aging Related Statistics, 2012). Different organizations
defined and categorized AMO in different ways. Therefore, applying a uniform definition for the
age group has been difficult. PEW (2009) defined older adults as Younger Boomers (YB) (Born
1955-1964), Older Boomers (OB) (Born 1946-1954), the Silent Generation (Born 1937-1945),
and the GI generation (Born – 1936). A portion of this definition that identified YB and OB was
used in this exploratory dissertation study.
AMO have diverse characteristics. Several AMO continue to work after retirement age,
which is currently age 67 (Jones 2012) and continue to be active in their community. Other
AMO have retired and have possibly lost touch with former colleagues and friends. Many AMO
have worked with computers and other information technology. However, there have been AMO
who have little knowledge or training in using information technologies. Wicks (2004) discussed
how older adults just entering retirement age seek information differently than adults much older.
Furthermore, there have been some AMO who do not have direct access to technological
hardware or software and cannot afford the training necessary to use the information technology
(Dunnett, 1998; Webb, 2002). In addition, there could be age related health issues such as
mobility difficulties, impaired vision, hearing and cognitive issues. These issues could

63

potentially make it difficult to access and retrieve information from an online environment,
especially from a mobile device.
2.5.1 Special needs
As individuals age, physical conditions could change due to the natural process of aging
(Hutchison, Eastman & Tirrito, 1997; Wagner, Hassanein & Head, 2010). Biological,
psychological and social differences could make it frustrating and difficult for AMO interacting
with information technology. Some characteristics that could change would be sensation (color,
vision, auditory), perception (what aware of in environment), cognition (reasoning, memory) and
movement (control, coordination) (Fisk et al., 2009). This could make the usability of a system
important but it could also make it challenging. These changes could affect an adult’s ability to
use standard interface features due to vision issues and they could experience difficulty
understanding the overall IR systems (Hutchison, et al. 1997; Mates 2004). Cognitive abilities of
AMO could play a role in using a computer or newer technologies. Czaja et al. (2006) examined
cognitive abilities and the utilization of computer technologies. Results indicated cognitive
abilities were an intervening variable in using a computer. This could be because some older
adults have not been exposed to computer technologies and it would require them to learn new
skills. This exemplified that system interfaces need to be simple and easy to use; thus requiring
less mental effort and working memory for AMO needing to seek out information from an online
IR system. Evaluating and making good judgments about the credibility of the material would be
essential for AMO. With so much information out there, AMO would need to be able to decide
whether the information presented to them was accurate. Creating or formulating new ideas from
the information while using a technological device could be beneficial for AMO. McFadden and
Basting (2010) discussed how research was starting to reveal how participating in different types

64

of creative activities could aid individuals cognitively and socially, which could lessen the
effects of dementia. An active mind could play a role in keeping the body healthy (Kiel, 2005).
Visual acuity could also play a role in utilizing information technology. Stephen (2009)
stated about 5% of the population in Sydney, Australia has a significant vision impairment, with
the number increasing as the population ages. If the reading format did not suit the user, then the
user would not understand the text meaning, or reading would become slower to enable better
processing of the information. Additionally, the monitor interface could be difficult to read due
to vision impairments (Hutchison, et al. 1997). Depending on the information technology used,
the monitor screen size could be large or small, varying the text/image size on the screen. This
could be challenging for individuals with a visual impairment. Mobile technology devices
typically would have a smaller screen due to the small device for easier mobility. A study by
Chae and Kim (2004) found that the screen size affected the content, causing the user to scroll
and navigate more between Web pages. This significantly affected the behavior and perception
of the mobile user. Even though the participants in the study consisted of teens to adults in their
thirties, an adult with a vision impairment could also experience this issue. Furthermore, mobile
devices could be utilized in different types of environments that could have poor lighting
conditions such as sunlight reflection causing reading difficulty due to contrast issues.
Moreover, adults who have experienced a hearing loss or a hearing impairment could
have difficulty accessing audio content on the Internet. A noisy environment could cause
difficulty in hearing. According to Harper, Yesilada and Chen (2011), users with a hearing loss
utilizing a mobile device could have difficulty listening to voice prompts to input data onto the
device, which could cause errors in the buttons pressed to receive the correct information. This
could cause the wrong information accessed by the mobile user.

65

In addition, Sears and Young (2003) stated, “…a physical impairment affects a person’s
ability to move, and dexterity impairments are those that affect the use of the hands and arms”
(as cited in Harper et al., 2011, p. 678). The decline in motor control and coordination along with
some disabling conditions, such as arthritis, could make it difficult to manipulate a standard
computer mouse successfully or buttons and keypads on smaller devices. Smith, Sharit and
Czaja’s (1999) study on 60 participants (ages 20-75 year old) psychomotor ability with a
computer mouse indicated older adult participants had greater difficulty handling different
computer tasks than younger adult participants. These issues could be frustrating and sometimes
embarrassing for the older adult user (Decker 2010). Mobile devices have smaller features to
utilize, which could pose challenges for the physically impaired.
2.5.2 Information use and information behaviors
Age related changes in cognition and lack of computer experience could affect an older
adult’s use of online systems (Sit, 1998). Hutchison et al. (1997) discussed how older adults
could experience overly cautious behavior and have difficulty remembering learned concepts;
thus requiring more training on a computer than younger users. The researchers’ study of 122
adults over age 50 indicated over 84% experienced frustration using one or more computer
features. Karavidas et al. (2005) explored anxiety and self-efficacy of 222 participants (ages 5388). The survey results revealed that computer anxiety and self-efficacy were variables that
influenced computer knowledge and overall life satisfaction. The lower the self-efficacy, the
higher the anxiety level the user had regarding learning about computers. Low self-efficacy
could cause less motivation to learn information technology (Czaja et al., 2006) and could
decrease information seeking skills. Bandura (1977, 1986) believed a user’s confidence in the
ability to perform a search task or self-efficacy could play a role in the information seeking

66

process (as cited in Watters & Duffy, 2005, p. 243). Czaja et al. (2006) explored the successful
adoption of information technology of 1,204 participants (ages 18-91). Results concluded there
was significantly less use and less experience with computers among older participants compared
to younger participants. It was also found that middle aged and older adult participants had lower
self-efficacy and higher anxiety with the use of computers compared to the younger adults. The
findings suggested that computer self-efficacy was a predictor of general use of technology.
Older adults could underestimate their actual computer knowledge due to feeling less confident
about computer usage (Karavidas et al., 2005; Piper et al., 2009).
Martyn and Gallant, (2012) found study participants over age 50 did not want to seek
information beyond their comfort level and ability. They found older users would seek out
information if the technology was easy to use for their information searches. Butcher and Street
(2009) revealed the computer needs of older adults were to keep instruction simple and provide
practice time that would aid an older adult unfamiliar with the technology to search for
information. The researchers emphasized having an environment that encouraged older adults to
overcome their fear of information technology and anxiety of appearing foolish in front of others
fostered a better learning environment that would improve their information seeking skills.
Nycyk and Redsell (2010) case study on older adults found that continuous computer training
was beneficial to older learners. A patient tutor willing to explain the technology in repeated
steps aided the older adult learning computer technology. This study illustrated that older adults
were capable of learning new skills to retrieve and access information within an online
environment. If a user has less anxiety about using information technology, it could increase the
possible usage of newer technologies such as mobile technology.

67

When searching in an online environment, AMO could have varying capabilities that
could affect the IR process. Mead et al. (2000) compared older and younger adults performing
within an OPAC system found older computer participants who did not have computer
experience had difficulty searching within the online environment. Moreover, they demonstrated
poorer understanding of the operations needed for the search. Additionally, Stronge et al. (2006),
mentioned previously, indicated older adults did not use search strategies effectively and timed
out when seeking information on the Internet more often than younger adults. This could be due
to lack of knowledge about using different strategies, like the advanced keyword search, to assist
in the information seeking process. This lack of knowledge could be due to a lack of the
necessary digital literacy skills. Some AMO have worked with computers and other mobile
technologies while others have been afraid to touch a computer (Decker, 2010; Wicks, 2004).
Digital literacy skills have been important for this age group since there have been different
types of information resources such as health information, government documents, educational
opportunities, entertainment resources, financial records, communicating with family and
friends, and leisure reading activities available via online environments. Leisure reading
activities could have educational outcomes in adults (Moyer, 2007), thereby increasing lifelong
learning. Having digital literacy skills could provide AMO the knowledge to be able to search for
different types of resources. Martyn and Gallant (2012) found that most of the older adult
participants did not want to use information technology to search for information. However, they
understood more information was becoming more online. Eshet-Alkalai and AmichaiHamburger (2004) discussed how digital literacy was more than just developing technical skills.
They believed varieties of cognitive skills and knowledge were taking place when interacting
with a digital environment.

68

Changes in cognition and having a lack of experience could cause anxiety and selfefficacy in regards to information technology. This, in turn, could affect how motivated AMO
would be to learn and utilize new information technologies such as a mobile device. Having a
variety of cognitive and digital literacy skills was important in the IR process and could affect
how AMO view retrieving online information and the device they utilize in the IR process.
2.5.2.a Baby Boomers
Baby Boomers information seeking and searching behaviors have varied widely. The
diversity could be because the Baby Boomer age range spans nineteen years. This age difference
could affect the way they seek out information in a digital environment and their comfort level in
using technological devices. According to Dempsey (2007), a key characteristic of Baby
Boomers was they wanted to be in touch with information technology. However, information
seeking differed even among Baby Boomers. YB used the Internet 15% more than OB (Rainie,
2012a). This could be considered a digital divide. Connaway et al. (2008) compared information
seeking behaviors of Millennials and Baby Boomers found that Baby Boomers would use
Google for quick searches, but this was secondary to seeking information from another person.
Seeking information from a human source rather than from a technological device was a diverse
factor among Baby Boomers. Additionally, cognitive factors and knowledge of information
technology could be a factor for Baby Boomers seeking information. Martyn and Gallant (2012)
discussed how adults over 50 would seek information if they felt they had the ability to use the
technology. This could be a determining factor in seeking information among Baby Boomers.
Some Baby Boomers have been in the workforce longer and therefore exposed to more
technology, which could increase their comfort level and digital literacy skills. According to Ng

69

(2007), the social environment was important to learning information technology, which could
also be an area that determines information seeking among Baby Boomers.
Furthermore, there have been some Baby Boomers comfortable with new technology and
have been doing more online activities (Mack & Jennings, 2010). Niemela-Nyrhinen (2007)
examined Baby Boomers (age 50-60) in Finland and whether they had less anxiety than
traditional stereotypes believed for older adults using online technology and text messaging on a
mobile phone. Findings revealed the Baby Boomer participants had less anxiety in using
information technology. However, technological anxiety was higher than text messaging anxiety.
These findings could be due to the variations in the meaning of technology and that Finland has
been a leading edge country in mobile technology. Over 95% of the participants had a mobile
phone and the participants could have felt that text messaging was a routine activity not
associated with the word technology. The above studies have shown that Baby Boomers vary in
their knowledge, experience and skills when seeking information while using information
technology.
2.5.3 Utilization of information technology/mobile technology
In the US, information technology use varied with age, with only 24% of older adults
over age 65 owning a technological device as compared to 58% of adults under 47 years of age
(Rainie, 2012b). Mobile technology use also varied with 38% of Baby Boomers owning a mobile
device with the highest percentage of device ownership being a cellphone and the lowest being a
tablet (Zickuhr, 2011). Of the 88% of Baby Boomers who owned a cellphone, just a little over
half (51%) used the device to access the Internet (Duggan & Smith, 2013).
Many older adults have limited access to broadband, computers and other electronic
devices (Joseph 2009). Access to these technologies could vary for different reasons. Olson,

70

Obrien, Rogers and Charness (2011) investigated the use of information technology in a
quantitative study with younger and older adults. Results revealed older adults use of different
information technologies for information was less than younger adults. However, the study did
not look at why the older adults did not use the technology or the strategies and behaviors
affecting their computer usage.
Computer usage could be important for AMO to obtain information and to keep in touch
with friends and family. Karavidas, et al. (2005) found the participants who had more practical
understanding of a computer system were more satisfied with life. The AMO used the computer
for social networking of friends and family in addition to staying informed about health related
issues. Other research has suggested teaching email and social networking skills could help
improve quality of life (Decker, 2010; Kiel, 2005; Piper et al., 2009, Wicks, 2004). YB and OB
were more likely to search for government and health information than other activities when
searching online (Zickuhr, 2010). A recent PEW study revealed that mobile phone activity
among Baby Boomers ages 50-64 has increased from 7% in 2010 to 19% in 2012 when
accessing health information via their mobile phone device (Fox & Duggan, 2012). This would
be important to note as Baby Boomers age and would seek ways to keep healthier or find
information on more health related issues.
According to Pew, e-book readers have been owned by 19% of adults’ ages 50-64, which
is just slightly lower than adults age 30-49 at 24% (Rainie, Zickuhr, Purcell, Madden, & Brenner,
2012). The e-book market could attract more older individuals and has the potential benefits of
interaction with information technology as well as the enjoyment of reading for pleasure.
Reading e-books, though, could be challenging for AMO due to screen size on a device that
could affect the presentation of the information. Lee, Shieh, Tsai, Jeng and Shen (2008)

71

discussed how most e-readers have multiple text sizes but there have been few studies examining
whether this aids reading accuracy (as cited in Moyer, 2012, p. 348). Tsai, Ro, Chang, and Lee
(2011) examined e-book reading performance on mobile phone devices, investigating the effects
of font size and page presentation. Twenty-four older adults, ages 62-70, participated with the
results indicating the participants preferred reading in 14-size font and read faster with a flip
page method instead of the scrolling page method, which is typical on a mobile phone device.
Moreover, Baby Boomers were more likely to use the Internet. However, Internet use
could depend on factors such as education level, workforce involvement, user occupation and the
type of household (Willis, 2006). Information searching on the Internet could be difficult for
AMO due to not having the correct digital literacy skills. Some AMO have looked to libraries to
assist them in learning digital literacy skills. Bennett-Kapusniak’s (2013) study on library
programming for adults over age 50 found that just a little over half of the 50 public libraries
examined offered a basic computer skills program for library users. Yet, few libraries had a
computer lab to practice skills and more than half did not offer help from a librarian. This lack of
services could be discouraging for adults who rely on libraries to assist them in accessing and
retrieving information electronically. Aula’s (2005b) study of 10 older adults’ ages 61-74 found
that support was an important factor in the continued use of computers. Participants were able to
search the Web after little training. However, if there were usability issues, the older adults
became discouraged if they did not have adequate support.
Lindley, Harper and Sellen (2009) researched the attitudes of older adults’ 55-81 years
of age and their communication with family and friends. The researchers explored how the
participants felt about different communication media including technological and nontechnological means of communicating with family and friends. Five main themes emerged from

72

the research with keeping in touch being the most important concept and worthy of the
participants time. However, the participants did not feel the need to be in touch all the time,
which was in contrast with their attitude on the younger generation, who they felt needed to be in
constant communication with each other by texting on their cellphones (Lindley et al., 2009).
This could be important in regard to how some AMO view and use newer technology. Baby
Boomer mobile device usage has increased, with 31% owning a mobile device compared to 53%
of adults under age 46 (Zickuhr, 2011). However; there were Baby Boomers who did not own or
use mobile technology. According to Zickuhr (2010), 34% of Baby Boomers were not online and
14% of that total was OB. The participants’ top reason was they just were not interested in it.
This could be a factor in not utilizing mobile technology. For this dissertation study, Baby
Boomers who did not use mobile technology were not examined.
2.5.4 Digital divide
Some Baby Boomers have unique information search behaviors when interacting with
information technology and need to be considered when investigating this specific age group.
The personal computer made an appearance in the late 1970s and was in the workforce in the late
1980s. This was significant since nearly all Baby Boomers and some pre-Boomers would fall in
a gap of not having the use of this information technology when they were in high school
(Salkowitz, 2008). This caused a generational difference of being exposed to information
technology and could affect comfort level when finding online information. Prensky (2001)
defined these users as digital immigrants or individuals not born in a digital world who would be
considered digital natives. However, Decker (2010) and Joseph (2009) noted it was important
not to generalize or make assumptions on the technological abilities of this age group due to the
varied individual characteristics. Selwyn (2004) conducted interviews of adults over age 60

73

providing more in-depth data about older adult’s adoption and use of ICT. Two broad themes
emerged which were the use and nonuse of ICT by older adults. Computer use changed over
time dependent on the situation and whether the computer would fit conveniently in the
participant’s life. A key finding in the study was how the older adults felt the computer was an
efficient provider of information and many participants were embarrassed to admit they did not
have the knowledge to use them. However, it has been noted that there have been some older
adults who expressed a positive attitude towards change and who were not afraid of different
technological devices (Kiel, 2005; Nasmith & Parkinson, 2008). In recent research, Wong et al.
(2009) found a digital divide existed with some disadvantaged groups. Public libraries have
provided access to Internet computers and they have played a role in equalizing access to all
users (Kinney, 2010). Disadvantaged groups have been more likely to use the public library for
access to online information although more people have achieved access outside of the library by
utilizing, for instance, a mobile device. According to Gauder (2011), there was a substantial
increase in growth of Baby Boomers using email and Web searching from 2007-2010, making
the gap smaller between age groups. However, only 7% of Baby Boomers were searching the
Web with a mobile device.
The above research illustrated that there was a digital divide when it came to being
exposed to and using certain information technologies. The Baby Boomers use of information
technologies has been increasing. However, more recent research would be needed to determine
if Baby Boomers have been accessing the Internet more with a mobile device.
2.6 Chapter summary
AMO have diverse characteristics; therefore, different types of approaches could be used
when researching the older population. For this exploratory dissertation study, different IR,

74

searching and seeking models were examined since each explored different user aspects
interacting with information sources. However, with the different characteristics and needs of
AMO, one particular model, approach, or theory did not fit the user group and their IR and
access needs. The information seeking process could vary dependent on what resource the
individual decided to utilize in the process. Different user-oriented studies could be researched
examining different aspects of the information seeking process. However, there were some
limitations with the existing research regarding AMO information seeking behaviors especially
focusing on Baby Boomers.
Most research studies were on system performance concerning precision and recall
(Ruthven & Kelly, 2011). Spink’s (1997) model examined relevance and feedback of a system
and therefore does not give much information on AMO since the focus was on the online system.
Ingwersen and Jarvelin’s (2005), Belkin’s (1996), Hert‘s (1996), Saracevic’s (1997), and Wang
et al.’s (2000) models also examined the system and user interaction with the interface. Certain
aspects were missing from the models that need to be explored such as domain knowledge, the
strategies used, the actual user needs or behaviors. In addition, there were few studies looking at
the interaction from the users’ perspective. Fidel and Pejtersen’s (2004), Pharo’s (2004) Bystrom
and Jarvelin’s (1995) theory and Leckie et al.’s (1996) models examined user goal or work task.
These models and theories would be beneficial to examine AMO who continue to work even
after retirement age. However, not all AMO have continued to work. Furthermore, different
types of tasks could also affect different types of shifts when seeking information. Xie’s (2008)
planned situational model focused on the user’s goals, strategies, and the different factors that
could influence the interaction. However, the model did not look at user behavior, such as
uncertainty and anxiety. There were also limited studies examining AMO searching in different

75

types of environments with different types of tasks and few looked at real users seeking
undefined tasks.
Taylor’s (1967) and Belkin’s (1980) approaches could be used to study the types of AMO
needs when seeking out information sources. However, Kuhlthau’s (1991) ISP or Vakkari’s
(2001) models gave richer detail about user needs as well as user thoughts and feelings when
seeking information. These models, though, did not examine the type of need or the environment
around the user. Users have exhibited different types of behaviors when seeking information
such as feelings of uncertainty (Belkin, 1980; Chatman, 1999; Kuhlthau, 1991; Taylor, 1967;
Vakkari, 2001; Wilson et al., 2002). Research studies have shown computer anxiety was
correlated with age. Krikelas’ (1983) Model on user uncertainty would be a good choice to study
AMO, though this would be only one aspect of information searching. Savolainen’s (1995) ELIS
model would be a better choice to look at AMO everyday life information seeking strategies of
making sense of their world since the model examined different types of behaviors, which could
affect information seeking. However, it has not been tested with any online system. Even though
Dervin’s (1992) model explained how there was a gap in knowledge and situations occur to
bridge that gap, the model did not examine the different behaviors affecting the situations.
Additionally, Johnson’s (1997) model examined information seeking as a sense-making
approach influenced by context (Case, 2012). However, it has only been tested empirically in the
health communication fields. Wilson’s (1999) model would also be an appropriate model to
examine AMO behaviors, especially if the researcher was exploring anxiety or self-efficacy of
users’ information seeking. However, the model did not look at the context or the patterns of the
process. Ellis’ (1989) behavior framework examined different characteristics of seeking
information but it did not clearly relate any factors that could influence the search process, like

76

anxiety. Furthermore, Bates’ (1989) model was a good model to explore AMO browsing
behaviors. However, it did not examine the different variables that could be influencing
browsing behaviors, such as a user’s thoughts and knowledge. Having digital literacy skills to
access and retrieve information online has been considered important for AMO but there have
been limited studies exploring AMO interacting with different technologies and very few
interacting with a mobile device. In addition, when AMO would be seeking information, social
aspects could play a role in the process. Dervin’s (1992), Savolainen’s (1995), Wilson’s (1999),
Chatman’s (1999), and Fisher et al.’s (2004) models and theories examined the social factors
affecting information seeking. All but Dervin’s would be ideal to use when studying AMO.
However, this would be only one aspect of information seeking and other factors could be
influencing the process.
Most user-oriented studies have focused on a few types of user groups, such as children,
young adults and college students. However, little research has examined AMO information
seeking and searching in the LIS field; specifically looking at Baby Boomers, even though these
users could have special issues when seeking information from an IR system. Furthermore,
Birkland and Karrst-Brown (2010) found that little research has been conducted on older adult
experiences with information technology. Wagner et al. (2010) conducted a multi-disciplinary
review of studies pertaining to older adults and their use of computers and the Internet. Results
revealed there were a number of qualitative attitudinal studies of how older adults view
computers and the Internet but very few examining different behaviors seeking information from
a computer environment, and none were found with AMO interacting with mobile technology
specifically examining Baby Boomers. In addition, there was a significant difference in the
number of Baby Boomers accessing and searching the Internet on a mobile device, illustrating

77

that the characteristics of information technology use varies widely among Baby Boomers. There
has been little research conducted on mobile technology IR especially in real life situations
(Jansen, Spink, Bateman, & Saracevic, 1998; Sohn, Li, Griswold & Hollan, 2008). Information
seeking studies that have been age-focused, such as on Baby Boomers, have been uncommon.
This exploratory dissertation study examined Baby Boomers and their use of mobile
technology in everyday life situations. This study divided Baby Boomers into 2 groups
consisting of YB and OB due to the varied characteristics of each age group. Previous studies
that have examined older adults’ responses to new information technology have typically used
quantitative research designs with participants completing questionnaires or surveys with very
few utilizing a qualitative research method. The participants in this study completed a short
questionnaire asking demographic information, information technology experience and mobile
device(s) owned as well as completing an electronic or print diary to document their information
searching on a mobile device. The researcher conducted a follow-up interview of each
participant to gain a richer context of the mobile technology interaction.

78

Chapter 3. Research Methodology
3.1 Introduction
The previous chapter explored prior research on information retrieval (IR), information
access, mobile technology, and adults’ midlife and older. This chapter details the methods used
for this current study. The goals explained in Chapter 1 were investigated by a qualitative
approach used in this exploratory dissertation study.
The user-system interaction has been important in user study research since it provides
valuable information about the user when he or she retrieves information within a digital context.
A qualitative method has usually focused on depth and development of a theory from the
gathered data. The concepts would be from the thick descriptions and perceptions derived from
the participants, typically within a natural setting. This method would evolve and change as the
study progresses (Smale & Gillies, 2012). Connections and relationships were developed by
clustering categories and codes together into themes and patterns relating to and explaining the
central phenomenon discovered from the data (Cresswell, 2013). See Section 3.6 for a more
detailed description of the coding scheme. This dissertation study examined how Baby Boomers
utilized mobile technology, explored how Baby Boomers effectively acquired and retrieved
information from mobile technological device(s), and any factors and challenges Baby Boomers
had in the IR process.
3.2 Rationale for qualitative methodology
Qualitative researchers typically studied individuals in a natural setting and would seek
understanding or meaning of the world around them. Researchers have chosen a qualitative
approach for 1) an exploratory study, 2) the subject size and 3) for in-depth information. In other
words, researchers would conduct qualitative research when a problem or a group of individuals

79

needed to be explored, and talking directly with the users allows them to tell their story, which
derives a deeper detailed explanation and understanding of the problem or the group of
individuals. Researchers want to bring about change focusing on the process and meaning of
findings created from the data gathered. Corbin and Strauss (2008) stated the participants’
perspectives were an important aspect of the data gathered. The qualitative approach typically
focused on a single concept with the researcher interpreting the data bringing personal values
into the study (Cresswell, 2009; Sale, Lohfeld & Brazil, 2002). The study would begin without a
set theory in mind or a hypothesis to verify. Qualitative research would provide suggestions
and/or evidence in the broad categories of contextual (describe and display phenomena),
explanatory (examines reasons for or associations between what exists), evaluative (examines
factors or effects) and generative (aids in the development of theories) research within the social
science field (Ritchie & Ormston, 2014). Qualitative research, as opposed to quantitative
research, could assist in explaining why or how certain factors were occurring among the data.
Thick descriptions would be used to help convey sufficient information about the research to the
reader (Punch, 2005). This method would allow the researcher the freedom to “check out ideas
and follow the data trail wherever it leads” (Corbin & Strauss, 2008, p. 228). Qualitative
methods would be useful when little information is available about the area of study.
Triangulation in qualitative research has helped to confirm and improve clarity in the
research findings. According to Campbell and Fiske (1959), triangulation of the research could
be referred to as “multiple operationalism, in which more than one method is used as part of a
validation process” (as cited in Johnson, Onwuegbuzie & Turner, 2007, p. 113-114). The
triangulation used in this dissertation study assisted in the understanding of the problem by
examining the emerging themes and their connections or relationships to the research questions.

80

The different methods used to gather the data in this study consisted of questionnaires, diaries,
interviews and field notes. These different data resources provided quantitative and qualitative
findings that created a surplus of different information and innovative ways to understand Baby
Boomers utilizing mobile technology.
The purpose of using a qualitative approach for this exploratory dissertation study was to
gain further knowledge about Baby Boomers. The researcher gave greater detailed explanations
examining why and how certain factors were affecting Baby Boomers utilizing mobile devices
by attaining a richer perspective from the different types of gathered data. The qualitative
methods added richer detail taken from the participant responses providing a reason why the
device was chosen or used over another mobile device to search for information.
3.3 Research questions
The following research questions were examined and answered.
R1) How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to search for information in terms of the
mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of information searched?
R2) What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in searching for
information and their affecting factors?
3.4 Sampling
A purposive sampling method was used in this exploratory dissertation study at the
participant level to provide insight and understanding about Baby Boomers, an age group within
adults midlife and older. In purposive sampling, the researcher would select individuals that
would be typical cases who would provide rich and relevant information to learn more about the
research goals (Flick, 2014, Pickard, 2013). This would be in contrast to random sampling
typically found in quantitative research studies. A type of purposive sampling would be snowball

81

or chain sampling. The snowball sampling strategy has been defined as “a method that has been
widely used in qualitative sociological research. The methods yields a study sample through
referrals made upon people who share or know of others who possess some characteristics that
are of research interest” (as cited in Biernacki & Waldorf, 1981, p. 141). Snowball sampling was
used in this exploratory dissertation study to identify individuals who knew other individuals
who fit the criteria for participation in the study. The purposive sampling method allowed for
sampling across various locations in the United States (US) and even though the participants
were in a specific age range, differences were among them, such as gender, education,
information technology experience and mobile technology ownership.
The following inclusion and exclusion criteria were used for participants in the study.
Inclusion criteria: 1) age range of 50-69 years or born between the years 1946-1964; 2) no
evidence of physical or cognitive impairment that would hinder questionnaire or diary entrees; 3)
the utilization of mobile technology at least once a day. Exclusion criteria: 1) adults 70 years and
older or born before 1946. These individuals were not considered Baby Boomers and did not
meet the study criteria; 2) a physical or cognitive impairment that would impede any use of
mobile technology; 3) non-users of mobile technology or other forms of information technology.
Participants were selected in the age range of Baby Boomers (age 50-69). Fifty
participants were selected and divided into 2 groups, Younger Boomers (YB) (Born 1955-1964)
with the age range of 50-59 and Older Boomers (OB) (Born 1946-1954) with the age range of
60-69. Recruitment procedures used were varied to obtain the participants. Recruitment of adults
over age 50 has been challenging with past studies documenting difficulties (Dickinson, Arnott
& Prior, 2007) so various methods to recruit participants were used. The three types of
recruitment methods were: personal interaction recruitment, online email recruitment, and online

82

social network recruitment. First, participants were recruited by personal interactions by the
researcher, whereby the researcher would meet with potential participants, explain the details of
the study and what they would do if they wanted to participate. The researcher would personally
ask whether they were interested in participating or if they knew of other potential individuals
who might be interested in participating in the study. Second, the researcher contacted friends of
relatives via email who participated and/or recruited other possible participants (see Appendix
B). These methods created a snowball effect from participant friends and/or relatives in the
correct age range, which involved them in the recruitment process, promoted participation, and
retention in the research study (Mody et al., 2008). Third, a flier was distributed via the social
networking site Facebook to elicit Baby Boomer participants (see Appendix A). This also created
a snowball effect or sampling of users who saw and/or participated in the study and passed the
information on to “friends” in the specific age range. Due to the snowball strategy, more than
half of the participants in the study were recruited within the first 24 hours. However, the
participants were in the YB age range. To recruit more OB for the study, a revised flier was
created requesting participants ages 60-69 to ensure an even number of YB and OB participants.
The revised flier was used for each of the recruitment methods stated previously. Recruitment
lasted 3 months until a total of 50 Baby Boomer participants were recruited for the study. The
participants did not need to reside in the immediate area of the researcher to participate in the
study. Saturation of the participants recruited occurred when the sample provided a diverse
sampling of Baby Boomers. Section 3.5 details further explanations of the Data collection
procedures.
The Institutional Review Board (IRB) of the University of Wisconsin Milwaukee,
Milwaukee, Wisconsin approved this exploratory dissertation study to be conducted (see

83

Appendix E). An IRB consent form was given to all potential participants and was either
handwritten or signed electronically dependent on the type of diary method chosen by the
participant prior to the beginning of the study. Participants were allowed to request print or
electronic format for the consent form, questionnaire and for the diary entries. Participants were
able to withdraw from the study at any time. If a participant withdrew, the questionnaire and
diary data from that participant was not included in the final results.
Participants were compensated $25 upon completion of the study as an incentive since
the study required a time commitment of documenting responses in a diary for 7 days as well as
participation in a follow-up interview. Participants who withdrew or did not complete the diary
and the interview were not compensated. A total of 57 respondents expressed interest in
performing the study.
3.5 Data collection
3.5.1 Methods
This study used a qualitative approach that consisted of different types of data for
triangulation: questionnaires, diaries, field notes and interview responses. Using multiple kinds
of data instruments provided corroborating evidence to develop a theme encompassing the data
and presented further finding validity.
The researcher received 57 responses from potential participants. Four respondents, after
receiving an initial email explaining the study procedures, decided not to participate. One
participant started the study answering the questionnaire and creating 2 days of diary entrees.
This participant contacted the researcher and withdrew from the study stating it was difficult to
finish the diary due to employment workload. The participant did comment that the Smartphone
was the initial device utilized for search activities. However, the researcher removed this

84

participant’s data from the questionnaire results and the diary entrees were not used in the final
analyses.
The following four procedures were used in the data collection process for this
exploratory dissertation study. 1) participants filled out a print or electronic questionnaire, 2)
participants documented in a print or electronic diary their mobile device information searching
activities for 7 days, 3) follow-up interviews were conducted after completion of the diary
entrees, 4) field notes were chronicled by the researcher throughout the data collection and
analysis process. A more detailed explanation of the procedures are detailed below.
First, 50 participants filled out a print or an electronic questionnaire that identified
demographic information (gender, age, and educational level), information technology
experience as well as mobile device(s) owned and utilized. Socio-economic status of the
participants were not collected to instill trust and cooperation to participate in the study. Gachter,
Herrman and Thoni (2004) found that socio-economic variables strongly influenced people’s
trust in other people’s fairness to be treated equally. Recruitment of adults over 50, as stated in
the previous section, has been challenging, and to increase participation and trust for this study,
socio-economic indicators were not collected. The definitions for information technology
experience were broad and self-assessed by the participants. This was satisfactory in the context
of this dissertation study because users have a sense of their own skills when searching for
information online. This self-assessment could be a factor in how the participant viewed and felt
about mobile technology. It also allowed for a diverse set of individual users for the study.
Additionally, self-assessment could play a role in the use or non-use of mobile technology for
information searching. The online questionnaire was on Qualtrics (UWM 2015), a nationally
respected software instrument, ensuring the privacy and security of the participant’s data. The

85

printed and electronic questionnaire had the same set up and questions to ensure consistency in
the data. See Appendix C for a sample of the questionnaire.
The 50 participants represented diverse backgrounds with ages ranging from 50-69 that
were divided into 2 groups consisting of 50% (N=25) YB and 50% (N=25) OB (see Table 3.1).
The majority of the participants, 74%, were female and 26% were male. In terms of their
educational background, 16% (N=8) were high school graduates and 84% (N=42) were college
graduates. Participants self-assessed their experience with information technology, 36% (N=18)
indicated they were expert users and 2/3 [64% (N=32)] of the participants indicated some
challenges finding and retrieving electronic information as intermediate users. Participants were
also asked whether they owned a list of mobile devices. Almost all of the participants had an
Internet enabled cellphone [96%, (N=48)], 80% (N=40) owned an e-reader, 30% (N=15) owned
a tablet and 4% (N=2) owned an iPod Touch.
Table 3.1.
Descriptive Statistics of Participants’ Characteristics
Measure
Items
Gender
Male
Female
Age
50-59
Mean = 51.36, SD = 2.628
60-69
Mean = 64.20, SD = 2.327
Education
High School graduate
College graduate
Information Technology Experience Expert user
Intermediate user
Novice user
Mobile Technology Owned
Internet enabled cellphone
E-reader
Tablet
iPod Touch

86

Frequency
13
37
25

Percent
26
74
50

25

50

8
42
18
32
0
48
40
15
2

16
84
36
64
0
96
80
30
4

Most participants lived in the States of Wisconsin or New York. However, ten other US States
were also represented providing a wider range of Baby Boomers living in different communities
(see Table 3.2)
Table 3.2
Participants by State
State
Number
CT
1
MA
2
MD
1
MN
1
NC
1
NJ
1
NY
18
OH
1
SC
1
VA
1
VT
1
WI
21
Total
50
The second procedure for data collection after the questionnaire was participants were
given the choice of documenting diary entrees in a printed or electronic diary. Diary studies have
allowed participants to capture their information needs whenever it arose throughout the day.
Solicited diaries have been noted to be different from unsolicited personal diaries. Solicited
diaries usually have a specific purpose and unsolicited diaries have typically spontaneous writing
with no incentive or purpose without the intention of someone reading and analyzing the
passages. Researchers would request solicited diaries usually with a specific focus (i.e. health
diary, food diary, daily activity log). Previous user group qualitative studies have utilized this
method to gather research data. For example, Jacelon and Imperio (2005) examined participants
with a chronic health issue (age 75+) that kept a 2-week diary explaining their thoughts and
feelings on doing different activities. Xie’s (2006) study had 20 participants (ages 40-51) that
kept an information interaction diary on two search tasks for a 2-week period and Sohn et al.
87

(2008) explored participants (ages 19-58) mobile information needs, strategies, and factors that
influenced their need using a 2-week diary method. Solicited participant diaries were attained
from participants who documented daily activities they performed on their mobile devices. The
solicited diaries in this dissertation study were a valuable source of information depicting data
over a period of time that could not be easily observed since the participants would be
documenting within their home communities. Responses in the solicited diary were of interest to
the researcher and participants’ completed the diaries with the knowledge the researcher would
read and interpret the data (Jacelon & Imperio, 2005).
For this dissertation study, the diary was based on a set of questions designed to help the
participants focus their thoughts on how and why they used mobile technology for information
searching activities. The questions focused on what types of mobile device(s) the participant
utilized, search activities, search activity context, activity time, frequency and duration of mobile
device usage, whether the information was accessed successfully, any problems encountered
during the process, whether anyone helped during the process and why the mobile device was
chosen for the search activity (see Appendix D). To retain participants in the study, the diary was
for a period of 7 days. Keeping a diary for 7 days would develop a rich data set. Past research has
shown that maintaining a diary for a longer period of time, longer than 7 days, could cause the
participants to become tired of documenting entries (Jacelon & Imperio, 2005). Throughout the 7
days, the participant recorded and answered questions on 5 different online activities per day
with subsequent same activities for the day tallied without detailed information. For example, the
participant could record and answer questions for the following 5 online search activities: health
information, gaming, shopping, directions and the social network Facebook on Day 1. If the
participant went on Facebook multiple times on Day 1, the participant would record and tally the

88

Facebook search activities without having to answer the questions in the diary after the first
initial search.
Participants were given a choice of what type of diary they would use to document their
entries (print or electronic format). A choice was given due to prior research detailing Baby
Boomers having unique characteristics in using information technology. Providing the
participant the choice of diary preference allowed more comfort in documenting diary entrees.
Participants did not need to reside in the researcher’s immediate area to complete the diary. The
researcher provided and mailed printed materials that included a stamped return envelope to the
participants. The participants who chose the electronic diary format accessed the diary from a
technological device. The electronic diary was on Qualtrics (UWM, 2015) and an exclusive URL
was created for each individual participant. The participants who chose the electronic version
were given the URL to access the diary via email and printed diary participants were provided a
printed version via US mail. The printed diary had the same questions as the electronic diary and
were displayed in the form of a personalized folder. A typed written copy of questions was
provided at the beginning of the printed diary for easy reference. Each page of the printed diary
had one diary question for adequate space for written explanations. Diary studies have the
possibility of missing data due to participants forgetting to report an entry. Participants in this
study had reminders via email to encourage diary entrees. An initial reminder was sent to a
participant if the participant had not started to record data in the electronic diary after 1 week
from signing the consent form. After the initial reminder email, reminders were sent to a
participant, if needed, in 2-week increments, beginning from the first day of the participant’s
diary entry. This was to check whether he or she was interested in finishing the study and to
encourage diary entrees. All correspondence was done via email between participant and

89

researcher once participant consent was attained. All participant correspondence was through
email irrespective of the print or electronic instruments chosen for the questionnaire and diary.
The researcher sent all reminders to the participants.
Audio diaries were not used in this study due to the following reasons: 1) a small digital
recorder would not have a place to attach the written questions for easy accessibility for the
participants. This would cause undue issues of having to keep two separate items together for
consistency in diary entrees; 2) small digital recorders have instructions on usage that the
researcher did not want to have the participants learn to be able to participate in the study; 3)
small digital recorders have small buttons and screens, which could be difficult to use for some
participants creating possible frustration or withdrawal from participating in the study; and 4)
small digital recorders require batteries to work efficiently. With the possibility of multiple usage
on a daily basis, batteries would need to be supplied to participants with recorders that stopped
working, which could interrupt the flow of daily reporting of activities.
The third part of the data collection procedures were the participant interviews. These
were conducted after the diaries were completed and received by the researcher. Almost all
interviews were digitally recorded for clarification of diary entrees. The researcher conducted
interviews at a time convenient for the interviewee either in person, by phone or via the social
network Face Time. If the participant indicated he or she was unavailable for a recorded
interview, the interview questions were emailed to the participant. The researcher was the only
interviewer to increase validity and consistency of the interview questions. The interview
allowed other questions deemed pertinent and timely dependent on the interviewees’ responses
to the initial questions in the diary. The questions were semi-structured and open-ended, which
allowed for follow-up of any new information expressed during the interview process. Interview

90

questions were the same for onsite and online interviews. There were 19 main questions (see
Appendix F) that encompassed 4 areas of interest: 1) mobile device ownership and utilization, 2)
mobile device problems and challenges with information searching, 3) non-mobile device
utilization and 4) other information about mobile device(s) not covered in the questions.
The fourth and final procedure of data collection was field notes. These were taken by the
researcher during the course of the study to allow for a richer context in data analysis. Field notes
were the researcher’s written chronicles during the data collection and transcribing process. The
inclusion criteria for the field notes included thoughts, impressions and perceptions as well as
short analytical insights about participant’s correspondences with the researcher, the transcribed
individual diaries, as well as during and after interactions with the participant’s interview. In
regards to exclusion criteria for the field notes, nothing was excluded from the field notes since
all data gathered was useful in the final analysis. Section 3.6.3 has an example of the field notes.
3.5.2 Setting
Participants kept an electronic or print diary in their natural setting in their own
community in the US. Participants were not required to be in the same community or state as the
researcher allowing for a diverse group of Baby Boomers. All participants kept a diary in a
natural setting to allow for real search activities to be performed and any real problems that could
occur when utilizing a mobile device.
3.5.3 Pilot test
The researcher conducted a pilot study to test the instruments of the questionnaire and
diary methods (print and electronic) with 3 participants to look for potential problems and bias of
questions. The pilot test participants included one YB and two OB. Results from the pilot study
found that the electronic and print questionnaire did not need to have changes made to the

91

questions since the pilot participants understood the meaning and wording of the various
questions. However, the electronic diary pilot participants experienced difficulty understanding
the last question (Question 11 or Q11) in the diary, which originally stated: Q11) “How many
times did you use your mobile device today?” The researcher believed the question caused
confusion for the online participant since the diary was created on Qualtrics (UWM, 2015) and
this question would have been answered each time the participant recorded a diary entry. This
could have occurred multiple times as the participant documented each time he or she searched
on a mobile device throughout the day. Q11 was removed from the print and electronic diary for
the actual study and the question was incorporated as an interview question for the actual
dissertation study.
3.6 Data analysis
A constant comparative analysis was undertaken to determine patterns in the data to build
a theory. The questionnaire, diaries, field notes and interviews were placed in categories and
compared to look for related themes or patterns across the data sets. The researcher started by
compiling the descriptive statistics from the questionnaire participants completed before starting
the diary. IBM SPSS Statistics 22 software and Microsoft Excel 2013 software was used to
create frequencies and charts of the various data sets. Next, the diaries were read and transcribed
by the researcher. Electronic diaries were stored on a password-locked computer accessed only
by the researcher. Returned printed diaries were stored in a locked file cabinet during and after
transcription. All diaries were transcribed and stored on one password-locked computer accessed
only by the researcher. Each participant was assigned a number (e.g. P1, P2, etc.) to protect
participant privacy. Digital audio interviews were transcribed and stored on the same computer
with the interviewees assigned the same participant number as the diary numbers. After audio

92

recordings were transcribed, the audio recordings were erased. The researcher used NVivo
qualitative software to assist in analyzing the transcribed diaries and interviews to derive themes
from the different gathered data. The triangulation of the data collected from the questionnaires,
diaries, interviews and field notes provided support and corroborating evidence for the related
concepts and themes discussed in Chapters 4 and 5.
After independently working, another PhD researcher, who had previous qualitative
coding experience, was consulted to examine diary entrees and interview transcripts. Theme
similarities and differences were discussed between the researchers. This process aided the
development of the categorical codes and inter-coder agreement. The researcher kept field notes
to record thoughts, reflections and analyses throughout the research study. Using the various
forms of analyses provided a deeper and richer understanding of the Baby Boomer information
need. Table 3.3 has the data collection and analysis plan.
Table 3.3
Data Collection and Analysis Plan
Research Questions
Collection Instruments
How are Baby Boomers
Questionnaire
utilizing a mobile device to
Diary
search for information in terms Interview
of the mobile device types, the
environmental contexts and the
types of information searched?
What are the challenges
Diary
concerning Baby Boomers
Interview
utilizing a mobile device in
searching for information and
their affecting factors?

Analysis Methods
Taxonomies of usage types
Descriptive analysis

Taxonomies of challenges
Taxonomies of user factors, mobile
technology and interactions
Descriptive analysis

3.6.1 Grounded theory
Grounded theory has been termed as a “family of methods” with distinctions between
some versions of grounded theory and some overlap in others (Bryant & Charmez, 2007, p. 12).
Grounded theory would be when “…the inquirer generates a general explanation (a theory) of a

93

process, an action, or an interaction shaped by the views of a large number of participants”
(Creswell, 2013, p. 83). In other words, theory grounded in data. The process could occur when
there would be enough data to saturate categories and detail a theory. Multiple perspectives from
participants could be considered when using the grounded theory approach and multiple levels of
data analysis would be conducted throughout the research process. Grounded theory would
involve the collection and analysis of data that has been examined, coded, compared, and
categorized developing themes or concepts (Charmez, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 1990; Glaser &
Strauss, 1967; Glesne, 2011; Strauss and Corbin, 1994). Relevant concepts could be revealed by
showing up multiple times within the data. As Kearney (2007) suggested, “grounded theory does
not simply posit that A always leads to B, but rather that the degree to which A leads to B and
what the relationship looks like depends on a range of factors that influence A, B, and the
relationship between them” (as cited in Kearney, 2007, p. 128). The researcher’s role would be
to keep an open mind to any possible evidence that could exist in the dataset. Grounded theory
has been used in different areas of study including the LIS field. Meaningful conclusions could
be derived from analyzing the data and new insights or ideas could also be revealed (Allan,
2003; Corbin & Strauss, 2015). The data would typically be collected from research questions,
not from the verification of defined hypotheses (Mansourian, 2006). This exploratory
dissertation study explored search activities, the challenges and factors that affected Baby
Boomers utilizing mobile technology. A constant comparative analysis was undertaken to
determine patterns in the data.
There has been much debate on the literature review while utilizing grounded theory. For
this dissertation study, a literature review has been provided to establish theoretical sensitivity
and foundation for the study. The researcher needed to be “…steeped in the literature that deals

94

with both the kinds of variables and their associated general ideas that will be used” (as cited in
Glaser, 1978, p. 3). This sensitivity gave meaning to the data setting the stage for the
dissertation’s objectives. The diaries, questionnaires, field notes and interview responses were
placed in categories and compared to look for related themes or patterns across the data sets. The
researcher started by transcribing the diaries and identifying the themes of the different data.
Glaser (1978) pointed out that having many theoretical codes would enable the researcher to be
more sensitive to the relationships between the data.
3.6.2 Coding process and coding scheme
The first phase of the grounded theory approach would be open coding whereby a
category would be formed from the data. In other words, a code word or phrase would be
assigned that accurately described the text segment meaning. Codes were broken down into
categories or the codes’ core concepts. Next, the researcher clustered together similar codes,
thereby reducing the long list of codes to a smaller, more manageable number. The second phase
is axial coding, which would be the process of finding associations between the categories to
create themes. During this phase, the researcher would think about the main phenomenon, the
causal conditions, strategies, context, intervening conditions and consequences (Charmez, 2006;
Corbin & Strauss, 1990; Cresswell, 2013). Themes would start to develop by constantly
comparing the data. This constant comparative analysis of the data gradually would evolve into a
core of emerging theory or selective coding. This would be the central code that the other codes
were related to or a more general concept, or central phenomenon. (Babbie, 2011; Creswell,
2013). Figure 3.1 has illustrated the grounded theory process.

95

Diaries
Interviews

Open Coding
Initially
identify concepts

CODING

Axial Coding
Generate categories of
relationships between
concepts

Field Notes

Selective Coding
Integrate
and develop the theory

Figure 3.1 Grounded Theory Process
The researcher analyzed the questionnaires, diaries, interview transcripts and field notes
using the grounded theory process (Babbie, 2011; Charmez, 2006; Corbin & Strauss, 1990;
Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Glesne, 2011; Strauss and Corbin, 1994). The grounded theory method
was used since there could have been valuable variables discovered or themes of interest pulled
from the qualitative data which have not been revealed in previous research studies. Data was
reviewed line by line (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) and codes were assigned as the concept emerged.
Next, the researcher compared codes to look for relationships developing themes. The data
collection and analysis process continued until the researcher attained conceptual saturation
(Corbin & Strauss, 2015) and was satisfied sufficient data was discovered to describe each of the
categories. See Table 3.4 for coding sheet and Table 3.5 for examples of the main categories.

96

Linking the concepts together by constantly comparing the codes and the relationships between
them built a model from the gathered qualitative data, which is discussed in Chapter 5.
Table 3.4
Coding Sheet
Participant Id

Type of
Information

Mobile
Device

Location

Table 3.5
Coding Scheme: Examples of Main Categories
Types of Categories
Definitions
Participants’ ability or inability
to effectively search for
News/Sports

Type of Information:
Email

Participants’ ability or inability
to effectively search for Email

Challenge:

Challenge:
Inability to find
information/solution
Factor:
Personal Emotion
Comfort level (CL)
Factor:
Device Aspect
Device security (DS)

Factor

Examples

Type of Information:
News/Sports

Inability to solve the
Problem

Challenge

Participants’ inability using
and/or figuring out how to use
the mobile device to perform the
search activity
Participants’ inability finding
information they were searching
for on their mobile device or
finding a solution to assist them
in finding the information
Participant’s feelings of
enjoyment or frustration of using
a mobile device
Participant’s perception of
privacy and security of doing the
search on a mobile device
affected the use or non-use of the
mobile device

“I get my news on an ipad
because it’s a bigger screen
making it more easier to read.”
(P34)
“I had difficulty searching my
email…Parts of my school
building, I can’t find a signal so I
go ½ a day without a cell signal.”
(P17)
“I couldn’t figure out how to
make my phone start speaking
the directions” (P43)
“There were too many screens I
had to scroll through and my
phone wouldn’t let me back up. It
was frustrating.” (P30)
“The two locations I looked up I
couldn't flag on same map...very
frustrating that I didn't know how
to do that.” (P27)
“I don’t shop on my device…I
personally don’t feel safe doing it
from a mobile phone.” (P5)

As mentioned previously in the data analysis plan, a PhD researcher (Coder 2) examined
the data and developed codes to create consistency and agreement among the datasets. Three
transcripts were given to Coder 2. One transcript contained Day 1 diary entrees from 25
participants that entailed 8 answered questions for a total of 200 passages coded. The two

97

remaining transcripts were interview transcripts randomly chosen from the participants, one YB
and one OB participant. After coding the transcript passages, the researcher and Coder 2 met and
discussed text code names identifying overlapping agreement on coded names and passages.
Discrepancies in the codes were discussed and explained or resolved, and a codebook was
created. The researcher and Coder 2 coded an additional transcript that contained answers to the
Interview question “Have you ever had any difficulties or problems using your (mobile device)?
If yes, could you please explain one to me?” from the 50 participants. This question was chosen
specifically since the responses gave types of challenges and their affecting factors to establish at
least a 90% inter-coder agreement (Cresswell, 2009; 2013) and inter-coder reliability of
assigning types of challenges and affecting factors between the researcher and Coder 2. Cohen
Kappa’s (K) (1960) coefficient is a “measure of agreement between two raters (or judges),
corrected for chance, on the classification of a group of objects” (as cited in Becker, 2000, p.
1172). Cohen’s Kappa was used to measure inter-coder reliability to establish and validate the
quality of the coding schema developed from the qualitative data gathered in this study. The
results fell within a high measure of reliability at K=0.95 for types of challenges and K=0.93 for
the affecting factors. As the process of grounded theory took place, emerging categories and
subcategories were developed. The definitions for the types of challenges and affecting factors
are explained in Chapter 4 with examples from the participant diaries and interviews These have
been interpreted in the context and development of the Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information
Searching Model discussed in Chapter 5.
3.6.3 Field notes
Field notes were used during the research study, which involved reflexivity of the
researcher. Reflexivity in qualitative research would involve the …”critical reflection on how

98

researcher, research participants, setting, and research procedures interact and influence each
other” (as cited in Glesne, 2011, p. 151). This would inform the reader what prompted interest in
this exploratory dissertation study and how it informed the data’s interpretation. The researcher’s
culture, social, gender, class and personal politics would be reflected in the interpretation
(Cresswell, 2013). Due to the reflexivity of the findings, the researcher was conscious of the
biases, values and experiences while interpreting the data. In total, 154 notes were chronicled
during the research process. Two examples have been given below:
1/12/15: Received email from P7. Issues understanding Qualtrics diary and recording
data. (Said was already confused-mentioned age-laughed) Self-efficacy apparent. Given
examples to help.
1/22/15: Email form P30. Felt like only one asking for paper diary. (Interesting-need to
ask in interview why) Participant thought would do better with it. (ageism, self-efficacy,
was used to print)
3.6.4 Descriptive analysis
Qualitative research could involve quantitative analysis of data. In the context of this
dissertation study, numbers, frequencies and percentages were derived from the questionnaire,
diary and interview transcripts. Descriptive analysis was conducted to analyze information
search activities performed by the Baby Boomers, mobile device types, the reason for mobile
device usage, the frequency distribution of mobile device used and search activities, Baby
Boomer comparisons, usage environment, time spent on the mobile device and number of
challenges and factors.
3.7 Trustworthiness and research validity
Cohen and Crabtree (2006) discussed the importance of trustworthiness of a research
study in evaluating its worth. Trustworthiness involves establishing credibility, transferability,
dependability and confirmability. Different strategies were undertaken by the researcher to assess

99

the internal and external validity of this exploratory dissertation study. These include
triangulation of different sources to provide corroborating evidence, rich descriptions and actual
quotes from the participants, diverse characteristics and locations of participants in a natural
setting, peer review of the data and the clarification of researcher bias.
A purposive sampling method and gathered a small number of participants that allowed
for more in-depth information to be uncovered about a specific topic. By using a grounded
theory approach, themes developed, and by using qualitative statements from the participants,
gave more internal validity to the data. This study also used more than one set of data
(questionnaires, dairies, interviews, field notes) or triangulation, allowing for more in-depth data.
Triangulating the data among the different data collection instruments provided internal validity
to the findings.
A snowball approach was used and resulted in different types of participants who had
diverse characteristics giving internal and external validity to the research findings. Print and
electronic questionnaire responses from the participants identified demographic information,
information technology experience and mobile device ownership. Participants were in their own
environment and not in front of the researcher allowing for natural answers to the questions
creating ethical validity from the participants.
A wide scope of data was examined by acquiring print and electronic diaries from the 50
diverse Baby Boomer participants to obtain research trustworthiness. Participants recorded over
a 7-day period to allow for various search information activities from the participants utilizing a
mobile device. Participants documented data in a real setting with real problems or issues. This
allowed the data to be more trustworthy and giving more validity to the findings than if the data

100

was recorded within a lab setting or whether the researcher controlled the search activities or the
mobile technology utilized.
Furthermore, the study included descriptive context-relevant statements that were
reported to allow for transferability. Accurate quotes were stated from participants to give richer
detail and give descriptive validity to the data. Interviews were conducted to clarify diary entrees
providing interpretive validity to the data and to ensure accurate portrayal of the participant’s
statements and views. The researcher used non-leading, probing techniques to strengthen validity
of the participant’s responses and to minimize bias. The goal of the interviews was to understand
or make meaning about how the participants’ understand the experience they had using and
searching with a mobile device. In addition, by interviewing the 50 participants, the researcher
could connect the experiences and check the responses against those of other participants,
creating further internal validity.
The qualitative data gathered gave the research more validity due to the richness and
detailed description of the data. A second coder was used providing peer review and inter-coder
agreement establishing validity to the coding scheme. In addition, the reflexivity of the field
notes and the constant comparative data analysis provided inter-coder agreement and reliability
to the existing data set.
3.8 Ethical issues
Some ethical issues could arise from the nature of this study. The main issue would be
maintaining the participant privacy. The opinions and thoughts of Baby Boomers were a key
factor in the research and all effort was made to ensure the information obtained did not effect
current lifestyle or situation. “The basic ethical principle governing data collection is that no
harm should come to the respondents as a result of their participation in the research…The

101

respondent’s right to privacy and the right to refuse to answer certain questions, or to be
interviewed at all, should always be respected, and no undue pressure should be brought to bear.”
(Oppenheim, 1992, p. 84).
Participants were referred to as P1, P2, etc…when quotes were used in the findings. The
IRB consent form was mailed to each participant who preferred a printed copy. This was mailed
back to the researcher in order to receive the written diary. Participants typed their name in the
electronic IRB form on Qualtrics (UWM, 2015) to gain access to the electronic diary. The
consent form safeguarded the participant’s knowledge about the study and gathered participant’s
consent. Verbal consent was also asked of the participant before the recorded participant
interviews. The participants were assured that anonymity and confidentiality would be
maintained at all times.
Due to the subjective nature of grounded theory analysis (Cresswell, 2013), the
researcher was not able to keep personal bias out of the findings. However, to aid in finding
reliability, a second researcher reviewed and coded a number of interview and diary transcripts
to establish inter-coder agreement on code names and coded passages. All data was reviewed and
analyzed to maintain the importance of identifying “what a respondent was trying to convey
because whatever the incident was, it had to have some significance for the participant to
mention it” (as cited in Corbin & Strauss, 2015, p. 80). Field notes were taken throughout the
study and after interviews to note of any impressions derived about the participants that would
not have been conveyed within the printed or electronic diaries.
All information collected during the course of this exploratory dissertation study has been
kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. Disclosure about presenting the data gathered
and publishing the results in scientific journals or at scientific conferences was disclosed to the

102

participants’ via the signed consent form. Participant information has been stored in a locked
cabinet and on 2 password protected computers. The data collected will be stored for a period of
5 years in a locked cabinet and a password protected computer for future research studies.
3.9 Chapter summary
This methodology chapter outlined how the research questions have been formulated.
The researcher recruited 50 participants representing diverse backgrounds such as age,
education, gender and information technology experiences. The participants were divided into 2
user groups, YB ages 50-59 and OB ages 60-69 from various geographical areas. The
participants conducted any search task on their mobile device(s) and reported all of their search
activities over a 7-day period in a print or electronic diary. The diary entrees had pre-determined
questions to allow for more consistency with the data collection. Data was collected through
print and electronic demographic questionnaires, print and electronic diaries, and subsequent
interview questions that clarified data gathered from the diaries. A qualitative approach was used
to provide more in depth data providing a better understanding or explanation of the results.
Grounded theory was used to discover variables not previously revealed in former quantitative
research studies. The aim was to gain an understanding of the Baby Boomers experience with
mobile technology and the information search processes of adults over 50 years of age. The
resulting data provided further insight into Baby Boomers utilization of a mobile device filling in
a gap in the LIS scholarly research on adults over 50 years of age IR and access needs as well as
suggesting areas for future research.

103

Chapter 4. Results
The previous chapter discussed the methodology used in this dissertation. The following
sections analyzes the results of 50 questionnaires, diaries and interview responses that answered
the following research questions: R1) How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to search
for information in terms of the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of
information searched? R2) What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile
device in searching for information and their affecting factors?
Participants chose a print or an electronic format to complete the questionnaire and diary.
Two print diaries were not returned to the researcher and questionnaire responses for those
participants were removed from the questionnaire results. Interviews were not conducted on
those two participants, as they did not complete all the requirements for the study. Twelve [6Younger Boomers (YB), 6-Older Boomers (OB)] chose the printed format. A total of 50
participants completed the diaries and provided responses to questions for at least 1 search
activity conducted on a mobile device per day up to a total of 5 different search activities per
day. Participants did not need to answer questions for more than 5 different activities, though
they kept a tally sheet of all the search activities performed each day. The majority of the
participants utilized their mobile device for all 7 days of the diary. However, ten participants
(20%) did not utilize a mobile device every day to perform their search activities during the 7day period (see Table 4.1).

104

Table 4.1
Number of Days Participants Recorded Dairy Entrees (N=50)
Number of Participants
Total Number of Days of Diary Entrees
41
7
5
6
3
5
1
4
1
2
The participants who did not use a mobile device for 7 days to perform search activities
indicated they used a laptop or a desktop computer for search activities or they chose not to
search the Internet on any technological device. Some typical responses for non-mobile device
usage:
“I do not use it on a daily basis and I don’t use it much at home.” (P18)
“I use a computer all day and I’m busy doing other things.” (P46)
The following Sections, 4.1 and 4.2, answers the dissertation study research questions.
4.1 How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to search for information in terms of
the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of information searched?
4.1 Types of mobile devices
Participants indicated the mobile device used when conducting search activities.
Participants utilized 1 or more mobile devices for their different search activities dependent on
whether they owned more than 1 type of mobile device. 94% (N=47) utilized a cellphone at least
once for search activities during the 7-day diary period, 60% (N=30) utilized a tablet, and 18%
(N=9) utilized an e-reader device. Only 1 participant used an iPod Touch just once for a search
activity. Cellphones were utilized the most with participants using the device 58% of the time
when performing search activities compared to tablets (38%). Only two YB and one OB did not
use a cellphone for their search activities. Figure 4.1 has a comparison of mobile devices and the
number of search sessions on each device. Keep in mind that the participants in one search

105

session could have performed multiple search activities. Section 4.1.3 discusses the different
types of mobile device search activities.
500

465

450
400
350

311

300
Number of Search
250
Sessions
200
150
100
50

29

1

Ereader

iPod

0
Cellphone

Tablet

Mobile Device

Figure 4.1 Mobile Device Usage
A frequency distribution was conducted on cellphone and tablet usage, which has been
illustrated in Figure 4.2 and Figure 4.3. Both figures have the number of search sessions
illustrated on the x-axis and number of participants (N=50) on the y-axis. Figure 4.2 illustrated
the frequency distribution of search sessions among the participants utilizing a cellphone.
Participants performed search activities with their cellphones a Mean total of 9.3 times with a SD
of 7.279 during the 7- day period. In comparison, Figure 4.3 illustrated the frequency
distribution of search sessions among the participants utilizing a tablet. The participants
performed search activities with their tablets a Mean total of 6.22 times with a SD of 7.895
during the 7-day period. Participants did not use their e-readers (Mean=.58) or their iPod Touch
(Mean = .02) as frequently to perform search activities, therefore a frequency distribution was
not performed on these devices.

106

Figure 4.2 Frequency Distribution of
Cellphone Usage

Figure 4.3 Frequency Distribution of
Tablet Usage

When comparing mobile devices used during each search session between YB and OB,
there were only slight differences between YB and OB and the mobile device utilized when
searching for information on the Internet (see Figure 4.4). However, YB conducted a greater
number of search activities more often than OB during the search sessions, which is discussed in
Section 4.3.

107

250

231 234

200
148

150
Number
of Search Sessions
100

163

Younger
Boomers

50

Older
Boomers

27
2

1

0

0
Cellphone

E-reader

Tablet

iPodTouch

Mobile Device

Figure 4.4 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Mobile Device Usage Comparison
Participants expressed different reasons why they used their mobile devices instead of
other forms of technology (See Figure 4.5). The convenience of the mobile device was stated by
as the most prevalent reason (37%). 13% stated they utilized a mobile device because of a
function or search activity was on the device. This was closely followed by the ease of
use of the device (11%) and the location/accessibility (11%) of the mobile device compared to
other forms of technology. Participants indicated 9% of their search activities were performed on
a mobile device because it was the only device available. 6% of the search sessions were due to
the portability of the mobile device. 5% of the sessions was because the mobile device was faster
than another form of technology. The remaining 2% of the search sessions performed on the
mobile device were due to the device size, ease of use and because the device was more efficient
than a desktop computer.

108

Convenience

296

Efficient

14

Ease of Use

89
18

Easier than Desktop
Fast/Quick
Reason

38

Function on Device

104

Location/Accesibility

88

Only Device Available

72

Portable

53

Preference

18

Size

16
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

Number of Search Sessions

Figure 4.5 Reasons for Mobile Device Usage
4.1.2 Types of environments
Participants utilized their mobile device mainly within their home environment (57%)
with only 18% performing search activities in the work place (see Figure 4.6). However, 94%
(N= 47) of the participants indicated they still were in the workforce. Participants utilized their
mobile device 12% of the time in “Other” types of environments. A typical “Other” documented
place was another residence (daughter’s or son’s home) or another facility such as a car
dealership, bowling alley or restaurant. 11% of participants utilized their mobile device in their
car and 1% of participants were either at a school or the store. Most participants, as stated earlier,
utilized their mobile device in a particular environment because of the convenience. Some
typical quotes from participants were
“I like the iPad for the convenience; you know to do emails when I am away.” (P40)
“I use the tablet more than I use the computer. It’s convenient and easy. It’s something I
always have with me.” (P44)
“I like my phone because it can be right with me.” (P47)

109

500

463

400

300
Number of Search
Sessions
200
145
100

94

87
9

8

School

Store

0
Car

Home

Work

Other

Usage Environment

Figure 4.6 Mobile Device Usage Environment Comparison
When comparing environmental context between YB and OB (see Figure 4.7), OB
utilized their mobile device more within a home environment (64%) when performing search
activities compared to YB home usage (54%). However, YB used a mobile device more at work
(20%) compared to OB (15%).

110

300
273

250
221

200

Number of Search
Sessions 150

Younger Boomers
Older Boomers

100
82
63
53
50

34

29
3 6

34

5 3

0
Car

Home

School
Store
Usage Environment

Work

Other

Figure 4.7 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Environment Comparison
4.1.3 Types of information
Participants specified on the questionnaire how often they thought they used their mobile
device(s) performing a search activity. A majority (82% N= 40) indicated they would use a
mobile device more than 7 times a day while 14% (N=7) would use a mobile device 4-6 times a
day, 4% (N=2) was 2-3 times a day and 2% (N=1) only would use their mobile device once a
day.

111

The questionnaire asked the participants what types of search activities they believed they
performed on a mobile device throughout a particular day. More than 50% (Mean=35.71) of the
participants believed they performed the following 7 search activities more often: Directions
(74% N=37), Email (82% N=41), Entertainment (70% N=35), Finances (52% N=26), Other
Information Searching (80% N=40), Shopping (66% N=33), and Social Media (76% N=38). The
top four search activities they believed they performed on a mobile device were Email, Other
Information Searching (e.g. personal information, government, health information, browsing),
Directions and Social Media (See Figure 4.8). The Mean number of different search activities the
participants believed they performed on their mobile device per day was 6.23, SD = 2.63. Two
participants indicated they would engage in 13 different activities compared to two other
participants who stated they would engage in only 2 activities a day on their mobile device.
45
40

41
37

40
35

33

35
30

26

25
20
Number of
Participants

38

15
10
5
0

Search Activities

Figure 4.8 Indicated Search Activities from the Questionnaire (N=50)

112

In the participants’ interviews, the participants responded how often they used their
mobile device(s) a day to search for information (see Figure 4.9). 34% (N=17) specified they
utilized their mobile device 6 to 10 times a day, 28% (N=14) specified they utilized their mobile
device 11 to 20 times a day, 16% (N=8) indicated 21 to 30 times a day, 10% (N=5) specified 1 to
4 times a day, and 6% (N=3) specified they utilized their mobile device either more than 30
times or day or they would use it every other day 6% (N=3). The search activities did not include
phone calls or text messages that would be typically found on some mobile devices.
18

17

16
14
14
12
Number of
Participants

10
8
8
6
4

5
3

3

2
0
Every other
day

1-5

6-10

11-20

21-30

30+

Number of Times per Day

Figure 4.9 Mobile Device Usage per Day (N=50)
When comparing how many times a day YB performed search activities on their mobile
devices with OB, most of the YB participants (76%) stated they utilized their mobile devices for
search activities 11 times a day or more. Compared to a majority of the OB (72%) who stated
they performed only 1-10 search activities a day on their mobile devices (see Figure 4.10).

113

14
13

12

10
10

8
Number of
Participants

Younger Boomers

6
6

Older Boomers

5

5
4
4

3
2

2

2

0
0
1 to 5

6 to 10

11 to 20

21 to 30

30+

Number of Times per Day

Figure 4.10 Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Mobile Device Usage Per Day
The participants performed 14 different search activities on their mobile device(s) that
they recorded in their diaries (see Figure 4.11). More than 50% (Mean = 35.14286) of the
participants performed the following most prevalent 7 search activities: Directions (54% N=27),
Email (100% N=50), Entertainment (78% N=39), Other Information Searching (98% N=49),
News/Sports (62% N=32), Shopping (60% N=30), and Social Media (80% N=42). The actual
recorded top 3 activities were Email, Social Media and Entertainment. One Participant recorded
11 different search activities on a single day compared to one participant only engaging in 5
different search activities.
114

60
42

39

40
Number of
30
Participants

49

50

50

32

30

27

20
10
0

Search Activities

Figure 4.11 Diary Performed Search Activities (N=50)
Figure 4.12 compared questionnaire indicated search activities and the actual diary
activities performed by the participants. Interestingly, the participants believed they performed
certain activities on their mobile devices. However, the search activities documented in the
diaries were not as prevalent. This was noted in the search activities of Finding Directions,
Educational information, Finances, Recipe searches, Shopping, Travel, and Weather information.
Participants believed they performed those search activities on their mobile devices more than
what they actually documented in their diaries. Participants documented performing Email,
Social Media, News/Sports information, Entertainment, and Other types of Information (e.g.
personal information, government, health information, browsing) search activities the most in
their diaries compared to other types of search activities.

115

50

50
45
40

41

15
10

40

39

37

40

35

35
Number 30
of
25
Participants
20

49

27

32

42
38
Questionnaire

30

Diary

26
18
11 9

15

13

5

7

5

4
0

2

0

Search Activities

Figure 4.12 Questionnaire and Diary Search Activity Comparison
The 50 participants documented a total of 1275 out of the 1750 potential recorded diary
search activities with responses to the diary questions. When comparing YB and OB actual
documented search activities, each participant could have potentially documented 35 search
activities during the 7-day period. YB recorded an average of 27.52 search activities and OB
recorded an average of 23.48 search activities during the 7-day diary period. Table 4.2 has a
comparison of YB and OB number of search activities performed during the 7-day period with
YB performing a greater number of search activities than OB on their mobile devices.

116

Table 4.2
Comparison of Younger Boomers and Older Boomers Range of Search Activities for 7 days
Range of Search Activities Recorded
1-5
Younger 1
Boomers
Older
0
Boomers
Total
1

6-10

11-15

16-20

21-25

26-30

31-35

0

1

1

6

7

9

Total # of
Participants
25

1

1

7

6

5

5

25

1

2

8

12

12

14

50

The participants recorded the first five different activities performed over a 7-day period.
Frequency and time spent searching and retrieving information was measured to understand user
engagement in the search process. A frequency distribution (see Figure 4.13) was conducted on
the number of search activities participants performed on their mobile devices. The number of
search activities has been illustrated on the x-axis and the number of participants (N=50) on the
y-axis. Only 16% (N=8) of the participants recorded 5 different activities for 7 seven days for a
total of 35 activities. Participants recorded a Mean of 25.5 with a SD of 7.465 during the 7-day
diary period. Participants varied on the number of different search activities they performed on
their mobile devices throughout the 7 days.

117

Figure 4.13 Frequency Distribution of Diary Search Activities
When comparing YB and OB total number of search activities documented during the 7day diary period, OB checked Email 9% more frequently than YB during the 7-day period. OB
also performed 14% more Entertainment search activities. On the other hand, YB performed
13% more Social Media search activities and a greater number of searches for News/Sports (8%)
than OB (see Table 4.3).

118

Table 4.3
Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Search Activities
Activity
Younger Boomers
Older Boomers
Email
Entertainment
Social Media
News/Sports
Other
Information
Searching
Total

Number of Times
Searched

Percentage

Number of Times
Searched

244
143
277
118

28%
16%
32%
13%

250
205
129
36

37%
30%
19%
5%

97

11%

64

9%

879

100%

684

100%

Percentage

Participants performed a greater number of search activities (56%) that took less than 15
minutes on their mobile device (see Table 4.4). Nine of the participants (19%) spent more than
an hour performing search activities. However, a greater number of participants, 66% (N=34),
spent less than 30 minutes on their mobile devices performing search activities.
Table 4.4
Minutes Utilizing Mobile Device(s) for 7 Days (N=50)
Minutes
Total Number of
Search Sessions
1-5
182
6 – 10
151
11 - 15
116
16 - 20
72
21 -30
32
31 - 40
73
41 – 50
29
51 – 60
6
61-90
76
90+
69
Total
806

Percentage
23%
19%
14%
9%
4%
9%
4%
1%
9%
8%
100%

When comparing the number of minutes that YB and OB took to perform their search
activities, YB and OB performed comparably the same number of activities with little difference
in the amount of time performing search activities on their mobile devices. 52% of YB search
sessions were 15 minutes or less compared to OB (59%) (see Table 4.5).

119

Table 4.5
Younger Boomer and Older Boomer Comparison of Number of Minutes for Search Activities
Number of Minutes per
Younger Boomers
Older Boomers
Search Activity
Search Sessions Percentage
Search Sessions Percentage
15 Minutes or Less
234
52%
215
59%
16 Minutes +
146
48%
211
41%
Total
380
100%
426
100%
More than 60% (N=30) of the participants utilized 2 or more mobile devices during the 7day period to perform search activities. Participants did not however, utilize a certain mobile
device more frequently than another mobile device for their search activities. For example, for
the top mobile devices owned by the participants (cellphones and tablets), participants performed
activities in 4 minutes or less on a cellphone, just slightly more often (55%) than on a tablet
(45%). Interestingly, some of the participants explained how they did not realize how often they
used their mobile device until they recorded their search activities for this study. One expressed
concern about the time spent utilizing the mobile device for search activities.
“It’s surprising to me how much time I used it (smartphone) when I was doing your
study. I didn’t know how much time I really spend on it. Is this a good use of my time?”
(P23).
The previous sections examined how Baby Boomers used mobile technology to retrieve
information looking at the types of mobile technology, the types of search activities, where the
Baby Boomers performed the search activity, the frequency and the duration of the mobile
search activities. The following section examines the challenges and factors affecting their
mobile device usage.
4.2 What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in
searching for information and their affecting factors?
When Baby Boomers wanted to seek information on the Internet, they typically utilized a
device that was convenient for them to use at the time. With the increased availability of mobile

120

devices, many Baby Boomers have a mobile device to use to search for information. However,
with the varying characteristics of Baby Boomers, different factors and challenges could arise
that would determine whether the mobile device would be used or could influence or affect their
interaction with the mobile device. The data analysis in this exploratory dissertation study
identified the following major categories and sub-categories with 10 types of challenges that
participants encountered in their interactions with mobile technology. The 10 types of challenges
have been represented in 5 categories (see Table 4.6): 1) inability to initiate search activity, 2)
instability of connection, 3) inability to perform the search, 4) inability to solve the problem and
(5) inability to find information/solution.
Table 4.6
Categories and Types of Challenges
Challenging
Types of Challenges
Categories
Inability to initiate
Inability to initiate search activity - Perception of information need
search activity
Inability to initiate search activity - Perception of search task
Inability to initiate search activity - Perception of mobile device
Instability of
Instability of connection - To get connected
connection
Instability of connection - To stay connected
Inability to perform Inability to perform the search – On the mobile device
the search
Inability to perform the search - To satisfy information need
Inability to perform the search – Social influences
Inability to solve
Inability to solve the problem - On the mobile device
the problem
Inability to find
Inability to find information/solution - To satisfy information need
information/solution
Participants encountered the different types of challenges 243 times. These challenges
occurred in 16% of the 1,563 search activities that the participants performed on their mobile
devices. Figure 4.14 has illustrated the number of the types of challenges identified in the study.
Among them, the inability to initiate search activity (27%) and the inability to perform the search
(41%) accounted for the most frequent type of challenge that participants encountered.

121

Inability to initiate search activity

66

Instability of connection
Challenge

35

Inability to perform the search

99

Inability to solve problem

32

Inability to find information/solution

11
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

Number of Challenges

Figure 4.14 Number of Different Types of Challenges
Additionally, the study revealed 23 factors that were significant in the participants’
encounters with their mobile devices. The 23 factors represented 10 categories: 1) physical
ability, 2) personal behavior, 3) personal emotion, 4) personal knowledge, 5) previous
experience, 6) task aspects, 7) device aspects, 8) personal context, 9) social relationships, and 10)
economic situation. The factors with their respective definitions have been represented in Table
4.7. The types of challenges were identified from participants’ diaries and interviews recorded by
the researcher. The following examples have quotes related to the types of challenges
encountered and the factors are underlined with the appropriate abbreviation specified.

122

Table 4.7
Types of Factors and Definitions
Types of
Definition
Factors/Abbreviation
Physical ability (PA)
Participant’s body ability and activity
Personal behavior
Participant’s interaction with the mobile device
Behavior intention (BI)
Participant’s effort needed to perform the search task
Behavior activity (BA)
Participant’s information seeking action
Personal emotion
Participant’s feelings of confidence and comfort in utilizing the
mobile device
Comfort level (CL)
Participant’s feeling of enjoyment, frustration using a mobile
device
Self-efficacy (SE)
Participant’s confidence to use a certain mobile device and
perform a task
Personal knowledge
Participant’s knowledge and skills related to information retrieval
Domain knowledge (DK) Participant’s knowledge on the topic
System knowledge (SK)
Participant’s knowledge on the mobile device
Retrieval knowledge (RK) Participant’s knowledge on searching for information
Previous experience (PE)
Participant’s previous experience searching for information on a
mobile device
Task Aspects
Attributes that define a search task
Task requirement (TR)
Special condition for a search task, such as time
Task type (TT)
Different types of search task, such as entertainment
communication, information, etc.
Task complexity (TC)
Difficulty level to perform the search task
Device Aspects
Attributes related to the mobile device
Device design (DD)
The design of the mobile device in relation to size, interface
features, display, etc.
Device convenience (DC) The availability of the mobile device in relation to the user
Device performance (DP) How the mobile device performs when performing the task
Device applications (DA) Software applications on the mobile device used to perform
certain tasks
Device ease of use (DE)
The usability of the mobile device in regards to the interaction
with the device and accomplishing the task.
Device security (DS)
Participant’s perception of privacy and security of doing task on
the mobile device
Personal context (PC)
Location, environment or destination of the individual
Social relationships
Participant’s social relationships with others, cultural norms
Social perception (SP)
Participant’s perception of others’ thoughts and opinions about
utilizing a mobile device
Personal perception (PP)
Participant’s perception of self about utilizing a mobile device
Social ageism (SA)
Cultural norms in how a participant views self
Economic situation (ES)
Monetary cost and value of device

123

4.2.1 Inability to initiate search activity
Participants typically become aware of a lack of knowledge or understanding of a certain
topic, which would initiate the information retrieval (IR) process. Participants in this study
defined themselves as intermediate or expert users in searching for information on various
technological devices. However, the first type of challenge found among the participants was the
inability to initiate the search activity. Initiating the search activity would typically involve an
action of the participant. The results found four situations where participants experienced an
inability to initiate the search activity: related to the participant’s perception of their actual need;
the participant’s perception of the task they would have to do on the device; the participant’s
perception of the mobile device they would use for the task and the perception of the importance
of using a mobile device for the search activity.
4.2.1.a Inability to initiate search activity - Perception of information need
Participants would initiate a search activity when they wanted to understand or find out
more about a topic. A participant’s perception of their need determined whether he or she started
the search activity. Domain knowledge of the topic and the participant’s feelings or comfort level
have been important in the IR process. However, a lack of domain knowledge and a feeling of
discomfort was a reason why some participants did not start the search activity. In addition,
participants experienced a lack of system knowledge and how to conduct the search on the
device also played a role. If participants only knew certain functions on the device, then the
search activity was not started.
“If we get separate accounts, then I don’t know how to share photos.” (P13)
PP/CL/DK

124

“I learn it if it is something I’m looking for it to do for me. Ok, yes there are functions I
SK/RK
have never touched because they don’t interest me, so I don’t dwell into stuff that don’t
DD/BI
interest me.” (P19)
“I don’t ever really learn more than I need.” (P34)
BI/SK/DK/RK
4.2.1.b Inability to initiate search activity - Perception of search task
Participants’ perception of what they had to do to accomplish the task determined
whether a mobile device was used. A person’s feelings performing an activity could play a role
of not initiating the search activity on the mobile device. Some participants felt a lack of comfort
utilizing a device due to the device design and therefore was responsible for not initiating the
search activity.
“I like having the tactile experience of reading. I am tired of looking at the light of the
BA/DD/CL
screen and I enjoy the book thing.” (P15)
A small number of participants stated they would not use their mobile device because it would
take too long or acquire too much effort to accomplish the task. This behavior occurred because
of the type of search task or how difficult the search task the participant felt would be to
accomplish on the mobile device. If a participant believed the mobile device would not be easy
to use to do the task, then the participant was not motivated to initiate the search activity on the
mobile device. In addition, a participant’s physical ability to perform the task on the mobile
device was also a factor. If the participant had difficulty physically performing the task on the
device, then the search activity was not initiated.
“Something I would do on my laptop would be to download and print pictures. On my
phone, it’s just not as fast.” (P23)
TT/TR

125

“So I end up going back and popping into my laptop and I am able to whip through my
BA/TR/TC
blog in record time. But if I tried to go to it on my iPad, it will not do it. It’s not
BI/DP
user- friendly.” (P3)
DE
“I have not picked up the “thumb” typing method so typing on a mobile device is time
PA/SK/TR
consuming.” (P32)
Certain tasks could be performed on a mobile device. However, a lack of system knowledge
affected some participants initiating the search activity on the mobile device. This could have
been due to the type of task that needed to be performed.
“…one of the things that drives me crazy is I haven’t yet figured out how to send a
CL/SK
group email from an Apple product.” (P29)
Participants mentioned how they were able to learn the mobile device system to accomplish the
task, though some believed age was a factor in the learning process.
“I honestly think my age made a difference that new technology takes longer to learn as
SA/TC/SK
you get older.” (P49)
“We have to work to keep up with it (technology). We are one of your (laughs) bad
elderly people.” (P30)
SE/SK/SA
The participants’ environment also played a role in search activities. Mobile devices have been
typically used because of the convenience of doing search activities anywhere and anytime.
However, some participants did not use a mobile device if they had a computer close by in their
environment that would accomplish the particular search activity.
“If I’m at home, I would rather use my computer. The reason I say this because I am not
PC/CL
sure if it’s a function of my phone.” (P28)
SK/DA

126

“I like using my computer at work. I have worked on it all my life.” (P48)
PC/CL/PE
4.2.1.d Inability to initiate search activity – Perception of device
Participants’ perception of a mobile device affected whether they would ever use the
device for search activities. The perceptions from the participants varied with a lack of comfort
with the mobile device design, how economical it would be to have the mobile device or it was
due to a lack of system knowledge to know whether the mobile device could be used to satisfy
their IR need.
“I would never use a smartphone, I would have a problem with its small size.” (P2)
CL/DD
“I do not own a tablet. Haven’t justified the expense.” (P38)
ES
“I have never used a tablet. Not sure what I would use it for.” (P5)
PE/CL/SK
Participants’ perception of how secure the mobile device also affected the situation. If the
participants were not comfortable and believed the mobile device did not provide enough
security for their personal information, then a different device was used and/or the activity was
not initiated on the mobile device.
“Shopping is done from my landline computer. I just personally don’t feel safe doing it
from a mobile device.” (P10)
CL/TT/DS
“Oh, I don’t bank, don’t pay bills online because of safety concerns.” (P46)
CL/TT/DS
“When I first started, I got very upset. I didn’t know about all the features. It wasn’t the
CL/SK
device. I was trying to be safe. (P3)
DS

127

One participant had mixed feelings on utilizing a mobile device for their search activities.
“It’s the greatest and worst thing ever. It’s at once fun and convenient but also addicting
CL
and demanding, if you let it be.” (P12)
Participants expressed a lack of importance of the mobile device in performing search activities.
They did not feel the need to use a mobile device due to either their environmental location or
because they simply wanted a break from the technology and didn’t feel like using it.
“When I am out and about, I’m just carrying my phone. I’m not necessarily doing
PC/DC
BA
searches. I mean it’s not like when you watch your kids say every time they turn
PP
around they are checking their phones.” (P36)
“I do not use it on a daily basis and I don’t use it much at home. We mostly use it to
BA/PC
travel.” (P18)
“I know a lot of people that spend so much time surfing the net. I try not to do that. I
don’t want to get into the habit playing around with mobile devices.” (P21)
PP/BI
Other participants mentioned their age as a factor in not utilizing the mobile device for search
activities.
“I guess I sound like a dinosaur but the other thing is I work all day on the computer
SA
and I have a lot of volunteer endeavors, and I spend so much time on them, it’s kind of
like I need a break.” (P11)
BI/CL
“I’m still a little old fashioned that way. (laughs) I would rather print it out to see it
SA
BA/SE
(document) then look at it on a device.” (P6)
A number of participants commented how they just did not use their mobile devices often or
owned a certain mobile device, such as a smart phone, because they would rather communicate
in-person with other individuals. Some typical examples have been noted below.

128

“There’s just not enough face-to-face time. I don’t own a smartphone. I don’t even
PP
want to text. ” (P11)
“I am a little concerned that this generation is so involved with mobile devices that we
are getting worse with communication and human interaction.” (P13)
PP
“I’m not good with the phone. I don’t like the phone. I’m better eye-ball to eye-ball
SK/PP
with people.” (P19)
I appreciate where technology is going but I still find value in the…and the face-to-face
interaction.” (P41)
PP
A number of participants commented how they did not own more than one mobile device due to
economical factors. Below would be a few typical examples.
“I think it’s me strictly budgeting my money.” (P22)
ES
“I kind of grew up being frugal. I’ll use a device until it breaks.” (P25)
ES
“A smartphone serves my needs and the cost of the tablet is prohibitive.” (P39)
ES
4.2.2 Instability of connection
Participants usually accessed information electronically through a Broadband connection.
These connections would be important in utilizing a mobile device in different environments.
Without a good Internet connection, participants experienced difficulty performing search
activities.
4.2.2.a Instability of connection - To get connected
A lack of stability to establish a connection affected the participants’ frustration and
usage of their mobile devices for search activities. The participants noted it could have been due
to the device or the environment, which caused the instability of the connection.

129

“Like for instance, the iPhone sometimes has a difficult time connecting to the wireless.”
(P20)
DP/PC/CL
“The Wi-Fi wouldn’t connect. I had to go into settings and Undo, then rejoin the school’s
PC/CL
Wi-Fi.” (P24)
4.2.2.b Instability of connection – To stay connected
The instability to stay connected electronically within different environments was
responsible for some participants’ usage of their mobile devices. Having a slow or intermittent
connection made it difficult for the participants to satisfy their information need.
“I had problems reading the newspaper online today because the (WiFi) reception was
PC
not good in the break room at work.” (P37)
“WiFi is intermittent at work. The device sometimes loses the signal and stalls until it
PC
regains the signal.” (P33)
4.2.3 Inability to perform the search
Participants performed tasks on a mobile device to satisfy their IR need. Accessing and
retrieving information could include the user having the necessary skills to perform the task on a
mobile device. Participants experienced issues performing search activities on certain mobile
devices or problems occurred due to a physical issue.
4.2.3.a Inability to perform the search - Due to certain mobile device
Participants’ knowledge and skills about a system would help them to perform a search
activity on a mobile device. Having system knowledge would be important to search for
information effectively while using a mobile device. The inability to perform a task was noted by
some of the participants due to a lack of system knowledge of their mobile device or difficulty in
using the device software.

130

“Well I’m not very well versed in it. I don’t know how to download an app, you know.”
(P22)
SK/SE/DA
“I probably just don’t know how to use my iPad correctly!” (P50)
SE/SK
“I don’t know if it’s because we are older or what, it (mobile device) doesn’t seem to
SA, SE, SK
take what we are trying to put into it.” (P3)
Some participants had difficulty preforming the task on the mobile device due to the search
activity they were trying to perform. The inability to perform the search on the mobile device
had participants using another form of technology. Participants expressed how the mobile
devices were not easy to use for performing some IR tasks.
“There are some hoops you have to jump through to find it (archived emails) on your
TC/BA/CL/SK
phone. They don’t make it easy.” (P48)
RK/DE
“I usually use my computer to shop online, do Facebook, etc. since all options are easier
to see on the same screen. You have to hunt for sidebars to find private messages or
BA/DE/TT/SE
actually logout on a mobile device.” (P49)
“Couldn’t sign in on my device so I used a laptop instead with no problems.” (P32)
DP/SK
“There is too many steps on the phone so it’s much easier to do on the computer.” (P20)
SK/RK/SE
Other participants expressed how it was not because they could not learn the mobile device
system, but instead due to not having the time or interest to learn all the system capabilities.
“I know I don’t use the phone to the capabilities that I could, but I just haven’t taken
SK/BI
the time to learn them.” (P46)
“I know there are many things I can do with my phone, but I’m not using it for
SK, BI
everything it could be used for though.” (P16)

131

In addition, one participant commented about others’ perceptions of adults midlife and older.
“I frequently hear that younger people think older people are not tech savvy. While
SP
it’s true we did not grow up with technology, we use it as easily as anyone else if we
PP
choose to.” (P38)
However, some participants had lower self-efficacy in learning the mobile device functions
stating they needed a longer time to learn the system.
“As long as you take it slow and learn a little at a time.” (P10)
SK/SE
“It’s harder for me to learn technology as I get older.” (P50)
SK/SE
Additionally, the security about their mobile devices affected the participants’ ability to perform
certain tasks on their mobile devices. Banking was the primary concern on a mobile device as
well as search activities that involved passwords.
“My husband does all the online banking on the laptop, and frankly I don’t trust the
TT/DS
mobile device security.” (P2)
“I’m old-fashioned, I don’t do banking on my device…I feel more secure if I call and
SA/TT/DS
figure it out that way.” (P45)
“I won’t save my passwords on my phone. You can easily crack a phone than a
TT/DS
computer. It just gives me some sort of safety net.” (P7)
“I don’t do banking on my phone…I feel like my laptop is on a more secure Internet.”
(P31)
TT/DS
4.2.3.b Inability to perform the search - To satisfy information need
Participants chose certain mobile devices to use depending on the search activity due to a
physical challenge of not seeing the text on a mobile device display. 58% (N=29) of participants,
who used more than one mobile device, chose to use a larger mobile device, such as an iPad, to

132

perform search activities or a computer was chosen (entertainment activity, reading the news,
etc). Participants indicated they felt they would not be able to see as well on their cellphone
display.
“My eyes are so bad that the smaller screen is the only issue. I was shocked when they
PA/DD
came out with the iPad mini and not a bigger iPad.” (P17)
“It allows me to search the Internet a little easier and get my news on a iPad because
BA/DE/DD/TT
it’s a bigger screen making it more easier to read.” (P25)
“I would use my laptop because it is easier to see the script?” (P14)
BI, PA
Other participants stated it was a dexterity issue that affected them from performing the search
activity.
“I do not have dexterity in my hands. I have the typing aid that allows me to type. I have
PA
some reluctance to move into smaller display pieces like smartphones because of this.”
(P11)
SE/DD
4.2.3.c Inability to perform the search - Social influences
Participants indicated an inability to perform the search tasks on their mobile devices due
to a lack of system knowledge in performing certain functions on their devices. Participants
communicated how the people around them had an impact in regards to their mobile devices
since they had not learned all the necessary functions to perform certain tasks.
“I have an iPhone because my kids wanted me to have one. And there is probably 85%
SP
of the phone that I don’t know how to use.” (P42)
SE/SK
“My kids go through everything so quickly and they take it (phone) out of my hands
SP/SE
and they do it for me. Then I haven’t learned anything.” (P46)
SE/SK

133

4.2.4 Inability to solve the problem
When searching for information in an electronic environment, users sometimes have
problems in utilizing the system or finding the information. Participants experienced challenges
in solving the problem that occurred when they were searching on their mobile devices. These
issues dealt with the mobile device functions and features that would enable the participants to
navigate effectively while searching for information.
4.2.4.a Inability to solve the problem - On the mobile device
Participants experienced difficulty figuring out how to solve problems that arose when
performing a task on their mobile devices. A lack of system knowledge was found to be a factor,
which affected their comfort level in solving the problem on the mobile device.
“I can’t change the font, I can’t change the color. I don’t know why it doesn’t stay that
TC/SK
CL/SK
way in the settings.” (P27)
“The phone is harder to learn because unless it is exactly the same, all phones have
CL/SK/PE/DD
different features.” (P10)
Some participants believed it was their lack of knowledge that they could not solve the issues
with the mobile device expressing a higher anxiety over not figuring out the problem.
“This time I must have screwed it up…I have been unsuccessful in rectifying the
SE/CL/DK
problem.” (P38)
“I have problems getting some of the options to work. One example is iMessage. It
SE/SK
works for some of my contacts and not for others.” (P21)
“I don’t use some apps. I don’t know how they get there. Somebody tapped it into my
SE/DA
phone because I didn’t do it.” (P48)

134

4.2.5 Inability to find information/solution
Searching and retrieving information has been an important aspect to having a satisfying
experience with an electronic system. Participants would search for information to satisfy a need
on a particular problem or topic on their mobile devices. Participants found it challenging when
they were unable to find the information due to a lack of retrieval skills or due to the specific
mobile device.
4.2.5.a Inability to find information - To satisfy information need
Some participants experienced frustration when they could not find the information they
needed on their mobile device. Not having the correct digital literacy skills led the participants
feeling less confident in performing the search activity due to their lack of knowledge.
“It was frustrating that I didn’t know how to navigate through the pictures in an efficient
CL/SE/RK
way.” (P46)
“I could see chapter 7 showed how to bookmark, but when I hit that line (bookmark link)
and then tried the chapter link, neither took me to the correct page.” (P9)
CL/RK
Certain mobile devices hindered participants’ search activities due to the device software on the
system. The mobile device was not able to perform the particular task if the function was not on
the system.
“The mobile devices I have are not suitable for accomplishing the kind of work I do.”
(P33)
DA
However, sometimes the mobile device had the function, but the participants were unaware of
the feature and became frustrated until another individual disclosed how to perform the particular
search activity.
“I have stopped at US Cellular for advice. It takes them ½ a second to show me how to
do something (features) that I spent hours on trying to figure out.” (P37)
SE/SK/DA

135

These challenges and affecting factors illustrated that Baby Boomers had problems either
initiating the search activity, performing the search activity or finding a solution or the
information when they performed a search on a mobile device. Chapter 5 discusses the findings
in relation to the research questions.

136

Chapter 5. Discussion
The previous chapter discussed the findings from the data gathered from the participants’
diaries and interviews. This chapter contains a discussion of the results in relation to the research
questions: How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to search for information in terms of
the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the types of information searched? and
What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device in searching for
information and their affecting factors? including theoretical, practical and methodological
implications. In this exploratory dissertation study, the Baby Boomer participants were divided
into 2 groups, Younger Boomers (YB) and Older Boomers (OB) to examine comparisons and
differences between the 2 age groups, which have been discussed in relationship to the types of
mobile technology used, the environment where the mobile search occurred, the frequency,
duration and the type of search activities performed on a mobile device. There were no notable
distinctions between YB and OB discovered in the findings and therefore the Baby Boomers
were not divided into 2 separate groups when discussing the factors and challenges of utilizing a
mobile device.
5.1 Theoretical implications
The Baby Boomer participants had varied perceptions on mobile devices, which affected
their use to conduct search activities. Surprisingly, some participants did not utilize a mobile
device more than a few times or even at all during the 7-day diary period. Participants had
varying reasons for non-use of the device, such as the screen size on the mobile device was too
small or their physical dexterity impeded proper use. These reasons corresponded with earlier
studies, which concluded that users could have difficulty utilizing mobile technology and

137

therefore would choose not to utilize mobile technology to perform search activities (Chae &
Kim, 2004; Sears & Young, 2003).
Almost all of the Baby Boomer participants owned an Internet-enabled cellphone. This
was much higher than the Pew Research Center (PEW) study (Zickuhr, 2011) on American Baby
Boomers. However, the PEW study findings revealed comparisons to other aged adults and in
this exploratory dissertation study not all of the participants had a cellphone but did have another
type of mobile device to utilize for search activities. The majority of Baby Boomer participants
had a college degree, which suggested that the participants could be more affluent than other
Baby Boomers in society and therefore could have been exposed to information technologies
including mobile technology. This could explain why most of the Baby Boomer participants
owned a cellphone or another mobile device. This study also did not gather socio-economic
status information, which could be a factor in owning and using a mobile device. Further
research would be needed, examining Baby Boomers with various education levels, socioeconomic statuses and mobile device ownership and usage.
Not surprisingly, the most used mobile device was an Internet enabled cellphone, which
closely resembled the recent PEW (2014) Mobile Technology Fact Sheet study on accessing the
Internet from a cellphone device. Notably, participants complained about the size of the screen
on the cellphone being too small for certain activities. However, the cellphone was utilized more
than other mobile devices, such as a tablet that has a larger screen. This could be because of the
certain search activities reported in the diaries were not search activities that required extensive
reading or scrolling; or the participants used the cellphone more out of convenience (Hu &
Meier, 2011; Ruthven & Kelly, 2011) since it was more readily available than their other
devices.

138

Remarkably, there were a small number of OB that did not have their own separate
mobile devices, but instead shared a mobile device with a spouse. This could be because of
economic issues experienced by the participants or that other types of communication were used
instead (Kurniawan, 2008) so the participants felt there was not a need to have more than one
mobile device. Socio-economic indicators were not gathered for this study, therefore a
comparison of mobile device ownership and economic status could not be reported in the
findings. This would be an area where research would be needed to explore if a mobile device
were shared among Baby Boomers was because of economic status. In addition, participants who
shared a device expressed varying degrees of ageism with technology, (Cutler, 2005) laughing
and joking about their use and non-use of their mobile devices compared to other aged adults
with many mobile devices. Due to the small sample size of this dissertation study, further
exploration of a correlation between ageism, Baby Boomers and mobile device usage would
require a larger sample size.
Almost half of the participants expressed a reason for using a mobile device instead of
another information technology because it was more convenient to use in searching for
information. This was similar to the findings of Nylander, Lundquist & Brannstrom (2009) that
noted participants’ (ages 20-55) common reasons for using their cellphone to access the Internet
was speed and convenience. However, very few participants in this study used a mobile device to
search for information because the device was faster than other forms of information technology.
Only a handful of participants expressed the reason that they used a mobile device to search for
information because they could find the information quicker than if they used another device and
the ease of use of the mobile device. This finding was different than Martyn & Gallant’s (2012)
study of adults over 50 that indicated the ease of use of technology was one of the major themes

139

of technology usage. Xie’s (2003) study found an information retrieval (IR) system needed to be
easy to use to be an effective retrieval system. This would be an area for future research
examining mobile devices and their ease of use among Baby Boomers and other older adults.
Many of the Baby Boomer participants were comfortable using information technology
with none of the participants expressing that they were novice users in their self-assessment in
using a technological device. This was different than Karavidas et al.’s (2005) and Piper et al.’s
(2009) studies that suggested older adults underestimated their actual computer knowledge. The
self-identification of technology usage in this study covered all types of technology and not just
mobile technology. This suggested that other types of Baby Boomers, specifically novice users,
could have even greater difficulty searching for information, which could decrease their comfort
level using a mobile device. The higher comfort level reported by the participants in utilizing
information technology could also be because most of the Baby Boomers in this study have
continued to work and were exposed to information technologies. Further research would be
needed exploring Baby Boomers, specifically looking at novice users, employment status,
including retired Baby Boomers, and comfort level using a mobile device searching for
information.
Most of the participants utilized their mobile device(s) within their home environment.
This was interesting since almost all of the Baby Boomers were still working outside of the home
and most reported that they did not utilize their mobile device(s) at work. OB used their mobile
device more often at home than YB when comparing the two age groups. The types of
occupations were not noted in the study, which could be a factor in not utilizing a mobile device
in the workforce. Verkasalo (2009) found that mobile phone usage was more “on the move” than
within a home environment, which was the opposite of the results from this study. This could be

140

due to the types of search activities the participants recorded or because some of the participants
had a computer device at work and did not feel the need to use their mobile device when another
form of technology was readily available. However, most of the participants also had a computer
at home, which suggested that the mobile device has its own role for information searching
inside and outside of the home environment. Future research would be needed to examine certain
types of search activiities, environmental context, and Baby Boomer computer and mobile device
usage to determine if there would be significant differences between the 2 information
technologies, specific search activities and the environment.
Furthermore, that the majority of participants who utilized their mobile device at home
did so because of connection issues (Joseph, 2009) outside of their home environment. A stable
connection would be important for performing productive search activities. The findings
illustrated that OB performed the majority of their mobile device searching within their home
environment. This suggested that the OB could feel that a more stable connection would be
within their home environment than in other environmental contexts. Future research would need
to examine a larger number of YB and OB examining their mobile device search activities in
different environmental contexts. In addition, the findings in this study revealed participants
using a computer more than the mobile device for their search activities since they believed it
had a more stable connection. Future studies would need to explore Baby Boomers and their
search activities with mobile devices and other computer technologies to determine if there
would be significant differences on the type of technological devices used for search activities
and the age of the Baby Boomer.
It was interesting to note that a majority of participants would rather communicate face-to
face than using the mobile device to find out the information. Some of the participants expressed

141

they did not want to be connected all the time to technology. Therefore, when they were home,
they did not pick up their mobile device. These findings were in line with Lindley et al.’s (2009)
study that found keeping in touch was important using technological and non-technological
means. However, Lindley et al.’s participants’ felt that constant communication with other
individuals was not needed. The findings in this dissertation study illustrated that email was a
search activity performed by all of the participants on their mobile devices every day and
searching on a social media site was in the top 3 search activities performed by the majority of
the Baby Boomer participants. The findings also noted that OB checked email more often while
YB utilized more social media networking sites. This illustrated how communications with
others was an integral part of the Baby Boomer participants’ information seeking process (Xie,
2000; Rieh, 2007). However, for some of the participants, this search activity was not a priority.
This would be an area for future research studies that would examine a larger number of YB and
OB and their searching communication activities with or without a mobile device.
The most frequent search activities performed on the mobile device by the Baby Boomer
participants were email, social media and entertainment. This was different than the PEW
Generations Online study by Zickuhr (2010) that indicated YB and OB were more likely to
search for government and health information than other search activities. Only a small
percentage of mobile device search activities were on health related topics in this dissertation
study. These factors suggested to the researcher that the participants were relatively healthy. The
participants were able to perform the search activities on the mobile device and report the
information in the diaries. Additionally, some reported they were in different environmental
locations when performing the search activities. The findings also showed participants only some
minor physical issues.

142

The participants’ activities were similar to Hanson’s (2011) findings of academic student
activities. However, information searching activities in Hanson’s study were much higher than
the entertainment activities among the student participants compared to the Baby Boomers in this
dissertation study, which could be because of the students’ academic environment. When
examining the younger generations compared to the Baby Boomers, Zickuhr (2010) found email
as the top search activity on the Internet, which corresponded with the findings in this study.
However, for adults under 45, social networking was conducted more often than by Baby
Boomers. This was notably different than this study’s findings, which indicated social
networking as one of the top search activities. However, YB did search more on social
networking sites than OB participants suggesting a difference in social networking activities
between the Baby Boomer groups. This would be an area for future research exploring the
differences between search activities and Baby Boomers as well as younger adults to determine
if age is a factor in search activities, specifically looking at social networking sites.
Interestingly, the participants indicated they would perform more navigational, financial
and shopping activities than they actually documented performing in their mobile device diaries.
This could be because when they were outside of their home environment, the participants did
conduct more navigational search activities. However, this was still relatively small compared to
other reported diary search activities. In addition, there were many participants who did not
utilize their mobile devices for financial or shopping activities due to expressing concerns similar
to Boyles, Smith and Madden (2012) on security and privacy issues with mobile devices. The
findings in this study revealed that most of the search activities were performed within a home
environment, which suggested that the Baby Boomers felt that their mobile device was not

143

secure. This would be an area for future research exploring Baby Boomers, mobile devices and
security issues.
Additionally, only half of the participants recorded 25 or more activities in the diary, with
most of those participants being YB. This could be because some of the participants did not
utilize their devices every day and some participants indicated they just did not do a lot of search
activities on their mobile device. For instance, the participants indicated a cellphone was used
more for phone calls and text messages, which were not reported as part of this study. This was
similar to the PEW findings of Cell Internet Use (Duggan & Smith, 2013) that indicated only
half of Baby Boomers who owned cellphones accessed the Internet. Another explanation could
be that the participants could have forgotten to document the search activities since the diary was
for 7 days. According to Pew’s Generations and Their Gadgets, Zickhur (2011), OB were less
likely than YB to perform search activities, which aligned with the participant activities in this
study. However, some differences between the OB and YB search activities were found in the
data, with YB performing more activities on their mobile devices per day than OB even though
OB utilized their mobile devices more than YB. This would suggest that YB could be more
comfortable utilizing their mobile devices more than the OB, therefore they performed more
search activities. Overall, only a few of the Baby Boomer participants documented 35 activities
during the 7 day period of the diary. Most of the Baby Boomers were still in the workforce,
which could be why the participants did not perform a lot of activities on their mobile device.
Other adults midlife and older (AMO) who have retired or are not in the workforce could have
more time to perform search activities. Future studies need to examine Baby Boomers, both
within the workforce and retired, regarding search activities performed on a mobile device.

144

A little over half of the participants spent only a short amount of time performing search
activities on their mobile devices. This could be because the top 2 recorded activities were
checking email and social media sites, which would suggest that it did not take a lot of the
participants’ time. This finding was different than Connaway et al.’s (2008) study that noted
Baby Boomers used Google for quick searches more than Millennials (younger adults) and was
secondary to seeking information from another person. The quick searches by the participants
could be attributed to the fact that most of the participants searching was informational and very
little browsing was performed in this study. This has raised a question that if the search activities
on a mobile device were short in duration among the Baby Boomer participants, would search
activities also be short in duration among younger adult participants? This would suggest that
functions and software on a mobile device could be limiting the types of searching among users.
However, if younger adults were performing more browsing activities, might it be because they
have more knowedge, skills and exposure to information technologies than Baby Boomers? This
could suggest more of a digital divide among mobile device users. This is an area for future
research comparing Baby Boomers and young adults specifically looking at informational and
browsing searching activities.
Along with the data findings described above, a qualitative methodology was used in
interpreting the data through finding patterns and rich descriptions between the data gathered.
During the grounded theory process, after the initial open coding of the qualitative data; the axial
coding created categories and factors by different attributes, with examples. Interpretation of the
meaning of these factors and categories occurred during the selective coding process. Figure 5.1
illustrated the types of challenges and affecting factors found within the gathered data that led to

145

these situations for Baby Boomers. The results of this dissertation have theoretical, practical and
methodological implications.

Figure 5.1 Baby Boomer Model of Challenges & Affecting Factors
5.1.1 The Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model
Based on the results, the Baby Boomer Model of Challenges and Affecting Factors was
developed to illustrate the types of challenges and the factors involved in utilizing a mobile
device when accessing and retrieving information on the Internet. In this exploratory dissertation
146

study, Baby Boomers’ multiple types of search activities, challenges and interrelated factors
affected their use of mobile technology. In the IR process, Baby Boomers needed to initiate the
search activity, establish a connection, perform the search activity, solve the problem and find a
solution/information. The findings illustrated that multiple types of factors influenced the use of
a mobile device. More importantly, the perceptions of the Baby Boomers played a significant
role in the IR process.
The model would begin with the Predisposing Factors, factors that affected the
participant’s tendency to perform a search activity. The Predisposing Factors would be the
perceptions of Baby Boomer participants, which affected their use of a mobile device. This
included the perception need (behavioral intention, motivation), the personal perception of
themselves (confidence, physical ability, comfort level, knowledge & experience), the perception
of the mobile device to be used (design, availability, performance, ease of use, security), the
perception of the search task (complexity, type, difficulty) that needed to be accomplished and
the perception of the context (socio-economic, cultural, location, connection). These interrelated
Predisposing Factors determined if the search activity was initiated. After the activity was
initiated, the Intermediary Factors and Transactional Factors affected how the participants
performed the search activity on the mobile device, solved any problems with the search or with
the mobile device and if a solution to the problem and/or the information was found. The
Intermediary Factors would be the factors that affected the participant’s interaction with the
mobile device. The Transactional Factors would be the factors that affected the interaction with
the mobile device and the ability of the participants to solve a problem or find information or a
solution. Table 5.1 has the types of Predisposing, Intermediary and Transactional Factors and

147

Figure 5.2 has an illustration of the types of challenges and the 3 categories (Predisposing,
Intermediary and Transactional) derived from the affecting factors.
Table 5.1
Predisposing, Intermediary and Transactional Factors
Predisposing
Intermediary
TC, TT, TR, DK, SK, RK, ES, TC, TT, SK, RK, PA, SE, CL,
PA, SE, CL, BI, BA, DD, DC, BI, BA, DD, DP, DA, DE,
DP, DA, DE, DS, SA, PP, PC DS, SA, SP, PP, PC

Transactional
TC, TT, DK, SK, RK, PA, PE,
SE, CL, BI, BA, DD, DP, DA,
DE, DS, SA, SP, PP

Figure 5.2 Categorical Factors and Types of Challenges
The user would be the central component in the IR process, with the challenges and
factors affecting the interaction with the mobile device, the search activities, and the search task
within the socio-economic and cultural context. Figure 5.3 has a depiction of the Baby Boomer
Mobile Device Information Searching Model.

148

Figure 5.3 The Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model
The Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model has arrows that represent
the challenges that could occur during the interactive IR process. This would not be a straight
path but curved like a bend in the road, similar to Bates (1989) Berry-picking approach when
information searching. The challenges Baby Boomers face could cause a bend in the road or a
change in the process as the user moves through the process of searching for information. At the
beginning of the model, the user’s perceptions would play a key role with the Predisposing
Factors determining whether or not to initiate the search activity. The Baby Boomers’
perceptions all interacted together leading to the IR decision process to initiate the search
activity. For instance, if the Baby Boomer decided to use a mobile internet-enabled cellphone to

149

search for and read an e-book, the Baby Boomer’s behavioral intent could change to deciding not
to utilize the cellphone to search for an e-book to read because the print of the e-book could be
too difficult to read on the small screen of the mobile device. On the other hand, if the Baby
Boomer was not familiar with the process of downloading an e-book onto the cellphone, this
could cause anxiety using the mobile device to search for the e-book and the Baby Boomer
would question whether to use the mobile device for the e-book search activity. These instances
could cause a bend in the road or a change in the IR process. The arrows leading from the
Predisposing Factors revealed in the model travel in one direction towards the Intermediary
Factors indicating the search activity has been initiated on the mobile device. The arrows in the
Intermediary and Transactional Factors represented in the main body of the model illustrate that
the user-system interaction moves between the factors. Each area could affect the other
depending on the user’s personal knowledge and experience, physical ability, behavior, and
comfort level/confidence in utilizing a mobile device, the type of search activity chosen, the type
of mobile device, the search task, and the type of environment in which the search activity would
take place. These would be situated with the socio-economic and cultural context. An example of
how the information searching process could change would be if a Baby Boomer was utilizing an
iPad to search for information about the local news and the connection was not sufficient. The
Baby Boomer could decide to use another device (mobile or non-mobile), or keep using the
mobile device and become frustrated about the connection. The factors discovered in the data
from this exploratory dissertation study were interconnected and varied, depending on the Baby
Boomer participant and the different type of challenge.
The participants’ personal information infrastructures, such as the domain, system and
retrieval knowledge (Marchionini, 1995; Xie, 2012), as well as their past experiences with other

150

IR systems, particularly with mobile devices, played a significant role in the types of challenges
that occurred in the IR process. This is similar to past IR and information seeking models, which
indicated that cognitive behaviors of the users affected the IR process. The findings in this study
identified most of the Baby Boomer participants as college graduates, which could suggest a
digital divide among mobile device users depending on educational level attained. A lack of
digital literacy skills could affect mobile device information searching skill level. This would call
for more research, exploring different mobile devices and Baby Boomers with a variety of
education levels. This could determine whether there are significant differences between YB and
OB regarding education levels and mobile device(s).
Additionally, these infrastructures also affected the participants’ perceptions utilizing the
mobile device. Participants’ perceptions of the device used was affected by the perception of the
information need, perception of the search task that needed to be performed, the participant’s
comfort level and confidence in using the mobile device, and the user’s physical abilities in
accomplishing the search activity. In addition, participants’ context that included the perception
of the locations where the search activity would take place and the perception of themselves in
relation to the social/cultural context in using the mobile device all interacted together to
determine whether the search activity would be initiated on the mobile device. Past IR models
(Vakkari, 2001; Wang et al., 2000; Wilson, 1996) and past information seeking models (Bystrom
& Jarvelin, 1995; Krikelas, 1983; Savolainen, 2002) examined the user’s perception of need and
task. Past studies by Seeholzer & Salem (2011) examined student perceptions of the mobile
Internet, Kim & Sin (2007) examined student perception of information sources, and Chae &
Kim (2004) examined the young adult’s perception of the mobile device. This study extended
these past models and studies since the findings suggested the Baby Boomer’s perceptions of

151

need, task, mobile device, context and personal perceptions all were factors in the start of the IR
process. This also corresponded with Xie’s (2008) discussion of Ingwersen’s (2007) modified
version of the IS&R model (Ingwersen & Jarvelin, 2005), which identified the user’s perception
of the work tasks and interest, cognitive and emotional state of the user, the problem
situation/goal, the search task/information need, information behavior and the user’s assessment
and use of the information objects. All of these perceptions would be affected by the user’s
social, cultural organizational context and the system. However, the IS&R framework has not
been tested in a large-scale study. Baby Boomer’s perceptions and the relationship between
search tasks, information need, mobile device and the context is an important area for future
research studies, especially with mobile and non-mobile device using Baby Boomers.
Mobile devices that had unknown functions, design issues such as inadequate size or
lighting, poor performance and usability difficulties as well as unknown device securities caused
a number of challenges during search activities. Past research studies examined the interactions
with the user and the computer interface (Fidel & Pejtersen, 2004; Ingwersen and Jarvelin, 2005;
Saracevic, 1997). However, this dissertation study suggested differences with the search
interaction between the Baby Boomer and the mobile device, such as security issues and size of
the mobile device affecting the search interaction. In addition, the lack of knowledge regarding
the different mobile device functionalities could be a factor that would need to be explored
further in future studies since the majority of Baby Boomer participants had college degrees and
could have been exposed to different types of information technologies that include mobile
devices.
Furthermore, since socio-economic status was not gathered in this study, there is no way
to determine if the Baby Boomer participants were affluent members of society with more access

152

to mobile technologies than other individuals. This is one possible explanation for participants’
comfort in using certain functionalities on their mobile devices for information searching.
However, it raised questions, if other individuals who have not had as much exposure to
information technologies, specifically mobile devices, were to attempt these tasks or searches,
would the comfort level be different between Baby Boomers of differing socio-economic status’
and would there be differences between the types of searches and functions performed? Future
research is needed examining specific mobile devices and their functions, Baby Boomer’s
perceptions, knowledge structures and digital literacy skills, socio-economic levels, and types of
information searching activities.
Physical ability was a factor for some participants’ utilizing a mobile device. This study
extended previous studies by Wang et al. (2000) and Smith et al. (1999), which examined
human-computer interaction between students and between older adults. Baby Boomer
participants in this study had difficulty with the smaller mobile devices and experienced vision
issues because of screen size or lack of physical dexterity due to the smaller features on the
mobile device, which caused different types of challenges. These issues caused the participants
to either use another device or experience frustration using the mobile device. The relationship
between physical ability and specific mobile devices utilized by Baby Boomers is an area for
future research.
This study extended previous research on uncertainty behavior (Belkin, 1980; Dervin,
1983; Ingwersen & Jarvelin, 2005; Krikelas, 1983; Kuhlthau, 1991; Vakkari, 2001) in
information seeking, especially in the perception of the information need when utilizing a mobile
device. This study found many Baby Boomers were uncertain when utilizing their mobile device
while performing certain search activities. This affected their comfort level throughout the IR

153

process. Most of the search activities performed by the Baby Boomers were short in duration.
The comfort level of the participants or their feelings of uncertainty could have been the reason
they did not spend longer periods of time using their mobile devices for search activities.
In addition, physical and cognitive abilities affected some participants’ comfort level
utilizing a mobile device, which caused uncertainty behavior before or during the mobile device
search interaction. These findings would suggest, given that the majority of participants were
college graduates, the Baby Boomer participants were still uncertain about using a mobile device
for some search activities. However, would Baby Boomers with other education levels feel more
uncertain? Would this cause the Baby Boomers to not even use a mobile device for search
activity because of uncertainty? Feelings of comfort in using a technological device could
increase as digital literacy skills and knowledge increase, which could affect the time spent
performing search activities. This is an area that merits further examination, looking at Baby
Boomers’ education level, digital literacy skills, feelings of uncertainty and time spent
performing search tasks with a mobile device.
Additionally, the findings in this exploratory dissertation study did not find a notable
difference between YB and OB search activities or uncertainty behavior, even though YB
performed more search activities than OB. This suggests that OB could have more uncertainty
behaviors since they did not perform as many search activities on their mobile devices. Pew’s
study on Baby Boomers and Technology, Rainie (2012a), noted a digital divide between OB and
YB in regard to search activities. This would raise the question as to whether there would be an
actual digital divide or distinction between YB and OB. Future research is needed with a larger
group of Baby Boomers to determine if a digital divide exists between YB and OB regarding

154

information searching and feelings of uncertainty when performing search activities on a mobile
device.
Changes in cognition and a lack of digital literacy skills could also cause anxiety and a
reduction in confidence or lower self-efficacy (Bandura, 1977, 1986; Czaja et al, 2006; EshetAlkalai and Amichai-Hamburger, 2004; Johnson, 1997; Savolainen, 2002; Wilson, 1996). The
findings in this study were comparable to previous study findings in that users had varying levels
of self-efficacy in regards to information technology. As noted previously, none of the
participants self-identified as novice users. However, the participants’ motivations to learn about
and use of a mobile device for different activities was comparably different. Participants
described themselves as confident utilizing their mobile devices when conducting certain search
activities and said that they only learned what they felt they needed to know in order to use their
mobile devices. Motivation to learn other functions was not a high priority. This lack of
motivation to learn could have been due to the lack of digital literacy skills specific to a mobile
device. Because socio-economic information was not gathered in this study, it is possible that
digital literacy skills and self-efficacy levels among the Baby Boomers in this particular study
are not representative of Baby Boomers as a whole, but instead represent a subset of this large
group, due to the study participants’ greater exposure to technology. This confidence was clearly
shown in the participants’ self-assessment of information technology usage in the questionnaire,
describing themselves as intermediate and expert users of information technology. Future
research is needed examining Baby Boomers from diverse socio-economic backgrounds and
different information technology levels, including novice users looking at user motivation to
perform certain search activities on specific mobile devices and self-efficacy levels to determine
whether there is a relationship between income levels and digital competence.

155

Dimensions of search tasks or activities examined in this study were similar to Xie and
Cool (2009) that identified differences about ways in which task complexity, task requirements
and task type affected the IR process. This study extended previous research on tasks that were
conducted on non-Baby Boomer populations (Bystrom & Jarvelin, 1995; Fidel & Pejtersen,
2004; Pharo, 2004; Xie, 2008). This study also examined Baby Boomers performing a variety of
search activities and how the user’s thoughts and feelings affected the IR process. For instance,
when confronted with a complex search activity on their mobile device, participants’ digital
literacy skills, knowledge, comfort, anxiety levels and behavior were factors affecting the
different types of challenges. This study did not examine specific types of search tasks when
using a mobile device. However, most participants indicated their searches were for specific
information and that they engaged in very little browsing on their mobile devices. This finding is
similar to that of Wobbrock (2006), whose research described how browsing on a mobile device
was difficult due to the smaller screens and the buttons, which made navigating more difficult on
a mobile device. This could account for the reason participants did not engage in many browsing
activities. The area between browsing and specific search activities using a variety of mobile
devices by Baby Boomers is another area for future research.
Social, cultural and organizational contexts (Dervin, 1983; Ingwersen & Jarvelin, 2005;
Pharo & Jarvelin, 2004; Saracevic, 1997; Spink & Jansen, 2004; Wang et al., 2000; Xie, 2008)
were important interactive factors in this exploratory dissertation study of the IR process.
However, this study extended these previous studies by examining Baby Boomers and the digital
environment of a mobile device. Environmental location and having a sufficient Internet
connection for the mobile device caused some challenges for the participants. This had not been
considered in previous IR studies. Lack of a connection or stable connection could cause issues

156

for Baby Boomers whose economic status prevents them from obtaining a reliable Broadband
connection at home. This was not examined in this study. Most search activities were performed
within a participant’s home environment, which would suggest that Broadband affordability was
not a factor for participants in this study. However, if Baby Boomer participants could not afford
a Broadband connection within their home environment, a stable connection at different
locations would be a high priority. Previous research has shown that users rely on the library in
their communities to provide a stable Broadband connection for access and searching needs
(Saunders et al., 2012). This would raise further questions on whether Baby Boomers were using
libraries for Broadband connections and if the diverse characteristics of Baby Boomers would be
a factor in their usage of these services. Baby Boomers with diverse socio-economic levels,
specific locations, Internet connectivity and mobile device use and non-use are also areas for
future research.
The social context, similar to Chatman (1999), Fisher et al. (2005), Johnson (1997),
Savolainen, (1995), Taylor, (1967) and Wilson’s (1996) research, as well as the above scholarly
work on context, was noted as a factor in this study. However, this study extended these previous
works by examining Baby Boomers IR searching and seeking behaviors as well as a
technological mobile digital device within the social context. The findings in this study noted
that the participants’ perception of other individuals when they used a mobile device and/or their
own personal perception of themselves was a significant factor in the different types of
challenges, especially in regard to social ageism (Cutler, 2005). Stereotyping of self has been
examined in the sociology, psychology, gerontological and other various fields. Very little
research has been conducted on ageism in the Library & Information Science (LIS) field,
especially research examining ageism and mobile devices. The findings of this exploratory

157

dissertation study suggest that some Baby Boomers have varying perspectives regarding ageism.
This was found among YB and OB in regard to themselves and mobile technology. The
relationship between ageism, mobile device usage, and Baby Boomers merits future exploration
and research.
The economics owning a mobile device was a factor expressed by study participants.
Some participants had not purchased mobile devices. They were gifts from other family
members. This unexpected factor was found, but not further investigated within this study to
determine if the participants only had the mobile device because others wanted them to have it
and not because they needed or wanted the device for themselves. Interestingly, the demographic
data would suggest that the participants could be a part of a more affluent society since the
majority were college graduates. However, some of the participants did not purchase the mobile
device themselves. The findings illustrated that about ¼ of the participants only owned one
mobile device, with cost of the device stated as a key factor. This could raise the question as to
whether non-mobile device users of lower socio-economic status were at a greater disadvantage.
Does this create or widen an already existing digital divide among Baby Boomers with different
socio-economic situations? The relationships between socio-economic factors and mobile device
use and non-use among Baby Boomers would be an area for future research.
As previously stated, participants used their mobile devices the most within their home
environments, which was surprising considering that a mobile device could be used anywhere.
Additionally, most of the participants were still in the workforce and employed outside of the
home. With the small number of participants in this study, it was interesting to note that only a
small number of Baby Boomers were retired. Typically, retired Baby Boomers would be still
active in today’s society, which could affect the context of where search activities would take

158

place and whether they would be in other places besides a home environment. This is an area for
future research looking at mobile device usage and the relationship between age, search
activities, employment status and the environmental context. Additionally, studies are needed to
examine mobile device usage and specific search activities performed by Baby Boomers within a
work environment.
In this exploratory dissertation study, participants were divided into 2 groups, YB and
OB. When comparing the two groups throughout the data analysis process, no notable
distinctions were found between the two groups. Therefore, at this point, the Baby Boomer
Mobile Device Information Searching Model can be applied to all Baby Boomer participants.
Future research examining a larger group of Baby Boomers to determine whether the Baby
Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model would fit all types of Baby Boomers and
whether there would be significant differences between the factors affecting YB and OB would
be needed.
5.2 Practical implications
The following section has been divided into design implications and library service
implications for system, designers, LIS professionals and organizations, and for others outside of
the LIS field. As previously stated, the data did not identify a distinction between YB and OB,
therefore the practical implications have been suggested for all Baby Boomers.
5.2.1 Design implications
The findings of this study have offered suggested insights for interface design
improvements of mobile devices. Types of challenges, affecting factors and design implications
have been illustrated in Table 5.2. Affecting factors representing those factors that occurred most
frequently among the Baby Boomer participants during a particular type of challenge are noted.

159

Table 5.2
Summary of Types of Challenges, Affecting Factors and Design Implications
Types of
Challenges
Inability to Initiate
Search Activity

Inability to Establish
Connection

Inability to Perform
the Search

Affecting Factors

Design Implications

*CL, SE, DK, *SK,
RK, PE, DD, DA,
DS, DC, DP, DE,
BI, BA, *PA, SA,
TT, TR, TC, PP,
PC, ES

•
•
•

CL, DP, PC

•

CL,*SE,*SK, RK,
DD, DA, DS, DP,
DE, BI, BA,*PA,
SA, TT, TC, PP,
SP

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•

•
•
•
Inability to Solve the
Problem

Inability to Find
Information/Solution

*CL,*SK, PE,*SE,
DD, DK, DA, TC

*CL,*SE, SK,*RK,
DA

•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Expand the help section
Options for increased font sizes on interfaces pages
Ensure text is not frozen and can be adjusted by the
user
Eye-catching icons
Avoid low contrast backgrounds
Create brighter screens
Have visual, auditory or text choices
Develop low cost device with limited functions and
Applications
Create short videos for faster downloads and easier
access
Expand 3G services
Offer continuous service coverage
Enhance mobile traffic capacities
Create an intuitive interface design
Double-space all body text
Avoid unnecessary animation
Use icons consistently
Provide more natural language features
Provide easy to follow directions
Limit items on the interface screen, background
music, pop-ups & moving logos
Minimize scrolling in programs
Create a virtual keyboard on a flat surface for
easier typing
Project a virtual large screen image on the wall for
better visual display
Provide visual, animated as well as text tutorials
Build in instructional procedures
Create better organization and flow of information
on interface page
Provide information on external help
Provide examples for dealing with unsatisfying
interactions
Provide more interactive feedback
Provide tips on interface page
Provide feedback right away
Provide short video segments

Each type of challenge had numerous factors that affected that particular situation.
However, a participant’s cognitive behavior, such as system knowledge, retrieval knowledge and

160

domain knowledge played key roles in successfully starting and performing a search on a mobile
device. Along with the participant’s knowledge, physical ability and a participant’s thoughts and
feelings about his or her digital literacy skills was also significant. As previously mentioned,
these key factors have been noted within Table 5.2 and are discussed in more detail below.
A main reason for challenges with a mobile device was the Baby Boomer’s lack of
knowledge especially system and retrieval knowledge. Providing help topics that would be
available in different types of formats would enable Baby Boomers with different physical issues
or learning capabilities to utilize the mobile device effectively. Expanding the help section to
include animated videos that depict solutions to common errors could alleviate anxiety about
using the mobile device. Instructions about performing various functions on the device or
providing tips on the interface page could be built in for better ease of use. Having a more
interactive experience with the mobile device would create more satisfaction with the system
(Xie, 2008) and less anxiety performing different search activities on the mobile device. Building
in instructional procedures to help solve problems could help adults who have cognitive issues as
a natural process of aging (Fiske, 2009). This could help alleviate anxiety and increase
confidence about using mobile devices. Providing easy to follow directions of what to do for
certain search tasks could help alleviate cognitive load for the user, especially as applied to
learning new types of systems (O’Brien & Rogers, 2013) and increase the user’s domain and
system knowledge. Some Baby Boomers in this study only learned what was needed on their
mobile device and didn’t know all the capabilities or functions of the mobile device. Others
would wait until the mobile device stopped working before owning or utilizing another mobile
device. A typical reason stated by participants was that they did not want to have to learn another
new system. Providing substantial help features that give feedback right away would enable

161

Baby Boomers and other older adults to experience less anxiety about learning a new system
when a sufficient help system was built into the device. Decreasing anxiety would increase the
user’s comfort level in using a mobile device for different types of search activities.
Besides a participant’s knowledge, thoughts and feelings affecting mobile device
searching, a Baby Boomer’s physical ability to perform various functions on a mobile device
was important in the IR process. This warranted discussion because of the prevalence of this
factor among the Baby Boomer participants. Vision and dexterity of some participants caused
different types of challenges when searching on a mobile device. Developing options to increase
font sizes or ensure that the font could be adjusted and not frozen on the interface would help
Baby Boomers with vision issues. Providing spacing between text on the interface page or using
eye-catching icons would lessen cognitive load of the user when performing a search. However,
information could be limited on smaller mobile devices so the user would not be over stimulated.
It would also minimize scrolling (Charness & Boot, 2009).
Furthermore, participants typically stated they used a computer instead of a mobile
device more often when browsing for information or whether more steps were involved in
performing a search activity on a mobile device. This would suggest that the participants had
difficulty seeing the information on the screen, or that the size of the functions on the mobile
device made it difficult to accomplish all the steps needed to find the information. Minimizing
these issues on the mobile device or creating a virtual image or keyboard on a flat surface would
encourage Baby Boomers to utilize a mobile device more often for all their search activities.
One important finding that has not been addressed in previous studies was connection
issues participants had when utilizing mobile devices. Having a stable, low-cost Internet
connection was a significant factor for mobile device usage, especially in accomplishing

162

different search activities. Most participants used mobile devices in short increments, which
could be due to the possibility of losing the connection during an activity. Creating short videos
for faster downloading and quicker access to helpful information would be beneficial to Baby
Boomers encountering different types of challenges. In this exploratory dissertation study,
participants used mobile devices only for certain search activities. Developing a cost-effective
mobile device with limited functions, which AMO typically use to perform search activities on
their mobile devices (Kurniawan, 2008), would be an alternative for the economically minded
Baby Boomer and shorten the learning time for new functions on a typical newer device.
To further aid in mobile device design, Baby Boomers could be consulted about the
different types of challenges and factors that affect mobile device usage in searching for
information. By soliciting input from this age group, designers could develop functions and
capabilities for an aging population that would aid the search interaction between the AMO and
the mobile device.
5.2.2 Library service implications
These exploratory dissertation study findings also have practical library service
implications for the LIS field. It would be important to obtain feedback from Baby Boomers in
the library community to ensure that library services and programs would be effective and useful
for this age group. This could be accomplished by having Baby Boomers on committees that
discuss library programming and services offered, or by conducting studies (such as surveys)
asking for input and feedback. It would also be important to consider these needs in the library
budget. Dedicating and allocating money for services to Baby Boomers and other older adults
would help to fulfill the needs of aging library community members. According to Marshall and
Marshall (2010), the library community would need to examine not just the number of Baby

163

Boomers in the library community, but also socio-economic status, education and workforce
participation. Research has shown that most individuals over age 50 have been active and in the
workforce. This was also reflected in the findings of this dissertation study. Creating policies and
practices to serve this diverse, growing community would be needed for libraries and other
cultural institutions.
This exploratory dissertation study found Baby Boomers encountering different types of
challenges with mobile devices. Providing instructional classes on different types of mobile
devices would increase comfort and lessen anxiety in using a mobile device. Consider providing
a mobile technology zoo of different mobile devices to help encourage more use and comfort in
searching for information with the different mobile devices. Some Baby Boomers have not been
able to afford certain mobile technologies. Having different mobile devices available would give
community members the opportunity to utilize a mobile device to keep current on updated
technology advances as well as providing the opportunity to use a mobile device to search for
information before purchasing a new device. Additionally, economic factors in using a mobile
device could be a factor with disadvantaged Baby Boomers who do not have handy access to a
Broadband connection to perform search activities. Access to a stable Broadband connection at a
public library could be important to perform certain search activities without disruptions of
service (Jaeger et al., 2007; Kinney, 2010; Wang et al., 2009).
Lack of domain and system knowledge was a key factor in the different types of
challenges participants encountered in this study. Providing a place where Baby Boomers and
other older adults feel comfortable in a learning environment would be a good start to increasing
digital literacy skills. Programs and instructions about mobile devices given by peers would
allow for social support and more comfort in learning (Ng, 2007). However, as noted, Baby

164

Boomers comprise a diverse set of users, therefore, providing alternative methods of support
such as one-on-one instruction, tutorials, printed instructions or intergenerational programs could
allow for accommodation of different types of users since some AMO do not want to be
categorized into a certain age group. Moreover, consider providing programs that offer the
opportunity to search for different types of information (such as e-books) on a mobile device that
could assist Baby Boomers and other adults feel more comfortable and confident about using
mobile devices. Surprisingly, most of the Baby Boomer participants in this study were unaware
of public library e-book offerings and other digital materials, and few had accessed their public
library website from a mobile device. Consider marketing in a variety of venues, such as social
networking sites and electronic newsletters focusing on Baby Boomers and other older adults to
promote public services and programs that encourage the use of mobile technology. These
programs could assist Baby Boomers as well as other adults in the community to consider the
benefits of mobile technology in their daily lives.
Participants in this study indicated that they still wanted and were capable of learning
about mobile devices. However, some of participants experienced frustration when they were
unable to find a solution to a problem. Consider creating programs that would emphasize
learning by doing an activity. Programs that provided a working example (Atkinson, Derry,
Renkl, & Worthham, 2000), that stated a problem, give step-by-step instructions on how to solve
the problem and arrive at the resulting solution would help to reduce both the cognitive load of
the user and anxiety about using a mobile device. Another possible alternative would be to set up
community partnerships between the library and other organizations, such as conducting free
workshops at the library on specific mobile devices to assist Baby Boomers in the utilization of
various functions to perform search activities. The significance of the library’s role within the

165

community could increase as the library offers programs and services that promote lifelong
learning and interactive participation from their library community.
Social ageism played a key role among the participants in this exploratory dissertation
study. Providing intergenerational opportunities and interactions with the younger generation
could be beneficial for both age groups to help diminish stereotypes. In addition, providing
programming that creates a new perspective and broadens understanding on aging in society,
such as art exhibits and community forums, could provide different opportunities for reflection
and dialogue offering a new set of images and ideals that would be different than some of the
stereotypical depictions of AMO.
5.3 Methodological implications
This exploratory dissertation study used a qualitative grounded theory approach in
addressing the research questions about Baby Boomers, which led to the development of the
Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model. User studies on Baby Boomers, as
well as studies pertaining to mobile technology, have remained limited in the LIS field. This
study offered a model for future LIS user research as well as user research in other fields of study
examining Baby Boomers and mobile devices. This innovative model has illustrated the
importance of the user perceptions before an Internet search activity would be initiated as well as
the incorporation of the user’s behaviors, thoughts, skills, feelings and physical ability with the
search activities, the search task, and the context affecting the interaction with the mobile device.
The design used in this study relied on purposive snowball sampling for recruitment of
participants. Utilizing social media online was an updated version using technology for
increasing the geographic variety of Baby Boomer participants. This allowed for faster exposure
to a larger demographic audience than just using printed materials, thereby increasing the sample

166

size within a short amount of time. This design offered an innovative approach for recruitment of
diverse participants who have been difficult to recruit in previous user studies (Dickenson et al.,
2007).
This exploratory dissertation study’s design also offered the participants a choice
between print or an electronic format for the questionnaire and diary chronicles increasing
comfort level in participating in the study. Creating a choice for AMO participants decreased
anxiety about participating in a study; thus increasing study participation. The design of offering
a choice for participants would be a method for future Baby Boomer and older adult user
research.
5.4 Limitations
This study used purposive sampling and yielded a small number of participants, which
limited the generalizability of the results to other Baby Boomers. Utilizing a purposive sampling
method could increase research bias and could limit the external validity to other Baby Boomers.
In addition, with the specific age range of Baby Boomers, this limited the generalizations to
other adults older than 69 years of age as well as to individuals younger than 50.
This study used snowball sampling for recruitment of participants. Recruiting adults over
age 50 has been challenging, a factor noted in past research studies. Limiting the recruitment
process in this dissertation study by not advertising to find individuals who might not be known
by the researcher or the researcher’s friends and associates limited the generalizability of the data
set. In addition, using a snowball approach could have limited the representation of individuals
participating in this study, such as an equal number of gender participants. Gender differences
could be a factor in mobile device usage and this study had an unequal male to female ratio
limiting the generalization of the data.

167

Participants in this study were living in 12 different states, however most of the
participants were predominantly from the Midwest or the East Coast of the United States (US).
Different areas of the US could affect Baby Boomers mobile device usage. This could limit the
generalization of the data to other Baby Boomers living in other regions of the US.
Furthermore, the diary was only kept for one week (7 days), thus limiting the amount of
data reported. Additionally, having participants record their search activities limited the amount
of information that the user remembered conducting during the search process or actually
recorded in the diary. This also could have created the possibility the participants did not write
down as much detail about the searches. Previous research has noted that diary studies
sometimes would be disadvantaged because participants would miss recording entries (Sohn et
al., 2008). However, the researcher felt it was an effective method to retrieve data in a real life
situation over an extended period of time to examine real life users with real life problems/needs
within real life settings.
The dissertation study questionnaire used a participant’s self-assessment of information
technology knowledge into one of three groups: expert, intermediate and novice users. Due to the
self-assessment, the study findings were limited to intermediate and expert users with
information technology. With the majority of participants still in the workforce, there could be
the possibility that most of the Baby Boomer participants have been exposed to information
technology, thereby increasing digital literacy skills and comfort in working with technological
devices, which would limit generalizing the findings to all Baby Boomers.
Similarly, the questionnaire did not ask for socio-economic status from the participants to
instill trust in the researcher and limit bias. More than ¾ of the participants had attained college
degrees, which could have led to the possibility of participants being exposed to more

168

information technologies and having higher levels of digital literacies. This would limit the
findings, and follow-up studies would be needed that include more users with varying levels of
education along with varying levels of economic status to increase the generalizability of the
results.
This dissertation study focused on different types of mobile devices and didn’t limit what
mobile device was used when documenting search activities in the diary. The choice to not limit
the mobile device was needed to increase Baby Boomer participant recruitment that used a
mobile device and not limit diary entries for a specific device and a specific search activity.
Since the study had a small number of participants and diary question entries were limited to five
activities a day, comparisons of specific mobile devices and certain search activities were
difficult to attain. Additionally, due to the large number of different mobile devices and due to
the small number of different devices used, comparisons were not generated between devices and
the various factors. General themes emerged from this study and could be considered broadly
informative providing a roadmap for future research. Additional future studies specifically
examining certain mobile devices and specified tasks would be needed to generate quantifiable
comparisons to generalize the findings to Baby Boomer search activities and specific mobile
devices.

169

Chapter 6. Conclusions
The previous chapter gave a detailed discussion of the findings from this dissertation
study and the theoretical, practical and methodological implications. Suggested design
implications and library services were also discussed to help better serve the Baby Boomer
community. This chapter summarizes key findings from the exploratory dissertation study with
suggestions to system designers, researchers and information professionals within the Library
and Information Science (LIS) field and others outside of the LIS field, and those interested in
Baby Boomer research. Future research and directions are also discussed.
6.1 Key findings
This dissertation study was motivated by the need to further research on the Baby
Boomer generation in the LIS field. Baby Boomers are a large population, with varied
characteristics on use of information technology. With mobile technological devices increasing,
this exploratory dissertation study provided important findings and suggestions on Baby
Boomers and the usage of mobile devices during the information retrieval (IR) process by
answering the following research questions: How are Baby Boomers utilizing a mobile device to
search for information in terms of the mobile device types, the environmental contexts and the
types of information searched? and What are the challenges concerning Baby Boomers utilizing
a mobile device in searching for information and their affecting factors?
One of the key findings from this exploratory dissertation study and the important aspect
that determined whether the Baby Boomer participants initiated a search activity on a mobile
device was the perceptions the user. These included the perceptions of the task, the mobile
device, the information need, the environmental, social and cultural context as well as the
personal perceptions of knowledge and digital literacy skills, comfort level, self-efficacy,

170

behavioral intent and physical ability to utilize the mobile device. These interrelated factors
affected the Baby Boomers tendency to perform a search on a mobile device. A suggested Baby
Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model was developed from the findings that
incorporated these Predisposing Factors of the user’s perceptions. Once the search activity on the
moble device was initiated, Intermediary and Transactional Factors affected the Baby Boomers
interacion with the search activities, the search task, the mobile device and their ability to solve
any problems they encoutered or find the information that prompted the search activity. This
Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model has suggested that Baby Boomers
have multiple factors that affected the use of mobile devices and their interactions with the
mobile system. This would include the different challenges that could occur during the usersystem interaction with a mobile device, which were unique to this age group.
The participant Baby Boomers in this study utilized an Internet enabled cellphone more
than other mobile devices when conducting search activities. However, the mobile device usage
by a majority of the participants was small and in some cases intermittent. This occurred when
other non-mobile devices were more conveniently located to perform the search activity or they
had already been on a computer device most of the day and wanted a break from information
technology.
The most important search activities performed by the Baby Boomer participants were
communication activities suggesting the use of mobile devices would be used primarily to
further communicate with others more than other search activities. However, some of the
participants would rather communicate face-to-face with other individuals and would choose not
to use a mobile device. This could also explain why a majority of activities were short in
duration.

171

YB perferred social networking more than OB who preferred e-mail when
communicating with other individuals on the mobile devices. Overall, search activities were low
that were performed on a mobile device, which suggested that it could be due to the participant’s
lack of knowledge and digital literacy skills of the different mobile device functionalities since
some of the participants indicated they only understood and used certain functions on their
mobile devices to perform the search activities.
Convenience or availability of the mobile device was a key factor for use in performing a
search activity. If the mobile device was the closest device to the participant, then the device
would be used at the time of the information need. Surprisingly, most search activities on the
mobile devices occurred within the home environment. With the majority of the Baby Boomer
participants still actively in the workforce, this suggested that other technological devices were
being used within a work environment. On the other hand, the search activities Baby Boomers
documented in the diaries could have been only the activities performed on their personal mobile
devices and work related mobile devices were not utilized or documented for this study.
The majority of the interactions on the mobile devices were short in duration suggesting
that the search activities were more informational searches and browsing search activities would
have been conducted on other non-mobile devices. All of the participants documented search
activities for the majority of the seven days and all provided a minimum number of search
activities needed for this research study. However, only a small number of participants recorded
all the search activities for the duration of the diary. This suggested that the Baby Boomer
participants only interacted with a mobile device to perform certain search activities or the
participants could have stopped or forgot to document other activities during the 7-day period.

172

Since the majority of the participants were in the workforce, this could have affected the
availability of their time to document search activities within the diaries.
In addition, this exploratory dissertation study identified different types of challenges and
affecting factors that occurred when the Baby Boomer participants interacted with a mobile
device when performing search activities. The participants’ lack of knowledge infrastructures
played a key role in most of the different types of challenges. These structures would be domain
knowledge of the search task, system knowledge of the device functions and retrieval knowledge
of how to search for and find information on the mobile device. More importantly, besides the
lack of knowledge and digital literacy skills, the Baby Boomer participants’ physical ability also
played a role in some of the challenges. Declining vision and physical dexterity issues
determined mobile device usage especially with the smaller mobile devices during the IR
process. These physical and cognitive abilities affected the Baby Boomers self-efficacy or
confidence when utilizing a mobile device to search for information and caused more uncertainty
behavior before and during the mobile device user-system interaction. Self-efficacy towards
mobile device usage was evident among the Baby Boomer participants and was found
throughout the different types of challenges. To build confidence, Baby Boomers need to have
hands-on learning experiences using different types of mobile devices. This could provide Baby
Boomers with more confidence regarding learning new functions and provide the necessary
digital literacy skills when encountering other types of challenges while using a mobile device.
Furthermore, the context surrounding the Baby Boomer participants was also an
important aspect for mobile device utilization especially in regards to Internet connectivity. A
lack of a connection or a stable connection determined whether the Baby Boomer participant
used the mobile device for the search activity. This would be important to note compared to

173

other computer technology, since mobile devices could enable a user to have access to
information anywhere and at anytime. This however, would pose a challenge whether the
Internet connection was unstable due to the location or the type of mobile device. Providing a
stable Broadband connection at different locations especially in a public library environment
needs to be a major priority, since community members look towards libraries to provide stable
connections as more information becomes more prevalent on the Internet .
Today’s Baby Boomers would not fit the typical stereotype of “older adults.” Baby
Boomers have interacted with information technology and have been noted to be not afraid to
learn new technological devices. This was prevalent among the Baby Boomer participants.
However, social ageism had many Baby Boomer participants referring to themselves as
“dinosaurs” or “bad elderly folk” that could have been cultivated by society. Social ageism
affected the confidence and uncertainty of some of the participants searching with a mobile
device for their search activity. Positive depictions of adults midlife and older interacting with
mobile technology would be beneficial for all ages of users.
Furthermore, some types of challenges were caused by the design of the mobile devices.
The interface design determined the ease of use of the device for the search activity and whether
the information was found. The ease of use of the mobile device affected the Baby Boomer’s
confidence and comfort in using the device for the search activity. A well designed interface
would assist users in solving problems with the mobile device. Baby Boomers would benefit
with more implicit and explicit help since it would require less cognitive load to solve a problem.
Interestingly, security was a factor in a few of the challenges that occurred with the Baby
Boomer participants’ interactions with a mobile device. The lack of confidence in a secure
connection or the security of the information on the mobile device could be from the lack of

174

system knowledge and the type of environment where the search activity was going to take
place. Since most of the search activities of the Baby Boomer participants were within their
home environment, the lack of a secure connection was surprising. This could be alleviated by
better Broadband infrastructures or mobile device design. The participants indicated that their
system knowledge was limited to a certain number of functions that they needed to accomplish
certain tasks, which could explain the lack of feeling secure with the mobile device. Providing
opportunities to perform different search activities using different mobile devices could increase
knowledge about the mobile devices and alleviate anxiety about the mobile device security.
Different types of challenges were also influenced by the search tasks the participants
wanted to accomplish to satisfy an information need. Some search tasks had more requirements
and were more complex than others, which would require more knowledge and digital literacy
skills to perform and accomplish on a mobile device. Depending on the search task, the Baby
Boomer participants’ self-efficacy and comfort level affected whether a mobile device was used
to complete the search task.
The findings from this exploratory dissertation study generated a model detailing the
central phenomenon of how Baby Boomers interact with mobile technology, the challenges they
face and the affecting factors. Baby Boomers perceptions played a significant role in utilizing a
mobile device to perform search activities. During the user-system interaction different factors
affected the interaction, such as the Baby Boomers knowledge infrastructures, physical ability,
comfort level and confidence in utilizing a mobile device. Other unique factors discovered from
the findings was the context of having a stable Internet connection to perform the search
activites, security issues of the mobile device and the aspect of social ageism, which affected the
Baby Boomers interaction with the mobile device.

175

6.2 Contributions
The overall goal for this dissertation study was to examine how Baby Boomers search for
information on a mobile device and whether there were any challenges and factors that affected
the use of mobile technology. The different types of challenges and affecting factors as well as
the Baby Boomer search activities were put in an operational context by developing a Baby
Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model. The model has suggested that the
perceptions of the Baby Boomers would initiate the search on a mobile device and the
relationship between the user, the search activities, the mobile device and the task all within the
social and cultural context. In particular, the factors of perceived physical ability and perceived
social ageism bring novel aspects to the models of IR and information seeking.
6.3 Future research
The results from this dissertation study, the implications and the limitations have opened
the door to many different types of future research studies. The dissertation study divided the
Baby Boomer participants into two age groups, Younger Boomers (YB) and Older Boomers
(OB) to determine whether there were differences found between the two groups because the age
range of Baby Boomers spans 19 years. The comparisons between YB and OB did not show
substantial distinctions between the two groups. However, the number of participants in each age
group for this study was quite small. Future research would expand the number of YB and OB
age groups to determine whether there were significant differences between the two age groups
in regards to specific mobile device used, the environment, the type of task performed, the
frequency of use and the time spent on the particular mobile device.
The Baby Boomers in this study were still active and almost all the participants were still
in the workforce. However, most search activities conducted were within the home environment.

176

Future studies would specifically examine Baby Boomers within the workforce, what types of
mobile devices were used and the types of search activities performed on the mobile devices
within a work environment. In addition, there were a few retired Baby Boomer participants,
which could have been the reason the search activities were conducted in the home environment.
Future studies would specifically examine retired Baby Boomers and explore the types of search
activities performed on a mobile device and determine whether the environment was a
significant factor affecting the search activity.
The results of the second research question focused on the challenges and the affecting
factors Baby Boomers faced when utilizing a mobile device. These factors and the data
discovered in the first research question led to the development of the Baby Boomer Mobile
Device Information Searching Model. To improve the model and further clarify the data
discovered, future research would expand the number of Baby Boomer participants so more
quantifiable data could be included in the findings. This would further increase the data set by
examining gender, age (YB, OB) and the relationship between mobile device, self-efficacy
levels, social ageism, physical ability and comfort levels using specific mobile devices.
The perceptions of the Baby Boomers played a significant role in the use or non-use of a
mobile device for the search activity. Future research would expand this topic by examining
Baby Boomer’s perceptions of specific mobile devices, perceptions of knowledge structures and
digital literacy skills, and the relationship between performing specific search tasks and specific
mobile devices.
Physical ability was a significant factor among the Baby Boomer participants in
determining the use of a mobile device for specific search activities. However, specific search
tasks were not predetermined in this study. Future research would examine specific search tasks

177

with different mobile devices to determine whether there was a relationsip between age, physical
ability, search task type and the mobile device used to perform the search activity.
In addition, social ageism was another significant factor discovered in this dissertation
study. However, this was not examined further in this study due to the small number of Baby
Boomer participants. Future research would expand this area by examining the specific
relationship between certain mobile devices, social ageism, age and gender of the Baby Boomer.
An extension of this research would also compare these results to adults younger than 50 years of
age to determine whether other age groups slightly younger than Baby Boomers would
experience the same types of challenges and affecting factors.
The Baby Boomers in this exploratory dissertation study had factors and challenges that
affected the use of a mobile device. Future research would explore Baby Boomers utilizing a
mobile device interface that has incorporated some of the design implications mentioned in the
Chapter 5 discussion and compare the newly designed interface usage with an interface without
the design implications. Furthermore, to aid in mobile device design, Baby Boomers would need
to be consulted about the different types of challenges that they have with a mobile device.
Future research would encompass the development of surveys geared towards Baby Boomers,
asking for input about their interactions with mobile devices, and the types of functions and
capabilities needed for the aging population to have a successful user-system interaction with a
mobile device.
This study specifically examined Baby Boomers and the use of mobile devices for search
activities. However, this study did not explore Baby Boomers who chose not to own a mobile
device. Future studies would examine Baby Boomers who choose not to own a mobile device
and why they would not use a mobile device for performing search activities, specifically

178

looking at the perceptions held by the user of the specific mobile devices and whether the
perceptions played a key role in the decision process. Further exploration would compare Baby
Boomers who own a mobile device, how they received the mobile device (either self-purchased,
gift, cultural pressure, etc.), search activites and frequency of usage.
This dissertation study examined real users with real tasks in real settings and did not
explore specific types of search tasks performed on a specific mobile device. Future research
would examine Baby Boomers conducting specific search tasks and the types of mobile devices
used to perform those activities. Furthermore, research exploring Baby Boomers in specific IR
environments such as online databases, digital libraries, etc., would be explored by examining
the types of challenges and affecting factors within the specific IR environments on a mobile
device.
This dissertation study specifically examined Baby Boomers as a unique age group with
varied characterics. These characteristics could also be found in adults over age 69. Future
research would expand the participants age groups to include adults ages 50 and beyond to
determine whether the Baby Boomer Mobile Device Information Searching Model could also
include all of adults midlife and older. Additionally, expanding this further to include Generation
X individuals (younger than 50 years old) would determine whether some of the challenges and
factors found in the model could be expanded to this generation of adults.
In conclusion, Baby Boomers are not afraid of information technology and utilize new
technological devices, such as mobile devices for information searching activities. This
dissertation study contributed to the understanding of how Baby Boomers use mobile technology
for their IR needs. The data discovered in this study generated challenges Baby Boomers could
encounter and the affecting factors when utilizing a mobile device. The findings of this study

179

yielded several insights to the design of IR systems and suggested theoretical and
methodological implications in interactive IR research, as well as practical implications in library
services to the Baby Boomer library community.

180

References
ABC-CLIO Corporate. (2015). Dictionary for library and information science information
technology definition. Retrieved from http://www.abc-clio.com/ODLIS/odlis_i.aspx
ALA Digital Literacy Task Force. (2011.) ALA Office for Information Technology Policy digital
literacy definition. Retrieved from
http://connect.ala.org/files/94226/what%20is%20digilit%20%282%29.pdf
Allan, G. (2003). A critique of using grounded theory as a research method. Electronic Journal
of Business Research Methods, 2 (1), 1-10.
Alzaza, N., & Yaakub, A. (2011). Students' awareness and requirements of mobile learning s
services in the higher education environment. American Journal of Economics and
Business Administration, 3(1), 95.
American Association of School Librarians & Association for Educational Communications and
Technology. (AESL & AECT) (1998). Information Power: Building Partnerships for
Learning. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (1989). American Library Association
presidential committee on information literacy: Final report. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/publications/whitepapers/presidential
Association for College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2014). Introduction to information
literacy: What is information literacy?. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/issues/infolit/overview/intro
Atkinson, R. Derry, S. Renkl, A. & Worthham, D. (2000) Learning from examples: Instructional
principles from the worked examples research. Review of Educational Research, 70 181214. doi: 10.3102/00346543070002181.

181

Aula, A. (2005a). Studying user strategies and characteristics for developing web search
interfaces. PhD thesis, University of Tampere, Finland, Ph.D. Dissertation,
Dissertations in Interactive Technology, Number 3. Retrieved from
https://tampub.uta.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/67544/951-44-6488-5.pdf?sequence=1
Aula, A. (2005b). User study on older adults’ use of the Web and search engines. Universal
Access in the Information Society, 4(1), 67-81.
Babbie, E. (2011). The Basics of Social Research. (5th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, Cengage
Learning.
Bates, M. (1979a), Idea tactics. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 30(5),
280-289.
Bates, M. (1979b). Information search tactics. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science, 30(4), 205-214.
Bates, M. (1989). The design of browsing and berrypicking techniques for the online search
interface. Online Review, 13 (5), 407-424.
Bates, M. (2002a). After the dot-bomb: Getting Web information retrieval right this time. First
Monday, (7) 7. Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/971/892
Bates, M. (2002b). The cascade of interaction in the digital library interface. Information
Processing & Management, 38 (3), 381-400.
Bates, M. (2002c). Toward an integrated model of information seeking and searching. The New
Review of Information Behaviour Research, 3, 1-15.

182

Bawden, D. (2008). Origins and concepts of digital literacy. In C. Lankshear and M. Knobel
(Eds.). Digital Literacies: Concepts, Policies and Practices (pp. 17-32). New York, NY:
Peter Lang Publishing Incorporated.
Becker, G. (2000). Creating comparability among reliability coefficients: The case of Cronbach
alpha and Cohen kappa. Psychological Reports, 87, 1171-1182.
Belkin, N. (1980). Anomalous states of knowledge as a basis for information retrieval.
Canadian Journal of Information Science, 5(1), 133-143.
Belkin, N. (1996). Intelligent information retrieval: Whose intelligence?. In J. Krause, M.
Herfurth, & J. Marx (Eds.), Harausforderungen an die Informationswirtschaft.
Informationsverdichtung, Informationsbetwertung und Datenvisualisierung.
Proceedings of the 5th International Symposium for Information Science (ISI’96),
(pp. 25-31). Konstanz: Universitatsverlag, Konstanz.
Bennett-Kapusniak, R. (2013). Older adults and the public library: The impact of the Boomer
generation. Public Library Quarterly, 32(3), 204-222.
Bertot, J., Jaeger, P., Langa, L., & McClure, C. (2006). Public access computing and Internet
access in public libraries: The role of public libraries in e-government and emergency
situations. First Monday, 11(9).
Bertot, J., Jaeger, P., McClure, C., Wright, C., & Jensen, E. (2009). Public libraries and the
Internet 2008-2009: Issues, implications, and challenges. First Monday, 14(11).
Bertot, J., McClure, C., & Jaeger, P. (2005). Public libraries and the Internet 2004: Survey
results and findings. Information Use Management and Policy Institute, College of
Information, Florida State University.

183

Biernacki, P., & Waldorf, D. (1981). Snowball sampling: Problems and techniques of chain
referral sampling. Sociological Methods & Research, 10(2), 141-163.
Bilal, D. (2000). Children's use of the Yahooligans! Web search engine: I. Cognitive, physical,
and affective behaviors on fact-­‐based search tasks. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 51(7), 646-665.
Bilal, D. (2002). Perspectives on children’s navigation of the World Wide Web: Does the type of
search task make a difference?. Online Information Review, 26(2), 108-117.
Birkland, J. & Karrst-Brown, M. (2010). “What’s so special about studying old people?”: The
ethical, methodological, and sampling issues surrounding the study of older adults and
ICTs. In F. Sudweeks, H. Hrachovec & C. Ess (Eds.) Proceedings of the Seventh
International Conference on Cultural Attitudes Towards Technology and Communication
(pp. 341-356). Vancouver, B.C., Canada.
Borgman, C. (1986). Why are online catalogs hard to use? Lessons learned from informationretrieval studies. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 37(6), 387400.
Boyles, J., & Rainie, L. (2012). Mobile phone problems. Pew Research Internet Project.
Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/08/02/mobile-phone-problems/
Boyles, J., Smith, A., & Madden, M. (2012). Privacy and data management on mobile devices:
Main findings. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/09/05/main-findings-7/
Breeding, M. (2008). The birth of a new generation of library interfaces. Computers in Libraries,
27 (9), 34-37.

184

Brophy, J., & Bawden, D. (2005). Is Google enough? Comparison of an Internet search engine
with academic library resources. Aslib Proceedings, 57(6), 498-512. doi:
10.1108/00012530510634235.
Bruce, C. (1999). Workplace experiences of information literacy. International Journal of
Information Management, 19(1), 33-47.
Brusilovsky, P., Ahn, J., & Rasmussen, E. (2010). Teaching information retrieval with webbased interactive visualization. Journal of Education for Library and Information
Science, 51(3), 187-200.
Bryant, A., & Charmaz, K. (2007). Grounded theory research: Methods and practices. In A.
Bryant & K. Charmaz (Eds.). The SAGE Handbook of Grounded Theory (pp.1-28).
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Butcher, W., & Street, P. (2009). Lifelong learning with older adults. Australasian Public
Libraries and Information Services, 22(2), 64-70.
Butler, R. (2005). Ageism: looking back over my shoulder. Generations, 29(3), 84-86.
Byrnes, J., & Wasik, B. (2009). Language and Literacy Development: What Educators Need to
Know. New York, NY: The Guilford Press
Byström, K., & Järvelin, K. (1995). Task complexity affects information seeking and use.
Information Processing & Management, 31(2), 191-213.
Case, D. (2002) (Ed.). Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on Information Seeking
Needs and Behavior. Orlando, FL: Academic Press.
Case, D. (2012) (Ed.). Looking for Information: A Survey of Research on Information Seeking
Needs and Behavior. (3ed). United Kingdom: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.

185

Chae, M., & Kim, J. (2004). Do size and structure matter to mobile users? An empirical study of
the effects of screen size, information structure, and task complexity on user activities
with standard web phones. Behaviour & Information Technology, 23(3), 165-181.
Charmez, K. (2006). Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide Through Qualitative
Analysis. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Chatman, E. (1999). A theory of life in the round. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science, 50(3), 207-217.
Church, K., & Smyth, B. (2009). Understanding the intent behind mobile information needs. In
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, 247-256.
ACM.
Clark, L., & Visser, M. (2011). Chapter 6: Digital literacy takes center stage. Library Technology
Reports, 47(6), 38-42.
Coiro, J., Knobel, M., Lankshear, C., & Leu, D. (2009). Central issues in new literacies and new
literacies research. In Handbook of Research on New Literacies (pp. 1-21). New York,
NY: Routledge.
Cohen D., & Crabtree B. (2006). Qualitative Research Guidelines Project. Robert Wood Johnson
Foundations. Retrieved from http://www.qualres.org/HomeLinc-3684.html
Cool, C., & Belkin, N. (2011) Interactive information retrieval: History and background. In I.
Ruthven & D. Kelly (Eds.). Interactive Information Seeking, Behaviour and Retrieval
(pp. 1-14). London, WCIE: Facet Publishing.
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (2000). Multiliteracies: Literacy Learning and The Design of
Social Futures. London, England: Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.

186

Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (1990). Grounded theory research: Procedures, canons, and evaluative
criteria. Qualitative Sociology, 13(1), 3-21.
Corbin, J. & Strauss, A. (2008). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Grounded Theory, 3ed. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Corbin, J., & Strauss, A. (2015). Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for
Developing Grounded Theory, 4ed. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Cothey, V. (2002). A longitudinal study of World Wide Web users’ information-searching
behavior. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
53(2), 67-78. doi: 10.1002/asi.10011
Cresswell, J. (2009). Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed Methods
Approaches. (3ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications
Cresswell, J. (2013). Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design: Choosing Among Five
Approaches. (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications, Inc.
Cresswell, J., & Plano Clark, V. (2007). Designing and Conducting Mixed Methods Research.
(2ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications
Cummings, J., Merrill, A., & Borrelli, S. (2010). The use of handheld mobile devices: their
impact and implications for library services. Library Hi Tech, 28(1), 22-40.
Cutler, S. (2005). Ageism and technology. Generations, 29(3), 67-72.
Czaja, S., Charness, N, Fisk, A., Hertzog, C, Nair, S., Rogers, W., & Sharit, J. (2006). Factors
predicting the use of technology: Findings from the Center for Research and Education
on Aging and Technology Enhancement (CREATE). Psychology and Aging, 21(2), 333–
352.

187

Decker, E. (2010). Baby Boomers and the United States public library system. Library HiTech
28 (4), 605-16. doi: 10.1108/07378831011096268.
Dervin, B. (1983) An overview of sense-making research: Concepts, methods and results to date.
Paper presented at the International Communication Association Annual Meeting, Dallas,
TX (May). Retrieved from http://communication.sbs.ohio-state.edu/sensemaking/art/artdervin83.html
Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind's eye of the user: The sense-making qualitative-quantitative
methodology. Qualitative Research in Information Management, 6, 1-84.
Dewey, B. (2008) Social, intellectual, and cultural spaces: Creating compelling library
environments for the digital age. Journal of Library Administration, 48 (1). doi:
10.1080/01930820802035059
Dickinson, A., Arnott, J., & Prior, S. (2007). Methods for human–computer interaction research
with older people. Behaviour & Information Technology, 26(4), 343-352.
Digital transformation: A framework for ICT literacy: A report of the International ICT Literacy
Panel (2002). Retrieved from
http://www.ets.org/Media/Tests/Information_and_Communication_Technology_Literacy
/ictreport.pdf
Du, J., & Spink, A. (2011). Toward a web search model: Integrating multitasking, cognitive
coordination, and cognitive shifts. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 62 (8), 1446-1472. doi: 10.1002/asi.21551
Duggan, M. (2013). Cell phone activities 2013. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/19/cell-phone-activities-2013/

188

Duggan, M., & Smith, A. (2013). Cell internet use 2013. Pew Research Internet Project.
Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2013/09/16/main-findings-2/
Dunnett, C. (1998). Senior citizens tackling technology. Educational Media International, 35(1),
9-12.
Educause: Learning Initiative. (2010). 7 things you should know about e-readers. Retrieved from
http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/eli7058.pdf
Eick, S. (2001). Visualizing online activity. Communications of the ACM, 44 (8), 45-50.
Ellis, D. (1989). A behavioural approach to information retrieval system design. Journal of
Documentation, 45 (3), 171-212.
Ellis, D., Cox, D., & Hall, K. (1993). A comparison of the information seeking patterns of
researchers in the physical and social sciences. Journal of Documentation, 49(4), 356–
369.
Ellis, D., & Haugan, M. (1997). Modeling the information seeking patterns of engineers and
research scientists in an industrial environment. Journal of Documentation, 53(4), 384403.
Emmanuel, J., & Kern, M. (2009). Next generation catalogs: What do they do and why should
we care?. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 49(2), 117-120.
Enser, P. (2008). The evolution of visual information retrieval. Journal of Information Science,
34(4), 531-546. doi: 10.1177/0165551508091013.
Eriksson-Backa, K. (2010). Elderly people, health information, and libraries: A small-scale study
on seniors in a language minority. Libri: International Journal of Libraries &
Information Services 60 (2), 181-194. doi: 10.1515/libr.2010.016.

189

Eshet-Alkalai, Y., & Amichai-Hamburger, Y. (2004). Experiments in digital literacy.
CyberPsychology & Behavior, 7(4), 421-429.
FCC (n.d.). Broadband. National Broadband Map: All about Broadband. Retrieved from
http://www.broadbandmap.gov/classroom
Federal Interagency Forum on Aging Related Statistics. (2012). Older Americans 2012: Key
indicators of well-being. Retrieved from
http://www.agingstats.gov/Main_Site/Data/2012_Documents/docs/EntireChartbo
ok.pdf
Ferreira, S., & Pithan, D. (2005). Usability of digital libraries: A study based on the areas of
information science and human-computer-interaction. OCLC Systems & Services, 21(4),
311-323.
Fidel, R. (1985). Moves in online searching. Online Review, 9(1), 61-74.
Fidel, R. (1991). Searchers' selection of search keys: II. Controlled vocabulary or free-text
searching. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 42(7), 501-514.
Fidel, R. (2008). Are we there yet?: Mixed methods research in library and information science.
Library & Information Science Research, 30(4), 265-272.
Fidel, R. (2012). Human Information Interaction: An Ecological Approach to Information
Behavior. MIT Press: Cambridge, MA.
Fidel, R., & Pejtersen, A. (2004). From information behaviour research to the design of
information systems: The cognitive work analysis framework. Information Research, 10
(1) (Art. 210).

190

Fisher, K., Durrance, J., & Hinton, M. (2004). Information grounds and the use of need-­‐based
services by immigrants in Queens, New York: A context-­‐based, outcome evaluation
approach. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology,
55(8), 754-766.  
Fisher, K. Erdelez, S., & McKechnie, L. (Eds.). (2005). Theories of Information Behavior.
Medford, New Jersey: Information Today, Inc.
Fisk, A., Rogers, W., Charness, N., Czaja, S., & Sharit, J. (2009). Designing for Older Adults:
Principles and Creative Human Factors Approaches (2ed). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Flick, U. (2014). An Introduction to Qualitative Research. (5ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Fox, S., & Duggan, M. (2012). Mobile health. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/08/mobile-health-2012/
Gächter, S., Herrmann, B., & Thöni, C. (2004). Trust, voluntary cooperation, and socioeconomic background: survey and experimental evidence. Journal of Economic Behavior
& Organization, 55(4), 505-531.
Gauder, B. (2011). Perceptions of Libraries, 2010: Context and Community. Dublin, OH: OCLC
Online Computer Library Center, Inc.
Gilster, P. (1997). Digital Literacy. New York NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Glaser, B. (1978). Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the Methodology of Grounded Theory.
Mill Valley, CA: The Sociology Press.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative
Research. Hawthorne, NY: Aldine Publishing Company.
Glesne, C. (2011). Becoming Qualitative Researchers. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc.

191

Greenberg, J. (2005). Understanding metadata and metadata schemes. Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly, 40(3-4), 17-36.
Griffey, J. (2010a). Mobile Technology and Libraries: The Tech Set #2. New York, NY: NealSchuman Publishers, Inc.
Griffey, J. (2010b). Personal multimedia devices for capturing and consuming. Library
Technical Reports, 46(3), 20-29.
Griffiths, J., & Brophy, P. (2005). Student searching and the web: Use of academic resources and
Google. Library Trends, 53(4), 539-554. Retrieved from
http://www.ideals.illinois.edu/bitstream/handle/2142/1749/Griffiths539554.pdf?se
quence=2
Hanson, C. (2011). Issues for information access on the mobile web. In Libraries and Mobile
Services (Ch. 4). Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Harper, S., Yesilada, Y., & Chen, T. (2011). Mobile device impairment...similar problems,
similar solutions? Behaviour & Information Technology, 30(5), 673-690. doi:
10.1080/01449291003801943
Hert, C. (1996). User goals on an online public access catalog. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science, 47(7), 504-518.
Hertzum, M., & Frokjaer, E. (1996). Browsing and querying in online documentation: A
study of user interfaces and the interaction process. ACM Transactions on ComputerHuman Interaction (ToCHI), 3(2), 136–161.
Hobbs, R. (2011). Digital and Media Literacy: Connecting Culture and Classroom. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.

192

Hock, R. (2012). Search engines. In M. Bates (Ed.) Understanding Information Retrieval
Systems: Management, Types and Standards. Boca Raton, Fl.: CRC Press
Hu, R., & Meier, A. (2011). Planning for a mobile future: a user research case study from the
California Digital Library. Serials: The Journal for the Serials Community, 24, S17-S25.
Husain, R., & Ansari, M. A. (2006). From card catalogue to Web OPACs. DESIDOC Bulletin of
Information Technology, 26(2): 41-47.
Hutchison, D., Eastman, C., & Tirrito, T. (1997). Designing user interfaces for older adults.
Educational Gerontology 23: 497-513. doi: 10.1080/0360127970230601.
IFLA. (2013). IFLA/UNESCO Manifesto for digital libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.ifla.org/publications/iflaunesco-manifesto-for-digital-libraries
Ingwersen, P. (1992, 2002). Information Retrieval Interaction. London: Taylor Graham.
Ingwersen, P., & Jarvelin, K. (2005). The Turn: Integration of Information Seeking and
Retrieval in Context. Dortecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Internet Society. (2012). Brief history of the Internet. Retrieved from
http://www.internetsociety.org/internet/what-internet/history-internet/brief-historyinternet#Timeline
iPod Touch. (2014). Apple, Inc. Retrieved from http://www.apple.com/ipod-touch/features/
Jacelon, C., & Imperio, K. (2005). Participant diaries as a source of data in research with older
adults. Qualitative Health Research, 15(7), 991-997.
Jaeger, P., Bertot, J., McClure, C., & Rodriguez, M. (2007). Public libraries and Internet access
across the United States: A comparison by state 2004–2006. Information Technology and
Libraries, 26(2), 4-14.

193

Jansen, B., Booth, D., & Spink, A. (2008). Determining the informational, navigational, and
transactional intent of Web queries. Information Processing & Management, 44(3), 12511266.
Jansen, B., Spink, A., Bateman, J., & Saracevic, T. (1998). Real life information retrieval: A
study of user queries on the web. In ACM SIGIR Forum (Vol. 32, No. 1, pp. 5-17). New
York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).
Jansen, B., & Rieh, S. (2010). The seventeen theoretical constructs of information searching and
information retrieval. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 61(8), 1517-1534.
Johnson, R., Onwuegbuzie, A., & Turner, L. (2007). Toward a definition of mixed methods
research. Journal of Mixed Methods Research, 1(2), 112-133.
Jones, J. (2012). Expected retirement age in U.S. Up to 67. GALLUP Economy.
Retrieved from http://www.gallup.com/poll/154178/expected-retirement-age.aspx
Jones, B. & Flannigan, S. (2006). Connecting the digital dots: Literacy of the 21st century.
Educause Quarterly, 29(2), 8-10.
Joseph, M. (2009). Public library strategies for the over 50s: Everything old is new again - or is
it?. Australasian Public Libraries and Information Services 22 (3):115-119.
Joseph, P., Debowski, S. & Goldschmidt, P. (2013). Models of information search: a
comparative analysis. Information Research, 18(1). Retrieved from
http://InformationR.net/ir/18-1/paper562.html
Karavidas, M., Lim, N., & Katsikas, S. (2005). The effects of computers on older adult users.
Computers in Human Behavior, 21(5), 697-711. doi: 10.1016/j.chb.2004.03.012.

194

Katz, I., & Macklin, A. (2007). Information and communication technology (ICT) literacy:
Integration and assessment in higher education. Journal of Systemics, Cybernetics and
Informatics, 5(4), 50-55.
Kearney, M. (2007). From the sublime to the meticulous: The continuing evolution of grounded
formal theory. In A. Bryant & K. Charmaz (Eds.). The SAGE Handbook of Grounded
Theory (pp.127-150). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Kiel, J. (2005). The digital divide: Internet and e-mail use by the elderly. Medical Informatics &
the Internet in Medicine 30(1): 19-23. doi:10.1080/14639230500066900.
Kim, K., & Sin, S. (2007). Perception and selection of information sources by undergraduate
students: Effects of avoidant style, confidence and personal control in problem-solving.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 33(6), 655-665.
doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2007.09.012.
Kinney, B. (2010). The internet, public libraries, and the digital divide. Public Library Quarterly,
29(2), 104-161. doi:10.1080/01616841003779718.
Koltay, T. (2011). The media and the literacies: Media literacy, information literacy, digital
literacy. Media, Culture & Society, 33(2), 211-221.
Koshman, S. (2006). Visualization-based information retrieval on the Web. Library &
Information Science Research, 28(2), 192-207. doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2006.03.017
Kress, G. (2000) Multimodality. In Cope, B. & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (2000). Multiliteracies:
Literacy Learning and the Design of Social Futures (pp.182-202). London, England:
Routledge Taylor & Francis Group.
Kuhlthau, C. (1988). Developing a model of the library search process: Cognitive and affective
aspects. Research Quarterly, 28 (2), 232-242.

195

Kuhlthau, C. (1991). Inside the search process: Information seeking from the user’s
perspective. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 42 (5), 361371.
Kuhlthau, C. (2005). Kuhlthau’s information seeking process. In K. Fisher, S. Erdelez & L.
McKechnie (Eds.). Theories of Information Behavior. (pp. 230-234). Medford, NJ:
Information Today, Inc.
Kuhlthau, C., Maniotes, L., & Caspari, A. (2007). Guided Inquiry: Learning in the 21st
Century. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Kurniawan, S. (2008). Older people and mobile phones: A multi-method investigation.
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, 66(12), 889-901.
Lakoff, G., & Johnson, M. (1980). Metaphors We Live By. Chicago, IL: The University of
Chicago Press.
Lankshear, C., & Knobel, M. (2006). Digital literacy and digital literacies. Nordic Journal of
Digital Literacy, 1(1), 12-24.
Lanning, S. (2012). Concise Guide to Information Literacy. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries
Unlimited
Lemke, J. (1998). Metamedia literacy: Transforming meanings & media. In D. Reinking (Ed.).
Handbook of Literacy & Technology: Transformations in a Post-Typographic World (pp.
283-301). Mahwah, NY: L. Erbaum Associates.
Lesk, M. (2005). Understanding Digital Libraries. (2ed.). San Francisco, CA: Morgan
Kaufmann Publishers.

196

Leu, D., Kinzer, C., Coiro, J., & Cammack, D. (2004). Toward a theory of new literacies
emerging from the Internet and other information and communication technologies.
Theoretical Models and Processes of Reading, 5, 1570-1613.
Lin, C., Neafsey, P., & Strickler, Z. (2009). Usability testing by older adults of a computermediated health communication program. Journal of Health Communication, 14(2), 102118. doi: 10.1080/10810730802659095.
Lindley, S., Harper, R., & Sellen, A. (2009). Desiring to be in touch in a changing
communications landscape: Attitudes of older adults. In Proceedings of the 2009 SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1693-1702. New York, NY.
Liu, Z., & Yang, Z. (2004). Factors influencing distance-education graduate students use of
information sources: A user study. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 30(1), 24-35.
doi:10.1016/j.jal.2003.11.005.
Mack, T., & Jennings, L. (2010). Technology and the Baby Boomers. (2010). World Future
Review (World Future Society), 2(3), 54-59.
Malhotra, Y., & Galletta, D. (1999). Extending the technology acceptance model to account for
social influence: Theoretical bases and empirical validation. In Systems Sciences, 1999.
HICSS-32. Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 14pp). IEEE.
Mansourian, Y. (2006). Adoption of grounded theory in LIS research. New Library World,
107(9/10), 386-402.
Marchionini, G. (1995). Information Seeking in Electronic Environments. Melbourne, Australia:
Cambridge University Press.
Marcum, J. (2002). Rethinking information literacy. The Library Quarterly, 72 (1), 1-26.

197

Martyn, H., & Gallant, L. (2012). Over 50 and wired: Web-based stakeholder communication.
First Monday, 17 (6), 1-12. Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3449/3262
Mates, B. (2003). 5-star Programming and Services for your 55+ Library Customers. Chicago,
IL: American Library Association.
Mates, B. (2004). Chapter 1: Who aren’t you serving digitally?. Library Technology Reports 40
(3): 6-9.
McClure, C. (1994). Network literacy: A role for libraries? Information Technology and
Libraries, 13(2), 115-125.
McFadden, S., & Basting, A. (2010). Healthy aging persons and their brains: promoting
resilience through creative engagement. Clinics in Geriatric Medicine, 26(1), 149.
Mead, S., Sit, R., Rogers, W., Jamieson, B., & Rousseau, G. (2000). Influences of general
computer experience and age on library database search performance. Behaviour &
Information Technology, 19 (2), 107-123. doi:10.1080/014492900118713.
Mi, J., & Weng, C. (2008). Revitalizing the library OPAC: Interface, searching, and display
challenges. Information Technology and Libraries, 27(1), 5-22. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/lita/publications/ital/27/1/mi.pdf
Mizrachi, D., & Bates, M. J. (2013). Undergraduates' personal academic information
management and the consideration of time and task-urgency. Journal of The
American Society for Information Science & Technology, 64(8), 1590-1607.
doi:10.1002/asi.22849

198

Mody, L., Miller, D. K., McGloin, J. M., Freeman, M., Marcantonio, E. R., Magaziner, J., &
Studenski, S. (2008). Recruitment and retention of older adults in aging research. Journal
of the American Geriatrics Society, 56(12), 2340-2348.
Moyer, J. (2007). Learning from leisure reading. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 46(4),
66-79.
Moyer, J. (2012). Audiobooks and e-books. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 51(4), 340354.
Nasmith, W., & Parkinson, M. (2008). Senior citizens embrace change and make a new
technology work for them. The Electronic Library, 26(5), 673-682.
National Association for Media Literacy Education (NAMLE). (2013). NAMLE’s history.
Retrieved from http://namle.net/about-namle/namles-history/
National Education Association (NEA). (2012). Common Core Standards Initiative. Retrieved
from http://www.corestandards.org/ELA-Literacy
Net Industries. (2015). Search engine strategy-Types of search engines. Retrieved from
http://ecommerce.hostip.info/pages/924/Search-Engine-Strategy.html
Nicholas, D., Clark, D., Rowlands, I., & Jamali, H. (2013). Information on the go: A case study
of Europeana mobile users. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 64(7), 1311-1322.
Nichols, D. & Twidale, M. (2011) In I. Ruthven & D. Kelly (Eds.). Interactive Information
Seeking, Behaviour and Retrieval (pp. 205-234). London, WCIE: Facet Publishing.
Niemelä-Nyrhinen, J. (2007). Baby Boom consumers and technology: Shooting down
stereotypes. Journal of Consumer Marketing, 24(5), 305-312.

199

Ng, C.-h. (2007). Motivation among older adults in learning computing technologies: A
grounded model. Educational Gerontology, 34(1), 1-14.
Nycyk, M., & Redsell, M. (2010). Making computer learning easier for older adults: a
community study of tuition practices. In N. Reynolds & M. Turcsányi-Szabó (Eds.). Key
competencies in the knowledge society (Vol. 324, pp. 292-300). Boston, MA: Springer.
Nylander, S., Lundquist, T., & Brännström, A. (2009, April). At home and with computer access:
Why and where people use cell phones to access the internet. In Proceedings of the
SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1639-1642). ACM.
O’Brien, M. & Rogers, W. (2013). Design for aging: Enhancing everyday technology use. In R.
Zhang, R. Hill, & M. Gardner. (Eds.). Engaging Older Adults with Modern Technology:
Internet Use and Information Access Needs (pp. 105-123). Hershey PA: IGI Global.
O’Toole, J. (2014). Mobile apps overtake PC Internet usage in U.S. CNN Money: Tech.
Retrieved from http://money.cnn.com/2014/02/28/technology/mobile/mobileapps-internet/
Olson, K., O’Brien, M., Rogers, W., & Charness, N. (2011). Diffusion of technology: frequency
of use for younger and older adults. Ageing International, 36(1), 123-145.
Oppenheim, A.N (1992) Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measurement. (New
Ed.). London, England: Pinter Publishers.
Parandjuk, J. (2010). Using information architecture to evaluate digital libraries. The Reference
Librarian, 51(2), 124-134.
Pejtersen, A. (1979). Investigation of search strategies in fiction based on an analysis of 134
user-librarian conversations. Proceedings of the 3rd International Research Forum in
Information Science (pp. 107-132). Oslo: Statens Biblioteksskole.

200

Perley, C., Gentry, C., Fleming, S., & Sen, K. (2007). Conducting a user-centered information
needs assessment: The Via Christi Libraries experience. Journal of the Medical Library
Association, 95(2), 173-181. doi: 10.3163/1536-5050.95.2.173.
Pettigrew, K., Fidel, R. & Bruce, H. (2001). Conceptual frameworks in information behavior.
Annual Review of Information Science and Technology (ARIST), 35(43-78).
Pew Research Internet Project. (PEW) (2009). Generational differences in online activities.
Retrieved from http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2009/Generations-Online-in2009/Generational-Differences-in-Online-Activities.aspx.
Pew Research Internet Project. (PEW) (2014). Mobile technology fact sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/mobile-technology-fact-sheet/
Pharo, N. (2004). A new model of information behaviour based on the search situation transition
schema. Information Research, 10(1), 10-11.
Pharo, N., & Järvelin, K. (2004). The SST method: a tool for analysing web information search
processes. Information Processing & Management, 40(4), 633-654.
Phone Arena. (2014). Phone Carriers. Retrieved from
http://www.phonearena.com/phones/carriers
Pickard, A. (2013). Research Methods in Information. (2ed.). Chicago, IL: Neal-Schuman
Piper, D., Palmer. S., & Xie, B. (2009). Services to older adults: Preliminary findings from three
Maryland public libraries. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science,
50(2):107-118. Retrieved from
https://www.webjunction.org/content/dam/WebJunction/Documents/webjunction/
ServiceStudy.pdf
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital natives, digital immigrants part 1. On the Horizon, 9(5), 1-6.

201

Punch, K. (2005). Introduction to Social Research: Quantitative and Qualitative Approaches,
Second Edition. London: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Purch. (2014). Top ten reviews. Retrieved from http://tabletsreview.toptenreviews.com/index2.html
Rainie, L. (2012a). Baby Boomers and technology. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2012/03/28/baby-boomers-and-technology/
Rainie, L. (2012b). Senior citizens and digital technology. Pew Research Internet Project.
Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/Presentations/2012/Sep/SenioCitizens-andDigital-Technology.aspx.
Rainie, L., Zickuhr, K., Purcell, K., Madden, M., & Brenner, J. (2012, April 4). The rise of ereading. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved from
http://libraries.pewinternet.org/2012/04/04/the-rise-of-e-reading/
Reddy, Y. C., Raju, K. S., & Neeraja, K. (2013). E-Library using the mobile OPAC.
International Journal of Computers & Technology, 10(5), 1682-1686.
Reitz, J. (2014). OPAC. Retrieved from http://www.abc-clio.com/ODLIS/odlis_o.aspx#opac
Ritchie, J. & Ormston, R. (2014). The applications of qualitative methods to social research. In J.
Ritchie et al. (Eds.). Qualitative Research Practice: A Guide for Social Science Students
and Researchers, Second edition, (pp. 27-46). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.
Rieh, S. (2007). Toward an integrated framework of information and communication behavior:
College students' information resources and media selection. Proceedings of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology, 44(1), 1-15. doi:
10.1002/meet.1450440234.

202

Roach, M. (2013, April 19). Libraries and literacy in the digital age. (Web log comment)
Retrieved from http://blogs.sos.wa.gov/library/index.php/2013/04/libraries-andliteracy-in-the-digital-age/
Rowley, J., & Farrow, J. (2000). Organizing Knowledge: An Introduction to Managing Access to
Information (3ed.). Hampshire: Gower.
Ruthven, I., & Kelly, D. (2011). (Eds.). Interactive Information Seeking, Behaviour and
Retrieval. London, WCIE: Facet Publishing.
Sadeh, T. (2008). User experience in the library: a case study. New Library World, 109 (1/2), 724. doi: 10.1108/03074800810845976.
Sale, J. E., Lohfeld, L. H., & Brazil, K. (2002). Revisiting the quantitative-qualitative debate:
Implications for mixed-methods research. Quality and Quantity, 36(1), 43-53.
Salkowitz, R. (2008). Generation Blend: Managing Across the Technology Age Gap. Microsoft
Executive Leadership Series, Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Saracevic, T. (1997). The stratified model of information retrieval interaction: Extension and
applications. Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science, 34, 313-327.
Saunders, J., McClure, C., & Mandel, L. (2012). Broadband applications: Categories,
requirements, and future frameworks. First Monday, 17(11).
Savolainen, R. (1995). Everyday life information seeking: Approaching information seeking in
the context of “way of life”. Library & Information Science Research, 17(3), 259-294.
Savolainen, R. (2002). Network Competence and information seeking on the internet:
From definitions towards a social cognitive model. Journal of Documentation, 58
(2), 211-226.

203

Scheibe, C., & Rogow, F. (2012). The Teacher’s Guide to Media Literacy: Critical Thinking in a
Multimedia World. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin.
Seeholzer, J., & Salem, J. (2011). Library on the go: A focus group study of the mobile web and
the academic library. College & Research Libraries, 72(1), 9-20.
Selwyn, N. (2004). The information aged: A qualitative study of older adults’ use of information
and communications technology. Journal of Aging Studies, 18, 369-384. doi:
10.1016/j.jaging.2004.06.008.
Shiri, A. (2008). Metadata-enhanced visual interfaces to digital libraries. Journal of Information
Science, 34(6), 763-775 doi: 10.1177/0165551507087711.
Sit, R. (1998). Online library catalog search performance by older adult users. Library &
Information Science Research, 20(2), 115-131. doi:10.1016/S0740-8188(98)90015-9.
Smale, B., & Gillies, J. (2012). Studying leisure in the context of aging. In H. Gibson, & J.
Singleton (Eds.). Leisure and Aging: Theory and Practice. (pp. 67-93). Champaign, IL:
Human Kinetics.
Smith, A. (2010). Americans and their gadgets. Pew Research Internet Project. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/2010/10/14/americans-and-their-gadgets/
Smith, M., Sharit, J., & Czaja, S. (1999). Aging, motor control, and the performance of computer
mouse tasks. Human Factors 41(3): 388-96. doi: 10.1518/001872099779611102.
Sohn, T., Li, K. A., Griswold, W., & Hollan, J. (2008). A diary study of mobile information
needs. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems (pp. 433-442). New York, NY: Association for Computing Machinery (ACM).
Spink, A. (1997). Study of interactive feedback during mediated information retrieval. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, 48(5): 382-394.

204

Spink, A. & Cole, C. (2005). A multitasking framework for cognitive information retrieval. In A.
Spink & C. Cole (Eds.) New Directions in Cognitive Information Retrieval (pp. 102-112).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Spink, A., & Jansen, B. (2004). Web search: Public searching of the Web. Kluwer Academic
Publishers Dordrecht, The Netherlands.
Stephen, C. (2009). The new world of accessible editions for older adults. Australasian Public
Libraries and Information Services, 22(3), 120-127.
Stockwell, G. (2010). Using mobile phones for vocabulary activities: Examining the effect of the
platform. Language Learning & Technology, 14(2), 95-11
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1994). Grounded theory methodology. Handbook of Qualitative
Research, 273-285. Retrieved from http://cms.educ.ttu.edu/uploadedFiles/personnelfolder/lee-duemer/epsy-5382/documents/Grounded%20theory%20methodology.pdf
Stronge, A., Rogers, W., & Fisk, A. (2006). Web-based information search and retrieval: Effects
of strategy use and age on search success. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human
Factors and Ergonomics Society, 48(3), 434-446.
Taylor, R. (1967). Question-negotiation an information-seeking in libraries: DTIC Document.
Bethlehem, PA.
Tedd, L. (1994). OPACs through the Ages. Library Review, 43(4), 27-37.
Thomas, S., Joseph, C., Laccetti, J., Mason, B., Mills, S., Perril, S., & Pullinger, K. (2007).
Transliteracy: crossing divides. First Monday, 12(12), 1-16.

205

Tsai, W. C., Ro, Y. L., Chang, Y. T., & Lee, C. F. (2011). The effects of font size and page
presentation method of e-book reading on small screens for older adults. In Universal
Access in Human-Computer Interaction. Context Diversity (pp. 94-101). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Tsakonas, G., & Papatheodorou, C. (2006). Analysing and evaluating usefulness and usability in
electronic information services. Journal of Information Science, 32(5), 400-419.
Tyner, K. (Ed.). (2010). Media literacy: New agendas in communication. New York, NY:
Routledge.
University of Wisconsin Milwaukee (UWM). (2015). Qualtrics. Retrieved from
https://www4.uwm.edu/survey/overview/
Vakkari, P. (2001). A theory of the task-based information retrieval process: A summary and
generalization of a longitudinal study. Journal of Documentation, 57 (1), 44-60.
Vakkari, P. (2003). Task-­‐based information searching. Annual Review of Information Science
and Technology, 37(1), 413-464.
Vakkari, P. & Järvelin, K. (2005). Explanation in information seeking and retrieval. In A. Spink,
& C. Cole (Eds.) New Directions in Cognitive Information Retrieval (pp. 113-138).
Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer.
Vakkari, P., Pennanen, M., & Serola, S. (2003). Changes of search terms and tactics while
writing a research proposal: A longitudinal case study. Information Processing &
Management, 39(3), 445-463. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0306-4573(02)00031-6.
Verkasalo, H. (2009). Contextual patterns in mobile service usage. Personal and Ubiquitous
Computing, 13(5), 331-342.

206

Visser, M. (2014, February 6). FCC: The time is now to speed library broadband connections.
District Dispatch. (Web log comment) Retrieved from
http://www.districtdispatch.org/2014/02/fcc-time-now-speed-library-broadbandconnections/
Wagner, N., Hassanein, K., & Head, M. (2010). Computer use by older adults: A multidisciplinary review. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(5), 870-882.
Wang, P. (2011). Information behavior and seeking. In I. Ruthven & D. Kelly (2011). (Eds.).
Interactive Information Seeking, Behaviour and Retrieval (pp. 15-41). London, WCIE:
Facet Publishing.
Wang, P., Hawk, W., & Tenopir, C. (2000). Users’ interaction with the World Wide Web
resources: An exploratory study using a holistic approach. Information Processing and
Management, 36, 229-251.
Wapner, C. (2014, March 21). FCC Workshop highlights need for higher capacity Broadband in
rural libraries. (Web log comment) District Dispatch. Retrieved from
http://www.districtdispatch.org/2014/03/fcc-workshop-highlights-need-highercapacity-broadband-rural-libraries/
Watters, C., & Duffy, J. (2005). Motivational factors for interface design. Theories of
Information Behavior, 242-246.
Webb, L. (2002). Availability of internet training programs for elderly public library patrons.
Reference Librarian, 37 (77)137-147.
Wicks, D. (2004). Older adults and their information seeking. Behavioral & Social Sciences
Librarian 22(2): 1-26. doi: 10.1300/J103v22n02_01.

207

Wildemuth, B. (2004). The effects of domain knowledge on search tactic formulation. Journal
of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 55(3), 246-258.
Willis, S. (2006). Technology and learning in current and future generations of elders.
Generations, 30(2), 44-48.
Wilson, T. (1999). Models in information behaviour research. Journal of Documentation, 55(3),
249-270.
Wilson, T. (2000). Human information behavior. Informing Science, 3(2), 49-56.
Wilson, T., Ford, N., Ellis, D., Foster, A., & Spink, A. (2002). Information seeking and mediated
searching: Part 2. Uncertainty and its correlates. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 53(9), 704-715.
Wobbrock, J. (2006). The future of mobile device research in HCI. In CHI 2006 Workshop
Proceedings: What is the Next Generation of Human-Computer Interaction?, 131-134.
Wolfram, D., Wang, P., & Zhang, J. (2009). Identifying Web search session patterns using
cluster analysis: A comparison of three search environments. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(5), 896-910.
Wolfram, D., & Zhang, J. (2001). The impact of term-indexing characteristics on a document
space. Canadian Journal of Information & Library Sciences, 26(4), 21.
Wong, Y., Law, C., Fung, J., & Lam, J. (2009). Perpetuating old exclusions and producing new
ones: Digital exclusions in an information society. Journal of Technology in Human
Science, 27(1), 57-78. doi: 10.1080/15228830802459135.
Wright, J. (2014). Two billion for E-rate provides “2-for-1” benefits.” Direct Dispatch.
Retrieved from http://www.districtdispatch.org/2014/04/two-billion-e-rate-provides-2-1benefits/

208

Xie, H. (2000). Shifts of interactive intentions and information-seeking strategies in interactive
information retrieval. Journal of the American Society for Information Science, 51(9),
841-857. doi: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4571(2000)51:9<841::aid-asi70>3.0.co;2-0
Xie, H. (2003). Supporting ease-of-use and user control: desired features and structure of
Web-based online IR systems. Information Processing and Management, 39(6),
899-922. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4573(02)00042-0.
Xie, H. (2006). Understanding human-work domain interaction: Implications for the design of a
corporate digital library. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 57 (1), 128-143. doi: 10.1002/asi.
Xie, I. (2004). Online IR system evaluation: Online databases versus Web search engines. Online
Information Review, 28(3), 211-219. doi: 10.1108/14684520410543652.
Xie, I. (2008). Interactive Information Retrieval in Digital Environments. Hershey, Pa: IGI
Publishing.
Xie, I. (2009). Information searching and search models. In M. Bates & M. N. Maack (Eds.)
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences, Third Edition, (pp. 2592-2604). New
York, NY: Taylor & Francis. doi: 10.108/E-ELIS3-120043745.
Xie, I. (2012). Information searching and search models. In M. Bates (Ed.). Understanding
Information Retrieval Systems: Management, Types, and Standards (pp. 31-46). Boca
Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Xie, I., & Cool, C. (2009). Understanding help seeking within the context of searching digital
libraries. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 60(3),
477-494.

209

Xie, I., & Joo, S. (2010). Transitions in search tactics during the Web-­‐based search process.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 61(11), 21882205.
Zhang, J. (2008). Visualization for Information Retrieval. Berlin Heidelberg: Springer.
Zhang, J., & Nguyen, T. (2005). WebStar: A visualization model for hyperlink structures.
Information Processing and Management, 41, 1003-1018. doi:
10.1016/j.ipm.2004.03.005.
Zickuhr, K. (2010). Generations: Online activities. Pew Research and Internet Project. Retrieved
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2010/12/16/online-activities/
Zickuhr, K. (2011). Generations and their gadgets. Pew Research and Internet Project. Retrieved
from http://www.pewinternet.org/2011/02/03/generations-and-their-gadgets/
Zickuhr, K., & Madden, M. (2012). Older adults and internet use. Pew Research Internet
Project. Retrieved from
http://www.sainetz.at/dokumente/Older_adults_and_internet_use_2012.pdf
Zickuhr, K., & Rainie, L. (2014). Tablet & e-reader ownership. Pew Research and Internet
Project. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/2014/01/16/tablet-and-e-readerownership/
Ziefle, M., & Bay, S. (2005). How older adults meet complexity: aging effects on the usability of
different mobile phones. Behaviour & Information Technology, 24(5), 375-389.
Zwass, V. (2012). Ethical issues in information systems. In M. Bates (Ed.) Understanding
Information Retrieval Systems: Management, Types and Standards. Boca Raton, Fl.:
CRC Press.

210

Appendix A: Study Flyer

211

Appendix B: Email Letter
Dear (Friend):
I am writing to ask you to be a part of my dissertation study. I have attached a flyer that gives
more information of what the study entails. It will take a small amount of your time to
participate. If possible, please feel free to tell your friends and family and pass along the flyer to
individuals in the appropriate age range (born 1946-1964) for the study along with my contact
information. I appreciate all your help and I look forward to hearing from you.
Best,
Renee

Renee-Bennett-Kapusniak
PhD Dissertator/B2A Fellow
School of Information Studies
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee

212

Appendix C: Questionnaire
1) What is your gender?

Male

2) How old are you?

Female
___________

3) What is your highest education?
High School graduate or less

Some college

College graduate

4) What is your experience with information technology?
Expert (I have few problems finding and retrieving information on a computer or
electronic device).
Intermediate (I have some challenges finding and retrieving information on a computer
or electronic device.)
Novice (I have difficulties finding and retrieving information on a computer or electronic
device.)
5) What type of electronic device(s) do you currently own to access information? Please check all
that apply.
Tablet Computer (iPad, Kindle Fire, Nook, etc.)
Smartphone/Internet enabled cellphone (Phone, Galaxy, Android,
GoPhone, Blackberry, etc.)
E-reader (Kindle, Nook, Nexus, etc.)
iPod Touch
6) How often do you use your mobile device? Please circle one.
Once a day

2-3x a day

4-6x a day

More than 7x a day

7) What activities do you use your mobile device for? (e.g. phone calls, text messages, email, social
networking, entertainment, shopping, education, banking, directions, information searching, etc.)
Please be specific.

213

Appendix D: Diary Questions
Questions
1) What type of mobile device did you use? (Smartphone/cellphone, E-reader, iPad/tablet, iPod
touch)
2) Where were you? (Home, Car, Work, School, Store, Other)
3) What type of information did you look for? Why? Please explain.
4) How long did you use the mobile device to find your information? Please indicate minutes, hours
5) Did you find what you were looking for? Why or Why not?
6) Did you encounter any problems? Please explain
7) Did anyone help you? Who was it?
8) Why did you choose to use that mobile device to find your information?

214

Appendix E: IRB Approval Letter

215

Appendix F: Interview Questions
1) I noticed in your diary you have a (mobile device). Do have any other mobile devices?
Would you mind sharing why you don’t own (mobile device)?
2) Have you ever had any difficulties or problems using your (mobile device)? If yes, could
you please explain one to me?
3) Was the (mobile device) easy to use and learn?
4) Did you have anyone teach you about the (mobile device) and how to use it?
5) Are you still learning different aspects of the (mobile device)? Would you teach someone
else to use it?
6) I noticed you did not indicate you performed (activities in diary). What device do you
use? Why do you prefer your (information technology) and not your mobile device?
7) Do you like using your mobile device to search for information on the Internet? Why?
8) You mentioned (…) as a factor in using your (mobile device). Would you still do
searching on a computer if you didn’t have the mobile device? Why?
9) Do you think you use your device more for quick specific searches or more for browsing?
Why?
10) Are there any search activities you don’t do on your (mobile device)? Why?
11) Do you still use a desktop or laptop computer?
12) If you had a choice-which would you most likely use, a mobile device or a computer?
Why?
13) How many times do you think you use your mobile device for searching in a day? 5, 10,
20 etc.…
14) Do you use your (mobile device) for an extended period of time or in short amounts?

216

15) I noticed in your diary that you didn’t use your (mobile device) over the weekend? Is
there a reason why?
16) Do you usually purchase or use new mobile devices or technology? Why or why not?
17) Do you find new mobile devices easy to learn and use? Why or why not?
18) Do you use your devices for work and at home? Where do you think you use it more?
Why?
19) Is there anything else you would like to share about using a mobile device?

217

CURRICULUM VITAE
Renee Bennett-Kapusniak
Place of birth: Saratoga Springs, NY
Education
Ph.D. (2015)
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Philosophy in Information Studies
Certification (1992)
New York State Permanent Teacher Certification Elementary Education N-6
M.S. (1990)
Nazareth College
Elementary Education Grades N-6
B.A./Certification (1986)
State University of New York at Potsdam
Psychology
New York State Provisional Teacher Certification Elementary Education N-6
Dissertation Title: Baby Boomers and Technology: Factors and Challenges in Utilizing
Mobile Devices
Research Areas
Information Retrieval
Baby Boomers
Digital Libraries

Information Access
Adults Midlife & Older
User Behaviors

User Studies
Library Services
User-System Interaction

Research Experience
University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI
“Exceeded Expectations” from Faculty in All Assistantships
Research Assistant with Dr. Iris Xie (Summer 2015)
Paper publication in progress: System support and user engagement in applying
search tactics
Research Assistant with Dr. Joyce Latham (Summer, 2015)
Paper publication in progress Library practitioners and research: bridging the gap

218

Research Experience
Research Assistant for the Research group for information retrieval (November 2013-July
2014) Coded qualitative data
Research Assistant with Dr. Iris Xie (Fall 2011- Spring 2014)
Three paper publications in progress
Research Assistant with Dr. Wooseob Jeong (Spring 2012- Spring 2013)
Co-Created citywide survey to determine Internet access for the city of
Milwaukee Quantitative analyses presented to Milwaukee City Board
Research Assistant with Dr. Joyce Latham (Summer 2013)
Research study with public libraries-Coded qualitative data and Cocreated presentations and posters of findings at WAPL 2013, ALISE 2014,
ALA 2014
Research Assistant with Dr. Jessica Moyer (Summer 2012)
Coded qualitative data and Co-created poster presentation of initial
findings at ALISE’13
Teaching Experience
Instructor Onsite
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee WI (Fall 2014)
INFOST 682 Digital Libraries
Supervisor of Teaching Assistant (Fall 2014)
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee WI (Fall 2014)
INFOST 682 – Digital Libraries
Teaching Assistant Online
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee W (Spring 2015)
INFOST 110 Introduction to Information Science and Technology
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee WI (Spring 2014)
INFOST 682 – Digital Libraries
“Exceeded Expectations” from Faculty
Teaching Assistant Onsite
University of Wisconsin Milwaukee, Milwaukee WI (Fall 2013)
INFOST 110 - Introduction to Information Science and Technology
“Exceeded Expectations” from Faculty

219

Other Teaching Experience
School Librarian Pre-K-6th grade (150-200 students)
Holy Trinity School, Webster, NY (June 2003-July 2006)
First Grade Teacher (16-22 students)
Holy Trinity School, Webster, NY (July 1998-Jun 2003)
Field Experience
Acquisitions Assistant (March 2008-July 2011)
Rincker Memorial Library Concordia University Wisconsin
Library Assistant-Circulation (November 2007-March 2008)
Pauline Haas Public Library Sussex, WI
Library Page (November 2007-March 2008)
Waukesha Public Library Waukesha, WI
Library Assistant-Circulation (January 2007-March 2008)
Delafield Public Library Delafield, WI
Senior Library Clerk-Circulation Supervisor (October 2005-July 2006)
Webster Public Library Webster, NY
Library Assistant-Circulation (October 2004-October 2005)
Webster Public Library Webster, NY
School Librarian-Grades K-6 (June 2003-July 2006)
Holy Trinity School Webster, NY
Articles and Papers Published
Wolfram, Dietmar, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Jeannette Glover, Adriana McCleer,
Jennifer Thiele. (2016) Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme: A
Report on The B2A Program. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science,
57(1) (publication pending).
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Adriana McCleer. (2015). Love in the digital library: A
search for racial heterogeneity in e-books. Journal of Popular Romance Studies, 5(1), 121. http://jprstudies.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/LITDL.08.2015.pdf
Xie, Iris, Soohyung Joo, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak. (2013). User Engagement and
System Support in the Search Process: User dominated, system dominated and balanced
search tactics. In Proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 50(1), 1-4

220

Articles and Papers Published
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee. (2013). Older Adults and the Public Library: The Impact of
the Boomer Generation. Public Library Quarterly, 32 (3) 204-222
Jeong, Wooseob, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Hye Jung Han. (2013). The Usability
Study on the Multicultural Children’s Book Project of the National Library for Children
and Young Adults (NLCY) in Korea. In iConference 2013 Proceedings (pp. 769-772)
Presentations
Wolfram, Dietmar, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Jeannette Glover, Adriana McCleer,
Jennifer Thiele. (2015). Planning LIS Doctoral Education Around a Focused Theme: The
B2A Approach. Juried Panel discussion at ALISE2015. January 30. Chicago, IL
McCleer, Adriana, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak. (2014). Love in the WPLC Digital
Library: Searching for Diversity in the E-Romance Collection. Wisconsin Library
Association Conference 2014. November 7. Wisconsin Dells, WI
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Shannon Crawford-Barniskis, Adriana McCleer, Jennifer
Thiele, Joyce Latham. (2014). Leveraging National Data to Advocate Locally. American
Library Association Annual Conference 2014. June 29. Las Vegas, NV
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Adriana McCleer. (2014). Love in the Digital Library: A
Search for Racial Heterogeneity in E-Books. Fifth International Conference on Popular
Romance Studies. June 19. Thessaloniki, Greece
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Shannon Crawford-Barniskis, Adriana McCleer, Jennifer
Thiele, Joyce Latham. (2014). Converging Knowledge: Networking the Gap between
Public Librarians and Researchers. Poster at ALISE’2014. January 21. Philadelphia, PA
Xie, Iris, Soohyung Joo, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak. (2013). User Engagement and
System Support in the Search Process: User dominated, system dominated and balanced
tactics. Poster at 2013ASIS&T Annual Meeting. November 4. Montreal, Canada
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Wooseob Jeong, Hye Jung Han. (2013). Digital
Inclusion Survey: ASIS&T SIG-USE Symposium IGNITE Talk. 2013 ASIS&T Annual
Meeting. November 2. Montreal, Canada
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Shannon Crawford-Barniskis, Adriana McCleer, Jennifer
Thiele, Joyce Latham. (2013). The Traditional, the Digital, and You: Discussing the Pew
Reports and What They Mean in Wisconsin. Wisconsin Library Association Conference
2013. October 24. Green Bay, WI

221

Presentations
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Shannon Crawford-Barniskis, Adriana McCleer, Jennifer
Thiele, Joyce Latham. (2013). The Traditional, the Digital, and You: Discussing the Pew
Reports. Wisconsin Association Public Library Conference. May 2. Lake Geneva, WI
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee. (2013). Librarians’ Perception of Older Adult Services: The
Importance of Older Adult Programming and Outreach in Rural, Suburban and Urban
Libraries in Wisconsin. University of Wisconsin School of Informational Studies B2A
Lecture Series. February 5. Milwaukee, WI
Thiele, Jennifer, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Michael Zimmer. (2013). E-books and
Cross Generational Perceived Privacy Issues. Poster at iConference 2013. February 1314. Fort Worth, TX
Han, Hye Jung, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Wooseob Jeong. (2013). The Usability
Study on the Multicultural Children’s Book Project of the National Library for Children
and Young Adults (NLCY) in Korea. Poster at iConference 2013. February 13-14. Fort
Worth, TX
Moyer, Jessica, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Jennifer Thiele. (2013). Reader’s Advisory
Services: Have We Gotten Any Better?. Poster at ALISE’13. January 22. Seattle, WA
Wolfram, Dietmar, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak, Jeannette Glover, Adriana McCleer,
Jennifer Thiele. (2012). Overcoming Barriers to Information Access: How E-books Help
or Hinder Information Access. Panel discussion at The 2nd National Joint Conference of
Librarians of Color. September 24. Kansas City, MO
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Jennifer Thiele. (2012). Browsing for Leisure Reading in
the Digital Environment: A Case Study. Poster at IFLA International Federation of
Library Associations and Institutions World Library and Information Congress. August
13-14. Helsinki, Finland
Bennett-Kapusniak, Renee, Jennifer Thiele. (2012). Wisconsin Public Library
Consortium: Access and Navigation. Wisconsin Library Association Support Staff and
Circulation Services Annual Professional Development Conference. May 23. Appleton,
WI
Joo, Soohyung, Renee Bennett-Kapusniak. (2012). Exploring User Engagement and
System Support in Applying Search Tactics. Presented at SLIS/SOIS Student Research
Forum. April 16. Madison, WI
Honors, Scholarships & Awards
Beta Phi Mu International Honor Society

222

Honors, Scholarships & Awards
Fellowship Grant (2011-2015) University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of
Information Studies Overcoming Barriers to Information Access (B2A), Sponsored by
the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS) Laura Bush 21st Century Library
Program
Doctoral Research Award Grant Opportunity University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
School of Information Studies
Baby Boomers and Technology: Factors and Challenges in Utilizing Mobile Devices
(October 2014) $1,000 Dissertation Research
E-books and the user interface: The interactions between users and OPAC systems
(August 2012) $500
Graduate School Travel Award University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
Fifth International Conference on Popular Romance Studies, Thessaloniki, Greece
(June 2014) $550
ALISE’13, Seattle, WA.
(January 2013) $450
Professional Services
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee School of Information Studies Milwaukee, WI
ASIS&T Student Chapter, Vice President (2012-Present)
Doctoral Student Organization Committee, Executive Member (2011-2013)
Research Committee, PhD Representative (2011-2013)
Co-Editor PhD Newsletter (Fall 2013)
Professional Affiliations
American Library Association
American Library Association Library Services to an Aging Population Committee
American Society for Information Science & Technology
Association for Library and Information Science Education
Popular Culture Association/American Culture Association
Public Library Association
Wisconsin Library Association
Professional Conference Activities
ALA (2012-2014)
IASPR (2014)
ALISE (2013-2015) iConference (2013)
ASIS&T (2013)
IFLA (2012)

223

JCLC (2012)
WAAL (2012)
WAPL (2013)

WLA (2008-2014)

