MEDIA SELECTION AND ACTIVE LEARNING: DESIGN PRACTICES OF
DESIGNERS-BY-ASSIGNMENT WITHIN THE ACADEMIC LIBRARY
by
Euthena Newman

MOLLY LANE, PhD, Faculty Mentor and Chair
ADAIR WHITE-JOHNSON, PhD, Committee Member
LESLIE MOLLER, PhD, Committee Member
ANN ARMSTRONG, EdD, Committee Member

Jim Wold, PhD, Interim Dean, School of Education

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy

Capella University
April 2015

UMI Number: 3700916

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3700916
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Euthena Newman, 2015

Abstract
Media selection is an important part of the instructional systems design process that
warrants the delivery of appropriate content in support of an active learning environment.
Instruction librarians, serving as designers-by-assignment, have responsibility for
effectively teaching information literacy skills to students. The purpose of the study was
to describe how instruction librarians select media when designing information literacy
instruction within an active learning environment. Media selection by designers-byassignment with little or no formal training in instructional systems design is an area that
has not been fully explored. A sample of 7 academic instruction librarians were
interviewed using a researcher prepared Interview Guide of open-ended, semi-structured
questions. The interviews were recorded and transcribed. Data were collected and
triangulated from participant interviews, participant artifacts, and researcher notes. Data
analysis was performed using inductive coding. Research findings indicated that media
classified as software, particularly cloud-based software, is selected most often to
integrate active learning in the design of information literacy instruction. The findings
also revealed that cost is the predominate factor that determines media selection. In
addition, media selection strategies used by designers-by-assignmentdesigners-byassignmentdesigners-by-assignment within the academic library involves: (a) acquiring
knowledge of best practices through professional development activities, (b) analyzing
pragmatic and functional characteristics of available media, (c) and aligning media with
learning objectives to meet learner needs.

Dedication
This dissertation is dedicated to my family for they continue to be my inspiration:
To my loving son, Damon Sr. who never doubted my ability, my precious grandchildren
Damon Jr., Amani, Khania and Jada, who encouraged me, and my awesome greatgrandson, Damon III who was my refuge; my wonderful sisters Blanche, Justine,
Beverly, and LaVerne and my terrific brother Buddy, along with their families. They are
indeed my greatest champions and the “wind beneath my wings”. Most of all, I dedicate
this dissertation to my precious, precious mother Rosie who accompanied me on this
path and left only after she was sure I knew the way. Even though she transitioned from
this life to the next before my journey ended, she left an inheritance of boundless love
and wisdom that continues to overflow. To God be the glory for the things He has done.

“And let us not be weary in well doing: for in due season we shall reap, if we faint not.”
(Galatians 6:9KJV)

iii

Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge my dedicated and inspiring mentor, Dr. Molly Lane,
for her valuable guidance, feedback, and expertise. She knew just what I needed to stay
focused and motivated. A special thanks to my committee members, Dr. Adair WhiteJohnson , Dr. Leslie Moller, and Dr. Ann Armstrong; to Dr. Lizzie Reeder, who
traveled this long and arduous journey with me and cheered me on; and to the study
participants who gave of themselves to add to the knowledge of instructional design
practice.
.

iv

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments

iv

List of Tables
List of Figures
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction to the Problem

1

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework

3

Statement of the Problem

4

Purpose of the Study

4

Research Questions

5

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance of the Study

5

Nature of the Study

6

Definition of Terms

6

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations

9

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

10

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

12

Introduction to the Literature Review

12

Conceptual Framework

12

Review of Research Literature and Methodological Literature

14

Instructional Design

15

Designers-by-Assignment

22

Information Literacy

24
v

Active Learning

27

Instructional Media

31

Media Selection Models

37

Synthesis of Research Findings

42

Critique of Previous Findings

43

Chapter 2 Summary

44

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

46

Introduction to Chapter 3

46

Purpose of the Study

46

Research Questions

47

Research Design

47

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures

48

Instrumentation

51

Data Collection

53

Field Test

55

Data Analysis Procedures

55

Limitations of the Research Design

57

Credibility

57

Transferability

58

Expected Findings

58

Ethical Issues

59

Chapter 3 Summary

61
vi

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

62

Introduction

62

Description of the Sample

62

Research Design and Introduction to the Analysis

68

Data Analysis

69

Chapter 4 Summary

83

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

84

Introduction

85

Summary of the Findings

86

Discussion of the Findings

87

Discussion of the Findings in Relation to the Literature

91

Limitations

94

Implication of the Findings for Practice

95

Recommendations for Further Research

96

Conclusion

97

REFERENCES

99

APPENDIX A. MEDIA SELECTION INTERVIEW GUIDE

115

APPENDIX B. CODES AND CODE DESCRIPTIONS

117

APPENDIX C.STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK

118

vii

List of Tables
Table 1. ADDIE Instructional Process

17

Table 2. Types of Instructional Media

33

Table 3. Media Selection Models and Guidelines

39

Table 4. Data Analysis Procedures

56

Table 5. Research Questions Analysis

56

Table 6. Demographic Description

63

Table 7. Subordinate Research Questions Mapped to Interview Questions

69

Table 8. Active Learning Descriptions

70

Table 9. Type of Media Used by Study Participants

72

Table 10. Factors that Affect Media Section

77

T able 11. Media Selection Strategies

79

Table 12. Participant Artifacts Analysis

82

viii

List of Figures
Figure 1: Conceptual framework for Media Selection for Active Learning

ix

13

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the Problem
The professional practice of instructional design (ID) requires the attainment and
demonstration of high level critical thinking, problem-solving, and interpersonal skills.
This profession, as described by Guernsey (1998) is a blending of academic computing
and college teaching. How people learn, the contexts in which people learn best, and the
instructional strategies that promote learning constitute the essence of this practice
(Merrill, Sebek, & Erksine, 2005, p. 29). Instructional designers are found throughout
various learning communities - military, business, and education - anywhere there is a
learning need. They systematically employ design theories, models, and a variety of
instructional media to guide the design of instructional experiences (Reiser, 2001).
Encouraged by an increase in online teaching and learning initiatives,
instructional designers are in high demand in higher education and their role in producing
effective instruction has been well documented (Pan & Thompson, 2009; Shibley,
Amaral, Shank, & Shibley, 2011). Assistance and collaboration with teaching faculty is
indispensable because, while higher education faculty members are trained in content,
there is no requirement for competence in innovative teaching strategies. Current
pedagogy in higher education has transitioned from a teacher-centered environment to an
active learning, student-centered environment. Active learning has proven to be effective
for insuring that students make appropriate connections between content and knowledge.
1

It encourages student engagement and supports knowledge retention by helping to
maintain students’ attention in the subject matter.
An integral and critical aspect of designing for active learning involves choosing
appropriate media to transport the instructional content. The instructional systems design
process involves analysis, design, development, implementation, and evaluation. During
the design phase of the instructional design process, instructional designers make
complex decisions regarding which medium will best deliver content to the users. They
perform detailed analysis of learning objectives, learner characteristics, and media
characteristics, in order to choose the most appropriate media. Several media selection
models have been developed to guide instructional designers in making appropriate
media selection.
As important as the instructional designer is to higher education, Merrill (2007)
reminds us that most instructional design is not performed by formally trained
instructional designers but by what he calls designers-by-assignment. This group of
designers are content or subject matter experts (SME) within their respective fields, but
have acquired little if any formal training in instructional systems design and pedagogy.
Academic librarians employed in institutions of higher education make up a significant
portion of the designers-by-assignment community.
University libraries are embedded in higher education’s core functions of teaching
and learning. Designing and delivering information literacy instruction has become a
primary responsibility of academic librarians as they prepare students for life-long
learning. Research literature detailing how instruction librarians perform instructional
design activities is limited, especially in the area of selecting instructional media. This
2

research study fills that knowledge gap by describing the real-life media selection
strategies of academic librarians serving as designers-by-assignment.

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework
A pedagogical shift is well underway in higher education from the traditional
teacher-centered instructional environment to a more active learning environment that is
process oriented and student-centered (Conway, 1997). Designing and delivering
instruction under the umbrella of active learning and without formal training in
instructional design and pedagogy is a common expectation of instruction librarians.
These designers are expected to plan, implement, and deliver instruction within the
framework of the five phases of the ADDIE instructional design process: analysis,
design, development, implementation, and evaluation. A serious aspect of the design
phase is matching appropriate media to learning objectives for effective student learning.
Introducing suitable media in the core of active learning environments is a challenge for
both novice and expert instructional designers. (Green & Gilbert, 1995; Hagenson, 2001).
Practical research findings in the area of media selection by designers-by-assignment are
extremely limited (Suzuki, 1995). This study will advance the scientific knowledge of
media selection and integrate the research across the disciplines of librarianship as well
as instructional design. The findings of this study will validate research quality, advance
the knowledge base and enrich the professional development of expert instructional
designers.

3

Statement of the Problem
The presence of instructional designers in higher education is critical because they
possess the necessary background in learning theories and instructional strategies to
produce high quality course design. They are trained to purposely develop the look, feel,
organization, and functionality of educational programs. A necessary aspect of the design
process is media integration but identifying and selecting the most appropriate
instructional media that best supports the learning objectives can be a complex and
challenging task (Fells, 2012). Utilizing media that does not help fulfill the learning
objectives can result in ineffective instruction, misuse of fiscal and human resources, and
misalignment of media with intended audience. Formally trained instructional designers
are instructed in the use of media selection models designed to assist in aligning learning
objectives with instructional media. Academic librarians responsible for library
instruction course design have not had the benefit of formal training in media selection.
There is little empirical research that documents how these designers perform media
selection within the instructional environment. This study will enhance the existing
research on media selection, identify best media selection practices, and advance general
design knowledge, which should translate into more effective instruction.

Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this research study is to extend the knowledge base of
instructional design by describing how designers-by-assignment select appropriate media
to support active learning in real-life practice (Richey & Klein, 2007). Helping future
designers-by-assignment as well as expert instructional designers facilitate maximum
4

effectiveness of their instructional efforts is an additional reason for this research.
Information from this research study will uncover best media selection practices for
building active learning environments and describe efficient and effective instructional
design strategies.

Research Questions
One central question will guide this study:
How do designers-by-assignment select instructional media to build active learning
environments?
Three subordinate questions will give support to the central question:
1. What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
2.

What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices with
respect to the design of active learning environments?

3. What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the design of
active learning environments?

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance
Selecting instructional media to meet learning needs is performed by novice
designers with little instructional design training. First-hand research that helps identify
how media are selected adds to the arsenal of information from which designers-byassignment can access for media selection assistance. Since the majority of instructional
design tends to be done by these novice designers (Merrill, 2007), understanding their
media selection practices may encourage trained instructional designers to develop tools
that will assist, support, and mentor this category of instructional designers.
5

Nature of the Study
A qualitative descriptive case study approach was used to gain insight into the
phenomenon of media selection by designers-by-assignment through examining their
verbal accounts of their real-life practices (Patton, 2002). A case study is appropriate for
investigating a phenomenon within its real-life context (Yin, 2003, p. 23).
Semi-structured interviews will constitute the method of collecting data to answer
the research questions. The advantage in using semi-structured interviews is that
interview questions can be prepared in advance, allowing the interviewer to appear
prepared and competent (Cachia & Millward, 2011; Wengraf, 2001). The interview
questions will be open-ended. This will permit the interviewees the liberty to express
their views. Research participants will be recruited from the academic library community
responsible for library instruction course design. Seven research participants were
recruited for the study. There is no definitive number as to the size that a study sample
should be because a sufficient sample size in qualitative research is relative (Mason,
2010; Trotter, 2012; Yin, 2003).

Definition of Terms
ADDIE. Most well-known generic representative of the instructional systems
design (ISD) process that consists of five steps: analysis, design, development,
implementation, and evaluation. This strategic plan for course design may serve as an
outline to design information literacy sessions and classes, as well as other instructional
events (Davis, 2013).

6

American Library Association (ALA). The American Library Association (ALA)
is the oldest and largest library association in the world, providing information relative to
the association, news, events, and advocacy resources for its members, librarians, and
library users in general (ALA, 2014).
Collaborative software. A broad term that represents computer-supported
software designed to help people work effectively to achieve a common goal.
Designer-by-assignment. Persons who are assigned responsibilities for designing
and developing instructional materials mainly because of their prior knowledge of a
certain subject area and their familiarity and experience with respective teaching and
learning (Merrill, 2007).
Emerging technologies. “Tools, concepts, innovations, and advancements utilized
in diverse educational settings to serve varied education-related purposes” that are
continually evolving, “not yet fully understood, and not yet fully researched”
(Veletsianos, 2010, p. 4).
Information literate. To be considered information literate, one must have the
ability to recognize when information is needed and know how to locate, evaluate, and
use the information effectively. Institutions of learning should integrate the concept of
information literacy into their academic programs so as to prepare individuals and
institutions to benefit from the opportunities central within the information society (ALA,
1989).

7

Instructional design. “The systematic and reflective process of translating
principles of learning and instruction into plans for instructional materials, activities,
information resources, and evaluation” (Smith & Ragan, 2005, p.4).
Instructional designer. An individual who has studied instructional design and is
knowledgeable in instructional design theory, learning theory, and instructional design
models.
Instructional librarian. Academic librarian whose work is focused on the design
and delivery of instructional services, along with traditional responsibilities in
librarianship such as reference, collection development, and liaison with a specific
academic department (ALA, 2008).
Instructional Media. All available human and material resources which appeal to
the learners’ sense of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, touching or feeling and which
assist to facilitate teaching and learning (Adekola, 2008).
Interview protocol. A set of guiding questions used by the researcher in
conducting a structured or semi-structured interview session (Creswell, 2008).
Librarian. For the purpose of this study a librarian is defined as a person who has
received a Master’s degree in Library Science or Library and Information Science or
comparable degree from an ALA-accredited School of library Science or Library and
Information Sciences.
Lived experience. For this study it is used here as the research participants’ direct
accounts of his or her personal professional experiences working as an instructional
librarian and subject matter expert with responsibilities for designing and delivering
library instruction in an academic library.
8

Media. The plural of medium. The means by which information is delivered from
one place to another. (Clark, 2012).
One-shot. One-time, fifty-minute librarian-led instructional session, designed to
acquaint students with library services, teach them how to search various databases, and
evaluate type and quality of resources (Walker & Pearce (2014).).
Subject Matter Expert (SME). "A person qualified to provide information about
content and resources relating to all aspects of the topics for which instruction is to be
designed” (Kemp, Morrison & Ross (2004).
Virtual Artifact: For this study a virtual artifact is an immaterial object that exists
only in the human mind.
Web 2.0 tools. The term Web 2.0 is associated with web applications that offer new
ways of creating, collaborating, editing and sharing user-generated content online. The
general categories of Web 2.0 tools include presentation tools; video tools; mobile tools
(podcasts, blogs, apps); and community tools (wikis, Facebook, Instagram, etc.). A
major characteristic of these tools is that they are inexpensive and easy to deploy (Gupta
& Savard, 2011).

Assumptions and Limitations
There are three assumptions related to this study:
1. A case study using interviews will uncover real lived decision-making processes
of study participants’ experiences.
2.

Study participants were honest and their responses reflect their true media
selection experiences with respect to active learning environments.
9

3. The researcher was able to leave behind any bias or assumptions with respect to
media selection that supports active learning environments during the data
collection and analysis phases of this study.

The limitations of this study exist with respect to the specific work environment and
instrumentation:
1. The study investigated the experiences of instruction librarians in higher
education serving as designers-by-assignmentdesigners-by-assignment.
Because this qualitative research provides in-depth answers specific to one
defined group, it cannot be generalized, nor does it guarantee that research
findings can transfer to designers-by-assignmentdesigners-by-assignment
employed in other environments.
2. The researcher is both the instrument of data collection as well as the
interpreter of the findings.

Organization of the Remainder of the Study
This study concerns the lived experiences of academic librarians pressed into
service as designers-by-assignment as they select instructional media in the design of
library instruction sessions within an active learning environment. Chapter 2 of this
dissertation discusses the conceptual framework upon which this research is based.
Presented also is (a) a review of the literature framed by the research questions, followed
by (b) a review of instructional design,(c) information literacy, (d) designers-byassignment within the academic library, (e) active learning, (f ) instructional media and ,
10

(g) media selection models and strategies utilized within an active learning environment.
Chapter 3 sets forth the study design, selection of research participants, data collection,
and analysis methods utilized in this study. Chapter 4 documents the results of the study
as it relates to the research questions, in a descriptive manner. Chapter 5 offers
conclusions to the dissertation and presents recommendations for further research.

11

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction to the Literature Review
The purpose of this chapter is to situate the present study within the context of
other studies relevant to the central and subordinate research questions pertaining to
media selection within the framework of active learning. It will also establish the
instructional environment within which the research findings will be presented and
analyzed. The literature presents a clear account of expert instructional designers’
decision-making processes regarding media selection but continues to be limited in
empirical research regarding decision-making processes of designers-by-assignment
within the academic library (Pesce, 2012, p. 31).
The chapter begins with an examination of the conceptual framework of this
study, followed by a review of the research literature, and a review of methodological
issues. A synthesis of research findings and a critique of previous research are presented.
A chapter summary appears at the end.

Conceptual Framework
Learning theories are conceptual frameworks that help in the understanding of
how ideas are organized and how information is processed and recalled during learning.
The conceptual framework upon which this research rests includes the learning theory of
active learning, a tenant of the constructivist learning theory. Constructivism reasons that
knowledge is constructed when the learner is actively involved in the process. It is based
on the principle that students discover their own truths through active learning strategies
and emphasizes learning as an active, constructive process in which learners build
12

knowledge for themselves based on prior experiences. Active learning has proved to be
effective in developing higher-order thinking skills by engaging students to do and think
about what they are doing (Bonwell & Eison, 1991). Conceptual frameworks plot the
direction that research will take and shows the relationship of the different ideas being
investigated. The conceptual framework for this study connects the problem, question,
literature review, methodology, data collection, and data analysis to summarize, interpret
research findings, and integrate knowledge to fill any gaps in the literature. It is
represented graphically in Figure 1 below and consists of four constructs around which
the literature review will be organized: (a) instructional design (b) designers-byassignment in the academic library (c) active learning (d) information literacy, and (e)
instructional media.

Instructional
Design

Media Selection
Models and
Guidelines

Instructional
Media

Media
Selection

Active
Learning
Strategies

Designers
-by-Assignment
in Academic
Libraries

Information
Literacy

Figure 1: Conceptual framework for Media Selection for Active Learning
13

Review of the Research and Methodological Literature
Ideally the instructional design function in higher education is the responsibility
of formally trained experts with a theoretical education grounded in learning theory and
instructional strategy (Browne, 2010; Marcucci & Usher, 2011). Due to heavy
workloads and reductions in resource allocations, this function is often regulated to
faculty or subject matter experts (Chao, Saj & Hamilton, 2010). Academic librarians as
subject matter experts or designers-by-assignment are also expected to design and deliver
effective library and information literacy instruction. A critical decision that must be
made during the instructional design process is selecting appropriate media for delivering
the instructional content to meet learning objectives. Matching instructional media to
learning objectives and teaching methods can be complicated and at times paradoxical
(Shachaf & Hara, 2007). Exploring how designers-by-assignment selected media to
support active learning added to the knowledge base of the role media plays in effective
instruction.
A qualitative case study methodology proved relevant to study media selection
for active learning by designers-by-assignment. This research method was selected to
gain insight into the phenomenon of media selection through verbal accounts of real-life
design practices (Patton, 2002: Yin, 2009). Yin defines the case study as an “empirical
inquiry that investigates a contemporary phenomenon in depth and within its real-life
context,” (Yin, 2009, p. 18). Similar case study research designs can be found throughout

14

the literature that involved design practices of this designers-by-assignment population
(Essmaker, 2012; Halloran, 2013; Pesce, 2012).
A thematically organized literature review formed the foundation for this research
study. The operating themes were: (a) instructional design, (b) designers-by-assignment
in the academic library, (c) information literacy, (d) active learning, (e) instructional
media, and (f) media selection models. The interrelationship between these themes
constituted the conceptual framework.

Instructional Design
Instructional design (ID) is based on principles of instruction and learning. Smith
and Ragan (2005) describe instructional design as a systematic process of converting
doctrines of learning and instruction into strategies for distributing instructional
materials, activities, information resources, and evaluation. Instructional approaches for
preparing instructional designers include systematic and collaborative instruction within a
framework of teaching and learning theories. Instructional designers in higher education
work with faculty or subject matter experts to translate learning objectives into design
specifications (Cennamo & Kalk, 2005, p. 2). This collaboration facilitates the
probability that desired learning outcome will be achieved (Oswald & Reigeluth 2003, p.
1147; Solomonson, 2008).
The constructivist approach to learning has found a prominent place in higher
education (Hussain, 2012) as designers involve students in the learning process. Active
learning is a core tenant of constructivism. Academic librarians as designers-byassignment discovered that incorporating active learning strategies in information literacy
15

instruction increases student interest and motivation, and encourages students to take
responsibility for their own learning. Although designers-by-assignment have limited
formal training in pedagogical theory and instructional systems design, they can
overcome this knowledge gap by designing instruction within the framework of
instructional design models (Davis, 2013).
Instructional design models have played a vital role in instructional design,
according to Gustafson and Branch (1998), by providing conceptual and communication
tools to help guide learning. They are visual representations of the instructional design
process. Instructional design models useful for planning effective information literacy
instruction within a constructivist learning environments were explored for this study.
Regrettably there is not a considerable amount of empirical research literature which
attests to the efficacy of most models for information literacy instruction, but a review of
significant models are discussed.
ADDIE Instructional Design Process
The traditional ADDIE process focuses on a linear method of design and runs
counter to the tenets of constructivism. In spite of this, the ADDIE design process or
some form or variation of it has continued to be popular with instruction librarians as
they design information literacy instruction (Campbell, 2014; Swanson, 2005). The five
phases of the ADDIE instructional design process correspond to the ADDIE acronym:
Analysis, Design, Development, Implementation, and Evaluation. The ADDIE phases
showcase the most important steps to be taken in designing a training session. In the
original hierarchical version, each phase was to be completed before continuing on to the
next phase.
16

Table 1: ADDIE Instructional Process
Phases

Description

Analysis

In the analysis phase, the instructional problem is articulated, learning
objectives established, and learners identified.

Design

The design phase deals with specifics such as lesson planning, assessment
instruments, and media selection

Development

The development phase is where the assembly, integration, and
arrangement of the content, media, graphics, etc., take place. Designers
write content, create graphics, and, if needed, design and integrate
technologies ion this phase.

Implementation

During the implementation phase, a plan for identifying procedure for
delivering the instruction is developed, along with learning outcomes,
delivery methods, and testing procedures.

Evaluation

The evaluation phase is formative and summative. Formative evaluation is
performed during each phase of the ADDIE process. Summative evaluation
occurs after instruction has been provided and presents opportunities for
feedback from the users

Davis (2013) described how utilizing the ADDIE process by instruction librarians
benefited the development of a one-shot, 50-minute instruction session for students in a
journalism class. Benefits of the ADDIE process include clear instructional goals, student
engagement with interactive instruction and improved student performance. The ADDIE
process implementation may not be suited for in all design making situations but many
applications of this process exist throughout the literature.
Traditional instructional design models, including the ADDIE process, are based
on behavioral theories of learning. As active learning became popular, additional ID
models were developed that addressed issues of collaboration, motivation, and selfregulation. Critics of constructivist instructional design models articulated objectives.
Merrill (1996) incredulously advocated quiet strongly that ID models based on
constructivism would lead to ineffective instruction that does not translate into teaching
17

(p. 58). He continued to raise doubts that students could play a participatory role in
instructional design since, in his opinion, students are “lazy” and would not put forth
effort.
Recursive and Reflective Design and Development model (R2D2)
The Recursive and Reflective Design and Development model (R2D2) provides a
framework for reflecting the values of constructivism such as active engagement and
collaboration, resulting in more engaging, active, and responsive teaching and learning
( Lebow, 1993). The R2D2 model proved particularly useful for helping online
instructors integrate media appropriately for effective online learning. The flexibility of
this model accommodates very well the dynamics of online distance education as this
learning environment becomes more widespread. The R2D2 model does not have a set of
preset steps but presents four guiding principles of design: (a) recursion, (b) reflection,
(c) non-linearity, and (d) participatory. Recursion allows for the revision and adjustments
at any time during the process; Reflection seeks input from many sources instead of a
static list of steps; Non-linearity does not start with specific objectives but may evolve
throughout the process; Participatory indicates a team of stakeholders – instructional
designers, subject matter experts, and students (Jost, Mumma, & Willis, 1999).
Fink’s Significant Learning Experiences, Design, and System Thinking Model
Fink’s integrated course design model presents six specific categories of learning:
(a) foundational knowledge (content), (b) application (engagement), (c) integration
(connections), (d) human dimension (human discovery),( e ) caring (about others), and (f)
learning how to learn. All six significant learning categories should be identified
throughout each course design. According to Fink (2003), the key to quality in
18

educational programs is for the instruction to transition from traditional presenters of
information to facilitators of significant learning. The structure of Fink's model is circular
rather than hierarchical which illustrates that learning is continuous and multidirectional.
Fink’s model has been widely adopted in design and delivery of student-centered
instruction. Guttikonda and Coco (2013) reports on the use of Fink’s Model in the redesigning of an intermediate accounting course that encouraged active learning.
Significant learning happens when students are engaged. The accounting course was redesigned within the framework of Fink’s model to ensure opportunities were included for
student engagement. In fact, all six significant learning experiences of Fink’s model were
infused in the course. Once the course was re-designed, the authors reported that the redesign was more active, relevant, and meaningful to the students.
Zhang, Purcell, and Zhang (2012) also confirmed that Fink’s Integrated Course
Design model was effective for refining a Health Information Technology core course at
Southern Polytechnic State University in Marietta, Georgia. Fink’s model proved useful
for providing a practical and integrated guidance in the shift from a strictly teaching
paradigm to a learning paradigm. The application of Fink’s Model on the course redesign
enhanced student learning and prepared students to be able to contribute to the health
care profession, demonstrating that all six categories of learning had occurred.
Dale’s Cone of Experience
Dale’s Cone of Experience is a model developed by Edgar Dale that incorporates
several theories related to instructional design and the learning process. Edgar Dale
agreed that learners retained more information by what they do as opposed to what they
19

see, read, or hear. His research resulted from a systematic view of the nature and
importance of experience, and an emphasis on student-centered pedagogy (Dale, 1969).
The Cone, developed in 1946, was originally developed to describe various learning
experiences. It graphically shows the progression of experiences from the most tangiblebottom of the cone - to the most intangible – top of the cone (Chamberlain & Krals,
1993). The Cone was designed to help explain the interrelationships of types of audiovisual materials visually, as well as their place in the learning process. Dale’s model
assists instructional designers in finding opportunities for learners to use a combination of
all the senses to enhance the learning experience (Little, 2006).
Dwyer (2010) recognized the uniqueness of Dale's Cone of Experience as one of
the first attempts to organize the various types of media available. Media was presented
visually to explain the inter-relationships between the types of audio- visual materials,
although the arrangement of media was not to be taken literally. Percentages of
knowledge retention were later assigned to each level of the Cone. Dwyer (2010)
cautions that the Cone’s usefulness as neither an instructional tool, nor the percentages
assigned to each level, were supported by empirical data.
Gagne’s Nine Events of Instruction
Robert Gagne introduced in 1994 a conceptual framework for designing affective
instruction called the Events of Instruction. Gagne's Nine Events of Instruction provides a
step-by-step approach that can help instructional designers structure their training so that
students get the most from their learning experiences. This nine-step process details each
element or event required for effective learning. The model provides a checklist to use
before engaging in instructional activities. When each step is completed students are
20

more likely to be engaged “actively” and to retain the information or skills that they're
being taught. The Nine Events are: (a) gain attention, (b) inform learners of objectives, (c)
stimulate recall of prior learning, (d) present the content (e) provide "learning guidance"
(f) elicit performance, (g) provide feedback (h) assess performance, and (i) enhance
retention and with the ability to transfer what has been learned to the “real world”.
An application of Gagne’s nine instructional events was done by Leow and Neo
(2009) in the process of designing an interactive training module. A sample of 31
students received instruction from the student-centered interactive module as well as
through conventional classroom learning environment. Likert-scale-based attitudinal
surveys along, with a 10 open-ended questionnaire, were used to collect student
performance and perception data. Results indicated that student-centered learning
activities designed within the structure of Gagne’s nine instructional events increased
learning effectiveness over the conventional classroom learning environment.
Ideally instruction design practice is performed by experts who have received
formal training in instructional design theories and models and can synthesize learner
characteristics and training needs to design effective instruction. Design thinking is the
core creative process of instructional design (Cross, 2000). ID models are used by
instructional designers as visual representations of learning and design theories but Smith
(2009) contends that many instructional designers’ design thinking is based on other
factors, including experience and instincts. Christensen and Osguthorpe (2008)
substantiated this theory during an investigation of how instructional designers use
theories in the instructional design process. A web-survey was used to examine the
design strategies of expert instructional designers. The sample consisted of 113 ID
21

practitioners who were asked to rate how often they used learning theories or ID theories
to help make instructional-strategy decisions. The results indicate that only fifty percent
of the participants said they regularly used theories to help make instructional-strategy
decisions.
Designers-by-Assignment
Merrill (1970) articulates the reality that over 95% of instructional design is not
performed by expert instructional designers trained in instructional systems design, but
by those pressed into that service, which he refers to as designers-by-assignment. The
term designer-by-assignment was introduced by Merrill (2000) to represent those persons
who have responsibilities for designing and delivering instruction but have not received
formal training in instructional design. Subject matter experts, faculty designers, novice
designers, and instruction librarians are alternate terms that may be applied to this
category of instructional designers. Without formal instructional design training, the
knowledge base of this group is limited compared to expert instructional designers.
Assigning the responsibility for course design to faculty or subject matter experts
has been common practice within higher education (Chao, Saj & Hamilton, 2010). This
premise holds true for academic librarians as well who are expected to design and deliver
effective library and information literacy instruction for the university community.
Ahmed, Wallace, and Blessing (2003) performed ethnographic research with six
experienced designers and six novice designers to understand how each designer
approached the task of design within their natural setting. They used observations and
post observation interviews, discourse analysis, and interviews. Interviews were audiorecorded. The duration of the observations was between 90 minutes and 120 minutes
22

Findings indicated that novice designers did not use a standard instructional design model
but relied on trial and error. Experienced designers used systematic design strategies,
analyzing the task before hand and making any adjustments at the outset. Results of this
study highlighted the need for support by experienced designers to make novice designers
aware of systematic design strategies when there is opportunity.
The teaching role of librarians is unique and varied; in addition to providing oneon-one instruction at the reference desk, librarians teach one-shots, for credit courses, and
collaborate with other faculty to teach research methods in subject-specific courses across
the curriculum. An augmented emphasis on instructional activities by academic librarians
is the result of the library’s evolving mission of providing a storehouse of print books and
journals to an essential partner that ensures the institution fulfills its teaching and learning
mission through the provision of information literacy instruction. Instructional librarians’
teaching responsibilities are varied, consisting of designing instruction for small or large
groups, sometimes semester-long credit-bearing courses, but often delivered as “one
shot” sessions lasting from 50 minute to 90 minutes and often repeatable (Bewick &
Corrall, 2010; Clyde, 2002; Julien & Genuis, 2011; Polger & Okamoto, 2010; Shank &
Dewald, 2012).
As a consequence of the growing importance of producing an information literate
student, instruction has become a core professional activity for academic librarians and
they are intimately involved in course design (Chao, Saj & Hamilton, 2010). The
traditional service model of academic libraries has been redirected towards adapting
systematic instructional design that more accurately reflects the institution’s core values.
Bell and Shank (2004, 2007) proposed the concept of the “blended librarian” who has
23

responsibilities that fall in the traditional service model, along with increased
expectations in pedagogy and technology duties.
Although a deeper knowledge-base of instructional systems design will translate
into a higher quality course design, few librarians graduate from library school with the
necessary skills in pedagogy, instructional planning, and effective learning assessment.
Hogan (1980) and Brundin (1985) presented research conducted during the late 1980’s
that demonstrated the lack of professional education courses offered through library and
information sciences programs. Walter (2008) indicates that more recent studies usually
found only one course on instruction, offered as an elective or as an introduction to other
required courses in the curriculum. Numerous research studies have involved this group
of designers, examining their design thinking, use of learning theories, models, and
instructional technology (Hildreth, 2011; Mendenhall, 2012; Pesce, 2012; Russell, 2011;
Verstegen, Barnard, & Pilot, 2008).

Information Literacy
The focus of information literacy is to help people develop skills of critical
inquiry that will benefit them throughout their lives. The American Library Association
defines information literacy as the ability to “recognize when information is needed and
have the ability to locate, evaluate, and use effectively the needed information “(ACRL,
1989, p. 1). An information literate person knows when to look for information, how to
look for information, and how to know if the information retrieved is credible. The ALA
(2008) continues to remind us that an information literate person is prepared for lifelong
learning because they have learned how to learn. The Association of College and
24

Research Libraries (1989) identified 7 information literacy skills every individual should
learn:
1. Determine the magnitude of information needed
2. Access the needed information as effectively as possible
3. Evaluate information and its resources critically
4. Incorporate selected information into one’s knowledge base
5. Use information effectively to accomplish a specific purpose
6. Understand the economic, legal, and social issues surrounding the use of
information, and,
7. Ethically and legally access and use information
Becoming information literate is more important than ever. No other time in
history has such an abundance of information been available at the touch. Along with the
sheer magnitude of information available, individuals are confronted with questions of
accuracy, authenticity, reliability and applicability of the retrieved information.
Accreditation and review bodies expect higher education institutions to recognize
the importance of information literacy instruction. In fact, the Southern Association of
Colleges and Schools, a regional accreditation body, has as one of the criteria for
reaccreditation the development of information literacy. SACS points out those libraries
should provide traditional references services, along with personal assistance in
conducting library research and point-of-use instruction. This service contributes to the
goal of helping students become information literate (SACS, 2000, ¶ 7). The Middle
States Association of Colleges and Schools (MSACS), another regional body instituted a

25

study among their institutions and found that 31 percent of those schools responding
offered information literacy programs at their institutions (Ratteray & Simmons,1995).
Libraries have long been the primary providers of information for the higher
education community. The formation of the American Library Association in 1876
marked the beginning of academic librarianship as we know it. Traditionally academic
librarians were expected to locate and deliver information as needed. This information
was located in collections of printed material housed on shelves in physical buildings.
Material acquisitions, organization, and long-term preservation of pertinent information
resources are activities at the core of traditional academic librarianship. Additionally they
support the curricular and research needs of the university community by assisting
students and faculty at the reference desk, developing library collections, and providing
library orientation and bibliographic instruction sessions associated with particular
schools or departments (Alsop and Bordonaro, 2007). Teaching students how to use
information in any format has always been a responsibility of academic librarians. Even
Melvin Dewey, the founder of the American library profession, viewed the librarian first
of all as an educator (Lorenzen, 2001).
Bibliographic instruction was the term used by librarians to designate teaching
students the use of the library and its’ print resources. It was generally offered only at the
request of the classroom instructor. The term bibliographic instruction is being replaced
by online instruction, computer instruction or the popular information literacy instruction
(Kats, p. 167). Academic librarians’ responsibilities have moved toward collaborative
instructional activities and collaborative learning (Fidel et al., 2001; St Clair, 2001);
services for remote and distance learners (Hoerman and Furniss, 2001); and an increased
26

demand for teaching information literacy skills (Kibridge and DePalo, 2001; Manuel,
2001; Reynolds 2001). The field of librarianship has embraced innovative information
and communication technologies that are rapidly descending upon higher education. The
print-only world is making way for the multimedia and born digital world, and higher
education is accommodating a more diverse and mobile student body. Teaching
information literacy skills to the university community is an important responsibility for
academic librarians and new teaching and learning methodologies designed to create
active learning environments are necessary to maximize participation by all students and
enhance learning.
The literature is filed with reports and studies on information literacy, including
competencies and models. Bhatt (2011) studied the various information literacy models
in use globally and presented best practices, such as the (a) SCONUL (Society of
College, National and University Libraries) , a six pillar model identifying information
literacy skills used in United Kingdom and Ireland; (b) the Big6 Skills Information
Problem-Solving Approach to Information Skills Instruction, a six step learning process;
IFLA (International Federation of Libraries Associations) presented as access, evaluation,
and use, and (c) the ACRL(Association of College and Research Libraries) five
information literacy standards (p.5).

Active Learning
Research literature in the area of teaching and learning highlights the benefits of
active learning (Benjamin, 2008; Knight, 2008). There exist a vast body of evidence that
concurs that active learning strategies are effective for teaching and learning (Bonwell &
27

Eison, 1991; Carnevale, 2005). The impact of a shifting epistemology in the field of
instructional design during the last century has had a major impact on how instruction is
designed. Changing dynamics in higher education in areas of student population
diversity, scale of class, and student expectations have converged to demand an
examination of traditional approaches to teaching and learning. The traditional
instructional method most prevalent in higher education, lecturing, is being challenged by
active learning pedagogy. While lecturing has the teacher at the center of learning, active
learning has the student at the center of the learning process.
The articles reviewed in this research agree that active learning is an effective
teaching and learning strategy. Active learning is a canopy term that refers to several
approaches to teaching that gives preeminence to students and their learning needs.
Bonwell and Eison (1991) promoted this approach to instruction that recognizes that
when individuals engage with the content and with others they construct new knowledge
from their experiences. In active learning, students take responsibility for their own
learning (Ueckert & Gess-Newsome, 2008; Jayawardana, Hewagamage & Hirakawa,
2002). Active learning in higher education takes many forms, such as role-playing,
debates, student response systems, response cards, scavenger hunts, and peer discussions.
Innovative active learning strategies involve course management systems, technology and
software- enabled software programs, flipped classrooms, learning spaces, and other
student-centered activities. Student engagement and collaboration are the core
components of an active learning approach.
It is important to admit that not all higher education faculty have abandoned the
lecture for active learning approaches. Herreid and Schiller (2013) found that there is a
28

price to be paid for integrating innovative active learning strategies’ in the classrooms: a
steep learning curve to master a new strategy, greater classroom preparation time,
pressure on faculty to cover required content, and student resistance to novel teaching
methods.
There is broad support for active learning as an effective instructional strategy
(Bonwell & Eison, 1991; Carnevale, 2005). Student-centered instructional strategies
have proven to surpass traditional lecturing for student retention, writing, and thinking
(Bonwell & Eison, 1991). Detlor, Booker, Serenko, & Julien (2012) tested the merits of
active learning strategies for the delivery of information literacy instruction. A survey
was administered to 37 undergraduate students who received information literacy
instruction through both passive and active learning strategies. Student performance
improved when students were engaged and actively participated in their learning
(Narayan, Heward, Gardner, Courson, & Omness, 1990). The integration of media into
the teaching and learning process increases student satisfaction, motivation, and
engagement. Bolliger and Des Armier, Jr. (2013) studied the perception of graduate
students toward the integration of audio files in the online environment. An online survey
was used to register graduate student perception of student-generated audio files that
were integrated within the context of instruction. Results of the study indicated that,
although it was not unanimous, most participants were overall satisfied with the inclusion
of audio files media.

Instructional designers spend much time integrating active

learning instructional strategies in course design that require students to take a greater
responsibility for their learning.

29

As libraries become more embedded in higher education’s core functions of
teaching and learning, academic librarians are responsible for developing and
implementing instruction that empowers students with the skill set to locate, access,
analyze, and utilize information - to become information literate. The 50 to 90 minute
one-shot information session is the most common form of facilitated instruction in the
academic library.
Instruction librarians have readily embraced active learning in their instructional
activities. Strategies used by instruction librarians to support active learning include
Think-pair-share, one minute paper, scavenger hunts, and involves such media as
smartphones, clickers, tablet PCs, and smartphones. One of the most popular
collaborative active learning strategies embraced by higher education pedagogy within
the last year is the flipped classroom. Flipping the classroom involves delivering a
traditional lecture component of a course outside of class (via videos, webinar, and
readings) and then use class time for collaborative, active learning assignments,
facilitated by the instructor (Ruddick, 2012; Strayer, 2012; and Zappe, Leicht, Messner,
Litzinger & Lee 2009). This focus on collaborative learning is a key component of active
learning.
Strayer (2012) used a flipped introductory statistics class and compared the
learning environment with a traditional introductory statistics class. Data were collected
through interviews, focus groups, field notes, and an Environment Inventory instrument.
Results of research findings were that students in the flipped classroom were less
satisfied with the classroom environment structure but were more open to cooperative
learning. Ruddick (2012) flipped a re-designed college chemistry course. Students
30

watched video lectures at home and worked on problem-solving activities in the
classroom. A Student Assessment of their Learning Gains (SALG) instrument was
administered and the results, along with student course evaluations, were used to compare
performance of the flipped classroom students with lecture-based students. Results
indicated that the flipped classroom students performed better than the standard lecturebased students, with higher scores on the final examination and greater overall success.
Zappe, Leicht, Messner, Litzinger, and Lee (2009) also flipped an architectural
engineering course. Evaluations were completed by students to ascertain their
perceptions. Student experienced positive impact on learning: Their perception of the
new teaching method was that it was more effective than lecturing. They expressed their
enjoyment of watching the lecture videos before class. Whether flipping the classroom,
collaboration, student engagement, or integrating audio files, research studies evaluated
for the use of active learning strategies proved to be effective learning strategies for
performance of students and retention of content

Instructional Media
This research study describes how designers-by-assignment in academic libraries
select instructional media to support active learning. The process of assigning
instructional media is an integral part of the instructional system design process because
it ensures that the instructional medium can support the achievement of the learning
objectives. Media is an essential aid to active learning in that it keeps students engaged,
adjusts the learning climate, and promotes retention of content. It encompasses all the

31

materials and physical means used to implement instruction and expedite students'
achievement of instructional objectives. A plectra of instructional media is accessible
within the higher education community. Media elements that are used as part of an
instructional strategy to transport content to users include human, text, audio, visual,
motion, manipulative, multimedia, and electronic methods such as software, computers
and the internet.
Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, and Freeman (2014) identified and described
various emerging technologies that have impacted higher education instruction. These
include (a) social media, which fosters informal collaboration among individual students
as well as professional communities of practice, (b) Massively open online courses
(MOOCS), internet courses accessible from anywhere and generally free, and (c) mobile
technologies, accessible over such technologies as Smartphones and tablet PCs, offering
simple, free or low-cost apps. Two potentially revolutionary models of learning being
embraced by instruction librarians include Blended learning, which is a balance of webbased and traditional face-to-face instruction and the flipped classroom which shifts the
responsibility of learning from the instructor to the students.
Clark (1983) declared that “media are mere vehicles that deliver instruction but do
not influence student achievement any more than the truck that delivers our groceries
causes changes in our nutrition” (p. 445). Kozam (1994) contends with Clark that media
affects both learning and motivation and appropriate media encourages improved
learning outcomes and performance. Regardless of which philosophy is correct,
decisions regarding which media or technology is most appropriate and which media is

32

accepted by the end-user is an indispensible part of the instructional design process
(Dehkordi, Zarei, & Dehkordi, 2008; Gurvitch & Metzler, 2013).
Global technological and communication advancement have resulted in a variety of
appropriate media from which instructional designers may select to deliver instruction.
Table 2: Types of Instructional Media
Category of Media

Examples

Digital-base

eBooks,MP3s; Digital Badges

Digital or video

Games

Technology

Clickers; Smart Boards; Blackboard

Mobile Devices

Laptops, Smartphones, Tablets

Multi-media

Webinars, podcasts

Social Networks

Facebook, Instagram, Flicker

Three-Dimensional (3D)

interactive presentations; models

Web 2.0

Blogs, Internet, Wikis, Twitter, Flickr, Slideshare;
GoogleDocs, Wix; Storybird;Audioboo

Research involving popular media utilized by designers-by-assignment in
academic libraries is varied and each has their benefits for learning. The use of audience
response systems, or clickers in higher education classrooms has increased dramatically
as a support for active learning (Beatty, 2004; Caldwell, 2007; Draper and Brown, 2004;
MacGeorge et al., 2007). Based on previous findings, Oigara and Keengwe (2011)
conducted a study of their own to evaluate student perception of the use of clickers to
promote active learning and student engagement. The research sample consisted of
twenty four undergraduate students enrolled in a Physical Geography at a liberal arts
college. Data extracted from clicker quizzes, exam grades, student surveys measuring
33

their attitudes about clickers, and one-on-one interviews were triangulated to analyze
overall student performance. Survey data were analyzed for frequency and distribution.
This study used a different methodology from that of the current study but overall,
students demonstrated a positive attitude towards the use of clickers as an instructional
strategy. They were found to be easy to use, and, compared to the traditional lecturebased classes, assisted in understanding the subject matter better. Benefits of integrating
clickers in an active learning classroom have been found to enhance the instructor's
ability to encourage active participation from all students during lectures, to assess
student learning, and maximize content retention through real-time feedback.
Poirier and Feldman (2007) compared student performance in a traditional 75minute lecture class with that of students in a second section of the class. Student
performance in the clicker section was greater than that of the non-clicker section.
Chickering and Gamson (1987) were early adopters of active learning as evidenced by
the construction of their 7 principles of good instructional practice. Clickers address 3 of
the 7 principles: (a) actively engage students during the entire class period. (b) gauge
their level of understanding of the material presented, and (c) provide timely feedback to
student questions. Clickers helped students actively engage in the learning process as
evidenced by research studies such as that by Poirier and Feldman (2007). They
compared a traditional class with a class that used clickers. Data collection involved user
perception data. Results indicated that students in the clicker class out performed
students in the traditional class as it related to overall exam performance. Students in the
clicker class also showed a positive attitude about using clickers and recommended the
integration of clickers in the classroom.
34

According to the Pew Internet and American Life Project, by 2020 the primary
means of connecting to the Web for most users will be mobile devices. Pew found that
the percentage of adults in America who own tablets almost doubled, from 10 percent to
19 percent, over the 2011 holiday season. The abundant availability of portable devices,
including laptops, tablets, multimedia players, and mobile phones have transformed
instructional and learning strategies used with current students (Abdous, Camarena, &
Facer, 2009). Mobile learning (m-learning) has emerged as the next generation of elearning (Sharples, 2009). Since members of the higher education community are
increasingly using smartphones, tablets, and other mobile devices to access e-resources,
instruction librarians must be pro-active and integrate these emerging technologies in
instructional design strategies.
Educators had been captivated with the potential that media offers to help
transform teaching and learning (Hew & Brush 2007). The increasing popularity and use
of tablet computers and smart phones are beginning to have a direct effect on the way
library users locate, access, and interface with digital content. As a result of these new
technologies, university librarians are modifying information literacy instruction to take
advantages of these technologies. Li, Pow, Wong and Fung (2010) examine student
learning in a tablet PC supported environment using in-depth interviews and focus
groups, composed of students and subject teachers. The results of their study revealed
that the tablet PC implementation had a positive effect upon student learning in various
dimensions: cognitive, metacognitive, affective and socio-cultural. Along with enabling
students to reach an elevated level of information technology competence, student

35

motivation to and efficacy in learning, collaboration, sharing of learning resources,
organization, and responsibility for individual learning were all benefits. Barak, Lipson,
and Lerma (2006) examined the use of wireless laptops for promoting active learning in
the classroom. Data collection was performed using a survey and class observation.
Findings resulted in a positive reaction to the use of laptops for promoting active
learning. One caution articulated by the authors was that wireless laptops have the
potential to become a source of distraction, if used for non-learning purposes. A further
finding was that students should be given more opportunities to learn informally outside
of the classroom with network-enabled tablets. The authors found that as students take
control of their learning experiences, they usually retrieve more relevant content when
completing assignments because they choose things that interest them.
Technology-infused classrooms, or active learning spaces, support student
engagement and collaborative learning. Interactive classroom environments can serve as
instructional media. They were created using wireless tablet PCs and software
applications. Enriquez (2010) reported that two separate controlled studies of teaching
and learning using learning spaces with a sophomore-level Introductory Circuit Analysis
course resulted in a positive impact on student performance that was statistically
significant. Additionally, student perception of the effectiveness of learning spaces on
their learning experience was overwhelmingly positive. Interactive classroom
environments using wireless tablet PCs are potentially a more effective student-centered
teaching method compared with traditional lectured -centered teaching environments
(Enriquez, 2010).

36

Media Selection Models
Media selection is a central and critical part of the Instructional Systems Design
process and should be based on sound instructional design principles to ensure the
appropriate instructional medium can support the learning objectives. It can be a difficult
task for expert instructional designers as well as for instruction librarians serving as
designers-by-assignment because few rules exist about what the most adequate media
will be in every circumstance. Factors that influence media choice include learning
objectives, learner characteristics, instructor skill levels, learning location, (synchronous
versus asynchronous), availability, accessibility, economics, institutional constraints, ease
of use, and time (Gerritsen, 2009; Mahady, 1992; Strauss & Frost, 1999). Reiser and
Dick (1996) presented three major criteria for selecting instructional media: practicality,
student appropriateness, and instructional appropriateness. Practicality deals with
practical issues of time, cost, and availability and, if the instructor perceives, its
usefulness. Appropriateness addresses the issues of media appropriateness for the
developmental levels of the students and whether the media is appropriate for the planned
instructional strategy. Gagné, Briggs, and Wager (1992) suggest that instructors evaluate
the appropriateness of media based on the answers to a series of practical questions: scale
of group, instructional environment, flexibility of media to accommodate interaction
between students and instructor, and ability of media to deliver still or motion pictures,
spoken or written words, and color.
Media selection is complex. Media selection models have been developed over
the years to assist instructional designers with this task (Holden & Westfall, 2010; Reiser
& Gagne, 1982). Those developed can generally be categorized as either pragmatic,
37

theoretical, geared toward the learner, or geared toward the subject content. They take
the format of flow charts, matrixes, step-by-step procedures, and conceptual schemes
(Howard, 1977). Holden and Westfall, (2006) utilized a matrix to present a media
selection model to identify media for synchronous and asynchronous learning
environments. A media selection model presented as a flowchart was developed by
Kemp (1971) to assist the instructional designer in systematically choosing appropriate
media instead of relying only on intuitive practices. Levie’s (1977) media selection
model evaluates media against pragmatic constraints and incorporates a step-by-step
procedure to add a sense of reality to the selection process. His model recommends
selecting media based on an analysis of the task, the learner, and the instructional
environment. Wagner (1975) viewed media selection from the affective domain. He
referred to Edgar Dale’s “Cone of Experience” model that ranked media from the most
abstract to the most concrete. According to Wagner (1975), “when the instructional
designer is faced with the task of changing an existing attitude, media forms high in
concreteness may be more effective” (p. 6).
In 1948 Edward Dale introduced his learning theory, the Cone of Experience, in
his book entitled “Audio-visual methods in teaching”. The theory categorized media
experiences from the most abstract to the most concrete. According to this learning
theory, the least effective instructional method appears at the top of the cone where
information is offered through verbal symbols, such as lecturing. The most effective
instructional methods appear at the bottom of the cone, and involve direct learning
experiences from everyday life, such as hands-on (active learning). The Cone has also
been used to determine the knowledge retention rate of various methods of pedagogy,
38

although there is disagreement concerning the accuracy of Dale’s retention rating scale.
According to Gustafson and Branch (2002), instructional design models are classified
into three types: system models, product models, and classroom models. Instructional
designers utilize systems models when a large amount of instruction is required, such as
when new curricula are proposed. Product-Oriented models are not focused on instruction
primarily but on creating instructional products to be used in the instruction. These tools
should be as intuitive as possible so learners can use them with little instructional
intervention. Classroom models are useful for all academic environments.
Of the more than 100 design models, the following 4 provide an effective
framework for selecting media that will support active learning course design.

39

Table 3: Media Selection Models and Guidelines
Model Name

Author/Creator

Salient Elements

Purpose

ASSURE

Heinich, Molenda,
Russell, & Smaldino
(1999)

Six-parts:
Analyze learner characteristics
State objectives
Select media
Utilize media
Require learner participation
Evaluate and revise

Oriented toward
classroom use to
integrate media into
lesson to assure
learning

CASCOIME
Model

Patsula,Peter J.
(1999)

Oriented toward
distance and online
instruction, especially
international
environments

Simmons Model

Simmons College
(2005)

USDLA Model

United States
Distance Learning
Association 2010

Eight questions that correspond to
acronym of cost, accessibility,
social-political suitability, cultural
friendliness, openness/flexibility,
interactivity, motivational value,
and effectiveness
Seven questions that describe media
selection from the perspectives of :
risk, support, innovation, barriers,
and opportunities
Series of interactivity arguments
used to select the most appropriate
media

Selecting new and
emerging
technologies
Synchronous and
asynchronous focus
on higher education
learning environment

The ASSURE model, developed by Heinich, Molenda, Russell, and Smaldino
(1999) is a set of procedural guidelines designed for planning and delivering instruction
that integrates media into the teaching process. The focus is on the learner and the
learning objectives. This model is based on Robert Gagne’ Nine Events of Instruction
model and as such is constructivism-based. It has advantages for supporting active
learning. The model offers a six-step process that corresponds to the acronym: (a)
Analyze learners, (b) State objectives; (c) Select methods, media, materials; (d) Utilize
media and materials; (e) Require learner participation, and (f) Evaluate and revise.
The CASCOIME guidelines focused selecting media to improve the quality of
distance and online education instruction. The eight guidelines, which correspond to the
acronym, are (a) Cost, (b) Accessibility, (c) Social-Political Suitability, (d) Cultural
40

Friendliness, (e) Openness/Flexibility. (f) Interactivity, (g) Motivational Value, and (h)
Effectiveness. These guidelines were formulated to consider learner needs specific to
minority and international communities. With student populations in higher education
becoming more diverse, any medium of instruction should be culturally appropriate
(Murphy, 1991).
The Simmons Model developed at Simmons College presents a series of guiding
questions that focuses on strategies for selection and implementation of emerging
technologies. The questions are organized under the categories of (a) risk, (b) service and
support, (c) innovation, (d) barriers, and (e) opportunities. Although this model or
guidelines was specifically constructed for the Simmons College community, it is
applicable for other environments interested in using any of the emerging technologies in
the design of instruction (Fells, 2012).
The USDLA model, sponsored by the United States Distance Learning
Association is an approach to selecting the most appropriate media for the delivery of
content at a distance. It is actually a manual arranged in five major sections whose
purpose is to find the right medium-to-objective match to ensure that the best media are
selected. The model includes three strategies for consideration when selecting the most
appropriate media (Holden and Westfall, 2006):
1. The focus of asynchronous media that supports drill & practice may be more
appropriate for lower cognitive levels
2. The focus of synchronous media that supports synthesis, analysis, and evaluation
may be more appropriate for the higher cognitive Levels
3.

The efficient use of media requires symmetry of teaching strategy and technology
41

The focus of this instructional media selection study has been on the learning
environment, and not the technology.
All of these media selection models have similar concerns for student learning
and not primarily for the media. They focus on pragmatic issues and have experienced
limited validation through empirical research.
Synthesis of Research Findings
A synthesis of selected research studies provides an overview of key findings,
highlights methodological developments, and identifies the direction future research can
take to build on the foundation provided by these studies. Instructional design in higher
education is often performed by subject matter experts and in the case of academic
libraries by instruction librarians, all acting as designers-by-assignment. Research
indicates that academic librarians are interested in embracing active learning strategies
but the majority of instruction librarians continue to utilize a form of the ADDIE process,
even if it is not the most efficient. Their lack of formal training in instructional systems
design can be a barrier to selecting the most efficient ID model to encourage active
learning. While there is not one specific model that is best for every instructional event,
ID models investigated which address constructivist issues of active learning include
Recursive and Reflective Design and Development Model (R2D2), Fink’s Significant
Learning Experiences, Design, and System Thinking Model, Edgar Dale’s Cone of
Experience, and Gagne’s Nine Events of Instruction (Cross, 2000; Guttikonda & Coco,
2013; Lebow, 1993; Little, 2006). These models proved most effective for re-designing
traditional courses to support active learning outcomes such as collaboration, and student
42

engagement. It must be mentioned that some models produced only anecdotal and no
experimental evidence to support the usefulness of the model. Critics of constructivist
models exist, such as Merrill (1999), but evidence of the effectiveness of constructivist
models is easily accessible.
Amidst the media selection models in the literature the selection of instructional
media is often based on availability, experience and instinct and not on systematic
instructional design principles (Fells, 2012; Ortiz-Arteaga, 2013). The body of research
addressing media selection processes to support active learning was examined using
common research approaches – library print resources, journal article databases,
dissertation and thesis databases, and university websites. Design decision processes of
designers-by-assignment were identified as ill-structured and suggested oversight by
expert instructional designers (Pesce, 2012; Hooie, 2012). The literature review revealed
that visible instructional media (technology) as well as innovative strategies (flipped
classroom) supports active learning in the classroom because they provide inventive ways
to actively engage students (Poirier & Feldman, 2007). The studies reviewed in this
literature review were fairly uniform in how the research was designed and one
overarching conclusion has emerged: Taken as a whole, there is a positive and
convincing relationship between instructional media and active learning across academic
subjects.
Critique of Previous Research
Sufficient research literature exists on the application of the generic instructional
design process, ADDIE, by expert designers and designers-by-assignment in various
instructional settings. There is less research on design decisions of designers-by43

assignment operating in academic libraries. Most of the research pertaining to instruction
librarians’ use of instructional design strategies is antidotal in nature with a noticeable
gap of empirical research. There is even less research documentation pertaining to media
selection decisions. This could be due to the fact that instruction librarians are commonly
limited to 50 minute one-shot instructional sessions at a time. Overbaugh (2003)
mentions that instructional design is a complex and time-consuming processes. This
study should help fill the knowledge gap relative to media selection strategies by
designers-by-assignment.

Chapter 2 Summary
Integrating active learning into course design is an instructional strategy that has
gained some prominence in higher education in recent years. Academic librarians have
become embedded in higher education’s core functions of teaching and learning with
increased responsibilities for teaching information literacy skills to the student body.
This literature review reveals that despite a growing number of academic librarians
serving as instructional designers within the academic library, only a limited number of
research studies are available on instruction librarians as designers-by-assignment in their
natural workplace setting. They have embraced the work of information literacy course
design but have little evidence formal training in systematic instructional design
processes, relying on experience and intuitive discovery. A review of the research
literature on instructional design and media selection to support active learning reveals
that instruction librarians have an abundance of models to use to assist in information
literacy instruction design and do not need to confine their strategies to ADDIE alone.
44

This study describes the reality of design activities as practiced by experts and designersby-assignment in the field.

45

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Introduction to Chapter 3
The purpose of this research study was to describe the media selection practices
of academic instruction librarians when designing information literacy instruction within
an active learning environment. The results of this study added to the body of knowledge
of actual practice of 7 designers-by-assignment or subject matter experts within the
academic library. Understanding how media selection decisions are made in real-life
practices by those with little or no formal training in instructional systems design adds to
the knowledge base of instructional design. This chapter presents the methodology that
was used for this research by describing the research design, target population,
instrumentation, data collection, field test, and data analysis procedures, limitations of the
research design, credibility, transferability, expected findings, ethical issues, researcher's
position statement and conflict of interest assessment were also included. A chapter
summary concludes this section.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this research study was to extend the knowledge base of
instructional design by providing first-hand evidence of how designers-by-assignment
select appropriate media to support active learning in real-life practice (Richey & Klein,
2007). Helping future designers-by-assignment as well as expert instructional designers
facilitate maximum effectiveness of their instructional efforts was an additional benefit of
46

this research. Information from the interviews of instructional design practitioners
supported efficient and effective instructional design strategies and identify best media
selection practices for building active learning environment.
Research Questions
The means of describing how instruction librarians select media to support active
learning was through the use of semi-structured interview questions. One central question
framed the research:
How do designers-by-assignment make media selection decisions for active learning
environments? This central question was followed by three sub-questions:

1. What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
2.

What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices with
respect to the design of active learning environments?

3. What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the design of
active learning environments?
Research Design
Rowley (2002) explained that a research design ensures coherence between the
data to be collected and the research questions of a study to be answered. A qualitative
descriptive case study approach was used to guide this study in order to gain insight into
the phenomenon of media selection by designers-by-assignment by examining their
verbal accounts of their real-life practices (Patton, 2002). Case study research is an
experiential inquiry that explores a contemporary occurrence within its real life setting
47

(Yin, 1994, p. 13). It is appropriate for demonstrating relationships and describing the
real-life world as it actually exists. Yin (1994) provided a detailed review of case studies
and their characteristics. Three factors need to be considered when conducting a case
study: the kind of research question, the control of the behavioral events, and whether the
focus is on present-day rather than past events (Yin, 2009). The central research question
being posed was “How designers-by-assignment make media selection decisions for
active learning environments?” The researcher had no control over the actions of the
study participants, and media selection for active learning environments is a real-life
contemporary phenomenon, making the case study an appropriate research methodology.
Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures
Media selection process of designers-by-assignment is an area of research that has
not been fully explored. The target population for this study was academic librarians
employed in higher education institutions serving as designers-by-assignment. Along
with traditional librarianship responsibilities, these librarians are increasingly charged
with providing library and information literacy instruction. The researcher selected a
purposeful sample of instruction librarians for this study.
Target Population
Changes in the higher education landscape, coupled with advances in information
and communication technologies have mobilized academic librarians to make teaching
integral to their professional identity (Julien & Genuis, 2011). Instruction librarians teach
literacy skills to the more than 20 million diverse students enrolled in colleges and
universities across the United States (US Gov. Census, 2011). The target population for
this study consisted of academic librarians who taught library instruction/information
48

literacy skills to face-to-face and distance education students. This group of designers-byassignment have received an ALA accredited Masters’ degree in Library Science or its
equivalent, have worked in academic libraries for at least 5 years and have taught library
instruction/information literacy skills for a minimum of 5 years
Sampling Method
The researcher of this study used what is known as purposive sampling. The
selection of instruction librarians in academic libraries serving as designers-byassignment as the focus of the study was done purposefully. The justification for
purposive sampling was that all of the participants in the study had experienced the same
phenomenon of selecting instructional media in the design of information literacy
instruction. The study sample was selected from those subscribed to the Information
Literacy Instruction Discussion List, a professional electronic list hosted on the
American Library Association server, sponsored by the Instruction Section of the
Association of College and Research Libraries. A questionnaire soliciting participation
in the study was sent to the above list. Of those responding positively to the invitation to
be interviewed, 7 study participants were selected. This sample size was sufficient
because no definitive study sample size has been designated in qualitative research; it is
all relative (Trotter, 2012; Mason, 2010; Yin, 2003).
Sample Size
The sample size for this study was 7 academic instruction librarians. There are no
published guidelines or tests of adequacy for estimating the sample size in a qualitative
research study but reaching data saturation was the goal. Data saturation was reached
when new study participants did not add any new information. The sample size used in
49

qualitative research design is often smaller than that used in quantitative research. This is
because qualitative research methods are concerned with understanding the lived
experience of research participants (Dworkin, 2012; Morse, 2000).
Setting
The researcher interviewed the instruction librarians via telephone using the
Interview Guide (Appendix A). Each participant chose her/his respective location. The
researcher was situated in a location geographically separated from the interviewees.
Recruitment
The manager of the Information Literacy Instruction Discussion List, sponsored by
the Instruction Section of the Association of College and Research Libraries, was
contacted to get approval to submit a participant recruitment email. After approval was
received from the listserve manager, invitations to participate in the research were posted
to the List. The participants in this study had to be practicing instruction librarians.
Research participants were chosen based on the following criteria:
1. Employed in academic libraries for at least 5 years
2. Designed and taught library instruction/information literacy courses/sessions for
at least 5 years
3. Completed a master’s program in Library and Information Studies from an
American Library Association accredited program
4. Willing to share artifacts (syllabi, guidelines, models, etc.) that demonstrate how
you select and integrate media in the design of library/information literacy
instruction

50

Participants who agreed to be interviewed were contacted, procedures discussed, and if
they agreed to participate, were emailed an Informed Consent form. Once the form was
signed and returned, interviews were scheduled.

Instrumentation
An Interview Guide (Appendix A) served as the research instrument for this study
and as the framework that was followed during one-on-one interviews with study
participants. The Interview Guide was developed by the researcher based on a review of
the literature and the research questions. It originated with an introduction that briefly
described the study and explained how the interview would be conducted. Boyce and
Neale (2006) suggest beginning the interview with a question that is easy to answer and
designed to put the participant at ease. The last interview question was designed to bring
closure to the interview and leave the participant feeling positive about participating.
Data were collected during one-on-one telephone interviews between individual
study participants and the researcher. A total of 24 interview questions were arranged in
four categories and is described below.
Category One: General Questions
The general interview questions consisted of 7 factual questions that were
designed to gather essential information about participant’s current position and
experience as a designer-by-assignment within the academic library. These questions
provided an opportunity for the researcher to determine the actual instructional design
experience of the participants. Boyce and Neale (2006) suggest that factual questions be
asked before opinion questions. The remaining 17 questions were open-ended.
51

Category Two: Active Learning and Instructional Media
The purpose of questions in category two was to elicit the participant perception
of the value of active learning and the role played by media. According to Kenney
(2008), instruction time allotted to librarians to teach information literacy skills is brief
and the information to be communicated is very important. Incorporating media in the
midst of instruction may have a challenging effect, especially on instruction time. The
researcher considered the value the participants placed on active learning strategies as
vital to the study.
Category Three: Factors That Affect Media Selection
The question that dealt with factors that affect media selection was constructed so
that the researcher could understand the challenges faced by instruction librarians in
deciding which media to use to encourage active learning. It was informed by the
research question. Some factors are beyond the control of the designer. The researcher
considered factors that challenge media selection as vital to the study.
Category Four: Media Selection Strategies
Category four was comprised of the remainder of the interview questions. The
purpose of questions about media selection strategies was to provoke the participants to
describe their current real-life practices and insights of design decisions involving media.
These questions were informed by the research questions and the literature (Fells, 2012;
Holden et.al. 2010; Pesce, 2012; Pickles, 2014).
All of the questions were semi-structured to increase the diversity of data
collected (Gall, Gall, & Borg, 2003). Interviews that utilize standardized open-ended
questions tend to be the most popular form of interviewing used in research studies
52

because they allow participants to totally describe their experiences and express their
viewpoints. This open-endedness also allowed the researcher to ask exploratory
questions as a means of follow-up and stimulated participants to give as much
comprehensive information as they preferred.

Data Collection
Data collection for this study consisted of research interviews, participant
artifacts, and researcher notes. Interviews may be structured, semi-structured and
unstructured. Structured interviews are administered verbally with pre-determined
questions with no opportunity for follow-up or future elaboration. Semi-structured
interviews utilize pre-determined open-ended questions that serve as a guide but offer the
flexibility to allow for elaboration in greater detail or for follow-up questions by
interviewer and interviewee. Unstructured interviews are characterized by little or no
organization and are very time consuming (Gill, Stewart, Treasure, & Chadwick, 2008).
Questions may be asked in any order to encourage the conversation to flow naturally.
During qualitative research, a common less structured data collection technique
involves investigating data embedded in artifacts. Participants agreed to submit artifacts
that were used to make media selection decisions. Researchers often take notes by hand
to supplement the interview recordings and subsequent transcriptions. The importance of
these notes for the data collection phase of case study qualitative research relates to the
accuracy of findings. Audio recordings of each interview, artifacts, and researcher notes
have been stored in a locked in the researcher’s file cabinet, to be held for 7 years.

53

Previous studies dealing with instructional designers have successfully utilized these
methods and protocols (Gross, 2006; Kohlbacher, 2005; Perez, Johnson & Emery, 1995).
Interview Guide
The researcher developed an Interview Guide consisting of 24 in-depth, semistructured questions. Each of the 7 participants scheduled interviews during May – June,
2014, with each interview lasting between 45 – 50 minutes. Each interview was recorded
and the researcher also took notes during the interview to capture unfamiliar concepts,
special quotes, and any information or terms unfamiliar to the participants. At the
conclusion of each interview, the researcher verified that the recorder captured the entire
interview.
Artifacts
An artifact is something created by humans for a practical purpose. Study
participants agreed to share any artifacts they created or used to make media selection
decisions. Each participant submitted artifacts that the researcher used to triangulate
research data.
Researcher notes
During the recording of the telephone interviews, with the participants’
permission, the researcher also took notes using the Researcher Notes Form. Data
manually recorded included terms that needed further definition or items that needed
clarification. This data helped the researcher garner a more accurate understanding of the
participant’s responses. Researcher notes taken during the telephone interviews assisted
with selecting themes and provided, through triangulation (i.e., the convergence of
multiple data sources), another rich source of data (Ezzy, 2010).
54

Field Test
The instrument for this study was a 24 question Interview Guide. The interview
guide was developed by the researcher based on a review of the literature and the
research questions. The researcher designed Interview Guide was field tested to assess
the type of questions asked and to ensure that the responses were valid and reliable. Three
academic librarians with over 8 years of experience designing and teaching information
literacy skills in an academic library environment were involved in the field test. These
instruction librarians analyzed the interview questions for clarity and appropriateness to
the research question. This important step in the research process assured that participant
interview responses were appropriate to support the research questions (Creswell, 2013).
The three academic librarians who field tested the Interview Guide received the Guide
the day before they met to become familiar with the questions. Feedback from the field
test was used to revise the interview questions. The Interview Guide initially had 31
questions but the field testers made recommendation to eliminate six questions that were
not specific to the research questions or were redundant. The results of the field test
streamlined the Interview Guide and added clarity.
Data Analysis Procedures
Research data derived from this case study were analyzed using inductive coding.
Coding is a process of reducing the data into smaller groupings in order to make the data
more manageable. The process helped identify relationships between categories and
themes. Although some codes were predefined, others emerged from the data. The
seminal work of Miles and Huberman (1994) discussed best practices for analyzing
interview data such as data reduction, data display and conclusion – comparing,
55

contrasting, searching for patterns, triangulation etc. The researcher started with 40 preset codes extracted from the literature. After the interviews were conducted and
transcribed, 9 additional codes emerged (Appendix B). Once the codes were organized
and themes were established, the data were organized in word tables based on patterns
that permitted sorting by respondent, question, and other characteristics. After the data
was coded and organized, findings were summarized. Data analysis for the study was
performed by the researcher using the subsequent procedures detailed in Table 4:

Table 4: Data Analysis Procedures
Procedure
Recorded Interviews

Description
The one-on-one interviews between the researcher and the
participants were audio recorded. The recordings were transcribed
and will be maintained for a period of 7 years for later reference.

Artifacts

Participants agreed to and submitted artifacts that they used to
help make media selection decisions.

Researcher Notes

The researcher also took notes during the interviews on
significant descriptive responses given by each participant during
the interviews. A form was developed to record all the data.

Assign Codes

The researcher assigned codes (Appendix B) to the interview
transcriptions and the artifacts the participants submitted.

Create Themes

Recurring codes assigned to interview data were grouped to
create themes

Graphical Representation

To make the data more comprehensive, a word table was
constructed to present the relationship between the themes and
the research questions to make the data more comprehensible.

The relationship between the research questions, the data collection method, and
data analysis method is presented in Table 5.

56

Table 5: Research Questions Analysis
Research Question
What types of media do designers-byassignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?

Data Collection Methods
Interview Questions
11,12,13,14,16

What factors influence designers-byassignments’ media selection choices with
respect to the design of active learning
environments?
What media selection strategies do
designers-by-assignment use for the design
of active learning environments?

Interview Questions

Data Analysis Method
Inductive coding
Inductive coding

8,9,10,15,17,18,23
Interview Questions

Inductive coding

19,20,21,22,24

Limitations of the Research Design
The primary weakness was that the study sample consisted of only 7 purposively
sampled participants who could not represent all designers-by-assignments working in
academic libraries. The other key weakness was associated with the use of the researcher
as the instrument in data collection (Merriam, 2009). The researcher was both the
instrument of data collection as well as the analyzer of the findings. Merriam (2009)
noted that biases and shortcomings of the human as the research instrument might have
an impact on the research study. To address any bias, the researcher was intentional to
monitor and identify any influences of biases in collecting and analyzing data. The
Researcher Notes Form provided an avenue to record any bias identified.

Credibility
Credibility can be established through persistent observation, prolonged
engagement, and triangulation (Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Prolonged engagement involves
investing sufficient time to understand the content of the research topic. This researcher
57

has spent over 20 years learning the culture of designers-by-assignment through
designing and teaching information literacy and library instruction. This experience will
help build trust with the participants and allowed the researcher to experience the breadth
of any variations in media selection. Establishing credibility using the strategy of
persistent observation will require collecting interview data until sufficient data has been
gathered and themes begin repeating (Davis, 1995). There is no standard number
required for case-study research and this study will describe media selection decisions of
7 designers-by-assignment. Triangulation allowed the verification of data from multiple
sources of information. Data from (a) participant interviews, (b) participant artifacts,
and(c) researcher interviewer notes were collected and triangulated to confirm research
finding.

Transferability
Transferability of this study involved how applicable the findings were to another
study. Transferability was enhanced by providing sufficient descriptive data, or thick
data so readers of the study can decide for themselves if the findings are transferable to a
wider population (Bogdan & Biklen, 2003; Davis, 1995; Marshall & Rossman, 1989).
The selection of academic instruction librarians who served as designers-by-assignment
were appropriate study participants to obtain research data on media selection strategies.
Their real-life experiences as designers-by-assignment added believability to the results.
This qualitative researcher enhanced transferability by showing that the sample
represented the target population and described the research context that was central to
the research.
58

Expected Findings
The researcher has spent over 20 years in the same career as the study
participants. This has advantages and disadvantages. The advantages allow for an
immediate grasp of the issues faced by the study participants as well as a deep rapport
with the study participants. The disadvantages of similar experiences could have the
potential of producing researcher bias. The qualitative researcher must set aside any
preconceptions regarding the topic under investigation (Patton, 2002).To remove any
occasion for bias, the researcher adhered strictly to the prescribed methodology for this
study. The research topic involved the media selection processes of 7 instruction
librarians as they designed information literacy instruction within an active learning
framework. Expected finding were that this study identified a void in the participant’s use
of a systematic process for selecting appropriate media due to limited instructional design
training.
Ethical Issues
Ethical issues are an integral and critical aspect of any research design, and are
woven throughout the entire course of the research process, from the articulation of the
research problem to data collection and to the dissemination of the research results. The
five key principles of ethical research are: a) informed and voluntary consent; b)
confidentiality of information; c) anonymity of research participants; d) no harm to
participants; and e) reciprocity (Halai, 2006).
Since this research study involved human subjects, the researcher submitted an
application to the Capella University Institutional Review Board (IRB) for review to
59

guarantee the “ protection of human research participants in accordance with the
principles of the Nuremberg Code, the Declaration of Helsinki, and The Belmont Report
and the mandates of the federal regulations” (45 CFR 46). The IRB process is designed to
protect, among other things, the privacy, autonomy, confidentiality of participants and
dignity of research participants.
Once IRB approval was received, each research participant received an Informed
Consent Form via e-mail asking them to participate in the study. This form stipulated that
their identities would remain confidential. Their actual names were replaced by nondescript labels. The participants returned the signed consent form with an electronic
signature via e-mail. Participants were informed that they could withdraw from the study
at any time and that participating in the study posed no known risks to their health, safety,
or well-being. They were not required to answer any questions and they could withdraw
from the study at any time without penalty. Data generated during the interviews was
kept locked in a file cabinet. Electronic data gathered was stored on a flash drive and also
kept in a locked file cabinet. After at least 7 years from publication of the research
results, data in print format will be destroyed and data in electronic format will be erased
from all computer storage devices.
Researcher's Position Statement
The researcher has taught for over 20 years in higher education, primarily in the
area of library instruction and information literacy. Cross (2000) contends that the role of
the researcher is to make research responsive to the practitioner’s needs and help the
practitioner understand research results. The researcher’s similar experience to that of
the study participants aided in understanding research findings.
60

Conflict of interest assessment.
The researcher did not divulge names of any participants and has maintained the
integrity of the data collection methodology. The researcher followed strict protocol and
ethical guidelines while collecting data to ensure that any potential risks be kept at a
minimum. The researcher only involved participants that consented to the research and
maintained the privacy of the participants.

Chapter 3 Summary
Chapter 3 discussed the research methodology, study sample, data collection, data
analysis processes, and ethical considerations. The credibility and transferability of the
study were also discussed. A qualitative descriptive case study approach was used to
guide this study in order to gain insight into the phenomenon of media selection by
designers-by-assignment through an examination of the verbal accounts of their real-life
practices. This research design allowed the researcher to collect in-depth data that were
used to answer the central research question of how designers-by-assignment select
media to build active learning environments. The researcher was the primary instrument
for collecting and analyzing data. Data was collected from participant interviews,
participant artifacts, and researcher notes. The researcher adhered to confidentiality and
autonomy throughout to protect the identities of the participants. Electronic and hard
copies of all relevant data are kept in a secured location. Chapter 4 presents an analysis of
the data collected and research findings of the study.

61

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Introduction
This qualitative research study facilitated an exploration of how instruction
librarians selected media when designing instruction for an active learning environment.
Three lines of inquiry clarified and gave focus to the study: (a) types of media selected in
the design of active learning environments, (b) factors that influenced media selection
decisions, and (c) media selection strategies used to design active learning instruction.
Seven instruction librarians were interviewed via telephone using a researcher prepared
interview guide of 24 open-ended questions.
Data were collected from participant interviews, participant artifacts, and
researcher notes. This chapter presented an analysis of the research data organized into
three sections. Section one offers a description of the research sample and provides
detailed information on how the sample was selected. Section two summarizes the
findings of the research study in a succinct manner. A detailed analysis of the research
data constitutes section three. The chapter concluded with a summary.

Description of the Sample
Study participants consisted of academic instruction librarians serving as
designers-by-assignment and were selected utilizing an approved sampling protocol. An
62

invitation email was distributed via the Information Literacy Instruction Discussion List,
a professional electronic discussion list hosted on the American Library Association
server, sponsored by the Instruction Section of the Association of College and Research
Libraries. This list serves as a venue for communication about information literacy
instruction among librarians. A total of 10 candidates responded to the invitation. Of
these, three were preliminarily deemed ineligible for participation based on information
provided during the pre-screening. Seven individuals met all requirements for
participation and were scheduled to be interviewed. All interviews were conducted
between May and June of 2014 via telephone. To ensure anonymity, each participant was
referred to in the research documentation and all components of this study by alphabet
name Participant A (PA) through Participant G (PG). A demographic summary of the 7
selected research participants appears in Table 6:
Table 6: Demographic Description

Gender

A
Male

B
Female

Participants
C
D
Female Female

E
Female

F
Female

G
Male

Library Science Degree

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Years of teaching

10

15 ½

5

5

10

9

17

Sessions per semester

10

24

15

30

25

50

50

One-shots

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Instructional design courses

None

None

3

None

1

1

1

Descriptions of each study participant were intentionally vague to disallow for the
identification of any individual participant. Although gender was not used as a selection
consideration, it is noted that 86% of the research sample was female and 14% male.
According to the US Census data, 83% of practicing librarians are female and 17% are
63

male. The gender percentage of the research sample was consistent with that of the
general population of librarians. All of the participants possessed the American Library
Association’s accredited Masters’ degree in Library Science. This constitutes the terminal
degree for a professional librarian. The years of teaching experience of the participants
ranged from a minimum of 5 years to 17 years. Information sessions taught each semester
by the study participants varied from 10 per semester to 50, and were all one-shots. While
none of the participants had a formal degree in instructional design, 3 out of the 7
(42.86%) had taken at least one course in instructional design and one participant had
completed at least three formal courses in instructional design within the last three years.
Professional Profiles
This section supplements the demographic information of each study participant.
Information on the training and teaching workloads of the study participants improved
the understanding of real-life work challenges of this study group.
Participant A. Participant PA is male and was employed at a public university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. He was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. He had the Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 10
years’ experience in designing and teaching information literacy. PA had taught about 10
one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the request of his liaison
department. As PA puts it, “I teach information literacy classes as requested by my
subject area partners”. PA has not taken any formal instructional design courses within
the last three years but keeps current on instructional strategies by attending in-house

64

instruction workshops. PA signed and returned the Inform Consent and agreed to
participate in this research study.
Participant B. Participant PB is female and was employed at a public university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. She was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. She had the Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 15 ½
years’ experience in designing and teaching information literacy. PB had taught about 24
one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the request of her liaison
department. PB explains “I am part of the instruction team. My portion is heavy across
the graduate classes, especially in the social sciences but I tend to specialize in graduate
and upper class sessions.” PB has taken one formal instructional design course within the
last three years and states, “Actually I just finished … a course in Faculty Life and
Instructional design. It helped me in bringing together a lot of different ideas that I picked
up in different seminars and workshops but having a full course that was fully integrated
helped solidify a lot of stuff about active learning techniques.” She keeps current on
instructional strategies by attending seminars and workshops. PB signed and returned the
Inform Consent and agreed to participate in this research study.
Participant C. Participant PC is female and was employed at a public university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. She was an
instruction and distance services librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more
academic departments within the university at the time of this study. She had the
Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 5 years’ experience in designing and
teaching information literacy. PC had taught about 24 one-shot library instruction
65

sessions each semester at the request of her liaison department. PC pronounces that:
“Every semester I teach from 10 to 15 face-to-face classes each semester. The duration of
each class is 1 ½ hours. Since I am embedded in some classes, some classes last 4 weeks
and some last for 6 weeks.” PC had taken several formal instructional design courses
within the last three years, including an introduction to instructional design class. PC
signed and returned the Inform Consent and agreed to participate in this research study.
Participant D. Participant PD is female and was employed at a public university
located in the Midwest part of the country at the time of the interview. She was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. She had the Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 5
years’ experience in designing and teaching information literacy. PD had taught about 30
one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the request of her liaison
department. PD indicated that she had taken some formal instructional design courses
within the last three years under a training and development program. PD signed and
returned the Inform Consent and agreed to participate in this research study.
Participant E. Participant PE is female and was employed at a public university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. She was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. She had the Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 10
years’ experience in designing and teaching information literacy. PE had taught about 25
one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the request of her liaison
department. PE explains that “I teach approximately 20 – 25 library sessions each
semester, during the fall and spring semesters”. PE had taken one continuing education
66

course in assessment and instructional design within the last three years. PE signed and
returned the Inform Consent and agreed to participate in this research study.
Participant F. Participant PF is female and was employed at a public university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. She was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. She had served as coordinator and provided guidance for the
information literacy program at her university. She had the Masters’ degree in Library
Science and has had over 9 years’ experience in designing and teaching information
literacy. PF had taught about 50 one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the
request of her liaison department. PF explains, “I have not taken any instructional design
courses [within the last three years]. I went to the assessment tract of ACRL [Association
of College and Research Libraries] and did the program tract of Immersion [involved the
integration of teaching, learning, and technology]. PF signed and returned the Inform
Consent and agreed to participate in this research study.
Participant G. Participant PG is male and was employed at a private university
located in the southern part of the country at the time of the interview. He was an
instruction librarian and served as liaison librarian to one or more academic departments
within the university. He had the Masters’ degree in Library Science and had over 17
years’ experience in designing and teaching information literacy. PE had taught about 50
one-shot library instruction sessions each semester at the request of his liaison
department. PG had not taken any formal instructional design courses within the last
three years. PG signed and returned the Inform Consent and agreed to participate in this
research study.
67

Research Design and Introduction to the Analysis
A qualitative descriptive case study design was used to expand understanding of
media selection by designers-by-assignment by examining their real-life design practices.
The case study design was appropriate to investigate the contemporary phenomenon of
real-life design practices of instruction librarians. This approach allowed the researcher to
explore and describe how designers-by-assignment make media selection decisions when
developing active learning environments.
The central research question of “How designers-by-assignment select
instructional media to build active learning environments?” was addressed by the 7 study
participants during one-on-one telephone interviews. The researcher used an Interview
Guide of 24 open-ended questions arranged under the four categories of (a) general
questions, (b) active learning, (c) media selection, and (d) media selection strategies. The
interview questions were formulated to answer the research question.
Data were collected from the interview transcripts, participant artifacts, and
researcher notes, and served as methodological triangulation to enhance credibility and
reliability of the data. The data were analyzed using descriptive coding. Codes that
generated recurring patterns were aggregated into categories of meaning or themes. Data
were organized and presented according to themes that emerged from the data sources.

68

Detailed Analysis
The central question which drove this descriptive case study research was “How do
designers-by- assignment make media selection decisions for active learning
environments? Three subordinate questions helped to answer the central question:
1. What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
2.

What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices with
respect to the design of active learning environments?

3. What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the design of
active learning environments?

The responses to these questions were extracted by the researcher from responses given
by the research participants via twenty-four open-ended interview questions developed by
the researcher. The research questions were arranged under four broad categories: (a)
General Questions, (b) Active learning and Instructional Media, (c) Factors that Affect
Media Selection, and (d) Media Selection Strategies. The first 10 questions were
designed to extract demographic and general information. The remaining interview
questions were intended to coordinate with the respective subordinate research questions
as listed in Table 7.
Table 7: Subordinate Research Questions Mapped to Interview Questions
Subordinate Research Questions (SRQ)

Interview Questions

SRQ1. What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?

Interview Questions
11,12,13,14,16

SRQ2. What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices
with respect to the design of active learning environments?

Interview Questions
8,9,10,15,17,18,23

SRQ3. What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the
design of active learning environments?

Interview Questions
19,20,21,22,24

69

Descriptive coding was applied to all of the interview responses and the data were
grouped to generate themes. Common themes that emerged were included in the analysis.
In an effort to get the participants to feel comfortable talking, the researcher asked
each participant to describe what active learning meant to them. All participants (100%)
shared their respective definition of active learning. Themes that emerged from their
definitions are listed in Table 8.
Table 8: Active Learning Descriptions
Themes
A
Active participant
Doing something
Engaged
Facilitates active learning
Hands-on
Interactive
Involved
Non-passive
Participatory
Taking charge for their learning
Work things out

Participants
B
C

x

D
x

E

F

G

x

x
x

x
x

x
x
x
x
x

x
x
x

Eleven different terms or phases to explain active learning were expressed by the
participants. Only three of the terms or phases were repeated: doing something, engaged,
and participatory. Although a variety of descriptive terms were used to express the
concept of active learning, they all spoke to an educational environment that was studentcentered. An analysis of the remaining research data extracted from participant
responses to the remaining questions is organized and presented under each subordinate
question.

70

SRQ1: What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
The study participants described nineteen specific media they utilized in the
design of information literacy instruction. The collected data are presented in Table 9,
along with a description of each media and re-occurring themes under which the
researcher grouped each media type.

71

Table 9: Type of Media Used by Study Participants
Media

Description

Themes

Adobe® Connect™

Web conferencing platform for video conferencing, web meetings,
eLearning, and webinars (http://www.adobe.com/)

Software

Blackboard

Web-based learning management system (LMS) designed to support
fully online courses or provide a space for face-to-face course
supplementation to enhance teaching and learning
(http://www.uta.edu/blackboard/)

Software

Clickers

Interactive technology that enables instructors to pose questions to
students and immediately collect and view the responses of the
entire class ( https://www1.iclicker.com/)

Physical
technologies

Digital badges

Digital tokens awarded to signify the mastery of a skill, marks of
experience , or completion of a project
(http://net.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/eli7085.pdf)

Software

EndNote

Software tool for publishing and managing bibliographies, citations
and references ( http://endnote.com/product-details)

Software

GoAnimate

Cloud-based platform for creating and distributing animated videos
(http://goanimate.com/ )

Software

Google Drive

User file storage and synchronization service provided by Google
which enables cloud storage, file sharing, collaborative editing of
documents, spreadsheets, presentations, drawings, forms, and more
(https://www.google.com/drive/)

Software

Laptop

Personal computer that is mobile and therefore can be used in a
variety of locations

Physical
technologies

Learning Spaces

Collaborative spaces equipped with furniture and technology that
encourages students to work together to maximize the opportunity
for learning.

Physical
technologies

Microsoft OneNote

Computer software for gathering notes, drawings, screen clippings
and audio with the ability to share with other OneNote users
virtually http://endnote.com/product-details

Software

Minute Paper

A one-minute anonymous, in-class writing activity where students
respond to a question designed by the instructor to assess learning

Print

Screencast-O-Matic

Screen recorder for screen capture and sharing.
(http://www.screencast-o-matic.com/)

Software

SMART Board

Interactive whiteboards that addresses saving and storing any
information written on it.
(http://www.bamaed.ua.edu/cse489/smartboard/)

Physical
technologies

72

Table 9: Type of Media Used by Study Participants (Continued)

Media

Description

Themes

Smartphone

Mobile phone with an operating system that combines the features
of a phone with those of a personal digital assistant, a digital
camera, a media player, and GPS navigation.
http://www.pcmag.com/encyclopedia/term/51537/smartphone

Physical
technologies

Tablet PC

Portable personal computer, smaller than a laptop and larger than a
smartphone, that is wireless with a touch screen interface.

Physical
technologies

Webinar

Short for Web-based seminar offered as a presentation, lecture,
workshop or seminar that is transmitted over the Web.
http://www.webopedia.com/TERM/W/Webinar.html

Software

Wiki

Program that allows users to work together to design the content of a
Web site (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki)

Software

Worksheet

Sheet of paper with questions for students and places to record
answers.

Print

YouTube

Video-sharing Web site that lets users upload and share video clips
(https://www.youtube.com/yt/about/ )

Software

Participant responses to interview questions 11, 12, 13, 14, and 16 were gleaned
to extract the various types of instructional media used by the participants to create
student-centered active learning environments. According to the findings, the 7 research
participants collectively selected nineteen different instructional media to actively
involve students in information literacy instruction. As indicated in Table 9 above, the
different media were categorized and arranged under three themes: a) print, b) physical
technologies, and c) software. An analysis of each media theme selected by the
participants follows.

73

Print
Two of the nineteen media types selected by the participants (10.58%) to facilitate
active learning was print. The specific print media mentioned were worksheets and the
Minute Paper. Participant G stated:
“I include simple exercises where the students would be paired off and they
would have a worksheet and have them look for things and each pair would have
a specific exercise that they needed to accomplish. One student would find a book
in the catalog, one would search a database for an article, another one would find
journal”.
Participants PB and PD also agreed to the use a lot of worksheets with students to foster
collaboration and engagement in one-shot instructional sessions.
The learner-centered Minute Paper was popular among participants. Participant
PC explained, “I like to get students to do a minute paper after I am done with my
session, they write what they have learned… and [I]ask what you have questions about.”
She often uses print media with her distance classes because she indicated that the
integrity of the telecommunications infrastructure of remote locations was often
unreliable. “Distance settings make it difficult to use [high] technology”, she continued.
Physical technologies
The physical technologies theme included clickers, laptops, media labs or learning
spaces, SMART Boards, smartphones, and tablet pcs. Media in this category were
selected 31.58% of the time by participants. Participant PD, participant PF, and
participant PG had used clickers in their instruction. Participant PE described clickers as
valuable for achieving and active learning environment but shared that unfortunately “
We haven’t invested in them in a while .The classrooms have computers for each student

74

and an instructor’s station but the computers are over 10 years old [at her institution] and
wouldn’t be able to support the software”.
Academic libraries have begun converting group study rooms and other library
areas into collaborative learning spaces. Sometimes referred to as collaboratories,
information commons, interactive spaces, or media labs, the study participants described
these spaces as encouraging active learning among students. Participant PA explained
how he used learning spaces with his students:
“I let them go to our media lab. They can create PSA (public service
announcements) as opposed to brochures. They can use Moviemaker there and
things they like to use. They can create their own designs and stuff like that. I
show them and they can come on their own when they have something personal to
do as opposed to when they have something they want to do.”
Participant PE described one of the learning spaces as “classrooms with computers and
an instructor’s station”. Participant PF stated “we teach in a lab [with] things that are app
based”. The use of tablet PCs with instruction was mentioned by Participants PG as well
as by PA who stated; “I used tablets for small groups”. Interactive smart boards were part
of the items listed in learning spaces. Participant PD was the only participant that
mentioned the use of smartphones in course design.
Software
The researcher recognized that there is a variety of software available for
educational purposes that can be grouped as productivity software or instructional
software. For the purposes of this research, all software titles used were group under the
broad theme of software. The study participants described their use of several software
titles such as Adobe Connect for web conferences and webinars, Blackboard with
collaborative learning tools, Microsoft OneNote for interaction with note taking, and
75

Screencast-O-Matic to design engaging presentations. Participant PB stated, “I
sometimes [create] a webinar for peer discussion while Participant PC added, “I
facilitated a course in Blackboard”. Participant E said she desired to use these mediums
but lacked training.
Software vendors continue to transition media to the cloud at a rapid rate.
Software accessible via the cloud was selected to expedite active learning by 5 of the 7
participants: Participant PA, Participant PB, Participant PC, Participant PF and
Participant PG discussed their use of cloud based software. Individual titles used
predominately included digital badges, Go animate, Google Drive, Screencast-O-Matic,
webinars, Wikis, and YouTube videos. Participant PB stated that she “sometimes include
a webinar for peer discussion.” Participant PF volunteered that “all students [at this
institution] have access to Google Drive”, a cloud based program for file sharing and
collaborative editing. She continued to say that the use of this technology in her
information literacy instruction did not only affect students, but it “has energized my
teaching” as well.
Not all institutions are funded at the same level and not all instruction librarians
had access to all types of media. Participant PE explained that the instruction librarians at
her institution primarily select YouTube videos to create active learning environments.
”That’s all we have pretty much ventured into,” she explained, due to outdated computer
hardware at her institution.
PF stated, “We have Google Apps for education and all (our) students have access
to Google Drive so in some classes I use it to replace paper worksheets”. A predominant
view frequently repeated by the participants was that cloud based software was most
76

often selected. Access was seamless and PA articulated the sentiments of the other
participants by explaining that, “since Google Apps were free, we use it most often”.
SRQ 2: What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices
with respect to the design of active learning environments?
Participant responses to interview questions 8,9,10,15,17,18 and 23 were gleaned
to extract the factors that influenced designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices
with respect to the design of active learning environments. Of the top three themes that
emerged from the data as influencing media choice, cost of the media was the
overwhelming factor. The themes of time and learning objectives or student outcomes
followed closely behind as represented in Table 10.
Table 10: Factors that affect Media Selection

Media
Accessibility
Class size
Cost
Institutional factors
Learning objectives/outcomes
Literature Reviews
Peer Reviews
Support
Sustainability
Time (instruction)

PA
X
X
X
X

PB

Study Participants
PC
PD
PE

PF

PG

X

X

X

X
X
X

X
X

X

X

X
X

X

X

X
X
X

X

X

Cost
Six of the 7 study participants (85.71%) (PA, PB, PD, PE, PF, and PG) agreed that
the cost of the media was an important factor influencing media use in information
literacy instruction. PB stated that, “We use whatever (media) is free. I would definitely
try other media if it was available.” PE says, “Cost would be a major factor. Things that
are free would be selected most often.” Participants PA, PD, PF, and PD agreed that cost
77

was a factor in media selection. Participant PC said “Cost is not a factor in media
selection from the institution’s end “. She went on to say that if she wanted students to
use their Smartphones in an instruction session, there would be a cost to the student,
although she admitted that most students already had smartphones.
Learning objectives/outcomes
After cost, the next factor influencing media selection was learning objectives and
desired student outcomes. Five of the 7 study participants (71.43%) (PA, PB, PC, PD,
and PG) considered this as a predominate factor to be considered when designing
instruction. The issue of learning objectives/outcomes was always at the forefront of
every conversation with the study participants. Participant PD stated that “I don't want to
dilute the message with a lot of bells and whistles (but only use) media that helps meet
the learning outcomes.”
Time
The third top factor that influenced the type of instructional media used by 5 of the 7
instruction librarians (PA, PB, PD, PF, and PG) or (71.43%) was time – time required
to set up the media, time required to teach students how to use the media, or even the
time required for the instructor to learn to use the media. Participant PG agreed that
media selection is often selected based on “how much time it takes to use them.”
Participants PA, PB, PD and PF (elaborated on the challenges of designing for active
learning within the framework of one-shots, which range from 50 to 90 minutes per onetime session. Since one-shots were the primary instructional methods used by the 7 study
participants, In reference to time as a factor, participant PB stated that “Honestly there is
not enough time, if I could have anything I would probably chose something different.
78

There is a [time] constraint there”. Participant PF said “I need to make sure it is easy to
use and it is not going to take a lot of time to set up, to teach the students to use them”.
Participant PD continued by stating, “It really depends on the amount of time I have ”.
Additional factors were articulated by the participants, respectively as accessibility
(PA), class size (PB), institutional factors (PC), literature reviews (PA), peer reviews
(PG), support (PD), and sustainability (PD). Of particular interest to the researcher was
sustainability - having the ability to be useful and to be maintained for a long time.
SRQ 3: What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the
design of active learning environments?
The instruction librarians that comprised the study participants for this case study
had not received any formal instruction in media selection strategies. Interview questions
19, 20,21,22,24 of the Interview Guide were designed to ascertain the strategies they used
to make media selection decisions. Table 11 below lists the strategies these instruction
librarians use when selecting media to enhance active learning:
Table 11: Media Selection Strategies
Codes
AW
PR
LIT
NET
LO
LA
AUD
CO
TS
TI
EA
ACC
CL
TR

Code Description
Attend workshops
Peer review
Read the literature
Networking
Learning outcomes
Learner analysis
Consider audience
Cost
Technology support
Time
Ease
Accessibility
Comfort level
Training

Themes
Professional development
Professional development
Professional development
Professional development
Learner needs
Learner needs
Learner needs
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media
Characteristics of media

79

Study participants were free in describing their respective media selection strategies.
When asked if they used any media selection models, none of the participants suggested
the aid of any media or instructional design model to help select appropriate media.
Participant PD continued with “I am not really familiar with them, I never read an article
or certainly have not head of them in any classes I took in graduate school”
The topmost themes that emerged from the data that identified the study participants’
media selection strategies were, in order of priority, characteristics of media, professional
development, and learner needs.
Characteristics of the Media
The participants concurred that knowing as much as possible about the
characteristics of the media was a strategy for selecting the most appropriate media.
Background information collected on media characteristics by the participants were cost,
ease of use, accessibility, and time. The characteristics of the media and factors that
affected media choice were similar. Participants expressed concern as to how much time
would be required to learn to use the media by students and librarians and how much setup time would it take away from instruction, since one-shots are only 50 to 70 minutes.
Of particular interest to the researcher on the characteristics of the media as a selection
strategy was the issue expressed by a participant PD,
“I think sustainability of whatever media you use should be considered. It ties into
cost”. Being an early adopter of (emerging) instructional media, committing resources
and energy, and later finding the media was not appropriate to meet the learning
objectives affect the sustainability”.

80

Professional development
Background information and recommendations for media were gathered through
professional development, which included workshops, reading the professional literature,
viewing tutorials on the Web, and networking with peers. Participant PB expressed the
value of professional development for developing a strategy for media selection because
she was able to “pick up a lot of different ideas in different seminars and workshops”.
The library profession sponsors many workshops and conferences where training on
media is offered and librarians are, as participant PC described, “willing to share what
they have learned”. Media selection strategies used by participant PG expounded on
media selection strategies she used:
“The first thing is to read the literature. ALA (American Library Association)
published books on instruction on a regular basis. I look at those and what kind of
tools the article recommends and look at what other people are doing. I talk with
other instruction librarians. Someone is always developing something interesting.
Go to conferences. There are a lot of interesting things out there.”

Learner needs
Media selection strategy employed by the study participants involved considering
learner needs.

Learner analysis was expressed by the participants as a critical step in

choosing appropriate media. Participants repeatedly commented that understanding
students and how they prefer to learn will have a direct effect on the type of media
introduced. Are the students non-traditional, millennial, or international? In reference to
non-traditional student needs, participant PC stated that “if you know anything about our
non-traditional students they don’t like to do a whole lot of “techie” stuff. They don’t

81

want me to text; they don’t want any of that.” In this case, the participant selected media
that was primarily print and low-tech. She continued:
I kinda use the flipped method. Think-Pare-Share. I give them a scenario to think
about. Give them a couple minutes to let it ponder, and then we share. What do
you think about this and why? We just don’t share; they have to give a reason
why you believe what you believe. I also try to get them to do a Minute paper.
When I am done with my session, they have to do a minute paper and get them to
learn and ask what you have questions about.
One final theme that emerged from the study as an important selection strategy was the
summative evaluation. After participant PB used a particular media in a previous
instructional session, she stated that it was an important selection strategy to “keep a log
of what worked and what did not work” . This helped when selecting media in the future.
Participant Artifacts
Artifacts submitted by the participants were analyzed to verify themes that related
to media used within a framework of active learning pedagogy as indicated in Table 12:
Table 12: Participant Artifacts Analysis
Participant
PA
PB

Type of Artifact
Syllabus
Syllabus

Title of Artifact
Library Instruction
Information Literacy
Instruction
Instruction

PC

Syllabus

PD

Syllabus

Designing Thinking in
Technology

PE

Syllabus

Design Assignment

PF

Syllabus

Learning Outcomes for
Information Literacy

PG

Checklist

Library instruction Planning
Checklist

Themes
Laptops
Pens
Blackboard
Google Apps
Flipped classroom
Scenarios
Group Teams
Web
Learner characteristics
Learning objects
Hands on activities
Engagement
Collaboration
Text
Visuals
Multimedia

All 7 study participants submitted formal and informal artifacts they utilized in
designing information literacy instruction as part of their job responsibilities. Six
82

participants submitted course syllabi (PA, PB, PC, PD, PE, and PF). One participant
submitted a checklist (PG). Participant artifacts helped answer SQ1 relating to types of
media selected by instruction librarians to support an active learning environment. Four
of the 7 participants (57.14%) (PA, PB, PC, and PG) listed media on their artifacts.
Laptops, pens, Blackboard, Google Apps, text, visuals, and multimedia constituted the
media listed on the designated artifacts.
Researcher Notes
During the interviews the researcher tape recorded each of the 7 interviews. The
researcher also recorded handwritten notes of questions and overall impressions of the
interview session. Data analysis of interview notes revealed that participants had an
accurate understanding of each question and shared their media selection practices
without hesitation. Two participants, PB and PC, required an explanation of media
selection models.

Chapter 4 Summary
This chapter presented in detail the data collected and how it was analyzed to
answer the central research question and each of the three subordinate research questions
(SRQs) in this study. Data were collected via telephone interviews and think-aloud
protocol. The addition of participant artifacts and the researcher’s notes served to
triangulate data. The instructional design thought processes of 7 academic instruction
librarians were explored through descriptive narratives. The 7 cases were presented and
discussed collectively within the context of the research questions, ending with an
analysis of each SRQ.
83

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to describe how academic instruction librarians
serving as designers-by-assignment select instructional media to support active learning
environments. A descriptive case study methodology was imposed to gain an
understanding of the real-life practice of media selection performed by academic
librarians. Seven study participants were recruited via the information literacy discussion
list maintained by the American Library Association. The central research question and
three subordinate questions were used to help guide this study:
How do designers-by-assignment select instructional media to build active learning
environments?
1. What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
2.

What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices with
respect to the design of active learning environments?

3. What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the design of
active learning environments?
Participants were interviewed using a researcher prepared interview guide. Their
responses disclosed their actual practice under authentic conditions (Patton, 2002).
This chapter presents a comprehensive summary of the research findings based on
data collected primarily from participant interviews, but also from participant artifacts
and researcher notes. This chapter recaps the study findings as they relate to the research
problem and the research questions asked, the literature reviewed, and within research
84

study limitations. Findings are organized and presented sequentially by research
questions. Also discussed are limitations of the study and implications of the study for
designers-by-assignment practice and instructional design practice. This chapter ends
with recommendations for future research and a summary.

Summary of the Findings
A summary of the findings of this research study is offered in this section.
The findings as documented in Chapter 4 will be summarized and presented according
to the subordinate research questions.
SRQ1: What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?

Media selected by the study participants were grouped under the categories of
print, software, and physical technologies. The study participants most often selected
media categorized under software, followed by physical technologies. Print media was
selected less often.
SQR2: What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices
with respect to the design of active learning environments?

Factors that influenced the type media the participants selected included
accessibility, class size, cost, institutional factors, learning objectives/outcomes, literature
reviews, peer reviews, technology support, sustainability, and time. Cost exerted the most
influence, followed by learning objectives/outcomes. Time constituted the third most
influential factor for selecting media.

85

SRQ 3: What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the
design of active learning environments?

The strategies that the study participants used to make sure the media they
selected would support an active learning environment were individually based. They did
not use a formal media selection model. Their strategies involved activities that the
researcher organized under three specific themes: characteristics of the media, learner
needs, and professional development. The participants selected media that encouraged
collaboration and engagement, which are the basis of active learning.

Discussion of the Findings
The purpose of the research study was to describe how instruction libraries
serving as designers-by-assignment select appropriate media to design library
instruction/information literacy sessions within an active learning environment. The
central research question driving this research is “How do designers-by-assignment make
media selection decisions for active learning environments? The answer to this question
was given by the research participants through responses to twenty-four open-ended
questions arranged under four broad categories: General demographics, active learning
strategies, media selection, and media selection strategies. A detailed interpretation of the
research findings were summarized under each subordinate question and cumulated to
answer the central question of how designers-by-assignment make media selection
decisions within an active learning environment.

86

SRQ1: What types of media do designers-by-assignment select to facilitate active
learning environments?
According to the findings, the 7 research participants listed collectively nineteen
different instructional media they used to actively involve students in information literacy
instruction. The different media selected were categorized and arranged under three
themes: a) print media, b) software, and c) physical technologies.
Print media. Regardless of innovations in technology and communication, there
continues to be a place for print in active learning instruction. Four of the participants
(PB, PC, PD, and PG) used print media to engage students during information literacy
instruction. The specific print media mentioned were worksheets and the Minute Paper.
Worksheets were one of the easiest and less expensive ways to engage students during an
information literacy session. They were completed by individual students as an extension
of instruction and with groups to encourage collaboration. They were used by study
participants with lecture style sessions (Participant PB) as well as with the flipped
classrooms (Participant PG).
Student participation in the educational process is a necessary component for
active learning. The use of the Minute Paper involved facilitating student engagement
with course materials through a minute of writing at the end of a lesson. The Minute
Paper has proved useful as a student assessment technique and provided rapid feedback
on student learning.
Software. A prolific use of media under the category was due to the low or no
additional cost to the libraries experienced by the study participants for several of the
software titles. Examples of this type of media include Google Apps for Education, a
87

suite of productivity tools for classroom collaboration available in most academic
libraries. As a part of Google Apps for Education, Google Drive is an office suite of
productivity and collaborative software that allows students to create and edit documents
online while collaborating with other students in real-time. Its popularity with the
instruction librarians was influenced by the fact that these suites, including documents,
spreadsheets, presentations, drawings, forms, etc., were free to all Google Apps for
Education users. This is understandable because academic libraries have continued to
receive smaller shares of university budgets for the past decade and have been forced to
cut funding for resources (Kolowich, 2012).
Physical technologies. The third media type that the participants admitted using
was in the physical technologies category. This category included a variety of standalong and computer assisted technologies. A particular computer assisted technology
used by the participants was clickers. Although there were favorable opinions of clickers
for promoting active learning, participants also articulated challenges to using clickers.
PE reported that the cost of clickers was too expensive and the technology in their
classrooms was outdated and could not support their use. There was also a concern
among some of the participants that since the instruction time of one-shots is limited to a
one time, 50 to 90 minute session, the time it takes to acquaint the students and the
instructor to the technology was an important factor to consider. Multiple types of
technology for student collaboration and engagement were selected for use. It was not
surprising to the researcher that there was considerable interest in mobile technologies
such as laptops, tablets, smartphones, and Smart Boards. The effective uses of these

88

devices in academic libraries were possible because all of the libraries represented by the
participants provided free Wi-Fi.
The participants made recurring comments about creating and using active
learning spaces to support student-centered learning. Libraries have converted traditional
library areas into learning spaces. These spaces were described as technology-rich with
such items as digital cameras, flat screens, video conferencing hardware and software,
interactive whiteboards, and writable surfaces. Seating in these learning spaces were
arranged to accommodate collaborative and flexible learning. Findings showed the
popularity of using active learning spaces to engage students when teaching information
literacy skills.

SQR2: What factors influence designers-by-assignments’ media selection choices
with respect to the design of active learning environments?
The researcher asked each participant to describe active learning. In their
discussion, a recurring comment was that active learning should involve the student in
“doing something” to encourage engagement. The participants reported that maintaining
the student’s attention during instruction is sometimes a challenge. The inclusion of
media helps keep students involved. This observation corresponds with Bonwell and
Eison (1991) who reports that active learning engages students to do things and think
about what they are doing.
Research findings indicated that of all the factors that the study participants
described as influencing media selection for active learning, cost was the most
predominate. A plausible reason is that libraries are underfunded and have not received
their fair share of their university’s budgets (Kolowich, 2012). Libraries are often hard
89

pressed to maintain existing services. Study participants inferred that they were
encouraged to identify and utilize resources that do not add to the budget of the library.
The next prominent factor with 5 out of 7 participants in agreement was time.
Designers-by-assignment working in academic libraries operate under a severe time
constraint. They are challenged to produce an information literate student often within a
50 to 90 minute one-shot session. This time constraint limits the type of media they can
effectively integrate into an instructional session. Participants in the study testified that
the time constraint was a prominent factor in selecting media to support active learning.
Some libraries have begun to offer for credit semester-long information literacy courses
but the majority still limits instruction librarians to the non-recurring one-shot sessions.
Research findings also prioritized learning outcomes as a factor for selection of
media as described by 5 of the 7 participants. Good instruction design keeps the focus of
media selection on fulfilling learning objectives and not on the media itself. Aligning
media with the pre-determined learning objectives supplied by the requesting faculty
assured quality and effectiveness of instruction.
SRQ 3: What media selection strategies do designers-by-assignment use for the
design of active learning environments?
The researcher expected to find a void in the participant’s use of a systematic
process for selecting appropriate media due to limited instructional design training. The
actual findings concurred with the expected findings. The study participants made media
selection decisions for active learning environments, not based on a particular media
selection model but based on information learned from a combination of professional
workshops and conferences, the literature, peer recommendations, and previous
90

experience. The information learned translated in an informal strategy that was based on
the characteristics of the media, recommendations of media by peers, and the ability of
the medium to meet the learner needs.

Discussion of the Findings in Relation to the Literature
This research study was conducted to better understand how instruction librarians
make media selection decisions when designing information literacy instruction within an
active learning environment. Research questions focused on types of media selected,
factors that affected media selection, and strategies used for selecting media. The study
sample consisted of 7 instruction librarians recruited via an online discussion group
managed by the American Library Association. Along with traditional librarian
responsibilities such as reference, collection development, and technical processing, these
librarians have responsibilities for designing and teaching information literacy skills to
students in at their respective institutions. Instructional design is ideally assigned to
formally trained experts with a theoretical background in learning theory and
instructional strategy (Browne, 2010; Mercucci & Usher, 2011) but is often regulated to
subject matter experts (Shachaf & Hara, 2007) as was the case with this study. The
findings of this current study are consistent with the research literature suggesting that the
majority of instructional design is still performed by those with little or no formal training
in instructional design. The findings also project the effectiveness of active learning for
enhancing a better understanding of course content for learners.
Research findings revealed that, with the exception of Participant C, formal
instructional design courses were absent from the study participants’ training. They did
91

take some responsibility for addressing their training gap through workshops,
conferences, webinars, and tutorials. The description of this group also coincides with
Merrill (1994) who reported that 95% of all instructional design was performed by those
pressed into service without formal training in instructional systems design. He called
this group designers-by-assignment.
The participants’ responses articulated during this study showed that they
concurred with Bonwell and Eison (1991) in their understanding that active learning was
a key component to foster effective student outcomes. All of the participants approached
information literacy instruction from an active learning perspective. The 7 study
participants collectively taught approximately 200 information literacy sessions per
semester and reached approximately 6,000 students. Each participant said they designed
their information literacy information sessions themselves and selected the instructional
media that they described as encouraging active learning and aligning with the expected
student learning outcomes.
Findings from this research study of designers-by-assignment real-life design
practice are similarly aligned to those of the findings of other studies involving designersby-assignment discussed in Chapter 2: Essmaker, 2012; Halloran, 2013; and Pesce, 2012.
Essmaker (2012) studied designers-by-assignment in the community college educational
environment using a descriptive case study design. Research data was collected and
triangulated using a questionnaire, interviews, and course observations. Essmaker found
that this group of designers-by-assignmentdesigners-by-assignment had little if any
knowledge of instructional design, especially in the area of Universal Design. This
research study concurs with the current study that most designers-by-assignment are
92

genuinely interested in designing information sessions and courses that are effective for
student learning outcomes, regardless of formal training. Research conducted by Halloran
(2013) and Pesce(2012) involved case studies using in-depth interviews to discover how

instructional designers-by-assignment in community colleges and higher education
institutions performed aspects of instructional design without formal training in
instructional systems design. Their research suggests that strategies of instructional
design practice of these designers consisted of an ill-structured, intuitive decision-making
process that aligns with the current study.
Findings Aligned With Literature Review of Active Learning Media
Research findings coincided with Oigara and Keengwe (2011) that technology,
especially clickers were accepted by students as easy to use and by the instructors as
encouraging active participation. Other predominate emerging technologies selected by
the participants included instructional software, tablet PCs, Smartphones and Smart
Boards. These media accepted by the participants have been proven to encourage
engagement and collaboration (Abdous, Camarena, & Facer, 2009; Hew & Bush, 2007;
Li, Pow, Wong & Fung, 2009; Sharples, 2009).
Findings Aligned with Literature Review of Factors that Influence Media Choice.
Study findings revealed that recurring factors expressed by participants as
influencing media choice, in order of importance, were cost, learning
outcomes/objectives, and time required to implement media, followed by class size,
accessibility, institutional factors, literature review, peer reviews, support, and
sustainability. This list was aligned with factors expressed in the literature, but not
93

necessary in the order of importance (Mahady, 1992; Romiszowski, 1998; Strauss &
Frost, 1999). Cost was a major factor for selection with the study participants due to the
culture of the library profession. Libraries are service industries and as such are
dependent on funds from external sources. Higher education always protect the classroom
during budget cuts and leaves library budgets venerable (Kolowich, 2012). When funds
are limited, resources and applications that are free are acquired most often.
Findings Aligned with Literature Review of Media Selection Strategies
Media selection rules are used as irregular framework for selecting the most
appropriate media to support learning. None of the sample participants used any
systematic media selection models to help chose the best media, nor had they been
exposed to any media selection models. Their media selection strategy included (a)
gathering background information through professional development activities such as
workshops, peer recommendations, reading the literature, and networking, (b) analyzing
learner needs, and (c) analyzing characteristics of the media. This study uncovered
pragmatic issues that were important to instruction librarians when selecting media.
These findings align with the media selection models discussed in Chapter 2. All
instructional design and media selection models and strategies serve as frameworks and
guides for utilizing the best strategies to design instruction for effective learning.

Limitations
The study achieved its goal of describing how instruction librarians serving as
designers-by-assignment make media selection decisions when designing information
literacy information session within an active learning environment. The study identified
94

types of media instruction librarians select, factors that affect their media selection, and
media selection strategies they use to create an active learning environment. No study is
without limitations. The number of cases was kept small with 7 participants. This
number insured that the raw data extracted from the 24 open-ended questions would be
manageable. It was not the intention of the researcher that the findings be generalized to
larger populations but to present descriptive evidence on a reduced scale for gravity of
analysis. During the interviews the researcher made every effort not to show bias or
unduly influence the participant’s responses by refraining from leading the participants.
After the data analysis was completed, some questions were later found to have very
succinct responses. When limited information was noted or an omission was identified,
the researcher triangulated data from other questions, participant artifacts or research
notes.

Implication of the Findings for Practice
Implications for Designers-By-Assignment in Librarianship Practice
Results of this study will help future designers-by-assignment maximize the
effectiveness of their instructional design. Academic librarians in higher education are
responsible for a myriad of tasks for which they have been trained, with the exception of
only limited training in instructional systems design. Workshops, webinars, conferences,
and professional development constitute their informal training in instructional design
and pedagogy. Recent professional literature on the subject of instruction librarians
(Bell & Shank, 2007; Veldof, 2006) indicate that librarians will continue to take on the
role of instructional designer in their workplace. Therefore more opportunities for formal
95

training for designers-by-assignment are needed. Library school curriculums should
incorporate more courses in instructional systems design. The job market for librarians
has been changing to require instructional duties as a core job duty (Julien & Genius
2011), and these instructional duties themselves continue to increase as technology and
teaching have become intertwined.
Implications for Instructional Design Practice
This study was undertaken to assist the instructional design field in understanding
the issues faced by designers-by-assignment in academic librarianship, particularly in the
area of media selection. The participants of this study also described their lack of training
in instructional systems design. Knowing the dearth of formal training experienced by
instruction librarians should motivate expert instructional designers to collaborate with
academic librarians on a more consistent basis. Additional, this knowledge may
influence instructional designers to develop tools to assist these designers-by-assignment
in making appropriate media selections.

Recommendations for Further Research
The field of librarianship has recognized that instruction librarians need more
formal training in instructional systems design as evidenced by the American Library
Association’s revised competences that address instructional design (ALA, 2000).
Library administrators are actually recruiting for instructional design librarians, with an
expectation that they understand the instructional systems design process, along with
principle of librarianship. This particular study looked at a very small sample as a
descriptive approach, hence a larger sample or different population of designers-by96

assignment could assist in validating the findings. In doing so, the instructional design
field could best address the needs of designers-by-assignment in the course of improving
instruction and tools. Further research is needed to determine to what extent formal
training in instructional design processes would improve the media selection practice of
designers-by-assignment in academic libraries and other communities of practice.

Conclusion

In conclusion, this study revealed how instruction librarians serving as designersby-assignment made media selection decisions in the design of information literacy
instruction within an active learning environment. This sample of designers-byassignment made media selection decisions based on three specific strategies: (a)
Acquire knowledge of best practices of instructional design and pedagogy through
professional development as provided through internal and external workshops,
networking, peer recommendations, and reviews of the professional literature, (b)
Analyze pragmatic and functional characteristics of available media that supports
collaboration and engagement, and (c) Align media with learning objectives to meet
learner needs. Findings of the study aligned with the literature that learner needs, along
with other factors determine proper media selection. Although the 7 instruction librarians
serving as designers-by-assignment lacked formal training in instructional systems
design, they drew upon a variety of ill-structured strategies to make media selection
decisions within an active learning environment. The instructional design profession
could benefit if more attention were given to the designer-by-assignment community,
97

since the majority of instructional design is still performed by this population. Instruction
librarians would profit greatly from additional formal training in systematic instructional
design and in particular media selection strategies. Further study of this group of
designers would validate the extent of support this population needs from expert
instructional designers.

98

REFERENCES

Abdous, M., Camarena, M. M. & Facer, B. R. (2009). MALL Technology: Use of
academic podcasting in the foreign language classroom. ReCALL, 21(1), 76-95.

Adekola, G. (2008). Methods and Materials Utilisation in Adult and Non-Formal
Education. Ibadan: Gabesther Educational Publishers.

Ahmed, S., Wallace, K. M., & Blessing, L. T. M. (2003). Understanding the differences
between how novice and experienced designers approach design tasks. Research in
Engineering Design, 14, pp. 1-11.
Albrecht, R., & Baron, S. (2002). The politics of pedagogy: Expectations and reality for
information literacy in librarianship. Journal of Library Administration, 36 (1/2),
71-96.
Allen, W. H.(1967). Media stimulus and types of learning. Audio-visual instruction,
January 1967, 12, 27-31.
Alsop, J. & Broodmare, K. (2007). Multiple Roles of Academic Librarians. Electronic
Journal of Academic and Special Librarianship, 8(1).

American Library Association (1989). A progress report on information literacy: an
update on the American Library Association Presidential Committee on
information literacy: final report. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/publications/whitepapers/presidential.
American Library Association (2000) Information Literacy Competency Standards for
Higher Education
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency
Association of College and Research Libraries., & American Library Association. (2000).
Information literacy competency standards for higher education. Retrieved from
http://www.acrl.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/standards/standards.pdf
Barak, M., Lipson, A., & Lerman, S. (2006). Wireless laptops as means for promoting
active learning in large lecture halls. Journal of Research on Technology in
Education, 38(3), 245-263.
99

Beatty, I.D. (2004). Transforming student learning with classroom communication
systems. Educause Center for Applied Research, Boulder Colorado, Research
Bulletin, February 3, 1-13.
Bell, S.J., & Shank, J.D. (2004). The blended librarian: A blueprint for redefining the
teaching and learning role of academic librarians. College & Research Libraries
News, 65, 372–375. Retrieved from http://crln.acrl.org/content/65/7/372.full.pdf.
Bell, S.J., & Shank, J.D. (2007). Academic librarianship by design: A blended librarian's
guide to the tools and techniques. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Benjamin, L.T., Jr. (ed.) (2008) Favorite activities for the teaching of psychology.
Washington, DC US: American Psychological Association.
Bewick, L., & Corrall, S. (2010). Developing librarians as teachers: A study of their
pedagogical knowledge. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 42,
97‐110.
Bhatt, R.K.(2011). Information literacy models and competencies development initiatives
in India. 2nd International Conference of Asian Special Libraries. Tokyo, Japan.
Retrieved from http://units.sla.org/chapter/cas/ICoASL-2011%20ProcedingsDay2.htm
Bogdan, R.C. & Biklen, S.K. (2003). Qualitative Research for Education: An
Introduction to Theory and Methods. Fourth edition. Pearson Education Group,
Boston MA.
Bolliger, D.U., & Des Armier, Jr., D. (2013). Active learning in the online environment:
The integration of student-generated audio files. Active Learning in Higher
Education, 14(3), 201-211.
Bonwell, C. C., & Eison, J. A. (1991), Active Learning: Creating Excitement in the
Classroom, ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 1, George Washington
University.
Boyce, C. & Neale, P. (2006). Conducting In-depth interviews: A Guide for Designing
and Conducting In-depth Interviews for Evaluation Input. Retrieved from
http://www.pathfind.org/site/DocServer/m_e_tool_series_indepth_interviews.pdf?d
ocID=6301
Browne, J. (2010). Securing a sustainable future for higher education in England: An
independent review of higher education funding & student finance. Retrieved from
http://hereview.independent.gov.uk/hereview/report/

100

Brundin, R. E. (1985). Education for instructional librarians: Development and overview.
Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 25 (3), 177-189.
Cachia, M. & L. Millward (2011). The telephone medium and semi-structured
interviews: A complementary fit. Qualitative Research in Organizations and
Management: An International Journal 6(3), 265-277.
Caldwell, J.E. (2007). Clickers in the large classroom: Current research and best-practice
tips. Life Sciences Education, 6(1), 9-20.
California Media and Library Educators Association. (1997). From library skills to
information literacy: A handbook from the 21st century (2nd ed.). Sacramento, CA:
California School Library Association.
Carnevale, D. (2005). Run a class like a game show: 'Clickers' keep students involved.
The Chronicle of Higher Education, Information Technology.
Campbell (2014). Modifying ADDIE: Incorporating new technologies in library
instruction. Public Services Quarterly, 10(2), p138-149.
Cennamo, K. & Kalk, D. (2005). Real world instructional design. Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth/Thompson Learning.
Chao, I. T., Saj, T., & Hamilton, D. (2010). Using collaborative course development to
achieve online course quality standards. International Review of Research in Open
and Distance Learning, 11(3), 106-126. Retrieved from
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl
Chamberlain, V. M. & Krals, C. S. 1993.The cone of experience. Vocational Education
Journal, 68(2) 55.
Chickering, A. W., & Gamson, Z. F. (1991). Applying the seven principles for good
practice in undergraduate education. San Francisco, Calif: Jossey-Bass Inc.
Christensen, T. K. & Osguthorpe, R. T. (2008). How Do Instructional-Design
Practitioners Make Instructional-Strategy Decisions? Performance Improvement
Quarterly, 17(3), 45-65.
Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media. Review of
Educational Research, 43(4), 445-459.
Clark, R. E. (2012). Learning from media: Arguments, analysis, and evidence. Charlotte,
N.C: Information Age Pub.

101

Clyde,L. (2002). An instructional role for librarians: An overview and content analysis of
job advertisements. Academic & Research Libraries, 33,150‐167.
Conway, J. (1997). Educational Technology's Effect on Models of Instruction. Retrieved
October 11, 2013, from http://copland.udel.edu/~jconway/EDST666.htm
Conway, C. (1997). Authentic assessment in undergraduate brass methods class. Journal
of Music Teacher Education, 7(1), 6–15.
Creswell, J. W. (2008). Educational Research: Planning, Conducting, and Evaluating
Quantitative and Qualitative Research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Prentice Hall.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed method
approaches. Thousand Oaks, Calif: Sage Publications
Cross, K. P. (2000). The educational role of researchers. New Directions for Higher
Education, 110, 63-74.
Dale, E. (1969) Audio-Visual Methods in Teaching, 3 rd ed., Holt, Rinehart & Winston,
New York.
Davis, K. A. (1995). Qualitative theory and methods in applied linguistics research.
TESOL Quarterly, 29, 427-453.
Davis, A.L. (2013). Using instructional design principles to develop effective
information literacy instruction: the ADDIE model. College & Research Libraries
News 74, 205-207.
Detlor, B., Booker, L., Serenko. A., & Julien, H. (2012). Student perceptions of
information literacy instruction: the importance of active learning. Education for
Information. 29, 147 – 161.
Dehkordi, M. A., Zarei, B., & Dehkordi, S. A. (2008). The effect of gender and age
differences on media selection in small and medium tourism enterprises.
Cyberpsychology & Behavior: The impact of the internet, multimedia and virtual
Reality on Behavior and Society, 11(6), 683-6.
Draper, S. W. & Brown, M. I. (2004). Increasing interactivity in lectures using an
electronic voting system. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 20(2), 81-94.
Dworkin, S. L. (2012). Sample size policy for qualitative studies using in-depth
interviews. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41(6), 1319-20.

102

Dwyer, F. (2010). Edgar Dale's Cone of experience: a quasi-experimental analysis
International Journal of Instructional Media. 37(4), 431.
Edmunds, A. & Morris, A. (2000). The problem of information overload in business
organizations: a review of the literature. International Journal of Information
Management, 20 (1),18–28.
Enriquez, A, G. (2010). Enhancing Student Performance Using Tablet Computers.
College Teaching, 58 (3), 77-84.
Essmaker, G. M. (2012). How designers-by-assignment in community colleges apply
universal design principles to online course designs to accommodate aging learners.
(Order No. 3542032, Capella University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, , 181.
Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/1143072073?accountid=279
65. (1143072073).
Ezzy, D. (2010). Qualitative interviewing as an embodied emotional performance.
Qualitative Inquiry, 16(3), 163-170.
Fells, S. (2012). Instructional designers' media selection practices for distributed
problem-based learning environments. (Order No. 3548973, Capella University).
ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 245. Retrieved from http://search.proquest.com.
Fidel, R., Bruice, H., Pejtersen, A. M. Dumais, S., Grundin, J. & Poltrock, S. (2001),
Collaborative information retrieval (CIR). The new review of information
behavior research, 1, 235-47.
Fink, L. D. (2003) Creating Significant Learning Experiences: An Integrated Approach
to Designing College Courses. John Wiley & Sons: Jossey-Bass Higher and
Adult Education.
Gall, M. D., Gall, J. P., & Borg, W. R. (2010). Applying educational research: How to
read, do, and use research to solve problems of practice. Boston: Pearson.
Gagné, R. M., Briggs, L. J., & Wager, W. W. (1992). Principles of instructional design
(4th ed.). Forth Worth, TX: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich College Publishers.
Gerritsen, M. (2009). The Impact of Culture on Media Choice: The Role of Context,
Media Richness and Uncertainty Avoidance. Language for Professional
Communication: Research, Practice and Training: 146–160.

103

Gill, P., Stewart K., Treasure, E. & Chadwick, B. (2008). Methods of data collection in
qualitative research: interviews and focus groups. British Dental Journal 204, 291
– 295.
Green, K.C., & Gilbert, S.W. (1995). Content, communications, productivity and the role
of information technology in higher education. Change, 27(2) 8-18.
Gross, M. D. (2006). Instructional Design Thought Processes of Expert Nurse Educators.
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University. Retrieved from
http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-11262006225753/unrestricted/MGrossDissertationFinalDEC042006.pdf
Guernsey, L. (1998). A new career track combines teaching and academic computing.
The Chronicle of Higher Education, pp. A35-A37.
Gupta, D. K., Savard, R., & International Federation of Library Associations and
Institutions. (2011). Marketing libraries in a Web 2.0 world. Berlin: De Gruyter
Saur.
Gustafson, K. L. & Branch, R. M.(1997). Survey of instructional development models,
third edition. Syracuse, NY: ERIC Clearinghouse on Information and Technology, p.
18.
Gustafson, K. L., & Branch, R. M. (2002). Survey of instructional development models
(Fourth ed.). Syracuse University, Syracuse, New York 13244: ERIC Clearinghouse
on Information& Technology.
Gustafson, K., & Bratton, B. (1984). Instructional improvement centers in higher
education: A status report. Journal of Instructional Development, 7(2), 2–7.
Gurvitch, R. and Metzler, M. (2013). Aligning learning activities with instructional
models. Journal of Physical Education, Recreation & Dance, 84(3), 30-37.
Guttikonda, R. R. & Coco, C. M. (2013). Incorporating Fink’s Significant Learning
Experience Model in the re-designing of the flagship accounting course . Journal of
Accounting and Finance, 13(5).
Fells, S.(2012). Instructional designers' media selection practices for distributed problembased learning environments. Capella University, ProQuest, UMI Dissertations
Publishing, 2012. 3548973.
Hagenson, L. C. (2001). The integration of technology into teaching by university
College of Education faculty. Unpublished dissertation, Oklahoma State
University.
104

Halai, A. (2006). Ethics in qualitative research: Issues and challenges. Plenary Address:
Multi Disciplinary Qualitative Research in Developing Countries. EdQual
working Paper No. 4. EdQual RPC. Retrieved from
http://www.edqual.org/publications/workingpaper/edqualwp4.pdf
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J. D., & Smaldino, S. E. (1999). Instructional media
and the technologies for learning (6th ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ:
Merrill/Prentice Hall.
Herreid , C. F. & Schiller, N. A. (2013). Case Studies and the Flipped Classroom.
Journal of College Science Teaching, 42(5),62-66.
Hew, K. & Brush, T. (2007). Integrating technology into K-12 teaching and learning:
current knowledge gaps and recommendations for future research. Education Tech
Research Dev, 55, 223-252.
Hildreth, B. E. (2011). Obstacles to instructional design practices in community colleges:
A modified delphi study. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/876017846?accountid=2796
5. (876017846).
Hoerman, H.L. & Furniss, K.A. (2001), ``Education for provision of library services to
distance learners: the role of the LIS schools’’, Journal of Library Administration,
32( 1-2), 247-57.
Hogan, S. A. (1980). Training and education of library instruction librarians. Library
Trends, 29 (1), 105-126.
Holden, J.T. & Westfall, P. J.L. (2010). Developing a Blended Learning Strategy: An
Instructional Media Perspective. Journal of Instruction Delivery Systems.
Hooie, J. H. (2012). The dual role of instructor/designer: Use of instructional design
practices in the design of K-12 online instruction. (Order No. 3495149, Capella
University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, , 118. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/922671354?accountid=27
965. (922671354).
Halloran, J. (2013). Use of online assessment tools by instructional designers-byassignment: Necessary features and functionalities. Available from Dissertations
& Theses @ Capella University. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview
Houtman, E. (2010). “Trying to figure it out”: Academic librarians talk about learning to
teach. Library and Information Research, 34 (107), 18-40.
105

Howard, L. W. (1977). Models for media selection. Nspi Journal, 16 (7), 4-7.
Hussain, I. (2012). Use of Constructivist Approach in Higher Education: An Instructors’
Observation. Creative Education, 3(2), 179-184.
Irlbeck, S. A. (2011). Essay: Educating for an instructional design and technology future.
The Journal of Applied Instructional Design, 2(1), 19-24.
Jayawardana, C., Hewagamage, K. P., & Hirakawa, M. (2002). Personalization tools for
active learning in digital libraries. The Journal of Academic Media Librarianship,
8(1). Retrieved from http://wings.buffalo.edu/publications/mcjrnl/v8n1/active.pdf
Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V., Freeman, A. (2014). NMC Horizon Report:
2014 Higher Education Edition. Austin, Texas: The New Media Consortium.
Retrieved from http://cdn.nmc.org/media/2014-nmc-horizon-report-he-EN-SC.pdf
Johnson, W. G., Burke, A., & Evans, B. (2001). Bibliographic instructional design: A
case study. Community & Junior College Libraries, 10(3), 17-37.
Jost, M.B., Mumma, P. & Willis, J. (1999). R2D2: A Constructivist/Interpretivist
Instructional Design Model. In J. Price et al. (Eds.), Proceedings of Society for
Information Technology & Teacher Education International Conference 1999 (pp.
1489-1494). Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
Julien, H., & Genuis, S. K. (2009). Emotional labour in librarians instructional work.
Journal of Documentation, 65(6), 926-937.
Julien, H., & Genuis, S. K. (2011). Librarians’ experiences of the teaching role: A
national survey of librarians. Library & Information Science Research, 33(2), 103
– 111.
Katz, W. A. (2002). Introduction to Reference Work. Volume 1, Basic Information
Services. Volume 2, Reference Services and Reference Processes. Boston:
McGraw Hill.
Kemp, J. E. (1971). Instructional design: A plan for unit and course development.
Belmont, CA: Fearon Publishers.
Kemp, J. E.(1991). Which Medium? Audiovisual Instruction, 32(6), 36.
Kemp, J. E., Morrison, G. R., & Ross, S. V. (2004). Design effective instruction, (4th
Ed.). New York: John Wiley & Sons.

106

Kenney, B. (2008). Revitalizing the One-Shot Instruction Session Using Problem-Based
Learning. Librarian Publications. Paper 13. Retrieved from
http://docs.rwu.edu/librarypub/13.
Kibridge, H.M. & DePalo, L. (2001). The education function in a digital library
environment: a challenge for college and research libraries, The Electronic
Library, 19(5), 283-95.
Kohlbacher, F. (2005). The Use of Qualitative Content Analysis in Case Study Research.
Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research,
7(1),Retrieved from http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs0601211.
Kolowich, S. (2012). Smaller servings for libraries. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2012/02/21/library-budgets-continue-shrinkrelative-university-spending#sthash.iBVPQEb1.dpbs
Knight, E., & Lee, E. (2008). A guide to teaching developmental psychology. WileyBlackwell
Kozma, R. (1994). Will media influence learning: Reframing the debate. Educational.
Technology Research and Development, 42(2), 7-19.
Lebow, D. (1993). Constructivist values for instructional systems design. Five principles
toward a new mindset. Educational Technology, Research, and Development,
41(3), 4-16.
Leow, F.-T., & Neo, M. (2009 ). Effect of Incorporating Gagne's Nine Instructional
Events in the Context of Multimedia-Mediated Student-Centred Learning.
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference of Teaching and Learning.
University College, Malaysia, Retrieved from http://www.academia.edu/651269/
Levie, W.H. (1977). Models for media selection. NSPI Journal, 16(7), 4-7.
Li, S. C., Pow, J. W. C., Wong, E. M. L., & Fung, A. C. W. (2010). Empowering student
learning through Tablet PCs: A case study. Education and Information Technologies,
15( 3), 171-180.
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage
Publications, Inc.
Little, B. (2006). Figuring it out. E.Learning Age, , 38-39. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/200870727?accountid=27965
Lorenzen, M. (2001). Active learning and library instruction, Illinois Libraries 83, 19–
24.
107

Lorenzen, M.(2001). A brief history of library instruction in the United States of
America. Illinois.
MacGeorge, E., Homan, S., Dunning, J., Elmore, D., Bodie, G., Evans, E., Khichadia, S.,
Lichti, S., Feng, B., & Geddes, B. (2008). Student evaluation of audience
response technology in large lecture classes. Educational Technology Research &
Development, 56(2), 125-145.
Mahady, R. (1992). The study of high school teachers’ utilization of instructional media
in Aceh Province, Indonesia. Un- published doctoral dissertation, Syracuse
University, Syracuse.
Manuel, K. (2001), Teaching an online information literacy course, Reference Services
Review, 29 (3), 219-28.
Marcucci, P., & Usher, A. (2011). Tuition fees and student financial assistance: 2010
global year in review. Toronto: Higher Education Strategy Associates.
Marshall, C. & Rossman, G. B. (1989). Designing qualitative research. Beverly Hills,
CA: Sage Publishers.
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2006). Designing Qualitative Research (4 th ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mason, M. (2010). Sample size and saturation in PhD studies using qualitative
interviews. Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 11(3), Retrieved from http://nbnresolving.de/urn:nbn:de:0114-fqs100387
Merriam, S. B. (2009). Qualitative research: A guide to design and implementation. San
Francisco, CA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Merrill, M. D. (2007). The Proper Study of Instructional Design, in Reiser, R. A. and
Dempsey, J. V, (Eds.). Trends and Issues in Instructional Design and Technology,
2nd Ed. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007, pp. 336-341. Retrieved May 15, 2014 from
http://mdavidmerrill.com/Papers/ProperStudy.pdf
Merrill, M. D. (2002). First principles of instructional design. Educational Technology
Research and Development, 50(3), 43–59.
Merrill, M. (1996). What new paradigm of ISD? Educational Technology, 36(6), p. 5758.
Mendenhall, A. M. (2012). Examining the use of first principles of instruction by
instructional designers in a short-term, high volume, rapid production of online K-108

12 teacher professional development modules. (Order No. 3551163, The Florida
State University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 167.
Merrill, M., Sebek, R. & Erksine, L.(2005). Designing and building online information
Literacy Instruction, Virginia Libraries 51( 2 ), 29. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/67/6/514.full.pdf
Merrill, M. D. (2007). The future of instructional design: the proper study of
instructional design. In R. A. Reiser & J. V. Dempsey (Eds.), Trends and Issues
in Instructional Design and Technology (Second ed., pp. 336-341). Upper Saddle
River, NJ: Pearson Education, Inc.
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1994) Qualitative Data Analysis: an Expanded
Sourcebook, Thousand Oaks, Calif., Sage.
Morse, J. M. (2000). Determining sample size. Qualitative Health Research, 10(1), 3-5.
Morris, A. & Blagg, E. . (1998). Current document delivery practices in UK academic
libraries. Library Management, 19(4) 271.
Murphy, K. (1991). Patronage and an oral tradition: Influences on attributions of distance
learners in a traditional society (a qualitative study). Distance Education, 12(1), 2753.
Narayan, J.S., Heward, W. L., R Gardner III, Courson, F. H., & Omness C. K. (1990).
Using response cards to increase student participation in an elementary classroom.
Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, 23, 483-490.
Oigara, J. N. & Keengwe, J. (2011). Pre-service teachers and technology integration with
smart boards. International Journal of Information and Communication Technology
Education, 7(4), 84-92.
Oswald, D. F., & Reigeluth, C. M. (2003). Instructional design: overview. In
Encyclopedia of Education, edited by James W. Guthrie, 1146-51. New York:
MacMillan Reference USA.
Overbaugh, R. (2003). Instructional design taking the teaching-learning process to a
higher level. Quest Summer, 6( 2).
Pan, C., & Thompson, K., (2009). Exploring dynamics between instructional designers
and higher education faculty: An phonographic case study. Journal of Educational
Technology Development and Exchange, 2(1), 33-52.
Patsula, P. J. (2002). Practical guidelines for selecting media: An international
perspective. The Usableword Monitor. Retrieved from
109

http://www.patsula.com/usefo/usableword/report20020201_mediaselection_criteria.s
html
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods (3rd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Pesce, S. V. (2012). The designer-by-assignment in practice: Instructional design
thinking of subject matter experts. Capella University). ProQuest Dissertations and
Theses, 252.
Perez, R. S., Johnson, J. F., & Emery, C. D. (1995). Instructional design expertise: A
cognitive model of design. Instructional Science, 21 , 321-349.
Pickles, K. T. (2014). Online course development by the designer-by-assignment. (Order
No. 3617706, Capella University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 105.
Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/1528528157?accountid=279
65. (1528528157).
Poirier, C. R. & Feldman, R. S. (2007). Promoting active learning using individual
response technology in large introductory psychology classes. Teaching of
Psychology, 34, 194-196.
Polger, M.A. & Okamoto, K. (2010) Can't Anyone Be a Teacher Anyway?": Student
Perceptions of Academic Librarians as Teachers. Library Philosophy and Practice.
p. 1-16.
Ratteray, Oswald M.T. & Howard L. Simmons.(1995). Information Literacy in higher
education: A report on the middle states region. Philadelphia: Commission on
Higher Education, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools.
\
Reiser, R.A. (2001). A History of Instructional Design and Technology: Part I: A History
of Instructional Media. Educational Technology Research and Development , 49
(1), 53-64.
Reiser, R. A. & Dick, W. (1996). Instructional Planning: A Guide for Teachers. Allyn
and Bacon.
Reiser, R., & Gagné, R. M. (1982). The selection of media for instruction. Englewood
Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Reynolds, L. J. (2001). Model for a web-based information literacy course: Design,
conversion and experiences. Science and Technology Libraries 19 (3/4): 65-78

110

Richey, R. C., & Klein, J. D. (2007). Design and development research. Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Romiszowski, A. J. (1998). The selection and use of instructional media: For
improved classroom teaching and for interactive, individualized instruction
(2nd ed.). NewYork : Nichols Pub.
Rowley, J. (2002). Using Case Studies in Research. Management Research News, 25(1),
pp. 16 – 27. http://www.arf-asia.org/resources/using_case_study_in_research.pdf
Russell, L. R. (2011). Identifying complex cultural interactions in the instructional design
process: A case study of a cross-border, cross-sector training for innovation
program. (Order No. 3471647, Georgia State University). ProQuest Dissertations
and Theses, 298.
Ruddick, K. W. (2012). Improving chemical education from high school to college using
a more hands-on approach. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of
Memphis.
St Clair, G. (2001), ``Staffing the special library’’, in Scammel, A. (Ed.), Handbook of
Information Management, 8th ed., Aslib, London, pp. 43-71.
Saldaña, J. (2009). The coding manual for qualitative researchers. London: Sage.
Seels, B. (1989). The instructional design movement in educational technology.
Educational Technology, 29(5), 11-15. ERIC Document Reproduction Service
No. EJ 395 529.
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
education and the social sciences. New York: Teachers College Press
Shachaf, P., & Hara, N. (2007). Behavioural complexity theory of media selection: A
proposed theory for global virtual teams. Journal of Information Science, 33(1),
63-74.
Shank, J. D., & Dewald, N. H. (2012). Academic library administrators’perceptions of
four instructional skills. College and Research Libraries,73(1), 78-93.
Sharples, M. (2009). Learning at Large. Paper presented at the MLearn 2009: The 8th
World Conference on Mobile and Contextual Learning, University of Central
Florida, Institute for Simulation and Training, Orlando, Florida.
Shibley, I., Amaral, K. E., Shank, J. D & Shibley, L. R. (2011). E-signing a Blended
Course: Using ADDIE to Guide Instructional Design. Journal of College Science
Teaching, 40(6), 80-85.
111

Simons, H. (2009). 3 Listen, Look, Document: Methods in Case Study Research. In
Case Study Research in Practice. (pp. 43-67). London: SAGE Publications, Ltd.
doi: http://dx.doi.org.library.capella.edu/10.4135/9781446268322.n3
Smith, D. L. (2009). Instructional designer's use of theory when designing instruction.
(Order No. 3339299, Capella University). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, ,
127. Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com.library.capella.edu/docview/288109393?accountid=27
965. (288109393).
Smith, P. L., & Ragan, T. J. (2005). Instructional Design (Third ed.). Hoboken, NJ:
JohnWiley & Sons, Inc.
Solomonson, W. L. (2008). Toward fluent instructional design in the context of people
Performance Improvement. 47(7), 12-19.
Strayer, J. (2012). How learning in an inverted classroom influences cooperation,
innovation and task orientation. Learning Environments Research, 15,171–193.
Strauss, J., & Frost, R. (1999). Selecting instructional technology media for the marketing
classroom. Marketing Education Review, 9 (1), 11-20.
Suzuki, K. (1995). “Various Factors Related to the Selection of Media for Instruction,”
Research on Audio-Visual Education, Vol. 16, 1-10.
Swanson, T. A. (2005). ADDIE in the library: building a model for the information age
library. Community & Junior College Libraries, 13(2), pp. 51-61.
Trotter, R. (2012). Qualitative research sample design and sample size: Resolving and
unresolved issues and inferential imperative. Preventive Medicine. 55, 298-400
U.S. Census Bureau. (2011). Statistical abstract of the United States, 2012. Washington,
D.C: U.S. Census Bureau.
Ueckert, C., & Gess-Newsome, J. (2008), Active learning strategies. The Science
Teacher. 75(9), pp. 47-52.Ueckert & Gess-Newsome (2008)
Veldof, J. R. (2006). Creating the one-shot library workshop: A step-by-step guide.
Chicago: American Library Association.
Veletsianos, G. (2010). Emerging Technologies in Distance Education. Athabasca
University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.veletsianos.com/publications/#sthash.GPeInS2h.dpuf
112

Verstegen, Barnard, & Pilot (2008). Instructional Design by Novice Designers: Two
Empirical Studies. Journal of Interactive Learning Research. 19:2, p351-383.
Walker, K. W. & Pearce, M.. (2014). Student engagement in one-shot library instruction.
Journal of Academic Librarianship. 40(3-4), p. 281.
Walter, S. (2008). Librarians as teachers: a qualitative inquiry into professional identity.
College and research libraries. 69(1)
Watson-Boone, R. (1998). Constancy and change in the worklife of research university
librarians. Chicago: Ill. Association of College and Research Libraries.
Waxman, L., Clemons, S., Banning, J., & McKelfresh, D. (2007). The library as place:
Providing students with opportunities for socialization, relaxation, and restoration.
New Library World, 108, 424-434
Wengraf, T. (2001). Qualitative research interviewing: Biographical narrative and semistructured. Thousand Oaks, Calif: SAGE.
Westbrock, T., & Fabian, S. (2010). Proficiencies for instruction librarians: Is there still a
disconnect between professional education and professional responsibilities?
College & Research Libraries, 71(6), 569-590. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/
Woodside, A. G. (2010).
College, USA.

Case study research: theory, methods, practice. Boston

Wang, S. & Zhu, P. (2013). The roles and responsibilities of the educational researcher.
Education Research Frontier. September 2013, Volume 3, Issue 3, PP.92-95
Yin, R. (2009). Case Study Research. Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Thousand
Oaks, pp. 240.
Young, M. F. (1993). Instructional design for situated learning. . Educational Technology Research and
Development 41(1) 1, 43–58.
Yin, R.K. (1994) Case study research: design and methods. 2nd edition.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks, Calif:
Sage Publications.
Yin, R.K. (2009). Case study research. Design and methods. 4. ed. Thousand Oaks,
California.
113

Zappe, S., Leicht, R., Messner, J., Litzinger, T., & Lee, H. W. (2009). Flipping the
Classroom to Explore Active Learning in a Large Undergraduate Course.
Proceedings, American Society for Engineering.
Zhang, C. Purcell, K.P., & Zhang, X. (2012). Using Fink's Integrated Course Design in
Developing a Health IT Course. AIS SIG-ED International Conference on
Informatics Education and Research, IAIM 2012, Orlando, FL, 15-16.

114

APPENDIX A: MEDIA SELECTION INTERVIEW GUIDE

Introduction Thank you for agreeing to participate in this research study and for taking the
time to meet with me today. I would like to talk to you about your media
Key
Components: selection experiences while designing information literacy/library instruction
sessions or courses. The interview should take less than an hour. Although I will
be taking some notes during the session, I can’t possibly write fast enough to get
it all down. Therefore I will be taping the sessions. All responses will be kept
confidential and I ensure you that any information included in the report will not
identify you as the respondent. Remember, you don’t have to talk about anything
you don’t want to and you may end the interview at any time. Are there any
questions about what I have just explained?
Are you willing to participate in this interview?
Category
One: General
questions

Category
Two: Active
learning and
instructional
media

Category
Three:
Factors

Category One: General questions
1.
2.
3.
4.

Please describe your current position.
How long have you worked in your current position?
List your educational preparation for this position.
Describe any formal institutional design courses you have taken within
the last 3 years.
5. Please describe your involvement with the library
instruction/information literacy instructional program at your institution.
6. How often do you teach library instruction sessions/courses each
semester?
7. Do you design your own library instruction sessions or are they
developed by an instructional team?

Category Two: Active learning strategies
8. How do you describe active learning?
9. Do you use active learning strategies when you teach information
literacy sessions? Why or why not?
10. How do you design and develop an active learning experience?
11. What type of instructional media do you use to support an active
learning environment?
12. How do you determine which media is appropriate to support teaching
and learning in an active learning environment?

Category Three: Factors that affect media selection
13. What factors affect which media you will use to promote active

115

that affect
media
selection

Category
Four: Media
selection
strategies

learning?
a. Learning Outcome
b. Instructional Strategy
c. Learner Characteristics
d. Instructional Setting
e. Cost
f. Impact on student learning and engagement
g. Teaching/learning method
h. Institutional factors
i. Other: Explain.
Category Four: Media selection strategies

14. How familiar are you with media selection model(s) and tools for
making media selection decisions?
15. Please describe any model or guidelines you use when selecting media
and discuss why you use this particular model or set of guidelines.
16. What type of design documents (such as checklists, rubrics, templates,
or similar documents) do you use to assist you in making media
selection decisions?
17. Would you be willing to share this (these) document(s) with me for
purposes of this research?
18. What role does active learning play in your media selection decisions?
19. In your experience, does the instructional method (active learning) drive
media selection decisions or does the media influence the design?
20. What instructional media are available to you and your institution to
support active learning?
21. What do you need to know about each of the emerging technologies
described above to make wise decisions about their use for active
learning?
22. Please describe the factors that need to be taken into consideration when
selecting a given instructional media for active learning?
23. If you were training someone to select media, what strategies might you
share from your own media selection practices?
24. Is there anything more you would like to add?
I appreciate again your participation in this important study. I’ll be transcribing
Closing Key
Components: the interview and will send you a copy to review for accuracy and completeness.
Thank you for your time. Goodbye.

116

APPENDIX B: CODES AND CODE DESCRIPTIONS
Pre-set Codes
(40)

Code Descriptions

Emerging Codes
(9)

Code Descriptions

CA
CMS
KI
LS
MM
PM
SM
SD
TE
WEB
AC
TI
TR
CL
AU
AS
CO
FTF
LO
LO
OS
IS
ISET
ARL

Cloud accessible
Content Management Systems
Kinetic activities
Learning spaces
Multimedia
Print
Social media
Subscription databases
Technology enhanced
Web 2.0Accessibility
Time
Training
Comfort level
audience
Assignment
Cost
Face-to-face
Learning objectives
Learning outcome
One-shots
Infrastructure support
Institutional setting-Association of Research
Libraries(ARL)
Ask students
Attend workshops
Audience
Based on experience
Brainstorming
Check sheet
Example of use
Experiences
Have a backup
Have students involved
Peer Review
Keep log
Learner characteristics
Learning objectives
Student engagement
Syllabus

TR
CM
LC
TI
PR
MA
INF
NL
LE

Technical requirements
Cost of media
Learning curve
Time to implement
media
Peer recommendation
Media attributes
Infrastructure
Needs of learners
Learning environment

AS
AW
AU
BOE
BR
CS
EX
EXP
BA
SI
PR
LOG
LC
LO
SE
SY

117

APPENDIX C: STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK
Academic Honesty Policy
Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for the integrity of
work they submit, which includes but is not limited to discussion postings, assignments, comprehensive
exams, and the dissertation or capstone project.
Established in the Policy are the expectations for original work, rationale for the policy, definition of terms
that pertain to academic honesty and original work, and disciplinary consequences of academic dishonesty.
Also stated in the Policy is the expectation that learners will follow APA rules for citing another person’s
ideas or works.
The following standards for original work and definition of plagiarism are discussed in the Policy:
Learners are expected to be the sole authors of their work and to acknowledge the authorship of
others’ work through proper citation and reference. Use of another person’s ideas, including another
learner’s, without proper reference or citation constitutes plagiarism and academic dishonesty and is
prohibited conduct. (p. 1)
Plagiarism is one example of academic dishonesty. Plagiarism is presenting someone else’s ideas or
work as your own. Plagiarism also includes copying verbatim or rephrasing ideas without properly
acknowledging the source by author, date, and publication medium. (p. 2)
Capella University’s Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06) holds learners accountable for research integrity.
What constitutes research misconduct is discussed in the Policy:
Research misconduct includes but is not limited to falsification, fabrication, plagiarism,
misappropriation, or other practices that seriously deviate from those that are commonly accepted
within the academic community for proposing, conducting, or reviewing research, or in reporting
research results. (p. 1)
Learners failing to abide by these policies are subject to consequences, including but not limited to dismissal
or revocation of the degree.

118

Statement of Original Work and Signature
I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) and
Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06), including the Policy Statements, Rationale, and Definitions.
I attest that this dissertation or capstone project is my own work. Where I have used the ideas or words of
others, I have paraphrased, summarized, or used direct quotes following the guidelines set forth in the APA
Publication Manual.

Learner name
and date

Euthena Newman

February 26, 2015

Mentor name
and school

Dr. Molly Lane

February 26, 2015

119

120

