SECRET VAULTS OF FORGOTTEN TREASURES:
FREEMASONRY’S COLLECTIONS AND MATERIAL CULTURE
IN A DECLINING FRATERNAL AGE

Heather K. Calloway
A DISSERTATION
in
Higher Education Management
Presented to the Faculties of the University of Pennsylvania
in
Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the
Degree of Doctor of Education
2015

Supervisor of Dissertation:
_______________________________________
Mary-Linda Armacost, Adjunct Professor of Education
Dean, Graduate School of Education:
______________________________________
Pamela L. Grossman, Dean and Professor
Dissertation Committee:
Mary-Linda Armacost, Adjunct Professor of Education
Peter H. Garland, Adjunct Assistant Professor of Education
Wendy Waszut-Barrett, Founder, Bella Scena, LLC

ProQuest Number: 3721020

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 3721020
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  

SECRET VAULTS OF FORGOTTEN TREASURES:
FREEMASONRY’S COLLECTIONS AND MATERIAL CULTURE
IN A DECLINING FRATERNAL AGE

COPYRIGHT
2015
Heather K. Calloway

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

DEDICATION

To Simon Roger Kissam

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

iii	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

iv	  

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
To embark on a journey such as this one takes an incredible network of
encouragement. I am grateful for the commitment and support of my dissertation
committee, Dr. Mary-Linda Armacost, Dr. Peter Garland and Dr. Wendy Wazut-Barrett.
Dr. Armacost, I only hope that I can be as inspirational to my students as you were to me.
Dr. Garland your experience provided helpful insights into libraries and higher education.
Dr. Wazut-Barrett, not many females have made the study of Freemasonry into a career,
but I’m glad to have joined you in that tiny club.
To my teachers and colleagues Dr. S. Brent Morris and Arturo de Hoyos, I am
most appreciative of your endless editing of my writing and countless hours of instruction
in the philosophy of Freemasonry. I am a very lucky woman to have spent so many years
working alongside the most prolific Masonic writers of our generation.
To Larissa Watkins, my dear mentor and friend. You taught me what it means to
be a real librarian. From you, I learned to always take my time and produce the best
results possible. My passion for “saving the stuff” only grew as I worked alongside you.
To the Freemasons and friends that opened their doors and were willing to discuss
your temple treasures for this project. Without your participation, this endeavor would
not have occurred. In particular, thank you to Sean, Jeff, Micah, Glenn, William, Mark,
Adam, Tyler, JD, Kevin, Glenys and Cathy. To all of the ladies working at Masonic
institutions, you know even more than the members, and your secret is safe with me.

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

v	  

To my colleagues at the University of Pennsylvania, thank you. Each member of
cohort 13 has played a role in my success. In particular, Dave, thank you for getting me
through endless assignments of statistics and enduring my ceaseless harassment. Paul, I
still regret that they never let us work together on a group project. Can you imagine what
that would have produced? Someday we will join forces, and our creativity and humor
will be an energetic nuisance to everyone. Tad, you are one of the few who really
understands the value of the rare books I work so hard to save. Stacy and Ellen you are
amazing role models for female leaders in higher education, and I look forward to follow
in your footsteps. Andy, you have been a coach, role model, and counselor for my
transition back into higher education. Your support and friendship is unequaled. Thank
you all, Lucky 13.
I would not be the woman I am today without the love, care, and reassurance of
my parents. They taught me to never give up and to follow my dreams. Thanks to my
brother Nate and his family, Anna, Clayton and Kylee always provide the humor I need
to keep going.
There aren’t adequate words to thank my husband and colleague Todd, who has
officially accompanied me through three graduate degrees. Thank you for sacrificing
your own time, activities and rest so that I could study and complete ⎯ just one more
homework assignment.

	  

	  

	  

	  

Simon Roger, you are my inspiration. To have undergone the incredible
challenges to live is an encouragement to all. I can’t wait to see what you will discover
and accomplish next.

	  

vi	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

vii	  

ABSTRACT
SECRET VAULTS OF FORGOTTEN TREASURES:
FREEMASONRY’S COLLECTIONS AND MATERIAL CULTURE
IN A DECLINING FRATERNAL AGE
Heather K. Calloway
Mary-Linda Armacost
A cautionary tale emerges from this study, designed to highlight the importance
of the preservation of special collections in the oldest and largest fraternity in the world,
the Freemasons. Without intervention, these collections are at risk of potentially losing
rare and unique artifacts and materials as they struggle with declining resources. This
study examines caring for special collections at Masonic Grand Lodges in the United
States. The purpose of this study is to understand how Masonic groups have implemented
strategies to provide ongoing and long-term care for their collections. It examines the
ways these institutions are adapting to changes, particularly in regard to access,
technology and space. A review of current literature on special collections supports the
research and aided in the formulation of the research questions.
Six Masonic Grand Lodges were chosen as the focus of the case studies. The
findings emerged out of site visits, personal interviews and review of historical and
archival documents and media coverage. Common themes surfaced and the study
revealed some important revelations and implications for the future of special collections
and the work of librarians, curators and archivists in practice today. The research
obtained a list of guidelines that other special collections, including those outside the

	  

	  

	  

	  

viii	  

fraternity—might consider as they prepare for a move, a new building, or deaccession of
materials.

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Dedication
Acknowledgments
Abstract
List of Figures

iii
iv
vii
xi

Chapter One

Introduction
Purpose of Study
Significance of Study

1
6
8

Chapter Two

Literature Review
Special Collections
Space and Storage
Technology
Hidden Collections

11
15
19
24
32

Chapter Three

Methodology
Research Design
Site Selection
Site Access
Data Collection and Analysis
Researcher Bias
Limitations
Reliability and Validity

37
38
39
41
42
43
45
46

Chapter Four

Background of Freemasonry: Masonology
Historic Background
Masonic Special Collections

48
49
55

Chapter Five

Findings

58

Site One: Grand Lodge of California
Site Two: Grand Lodge of Louisiana
Site Three: Grand Lodge of Nebraska
Site Four: Grand Lodge of New Jersey
Site Five: Grand Lodge of New Mexico
Site Six: Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania
Views on Defining Masonic Special Collections
Challenges of Masonic Special Collections
Space and Storage Among Grand Lodges
Moving Special Collections
Technology in Grand Lodge Collections
Materials in the Collection
Funding

60
63
67
69
71
73
76
80
80
88
94
99
101

	  

	  

ix	  

	  

	  

	  

Preservation
Grand Lodges and Hidden Collections

104
106

Chapter Six

Discussion and Analysis
Governance, Staffing, and Survival
Collaborations and Partnerships
Security and Deaccession

111
113
118
122

Chapter Seven

Conclusions and Future Research
Decline in Fraternal Membership
Potential for the Future
Concluding Thoughts

127
127
136
142

References

	  

146

x	  

	  

	  

	  

List of Figures
Figure 1: Charles F. Crocker Jewel

61

Figure 2: L. C. Moreau Lislet, 1818, Grand Lodge of Louisiana

66

Figure 3: George Washington’s Masonic Apron

75

Figure 4: Stacks at the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania

83

Figure 5: Reading Room at the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania

85

Figure 6: Grand Lodge of New Mexico Library and Museum

86

Figure 7: Grand Lodge of New Mexico Library and Museum

87

Figure 8: Grand Lodge of Nebraska, artifact storage

110

Figure 9: Masonic Membership in Unites States Grand Lodges

131

	  

xi	  

	  

1	  

Chapter 1
Introduction
In 2001 I packed my tiny car with all my belongings and drove across the country
from New Mexico to Washington, D.C. I was fortunate to have secured a job in one of
the leading Masonic cultural institutions in the country, the House of the Temple, also
known as the Supreme Council, 33°—which is the headquarters of the Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry, Southern Jurisdiction. One of my first projects was to create a display
using some of their historically significant objects and artifacts. As I was unpacking
countless boxes of materials for the project, another staff member brought me a plain,
unmarked envelope. Inside I found three flags and a copy of a thank-you letter written on
October 1, 1985, to Brother Richard C. Delsi by Grand Commander Henry Clausen. The
letter states, “These will occupy permanent places in our museum as memorabilia with
appropriate credit to you.” Unfortunately, the flags never made it to the museum staff.
On September 2, 1985, Delsi—a retired lieutenant colonel of the United States
Army and officer in the Scottish Rite Valley of Santa Rosa, California—donated three
flags to the Supreme Council, 33°. One was a makeshift American flag made by
prisoners of war in Japan; one was a five-star general's flag that belonged to General
Douglas MacArthur, 33°; another was MacArthur's four-star flag, which was used by
another four-star general, Brother Robert L. Eichelberger.
The September 2nd date of Delsi's donation was significant because it marked the
40th anniversary of VJ Day (Victory over Japan Day). He was pleased to donate these
items and wrote to Clausen, stating, “I pass on to you these tokens of one of America's

	  

	  

2	  

sons bestowing like honor and respect upon you.” One month later Clausen retired as the
Grand Commander. Somehow, in the midst of Clausen's retirement, the flags never made
it to the museum but were instead stored away.
Following the death of Clausen in 1992, Delsi wrote to the House of the Temple
asking about the flags. He said, “I recall transmitting by hand these items to Clausen in a
brown envelope about 12 by 14 inches in size. I know that the chances of finding them is
now remote as we really do not know what Clausen may have done with them.” The flags
had seemingly disappeared. Even the estate of Henry Clausen was searched in hopes of
locating the items, but they were gone.
It wasn’t until years later, as building and grounds staff was cleaning, that they
found the envelope containing the flags. In fact, the flags were almost discarded, but the
staff thought they might be museum related and brought them to me for a closer
inspection. Based on the appearance and condition of the flags, I knew they must have
some type of special significance. One was hand stitched and tattered yet was clearly
modeled as an American flag. I wondered if the member who had donated them could tell
me more. I looked him up in the membership database, found his address, and composed
a letter about finding the flags. Perhaps he would know their history.
Delsi called me immediately upon receipt of my letter. He was thrilled. I asked
him to tell me their history. He described how he found the POW flag.
In 1945, I landed in Japan with the U.S. Eighth Army as part of the Allied
Occupying Forces. The instruments of surrender had been concluded aboard the
battleship USS Missouri ending 3 years, 8 months, and 25 days of bitter hostility
between the United States of America and the Imperial Government of Japan. My

	  

	  

3	  

unit took over a former Japanese Army camp in Shinagawa, which was in the
suburbs of Tokyo in the direction of Yokohama. I was among thousands of U.S.
Army infantrymen who were ordered to carry out the directive of General
Douglas MacArthur, Supreme Commander of the Allied Powers, Japan, to
'destroy the Japanese war machine.'
The task of my unit was to collect or accept from other U.S. units all Japanese
military items and supplies and to destroy them. Among the sources of such
material were Japanese military camps used to confine U.S. and other Allied
prisoners of war.
It was our practice to carefully inspect all field packs, dispatch cases, cartridge
belts, ammo pouches, etc., for explosives or ammunition, which could injure or
kill our personnel who were doing the burning. We also searched all packs,
pouches, and pockets for documents or other matter that could be of value to our
Intelligence agencies who had been assigned to assess and evaluate the Japanese
war effort.
Prisoners of war possessed limited items of clothing, personal effects, and field
gear. Going through the packs and pouches, I noticed a thick lining slightly
sticking out at the bottom. I pulled it out, paying little attention to the pack it was
in. The item concealed a slit, purposely cut in the lining of the pack.
Inside the pack Delsi mentioned was the POW flag that is now on display in the
Americanism Museum at the House of the Temple. More than 20 years passed after the
flags had been relegated to storage. In 2002 the flags were mounted and installed in a
beautiful museum gallery explaining their story and historic significance. Delsi traveled
from his home in California to Washington, D.C., for the museum gallery’s grand
opening. When I met him, tears came to his eyes; he could barely look at me and speak,
he was so overcome with joy. He was exceptionally moved and grateful for their
recovery. Delsi surmised about the POW artifact, “The flag must have been a source of
courage and strength to someone or to some group of Americans.” And, indeed, the flag
continues to be a source of courage to generations of American heroes.

	  

	  

4	  

Delsi passed away on July 11, 2005, at 78, only three short years after we located
the historic flags and had them installed in the museum. The moment I met Delsi, I was
greeted by a grown man who was in tears because of a piece of history. This incident was
among several moving episodes that have led me to a career of preserving historic
memorabilia and ephemera. The story of the lost flags is just one example of pieces of
material culture history that could potentially be missing forever without having
institutions such as the Freemasons to preserve these national treasures. What appears to
be an obscure building located only blocks from the White House in Washington, D.C., is
actually a cultural repository for Masonic history, and it is just one of these unique
locations belonging to the Freemasons.
The Freemasons are the oldest and largest fraternity in the world. In 1897 W. S.
Harwood estimated the adult male population at 19 million, and he claimed that one in
every five men was a member of a fraternal order (Harwood, 1897, p. 617). Only three
years later, the two largest organizations—the Odd Fellows and the Freemasons—had
one million members each and at least four others had more than 500,000 members, in an
adult male population of 21.9 million (Clawson, 1989, p. 7). Another scholar, Dumenil,
emphasized that more than 460 orders originated between 1880 and 1900 and that by
1901, more than five million Americans were in 600 orders (Dumenil, 1984, p. xi). By
1925 the oldest and most popular fraternal group, the Freemasons, had more than three
million members. Since its peak in 1927, the organization’s membership has been in
decline. S. Brent Morris estimates the current membership at 1.7 million (Morris, 2014).

	  

	  

5	  

The popularity of the group at its peak also created an entire industry of regalia
companies. Fraternal regalia and supply companies included the likes of Macoy, M. C.
Lilley & Co., and Henderson-Ames Co., each of which had mail-order catalogs where
members could buy an entire wardrobe and all of the props necessary to be taken back in
time to Egypt, Rome, or biblical stories. Many even had traveling salesmen promoting
the latest theatrical equipment for the clubs. This “stuff” that was created for fraternal use
meant that the Freemasons amassed an exceptional amount of material culture, including
books, manuscripts, photographs, ephemera, regalia, and artifacts of all kinds. It is these
fraternal collections, including those of the Freemasons, that are currently at great risk of
disappearing. The organization’s membership is in decline. The lodges are moving; some
are selling their old buildings; some lodges are merging with similar groups; and, sadly,
others are simply closing the doors to their lodge forever. When they do move, or close,
what happens to their materials?
Fraternal groups have created an incredible volume of materials used for rituals,
including costumes, jewelry, coins, and paraphernalia. In addition to the material culture
and the business it created, the groups documented their history in great detail in their
minutes, histories, manuscripts, and periodicals. Luckily, the story of these groups still
survives today, and these rare and unique items now fill our museums, libraries, and
archives. And it all began with the oldest and largest fraternity in the world—the
Freemasons.

	  

	  

6	  

Purpose of This Study
The purpose of this study is to understand how Masonic special collections have
implemented strategies to provide ongoing and long-term care for their collections
although their membership is in decline. I will examine the challenges faced by
collections of Masonic materials and the ways these institutions are adapting to changes,
particularly with regard to access, technology, and space. I also will examine long-term
preservation for their special collections in order to understand more fully the
environment where the materials are housed and ways to improve stability of the
collections. The study will specifically focus on the areas of space, technology, funding,
and hidden collections within several Grand Lodges across the United States.
Space and Storage: Having room to store and display special collections will
preserve the materials for future generations.
Technology: The traditional form of managing information found in special
collections has changed through technology. Information processes have changed
how libraries, museums, and archives manage information.
Funding: Special collections are often overlooked in the budget. Often, staff who
care for special collections are underpaid and/or relying on help from unpaid
volunteers with little experience. Budgets are limited for supplies.
Hidden Collections: Many archival and special collections are not processed or
difficult to find.

	  

	  

7	  

To gain a better understanding of how special collections are cared for at a
Masonic institution, I took a qualitative approach with a focus on identifying how the
philosophy of caring for materials had been established and implemented by interviewing
members, librarians, archivists, curators, collections managers, volunteers, officers, and
board members.
The overarching research questions for the study are:
1. In what ways are Masonic libraries, museums, and archives with special
collections adapting to changes in access, technology, and space and what are
the challenges?
2. What methods and practices are being utilized for long-term preservation of
special collections?
In this study, the definition of special collections is taken from Dooley and Luce’s
influential 2010 work Taking Our Pulse: The OCLC Research Survey of Special
Collections and Archives and defined as
library and archival materials in any format (e.g., rare books, manuscripts,
photographs, institutional archives) that are generally characterized by their
artifactual or monetary value, physical format, uniqueness or rarity, and/or an
institutional commitment to long-term preservation and access. They generally are
housed in a separate unit with specialized security and user services. Circulation
of materials usually is restricted. (Dooley & Luce, 2010, p. 16)
The use of the term special collections for this study includes materials from
museum, library, and archival collections specifically in a Masonic repository. Typically
within Masonic collections, there are not clear or distinct lines for library materials versus
archival materials and/or museum artifacts. The same person, or a small group of people
in charge of “collections,” often cares for these materials; therefore, they are considered

	  

	  

8	  

as one for the purposes of this study. Masonic special collections in this study are defined
as materials collected, maintained, or preserved in a library, museum, and/or archive
within a Masonic repository.
For research purposes, I chose repositories that have undergone a variety of
challenges and/or change in their access, storage, and preservation of collections. I chose
one of the sites (Pennsylvania) because of its distinct stability. Given the location, the fact
that their collections hadn’t moved, and their established staff and financial support, they
were an important baseline for the remainder of the sites I examined. I conducted
interviews with those working with Masonic collections (librarians, curators, archivists,
volunteers, organization officers, and affiliated individuals) and discussed the specific
challenges at selected repositories. The intent of this research is to inform similar
repositories how to care better for collections, provide access, understand, and fully use
technology and manage space concerns. The comparison of the various collections helped
to understand the culture of Masonic institutions that has emerged. The result of the study
has identified best approaches and tactics that other special collections could use and
implement to care for their own collections.
Significance of the Study
Special collections contain and house rare materials and memorabilia in all
formats. Yet local print collections are losing primacy as online resources increase in
importance (Long & Schonfeld, 2014, p. 5). Archives and special collections have found
themselves at a point where they must adapt and change to remain relevant. Yet change
in repositories of special collections is much slower than other types of libraries. The

	  

	  

9	  

preservation and archiving role is often less supported and has less institutional support
from supervisors outside the library (Long & Shonfeld, 2014, p. 5).
American men have been joining Freemasonry for nearly 300 years. However,
historians have ignored the contributions of Freemasons and Freemasonry in their
accounts (Roberts, 1985, p. xi). The history of the Freemasons that does exist is often
found in the little-known libraries, archives, and museums of the Freemasons themselves.
Countless volumes have been written to tell their stories. Moreover, members of the
fraternity have written a majority of these histories. Along with these manuscripts,
Masonic collections have evolved as the members have created appendant and affiliated
organizations to the traditional Blue Lodge Freemasonry. This has resulted in a treasure
trove of memorabilia and ephemera accumulating among Masonic lodges and their
related organizations.
Freemasonry has created its own unique collection of Americana material culture.
This collection of physical materials provides scholars with objects and artifacts that trace
the story of fraternalism in American society. With the Masons being the first and oldest
fraternal order, all other fraternal groups modeled their organizations on their success.
The rise of fraternalism in America has been an important part of the American story, as
is the recent decline in civic engagement, including membership in fraternal
organizations. American history, carefully examined, is a story of ups and downs in civic
engagement, not just downs—a story of collapse and renewal (Putnam, 2000, p. 25). The
story of the Freemasons in America is, then, an essential part of American history.

	  

	  

10	  

Institutions caring for special collections have numerous objects, items, and materials that
are unprocessed and not cataloged. Masonic groups are among these hidden collections.
Fraternal clubs and organizations have countless treasures that tell the story of American
history, and their preservation is essential in order to do so. This study has identified six
special collections at Masonic Grand Lodges throughout the United States. Examining
them can lead to a better understanding of how unique special collections can
successfully respond to various challenges and ensure future preservation.

	  

	  

11	  

Chapter 2
Literature Review
“Professor Langdon,” called a young man with curly hair in the back row, “if
Masonry is not a secret society, not a corporation, and not a religion, then what is it?”
“Well, if you were to ask a Mason, he would offer the following definition:
Masonry is a system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols.”
“Sounds to me like a euphemism for ‘freaky cult.’”
“Freaky, you say?”
“Hell, yes!” the kid said, standing up. “I heard what they do inside those secret
buildings! Weird candlelight rituals with coffins, and nooses, and drinking wine out of
skulls. Now that's freaky!”
Langdon scanned the class. “Does that sound freaky to anyone else?”
“Yes!” they all chimed in.
Langdon feigned a sad sigh. “Too bad. If that's too freaky for you, then I know
you'll never want to join my cult.”
Silence settled over the room. The student from the Women's Center looked
uneasy. “You're in a cult?”
Langdon nodded and lowered his voice to a conspiratorial whisper. “Don't tell
anyone, but on the pagan day of the sun god Ra, I kneel at the foot of an ancient
instrument of torture and consume ritualistic symbols of blood and flesh.”
The class looked horrified.

	  

	  

12	  

Langdon shrugged. “And if any of you care to join me, come to the Harvard
chapel on Sunday, kneel beneath the crucifix, and take Holy Communion.”
The classroom remained silent.
Langdon winked. “Open your minds, my friends. We all fear what we do not
understand.”
—The Lost Symbol (Brown, 2009, 31–32)
In 2009 Dan Brown published a book titled The Lost Symbol. My job, as I knew
it, literally changed overnight. The museum, library, and archives where I worked
happened to be the setting of Dan Brown’s latest bestseller. The obscure and little-known
tour of the House of the Temple that I managed suddenly came into public view and
people traveled from across the world to find out more about Freemasonry.
In modern-day America, when one thinks of the Freemasons, images of rituals,
secret signs, passwords, and handshakes might come to mind. Conspiracy theories have
only encouraged popular culture to promote and describe the organization as a secret
group that has some interesting or unique and powerful connections, and often theories
suggest it is to local governments! Even the long-running cartoon The Simpsons makes
references to the Stonecutters during its episode “Homer the Great” (episode 12 of The
Simpsons' sixth season, which originally aired January 8, 1995). The episode makes
cultural references to a variety of Masonic signs, symbols, and traditions. Even the song
“We Do,” which was written for the episode, was nominated for a primetime Emmy
award for Outstanding Individual Achievement in Music and Lyrics.

	  

	  

13	  

Stonecutters:
Who controls the British crown?
Who keeps the metric system down?
We do, we do!
Who keeps Atlantis off the maps?
Who keeps the Martians under wraps?
We do, we do!
Who holds back the electric car?
Who makes Steve Guttenberg a star?
We do, we do!
Who robs cavefish of their sight?
Who rigs every Oscar night?
We do!
We do!!!
J. Swartzwelder (1995)
The Freemasons are members of an organization that always has maintained a
fascinating allure because of the mystery surrounding it. And, to the uninitiated, the
secrecy is both exciting and attractive. Critics have gone to great lengths to attack the
organization, quoting things out of context and fraudulently promulgating all types of
inaccurate myths about the group. Members of Generations X, Y, and younger often
recall their grandparents and great-grandparents as members, yet previous generations
often refrain from discussing their personal participation or involvement in the
organizations. Why? Fraternal groups were defined in the 1800s and 1900s as so-called
secret societies.
What is a secret society? Catholic scholar William Whalen defines a secret
organization as “one which includes the criterion of a secret ritual and initiation
ceremony” (Whalen, 1966, p. v). The idea of a ritual is central to his definition, but many
organizations that have rituals and initiation ceremonies are not necessarily secret. Take,

	  

	  

14	  

for instance, Greek letter collegiate organizations or the Boy Scouts—each of these
groups has a variety of rituals, passwords, signs, and initiations, yet none is considered.
In the 19th and 20th centuries, the term “secret society” was used for these kinds of
groups, as seen in an article titled “Student government at Wellesley and how it makes
for loyalty among the college girls and faculty,” which appeared in the New York Times
in 1912. The article mentions how “secret societies” have changed . . . to “societies for
which those girls who stand highest in their academic work apply.” The term, which was
widely used in the 1800s and 1900s, doesn’t adequately reflect today’s definition of the
way these organizations have grown and evolved. As Alan Axelrod, author of The
International Encyclopedia of Secret Societies and Fraternal Orders, says, “There is but
one absolute truth concerning secret societies: There are no absolutes” (1997).
Societies with secrets can be traced back to the ancient mysteries, where the
object was to explain to the initiate the meaning of this present life; to calm his fears of
death; to reassure his soul about its immortality; and, by cleansing him from impurity, to
do away with the necessity of expiating crimes in a future existence (Lepper, 1971, p. 1).
The ancient mysteries were not separate societies but rather an integral part of daily life,
some with religious and/or political purposes (Lepper, 1971, p. 2). The rituals and
initiations for the myriad groups that were established in the 1700s and 1800s used some
of the same ancient mysteries as the Egyptians, biblical themes, and more. In fact, many
rituals for these groups are based—or clearly developed and evolved—with both
religious and esoteric themes throughout. (A background of the Freemasons will be
explored in Chapter 4.)

	  

	  

15	  

Special Collections
Special collections are an important part of the resources found at various cultural
institutions, including libraries, museums, and archives. The value of these special
collections can be overlooked due to the unique nature of these materials and the unusual
requirements they have for preservation, space, and general maintenance. This research
seeks to document the various challenges facing Masonic special collections regarding
preservation, space, financial, and ongoing protection and to explore some of the ways
repositories can adapt and implement improvements for long-term preservation and
conservation.
The special collection is at the greatest risk for disappearance. Primary source
materials, manuscripts, diaries, journals, letters, and artifacts all find a home in the
repository known and labeled as “special collections.” These items are seemingly being
overlooked as advances in technology have provided new levels of access to a broader
scope of research materials throughout the world. But repositories are not always finding
new ways to promote and feature special collections. Steven Escar Smith claims that
attitudes regarding special collections have begun to shift away from the perception of
rare books and archives as a rarefied and forbidding domain (Smith, 2006, p. 34). Users
are beginning to view special collections as a more welcoming and comprehensive home
of resources. In fact, special collections are being utilized in new ways by everybody
from journalists to graphic designers to T-shirt manufacturers to documentary film
producers to public relations and marketing firms to web designers (Smith, 2006, p. 35).

	  

	  

16	  

Special collections are an essential part of the library, museum, and archives.
Within special collections, you will find every imaginable variety of artifacts, including
paper, photographs, jewelry, artwork, textiles, scrapbooks, ceramics, furniture, books,
manuscripts, videos, audio recordings, newspaper, chapbooks, microfilm, and ephemera
of all types. The items tell a story. With some items, the story is evident, and we know
the exact provenance. We can tell where it was made, who owned it, and how it came to
the collection. For other items, their story is a mystery still uncovered. Given the range of
items, each has to be cared for in a different way. Paper items are stored in one way,
textiles in another. And this is just the boxes, folders, sleeves, and shelves used for
storing the items, not the space they are stored in.
Special collections are defined as
library and archival materials in any format (e.g., rare books, manuscripts,
photographs, institutional archives) that are generally characterized by their
artifactual or monetary value, physical format, uniqueness or rarity, and/or an
institutional commitment to long-term preservation and access. They generally are
housed in a separate unit with specialized security and user services. Circulation
of materials usually is restricted. (Dooley & Luce, 2010, p. 16)
It is the preservation of special collections, essentially keeping historical records
safe for future generations, which archivists and curators spend the bulk of their time
trying to manage. For many collection managers, preservation is one of two main goals in
maintaining collections, with the other goal being access and use. When working with

	  

	  

17	  

special collections, the focus must remain on adequately preserving and conserving the
artifacts because patrons can’t access and use the collections if they are not maintained
and preserved. Special collections are typically both rare and unique, which creates a
challenge in managing such a diverse collection of materials. Preservation, as defined by
the Society of American Archivists (2012), is:
n. ~ 1. The professional discipline of protecting materials by minimizing chemical
and physical deterioration and damage to minimize the loss of information and to
extend the life of cultural property. ~ 2. The act of keeping from harm, injury,
decay, or destruction, especially through noninvasive treatment. ~ 3. Law—The
obligation to protect records and other materials potentially relevant to litigation
and subject to discovery. (Moses, 304–305)
Special collections can be located in a variety of repositories, including libraries,
museums, and archives. The difference between items located within special collections
and items located in a general collection is that they are typically unique, one of a kind,
and/or unpublished, such as letters, manuscripts, journals, photographs, audio recordings,
or video recordings. In a general collection, items are duplicated in other similar
collections. In a special collection, items are often chosen and acquired on a case-by-case
basis. Special collections often manage items that are valuable as a collection, which
means the worth increases because the items are related by a topic or theme, such as
presidential papers, a company’s records, or an author’s manuscripts. Special collections
are also referred to as primary records (or, in some cases, primary documents). A primary
record is defined as a physical object produced or used at the particular past time that one
is concerned with in a given instance (Modern Language Association, 1995).

	  

	  

18	  

Librarians, archivists, and curators work as active custodians to preserve special
collections. But they face challenges doing so. One of the most recent studies to be
conducted on the topic of special collections is the 2013 Survey of Special Collections
and Archives in the United Kingdom and Ireland published by OCLC. Although the
survey is focused on collections outside of America, the issues and challenges faced
among these institutions are almost identical to those in the United States and therefore
warrant inclusion. The study found that when asked for the three top issues facing special
collections, the following five items were the most frequently cited: outreach (broadly
defined); space and facilities (particularly for collections); born-digital materials;
collection care; and cataloguing and archival processing (Dooley, 2013, 6).
A 2010 study also conducted by OCLC titled Taking Our Pulse: The OCLC
Research Survey of Special Collections and Archives concluded that the top three “most
challenging issues” in managing special collections were space, born-digital materials,
and digitization (Dooley & Luce, 2010, 9). These challenges, as identified in 2010, are
the same challenges established three years later in the 2013 OCLC United Kingdom
study. And it isn’t just the studies that focus on special collections that find these
challenges. Other library studies, such as The Ithaka S+R Library Survey 2013, found
that one significant gap in libraries is “the preservation and archiving role outside of the
research universities, suggesting possible tension between an expressed value of the
library profession and the organizational priorities of smaller and less research-intensive
colleges and universities” (Long & Schonfeld, 2014, p. 6).
	  

	  

19	  

Space and Storage
“The library is the centre of the life of the university,” wrote architectural critic
Ashton R. Williard in 1897. In late-19th-century America, libraries at colleges and
universities were given the most prominent place on campus, often in a distinguished
building. It wasn’t just about a building or books. Libraries are perceived as more than
physical collections (Matthews, 2013, p. 10). Many a student has fallen in love with a
library. It might be the space, the place, or the co-ed across the room, but every college
graduate has a story about spending time in the library. In fact, it is held in such high
regard that oftentimes the library has been referred to as the heart of the university
(Leupp, 1924, p. 193).
The museum and the library as a “place” is a beginning, a grounding, and a
situation that inspires thought (Carr, 2011, p. vii). In fact, when thinking about the history
of the library, many reminisce about the great library of Alexandria. It was said to have
collected and conserved Hellenistic legacy by accumulating as many materials as
possible in order to translate them into Greek (MacLeod, 2010, p. 3). Albeit the location
of this fabled library remains elusive, “in the precinct of the Library, were two
institutions, the Museum and the Library itself, with overlapping purposes but separate
jurisdiction—a biblion (or place of books) for scholars and a museion dedicated to the
Muses” (MacLeod, 2010, p. 3). Whether legend or reality, the library in Alexandria
provides the idea of what a library and museum could and should be, with book lovers
left to ponder what it might have been.

	  

	  

20	  

The library in Alexandria is supposed to have been built according to the plan of a
rameseseum, which is a combination of palace, museum, and shrine (MacLeod, 2010, p.
3). Even as there was a library, museum, and worship space, it was also a place to learn.
Men came together in this space to study. There were classrooms and a dining hall. In
fact, the way that the library of Alexandria is described is much like what the new
academic commons of the modern-day college and university have become.
Though many newly constructed libraries are working toward creating a better
space for the environment, the collections, and the students, there is another trend
occurring among libraries. Some are creating a new space known as the “academic
commons.” This scenario partners the librarians with the classroom faculty in teaching
information and visual-literacy competencies in a collaborative environment (Hernon,
2013, p. 90). Other support services are being brought into the library space to enhance
the quality of the services offered, including instruction space, classrooms, and tutors. On
many campuses, it is a place where collaborative teaching and learning bring together the
institution’s best library and academic support services. Tutoring centers, writing labs,
instructional design, a café, a faculty lounge, and much more are just waiting to assist
students, faculty, and the community at these new libraries. How should this library of
the future look? Hernon claims that “the primary motivations for pursuing this . . . are to
make the library an important player in attracting and retaining students, in assisting
faculty in their teaching, and in collaborating with faculty on funded research projects”
(Hernon, 2013, p. 91).

	  

	  

21	  

Other current trends in the academic library of today include the movement
toward making the physical library building sustainable. In fact, Larry Hardesty (2011)
claims that
[t]he academic library building is often the largest single building on a campus,
and it frequently operates the longest hours of any campus building—even 24
hours a day at some institutions. Therefore, in these days of economic stress and
growing environmental awareness, it is reasonable to scrutinize the costs of
sustaining the library building (p. 1).
Libraries today are built to contribute to sustainability through recycled paper, energysaving lights, a green roof, motion lights, and low-flush toilets, among other efforts
(Hernon, 2013, p. 85). Hardesty (2011) believes that these efforts can provide an example
for other university departments and that the “library . . . can lead the way in serving as
an important symbol of the institution’s commitment to environmental sustainability” (p.
2).
With the advent of technology, books are being moved to remote storage
locations; today, in many ways, libraries look more like a computer lab than a library.
How will libraries and librarians integrate the new offerings that libraries have to offer?
Courant (2006) claims that “the implications for the cost of library storage are potentially
huge. One can imagine that new work will take up relatively little space, and that a
substantial part of the existing monographic literature can be moved off site and replaced
for most purposes with electronic files” (p. 26).

	  

	  

22	  

Storage is directly related to the size of the collection and the willingness or
reluctance to weed that collection. There are many options to solve the problem of
overcrowding in a collection, principally weeding, microfilming, reducing the amount of
seating, and using compact or high-density shelving and remote storage (Kennedy &
Stockton, 1991, p. v). Although remote storage seems like a great solution, it has been
controversial among those managing all types of collections, but in some cases it might
be the only way to preserve or maintain certain collections. With the advent of academic
commons, remote storage becomes an even more appealing solution.
Albeit some believe that the advent of the academic or information commons is a
positive thing, Michael Gorman disagrees. He claims that “calling a new college library
an ‘information center’ is silly” (2006, p. 7). But he also believes that the library
transcends the space and structure, particularly today when technology extends the reach
of the library (Gorman, 2006, p. 7). In a national study, the Institute of Library and
Museum Services found that the numbers of visits to museums and public libraries are
positively correlated to ratings of quality (Griffiths, 2008, p. 3). More important, people
who visit public libraries and museums in person value the quality of information that
they find more highly than those who visit remotely. This reflects the fact that Internet
use is nearly always rated lower than in-person use (Griffiths, 2008, p. 3).
The change of library space will continue in the future. In 2006 librarians posed
the thought: “Considering the extra-ordinary pace with which knowledge is moving to the
web, it is equally difficult to imagine what an academic library will do and be in another
	  

	  

23	  

decade” (Wood, xxi). Yet, in 2015, we are still pondering the same concerns and
questions about the library of the future.
There is one difficult challenge in the field of special collections that has not been
explored as often or as in depth as other issues. That challenge is the task of creating and
maintaining adequate space to house these collections. At most cultural institutions,
providing a home for these unique holdings is problematic. Space is at a premium, and
often special collections are relegated to the basement, attic, garage, closet, and other
unsuitable locales. Institutions also lack adequate funding to maintain these collections.
This includes having satisfactory resources to employ staff to maintain the condition of
the space, among other things.
Storage and space concerns are important for special collections, as each
collection examined in this study has had some kind of “act of God” or natural disasters,
including fire, flooding, moves, and other problems that directly impacted the collections.
Preservation has remained a focus for libraries and special collections since libraries were
first organized. In 1891 the term “preservation” was first used in the field by none other
than Melvil Dewey (creator of the Dewey Decimal System) as a heading in a library
annual report for the New York State Library (Higginbotham, 1990, p. 9). From there,
preservation was labeled as such, but was part of the daily, routine activities of a
librarian. It wasn’t until the early 1970s that preservation became a focus as a unit within
the American Library Association (Higginbotham, 1990, p. 1). The year 1970 is fairly
late for a field—library science—that developed, as we know it, in the mid-1800s.
	  

	  

24	  

Moreover, it wasn’t until the late 1960s that preservation became absolutely essential due
to the problems emerging in collections related to acidity in paper. In the 19th century,
printers began to use acid in the paper-making process, thereby reducing the cost.
Unfortunately, problems in collections emerged in the 1960s as it became evident that the
acid in the paper was making it brittle and destroying it (Bobinski, 2007, p. 106). All
types of materials made from paper—books, certificates, journals, and more—fell apart
due to the acid.
Technology
The library is changing. A 2009 report from the Institute of Museum and Library
Services said that it is essential “for museums and libraries to take a proactive and
positive stance in facing the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century” (Pastore,
2009, p. xv). Amazon already sells more e-books than print books (Janes, 2013, p. 3). It
isn’t just books that are disappearing. DVDs, CDs, music, and video games are all rapidly
vanishing from the collections at the library. Media has become electronic, and the
library has become a place to access materials rather than a place to store materials. Even
the library’s so-called “enemy”—the subscription database—is facing the emergence of
the open-source software and open-source databases, encouraging and allowing open
access to users everywhere for free.
“Special collections” have found new challenges as they adapt to the changing
role of the library; however, these challenges are not new. In 1876 a Special Report was
published containing more than 30 essays on various aspects of American library history,

	  

	  

25	  

management, and philosophy; it was issued by the Bureau of Education (Higginbotham,
1990, p. 7). Of the 30 sources, four of the articles discussed the care of collections. Then
author and Librarian of Congress Ainsworth R. Spofford said in his 1876 essay, “Binding
and Preservation of Books,” that preservation was second only to the care and selection
of books (Higginbotham, 1990, p. 7). Spofford included collection maintenance, binding,
and the care and handling of library materials under the umbrella of preservation
(Higginbotham, 1990, p. 9).
Change particularly has affected special collections held at repositories and
independent institutions such as historical societies, religious groups, and fraternal
associations. These collections have less funding and overall support in their efforts to
preserve historic materials. Items are being collected and donated to repositories and
institutions, yet the funds to care for them adequately are lacking. Having incomplete
records because of moves and natural disasters is considered “normal.” And, sadly, in
2015 this topic is not new. In the Executive Summary of the Masonic Service Association
of 1923, Stanley C. Arthur claimed, “The fact that a number of records of the Grand
Lodge of Louisiana in the early days of the Order here are incomplete make it important
that there be on file anything and everything pertaining to Masonic activities in the early
days” (Scot, 1923, p. 97). Louisiana is one of many Grand Lodges that has suffered from
various elements such as fire, floods, and natural disasters, which directly have impacted
the collections of the organization.

	  

	  

26	  

The majority of recent material published about archives, museums, and special
collections focuses on technology and its impact on collections. Technology is changing
rapidly, almost so quickly that professionals can’t determine how to keep up with ways to
access that information, much less any consistent way to preserve it. Access, then,
becomes a key issue when discussing the future of collections. When libraries are trying
to keep afloat with tight budgets, why would they bother to preserve or develop their
special collections, archives, and artifacts in the academic library? Contributing to the
preservation of primary sources and artifacts in the digital age has become more relevant
as items are digitized and discarded.
Rachel Singer Gordon (2007) asserts that library planning and evolution often
focuses too much on the advent of new technologies rather than on their relevant uses in a
library environment. Just preserving collections in digital formats neglects the primary
source material, the artifact, or that one-of-a-kind manuscript that would be best suited to
location in a special collection. It is the special collection that is most at risk for
disappearance in the digital age. The indisputable major influence on university library
space is the dramatic increase in digital information provision (Matthews & Walton,
2013, p. xvii). Currently, the role of technology and growing use of online resources is
the most “dwelt-upon aspect of the future of academic library space” (Matthews &
Walton, 2013, p. 8). The debate within the library profession mainly centers on remote
access to resources and the growing desire for students to access information

	  

	  

27	  

electronically (Matthews & Walton, 2013, p. 8). The debate isn’t one that librarians take
lightly.
Physical material is being digitized, and librarians are faced with many decisions
about how to manage this change to their collections and their environment. David
Weinberger (2007) asserts that librarians’ roles will become even more important than
they have been.
The library is going to be more complex than ever. Librarians are going to have to
manage not just the collections, but all of the readers’ contributions to them. We
may look elsewhere for content expertise, but we’ll look to librarians for help
navigating the jungle of metadata. That’s a job for information architects.
It is no longer possible for libraries to meet all the anticipated needs through ownership
(ALA, 1993). New material is being born digital and more library collections are
becoming virtual. Library services, staff skills, user expectations, and much more have
been transformed with the increase in digital technology (Matthews & Walton, 2013, p.
xvii).
Academic and research libraries increasingly will want additional information in a
digital format, but Paul Courant (2008), dean of libraries at the University of Michigan,
realizes the challenge to be that “bibliographic reliability is much more difficult to
guarantee in a digital world than in the world of print.” As a result, university libraries
must “create a collective institution” designed to “assure bibliographic integrity of digital
scholarly materials. I can’t imagine anyone but librarians in charge of these institutions if
they are to succeed” (Courant, 2008, p. 27).

	  

	  

28	  

The underlying aim of digital preservation is “to maintain the object of
preservation for as long as required, in a form which is authentic, and accessible to users”
(Brown, 2013, p. 3). Preserving digital records is not new. Originally called “electronic
records,” these “digital” items are now more than 50 years old. Electronic records were
first created, processed, and stored in computers and called machine-readable records
(Turnbaugh, 2002, p. 23). As early as the 1960s, the National Archives and Records
Service (now called the National Archives and Records Administration) worked to
preserve machine-readable records of the federal databases (Turnbaugh, 2002, p. 23). To
protect these electronic records from loss, the National Archives claimed that machinereadable data was already covered by the legal definition of a record. Defining electronic
data as a record in the 1960s and 1970s helped to protect and also encompass future
digital technology.
Actual preservation of digital information first came about with the formation of
the Task Force on Archiving of Digital Information in 1994 (Brown, 2013, p. 3). Since
that time, major efforts to promote digitization have been established. Web archiving
includes the Internet Archive (1996) and the Nordic Web Archive (1997); open-source
platforms include Fedora (1997), EPrints (2000), and DSpace (2002); and there are even
new cloud services, including DuraCoud (2011) and Preservica (2012), to implement
digital preservation (Brown, 2013, p. 11).
In addition to creating new places to archive digital information, our beloved
library books have changed. The first Internet e-book was created in 1971 (Polanka,
	  

	  

29	  

2011, p. 3). It was called Project Gutenberg and created by a man named Michael S. Hart.
The first document he digitized was the Declaration of Independence. The library slowly
grew and, by 1989, the 10th book was added, the King James Bible (Polanka, 2011, p. 3).
The electronic book explosion has continued to grow into what we know today, with the
Gutenberg site consisting of more than 42,000 free e-books, which can be downloaded or
read online (http://www.gutenberg.org/). The processes to digitize various types of
information have resulted in an entire industry of electronic books, magazines,
newspapers, and more.
Some other trends to encourage digital access to special collections include such
efforts as the Digital Public Library of America (http://dp.la), where organizations can
create shared cultural resources accessible online for free. The goal is to have digitized
materials that can be linked from various institutions. The HathiTrust (hathitrust.org),
Google Book Search, the Internet Archive (https://archive.org), and other digital
repositories are being created to allow and encourage access to cultural resources. Trends
also encourage and support open access, “which is intended to provide free immediate
access to, and unrestricted use of, original works of all types. Anyone may copy,
distribute, or reuse open-access literature as long as the author and original source are
properly cited” (Hernon, 2013, p. 184).
In Currents of Archival Thinking, Eastwood and MacNeil (2010) address the
nature and purpose of archives but also explore their progression and direction for the

	  

	  

30	  

future. Much of the focus of the work centers on how technological changes have
affected the way we think about archives. Eastwood and MacNeil (2010) assert that
[t]he challenge of preserving digital records and ensuring their trustworthiness
over time has led archivists to reconsider the emphasis placed on the custodial
care of historical records and to direct more attention to the management of
current records: to shift, in other words, from post hoc to anticipatory approaches
to preservation. (ix)
Rick Anderson claims that, with the advent of technology, we tend to focus on
becoming “organizers of online collections” instead of focusing on a much more
important shift. As he says, “The gap that should most concern us in research libraries
today is not the one that lies between physical and online documents, but the one that lies
between commodity and non-commodity documents” (Anderson, 2014, p. 3). As libraries
change due to technology, more attention should be given to special collections. Special
collections are often more interested in documents as artifacts that are valuable in and of
themselves, independent of the immediate relevance or utility of the words and ideas they
contain—documents that, in a great many cases, are rare or fragile enough to be in
serious danger of loss without special care (Anderson, 2014, p. 4).
The changing role of the library has impacted the way that primary documents,
artifacts, manuscripts, ephemera, and other materials usually relegated to the archives are
being managed. Anderson believes that what needs to be done, right now, with academic
libraries, is to focus on unique holdings and specializations. In doing so, we should take
these three steps: acquire collections, digitize collections, and make them discoverable
(Anderson, 2014, p. 5). The rare and unique materials held by special collections are in
	  

	  

31	  

danger. Archives work to document the human experience. Their presence is essential for
scholars, students, and the community to continue to document history. Without special
collections and a plan to preserve them, our history is at a risk of being lost.
In contrast to libraries, visitors to museums interact with resources mostly to look
at them rather than borrow them (Glushko, 2013, p. 364). Museums display artifacts to
allow visitors to interact with the objects. Our museums are part of the larger special
collections that are currently at risk for disappearance if not properly cared for. Anderson
claims that one of the primary barriers in the protection of special collections is the
mission of their host institution (Anderson, 2014, p. 5). In fact, Anderson says that most
libraries are unable to devote adequate financial resources to support their special
collections and must seek institutional buy-in (Anderson, 2014, p. 5).
Wanting to preserve materials of historical significance necessarily includes
creating a plan for long-term or permanent care for objects and materials. Anderson
claims that every research library must strike a balance. His goal is to enrich the scholarly
environment with useful books and other documents that would otherwise remain hidden
from scholars and students and to shift the focus from resources and activities that make
relatively little contribution to those that will have the greatest enriching effect
(Anderson, 2014, p. 8).
More recently, another concern has been the preservation of the original item.
This has been a much-debated topic given the drastic and rapid advances in technology.

	  

	  

32	  

Once a reproduction exists, often it is a dilemma whether or not to keep the original. The
Modern Language Association (1996) came out with a statement specifically in support
of keeping the original item, saying, “[I]t is crucial for the future of humanistic study to
make more widely understood the continuing value of the artifacts themselves for reading
and research” (Modern Language Association, 1995). Therefore, artifacts—in particular,
those that are unique—should be preserved. The MLA believes that new forms cannot
fully substitute for the actual physical objects in which those earlier texts were embodied
at particular times in the past (MLA, 95).
Hidden Collections
Half of archival collections have no online presence (Dooley & Luce, 2010, p. 9).
In today’s world, patrons expect to find and readily access materials for research. Yet
many special collections are not in places where they can be found. In fact, it is no longer
a “dirty little secret” that libraries, archives, and cultural institutions hold significant
amounts of special collections material that have not been adequately described and are
therefore inaccessible (Conway & Proffitt, 2011, 9). Hidden collections have been the
topic of conversation in multiple reports, studies, and examinations of challenges in the
field of special collections (Association of Research Libraries, 2008; CLIR, 2011;
Dooley, 2010; Dooley, 2013; Pritchard, 2009).
These reports and studies have found that “the un-cataloged backlog among
manuscripts collections was a mean of nearly one-third of repository holdings” (ARL,

	  

	  

33	  

2008). This means that they are not listed in an OPAC, a card catalog, or in a finding aid.
Collections that are not listed anywhere cannot be found. A 1998 survey of Association
of Research Libraries members revealed that “significant portions” of special collections
material have not been processed or cataloged and therefore are not known, cannot be
discovered, and will not be used (Panitch, 2001, p. 8). By 2009 the situation had
improved only somewhat, as a large percent of materials are still not accessible online. In
fact, Dooley and Luce (2010) found that 71% of born-digital materials held in special
collections are not represented in online catalogs, which means that they are unknown
and unavailable to use for research (46).
Some professionals have advocated for new approaches to managing the backlog
of information. Staff in archives and special collections is normally limited and finding
adequate time to create finding aids and catalog collections is difficult. Archivists Mark
Greene and Dennis Meissner have suggested new approaches to processing and access in
their 2005 article “More Product, Less Process: Revamping Traditional Archival
Processing.” They believe the backlog in processing exists because the archival
profession has been unwilling or unable to change its processing benchmarks in response
to the greater quantities of acquisitions (Greene & Meissner, 2005, 1). In short, that
means that archivists have processed materials in the same manner they always have. In
their article, Greene & Meissner (2005) don’t just claim that we need to do something to
fix the problem of backlogs; they make suggestions to improve the conditions.

	  

	  

34	  

We need to articulate a new set of arrangement, preservation, and description
guidelines that (1) expedites getting collection materials into the hands of users,
(2) that assures arrangement of materials adequate to user needs, (3) that takes the
minimal steps necessary to physically preserve collection materials, and (4) that
describes materials sufficient to promote use. (2)
Although they recommend processing as quickly as possible to allow discovery,
the problem remains that collections are still donated and/or acquired more quickly than
they can be processed. And this isn’t a new problem. In 1939 Edwin Hemphill, at the
University of Virginia, wrote, “Manuscripts are received here faster than they can be
supplied with checklists and calendars” (Greene & Meissner, 2005, 1). Greene and
Meissner’s goal ultimately is to “describe everything in general before describing
anything in detail” and then to advertise the collection to the widest possible audience
(Conway & Proffitt, 2011, p. 9).
Just getting things cataloged, and therefore accessible, has been a major problem
within special collections. There are many problems with unprocessed collections. If they
aren’t cataloged, they are inaccessible to the scholarly community, which hinders
research and research results (Jones, 2004, p. 89). Conscious efforts have been made
more rapidly to process and catalog collections, yet when unprocessed collections are
made available, it is a security risk for the collections. They can be more easily lost or
stolen and the chance to recover these rare materials is remote. Even when unprocessed
collections are made available, they are difficult, if not impossible, for researchers to
locate unless they happen to suspect that the institution in question might have such a
collection (Jones, 2004, p. 89).

	  

	  

35	  

Unprocessed collections often are lost and forgotten in storage areas and sustain
physical damage from unstable temperature and humidity or become worn from too much
handling due to lack of finding aids (Jones, 2004, p. 90). These unprocessed materials are
relegated to inhospitable environments where they are stored until staff is able to devote
time to their care. Access to unprocessed collections is staff dependent, which is to the
detriment of the institution and the patron. Longtime staff becomes the source of
expertise for these collections; when they move on or retire, that undocumented
“institutional memory” is lost (Jones, 2004, p. 89).
Far from being the old and musty stuff, many of the more interesting (and more
hidden) collections are the primary sources reflecting recent histories of peoples,
countries, creative works, institutions, and topics that were sometimes thought less
central to major academic study (Pritchard, 2009, p. 179). Sarah Pritchard asserts that the
digital environment has allowed for new opportunities and services for special
collections, which has made them more noticeable and significant.
Yet even as there are advocates of new efforts actively to process materials,
another much larger, related problem is the lack of space. In the realm of collections
maintenance, space is not a new challenge. In 1902 Charles William Eliot, president of
Harvard University, expressed his concern to faculty:
It seems to me clear that a book which is worth keeping at all ought to be kept
accessible, that is, where it can be found, on demand, with a reasonable amount of
time and labor. The problem then is to devise a mode of storing disused books so

	  

	  

36	  

that they may be kept safe and accessible, and yet at a low cost for shelter.
(Kennedy & Stockton, 1991, p. 3)

	  

	  

37	  

Chapter 3
Methodology
The primary purpose of this study was to understand how Masonic special
collections have implemented strategies to provide ongoing and long-term care for their
collections although their membership is in decline. I also explored how they have
adapted despite challenges of space, funds, and staffing. I used a qualitative research
method that allowed for flexibility with the research design as the study unfolded
(Maxwell, 2013). Studying the participants at their institutions as part of the research
design also allowed for collecting data in the participants’ natural setting, which helped to
understand the rationale and meanings they had for behavior and decisions made in
caring for the collections (Creswell, 2013). I devised an exploratory case study approach
involving six special collections in order to study the repositories in their real-life context
(Yin, 2009).
Establishing the definition of special collections was important to do before
choosing the final sites for this study. The definition that I used in the site selection
process was adopted from Dooley and Luce’s influential work Taking Our Pulse: The
OCLC Research Survey of Special Collections and Archives and defined as
library and archival materials in any format (e.g., rare books, manuscripts,
photographs, institutional archives) that are generally characterized by their
artifactual or monetary value, physical format, uniqueness or rarity, and/or an
institutional commitment to long-term preservation and access. They generally are
housed in a separate unit with specialized security and user services. Circulation
of materials usually is restricted. (Dooley & Luce, 2010, 16)

	  

	  

38	  

I have created a definition blending Dooley and Luce’s definition of special
collections with Prown’s definition of material culture found in his seminal 1982 work
Mind in Matter: An Introduction to Material Culture Theory and Method. Prown defines
material culture as the study, through artifacts, of the beliefs—values, ideas, attitudes,
and assumptions—of a particular community or society at a given time (Prown, 1982, p.
1).
I then intentionally chose Masonic sites that exhibited and accumulated special
collections of material culture. Each of these had unique and varying challenges and
successes based on location, funding, space, traditions, and support of the membership. I
explored how each site managed its challenges and promoted its strengths. I continued to
assess the research design throughout the study in case any modifications or changes had
to be made. As various themes emerged, I wanted to ensure that I was meeting my
research goals (Maxwell, 2013). The overall intent of this research was to better inform
other similar and unique special collections on how they might implement changes for a
sustainable future.
Research Design
Using a case study design, I conducted interviews as the qualitative approach for
this research. I explored the efforts of Masonic repositories to preserve their collections.
Case studies have been used as a common form of research method in education in a
desire to understand complex social phenomena (Yin, 2009, p. 4). Currently, a gap in the
literature exists when it comes to the management and preservation of special collections,

	  

	  

39	  

particularly those not affiliated with a higher education institution, so this study will help
contribute to the emerging literature in the field. This study also describes some potential
solutions, based on the actions of their peers, for Masonic institutions struggling with
special collections.
The study emphasizes new and innovative ways in which special collections are
integrating technology and digital resources. With the advent of technology, the necessity
of libraries has been questioned and, in particular, the need for special collections. But
now, thanks to technology and the ability to access and locate materials, special
collections become even more important as a differentiating characteristic of research
universities—the equivalent of unique laboratory facilities that attract faculty and
research projects (Pritchard, 2009, p. 179). This analysis has highlighted the ways in
which special collections have incorporated changes for improvement.
Site Selection
This study examined special collections at six Grand Lodge Masonic libraries and
museums, which included the Grand Lodges of California, Louisiana, Nebraska, New
Jersey, New Mexico, and Pennsylvania. In my initial site selection, I had planned on
interviewing members and institutions that were exclusively caring for Scottish Rite
collections; yet through a series of initial interviews, it was apparent that many of these
groups were unable to provide adequate staffing for any of the collections. Not only was
the staffing limited or unavailable, there was no budget to support the materials. The
collections were unfortunately kept in locked cases, closets, or other inaccessible rooms

	  

	  

40	  

because they had no staff on hand to monitor them. The exception to this was the Scottish
Rite collections held at the headquarters in the Southern Jurisdiction and the Northern
Masonic Jurisdiction. This led me to seek other Masonic collections that were being
maintained as accessible libraries, museums, and archives.
I spoke with various officers of the organization who were essential in suggesting
sites with both strengths and weaknesses that would be good for my research. Among
these leaders, they offered a list of more than 20 possible sites. This step was important to
ensure the participants fit into the phenomenon that was being studied (Creswell, 2013).
Some phone and in-person conversations resulted in a list of potential sites that would be
beneficial to examine for this study. The leaders who contributed to these conversations
included Dr. S. Brent Morris, Arturo de Hoyos, Sean Graystone, Ronald A. Seale,
William Mollere, Jim Cole, Jack Yost, Dr. William Brunk, and several other Sovereign
Grand Inspector Generals of the Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry. Their insight proved invaluable in assessing strengths and weaknesses
among Masonic collections.
I then chose specific institutions because each faced varying challenges, which
they have made efforts to overcome. These challenges included closure, moving, staffing,
storage, and access complications. Each site has substantial special collections, including,
but not limited to, items such as manuscripts, journals, photographs, audio, video,
correspondence, and artifacts. I have chosen these Masonic institutions to show the
variety of special collections around the country and their various challenges within the

	  

	  

41	  

Masonic fraternity. I used a qualitative research method that allowed for flexibility as the
study was conducted.
I intentionally did not examine the Masonic repository where I formerly was
employed because I believe that it would create a power imbalance (Creswell, 2013) and
possibly skew the data collection. I spent 14 years working at the House of the Temple,
which is the headquarters of the Southern Jurisdiction of the Scottish Rite of
Freemasonry and one of the more complete Masonic special collections in the world. I
chose to leave the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, Southern Jurisdiction, and its sister
headquarters, the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, Northern Masonic Jurisdiction (National
Heritage Museum), located in Lexington, Massachusetts, because of my research. I
acknowledge that the work of both institutions is at the forefront of all preservation
efforts and in terms of providing access to Masonic materials among all Masonic
repositories in the world. They are the exception.
Site Access
In order to gain access to the Masonic Grand Lodge collections, I simply asked
the participants if they were willing to talk about their libraries, museums, and archives.
Owing to my tenure at the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, I have colleagues across the
country who were willing to share stories about caring for, preserving, and managing the
special collections of the Freemasons. I was able to gain access because I had very
cooperative and understanding participants. I began with my personal network of
associates who work with Masonic collections and, through them, met some of their
colleagues. As a former museum curator at the House of the Temple, I had the

	  

	  

42	  

opportunity to interact with Masonic dignitaries from around the world. Their support of
my research allowed me unprecedented access to the people and the collections. Several
sites I examined had members who assisted me with portions of my research, for which I
am truly grateful.
Data Collection and Analysis
I conducted phone and in-person interviews to collect data. I sent follow-up
questions by email. The interviews I conducted were a means of understanding how each
repository has managed specific challenges within its collections. I collected data not
only from interviews but also from articles, websites, books, and other publications
created by each of the repositories. Many special collections (Masonic and others) are
often managed and/or cared for by one person; hence, it was important for me to find out
if there were any volunteers or other individuals who work with the collections to provide
additional insight into the challenges they face.
Questions asked in the interviews included:
•

Tell me about your collection.

•

What does your institution collect (books, manuscripts, photographs, digital
media, artifacts, etc.)?

	  

•

Do you have books, archival materials, and/or artifacts?

•

What is your most valuable item? |

•

Tell me about the space(s) where you keep your collections.

•

How many people work with the collection? Paid/unpaid?

•

Do you have a board of directors? If so, how many people are on it?

	  

43	  

•

Do you have a budget? What is it?

•

Do you collaborate with other groups or repositories? If so, what do you do with
them?

•

Do you do any outreach? How?

•

Do you have a website?

•

Do you have a library catalog? Is it online?

•

Do you have a finding aid for the archives?

•

Tell me how you store your artifacts.

•

What is your biggest challenge?

•

What are you most proud of?

•

How do you currently store the materials?

•

Do you have remote storage?

•

How do you decide to discard materials?

•

How do you try to address your challenges?

•

What do you see as the best opportunity for use of your collections in the future?

Researcher Bias
I am quite aware that as a librarian, curator, and archivist, I am biased in several
ways when protecting and conserving collections. I believe strongly in the efforts to
preserve historical documents, primary sources, and artifacts; therefore, it is imperative
that I don’t unintentionally influence any of the answers provided during interviews. In
addition, the archival profession has a set of core values and a code of ethics that are
intended to be used together to guide archivists, as well as to inform those who work with

	  

	  

44	  

archivists in shaping expectations for professional engagement (SAA, Code). As
advocates for documentary collections and cultural objects under their care, archivists
aspire to carry out their professional activities with the highest standard of professional
conduct (SAA, Code). I believe in and apply these ethics in my daily work as well as my
research and publications. These actions include scrupulous conduct in terms of
professional relationships, judgment, authenticity, security and protection, access and use,
privacy, and trust when working with materials. In the archival profession, professional
integrity is seen as essential when working with collections.
The ethics, standards, and best practices for those who work in museums are also
applicable in caring for collections. The American Alliance of Museums has a code of
ethics that says:
The distinctive character of museum ethics derives from the ownership, care and use
of objects, specimens, and living collections representing the world's natural and
cultural common wealth. This stewardship of collections entails the highest public
trust and carries with it the presumption of rightful ownership, permanence, care,
documentation, accessibility and responsible disposal. (AAM, Code)
In addition to following the professional codes of conduct in my field, it is important
to note that I have worked with fraternal collections for many years. My personal belief is
that these objects and records should be preserved. Given that I am passionate about
saving these items, I am more likely to project an urgency regarding the project; that
might not be the case for someone who didn’t work as closely with these types of
materials. It is my hope that I can allow the voice of the interviewee to come through
rather than influence him or her with my personal bias.

	  

	  

45	  

Limitations
This study of special collections will examine collections that are located in
Masonic Grand Lodges across the United States. Although this is an interesting type of
special collection to examine, there are other types of repositories that house special
collections, including health, religious, museum, business, law, government, and higher
education, to name a few. None of these is discussed in this study. This will limit the
results of the study to the types of repositories I have chosen to examine. There are also
Grand Lodges with special collections located in various international locations, yet, for
the purposes of this study, I have chosen to focus on institutions in the United States.
There are numerous Grand Lodges in the United States with exceptional collections that I
was unable to include in this study due to time and travel constraints. It is my hope to
expand this research in future projects. There are other types of Masonic groups with
special collections (Scottish Rite, York Rite, the George Washington Masonic National
Memorial), yet for the purposes of this examination, I have chosen to limit my research to
those collections belonging to a Grand Lodge. I realize that this might miss or leave out
important challenges in the field; however, this is essential to focus the scope of the
study.
Another bias I had in this study is my commitment to assist Masonic libraries,
museums, and archives with plans that will sustain and improve their repositories.
Masonic collections are at risk because of the decline in membership and may be in
danger of closing. My hope is that this study will reveal new ideas and best practices for
caring for special collections. Give that I am new at qualitative research, my interviewees

	  

	  

46	  

possibly could have been influenced by my personal biases and idiosyncrasies. A more
skilled researcher might not have as many personal biases come through in the interview
process. Issues of anonymity and confidentiality were not part of this process because all
parties agreed to be part of the study. I also tried to anticipate the possibility that
additional limitations would surface as the research was under way.
And, last, as a female relative and friend of many Freemasons, I am writing as a
nonmember. I believe that respecting the confidentiality of the ritual is important.
Anyone can conduct research in this field and read exposés that date back to the early
years of Freemasonry. I have done so myself. Alleged revelations of Brethren have
provided commentary on all aspects of the ritual and ceremonies of the fraternity. But I
believe that reading a ritual is not like experiencing it as an initiate. I’m a member of an
all-female fraternal organization, and I respect and believe its teachings and ritual. I
wouldn’t want it carelessly shared with the uninitiated. Therefore, my interpretation is as
a caretaker of the collections, not as a member.
Reliability and Validity
Quantitative research allows the researcher to familiarize himself/herself with the
problem or concept to be studied and perhaps generate hypotheses to be tested
(Golafshani, 2003, p. 597). This study employed interviews to study how special
collections were cared for at Masonic Grand Lodges in the United States. Interviews with
various respondents helped to ensure that the data was valid. By my discussing the
collections with various sources, this helped to double-check the findings. With several of
my interviews, I used member-checking as a way also to validate the data. When

	  

	  

47	  

reviewing my notes and interview tapes, if I didn’t fully understand a response, I asked
additional follow-up questions to clarify and understand answers given by my
participants. The follow-up questions were conducted by email and phone. This gave the
contributors an opportunity to comment on the accuracy of their answers and my
interpretation of their responses (Miles et al., 2014).

	  

	  

48	  

Chapter 4
Background of Freemasonry: Masonology
The ghetto to which it was confined just a short while ago, but where it was often
quite contented, is no longer in fashion. ‘Masonology’ is no more. It has a place in
the public domain. Masonic Obediences have done much to bring this about by
opening their archives and their libraries to researchers. . . . Even the Vatican has
opened its doors. The secret is out. (Porset, 2014, p. 127)
In 2000 Andrew Prescott became the director of the Centre for Research into
Freemasonry at the University of Sheffield This was one of the first research centers to be
established in a British university to study Freemasonry. He held the position through
2007. Andreas Önnerfors began leadership of the centre in January 2008. Regrettably, for
various reasons—including the economic downturn, funding, and institutional support—
the center closed in 2010. Both Prescott and Önnerfors remain in academic roles at other
higher educational institutions and continue the study of Freemasonry. Other attempts
have been made to create research centers and other support in academia, including the
current efforts at the University of California–Los Angeles (UCLA), at the Freemasonry
and Civil Society program, as well as the partnership between Brock University–St.
Catherines and the Grand Lodge of Canada in the province of Ontario. These types of
programs, along with other research groups, have encouraged both collaboration and
support of Masonic resources and special collections used for their research, publications,
and lectures.
In fact, according to Andrew Prescott (2003),

	  

	  

49	  

Research into freemasonry explores the interconnections between such major
themes of modern scholarship as public space, gender, race and social networks.
These themes essentially all revolve around one major issue, the construction of
social identity, and the study of freemasonry, because it concerns an identity
which is both public and concealed at the same time, provides a unique
perspective on this issue. Methodologically, the study of freemasonry presents
many challenges, but the point that should be noted here is its inherently
interdisciplinary character.
This interdisciplinary field of research includes the study and use of each part of
Masonic special collections, archives, artifacts, museum pieces, and library materials in
order to understand the topic fully. “The nature of the masonic archive means that the
researcher into freemasonry must use many different types of media: texts ranging from
membership lists to rituals, jewels, banners, engravings, music and artefacts of many
different kinds. The interpretation of such materials requires a blend of scholarly skills”
(Prescott, 2003).
Masons and non-Masons have conducted research about Freemasonry using
various scholarly approaches. Prescott asserts, “While scholars frequently aspire towards
interdisciplinarity, they rarely achieve it. The study of freemasonry may perhaps provide
a model for interdisciplinary studies” (Prescott, 2003). This approach has allowed
historians to examine the organization in more depth and greater detail. It also has
encouraged a new generation of scholars to explore the materials in more depth, as their
research is valued as true scholarship, despite their academic discipline.
Historic Background
Freemasonry is a fraternal organization—simply put, a fraternity. Members of the
group are known as Freemasons. When attempting to define the “Freemasons,” William

	  

	  

50	  

Preston’s definition is often used, which says that the fraternity is “a regular system of
morality, conceived in a strain of interesting allegory, which readily unfolds its beauties
to the candid and industrious inquirer” (Preston, 1867, p. 37). Other scholars have
modified (and even just copied) his definition. Carl Claudy said Freemasonry is “a
peculiar system of morality, veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols” (Claudy, 1931,
p. 8). Coil’s Encyclopedia defines Freemasonry as
an oath bound fraternal order of men; deriving from the medieval fraternity of
operative Freemasons; adhering to many of their Ancient Charges, laws, customs
and legends; loyal to the civil government under which it exists; inculcating moral
and social virtues by symbolic application of the working tools of the
stonemasons and by allegories, lectures and charges; the members of which are
obligated to observe principles of brotherly love, equality, mutual aid and
assistance, secrecy and confidence; have secret modes of recognizing one another
as Masons when abroad in the world; and meet in lodges, each governed
somewhat autocratically by a Master, assisted by Wardens, where petitioners after
particular inquiry into their mental, moral and physical qualifications, are
formally admitted into the Society in secret ceremonies based in part on old
legends of the Craft. (Coil, 1961, p. 164)
The history of the Freemasons traces back to the stonemasons’ guilds. The true
origin of the group is unknown, as lodges existed in Scotland and England in the 1600s
but were not organized into a formal system until 1717. In that year, there were four
existing lodges in London, and they created what is now known as the United Grand
Lodge of England (UGLE). UGLE claims to be the oldest Grand Lodge in the world, yet
that fact is disputed, specifically by Scotland, which also claims to be the oldest. (This
debate is one for the scholars. See Hamill, J. [1980]. The craft: A history of English
freemasonry. Wellingborough, England; and Stevenson, D. [2001]. The first freemasons:
Scotland’s early lodges and their members. Edinburgh: Grand Lodge of Scotland.)

	  

	  

51	  

Whether the point of origination is Scotland or England, the ceremonies of the
Freemasons trace back to the operative stonemasons’ guilds, which were the groups of
men who built the great cathedrals. The experienced stonemasons originally shared their
architectural secrets with apprentices in order to learn how to build cathedrals and
eventually take over the trade as a master craftsman. Some historians believe the word
“freemason” came about because these craftsmen’s skills were so highly valued, as
recognized members of stonemasons' lodges were considered “free” men. They were
“free”—and permitted to travel freely from job to job, regardless of location, in order to
perform their work.
Eventually the groups and craft guilds began offering a more honorary form of
membership to influential and prominent members of the community. These new
members (who were not skilled craftsmen) were known as speculative members. Soon
the popularity of becoming a Mason grew and speculative members outnumbered the
operative members. At this point, the organization shifted to the group we know today as
Freemasonry.
Freemasons meet together in what they call a “lodge.” A lodge is their
organizational structure and is the group of members and potential new members who
meet together. Members meet as a lodge and discuss business, pay bills, vote on issues
such as potential new members, and plan social events. They perform rituals (also called
degrees) in the lodge.
What can be confusing is that a lodge is also what members often call the
building. The building can also be called a temple or Masonic center, depending on what

	  

	  

52	  

group it is and where they are meeting. The best comparison to this concept would be a
church. A church is the community of people who come together to meet, regardless of
location. But a church is also the name of the building where members meet. This is
exactly the same for a lodge. It is the community of members, as well as the building, but
they don’t have to meet at a particular building in order to be at a lodge meeting. Masonic
groups also meet in chapters, councils, consistories, and the like, but those are typically
for appendant groups, and these meetings often are held in the same lodge buildings. The
lodge is presided over by a Master as the lead officer (similar to a president) and,
depending on the jurisdiction of the lodge, that role may vary.
The structure of American Freemasonry includes a system of degrees beginning
with the symbolic lodge. Within Freemasonry there are three degrees—the entered
apprentice, called the first degree (1°); fellow craft, known as the second degree (2°); and
master mason, or third degree (3°). These degrees are commonly called the “Blue,”
“Symbolic,” and “Craft” degrees (deHoyos, 2104, p. 357). The first three degrees are
administered by local lodges, which fall under the jurisdiction of Grand Lodges. Masonic
ritual typically consists of degree ceremonies. During the first degree of Entered
Apprentice, a candidate is initiated into Freemasonry. A second degree ceremony occurs
at a later date, when the person will earn the degree of Fellowcraft. The final degree is
that of Master Mason. Each degree is full of signs, symbols, passwords, and grips unique
to each of the degrees.
A Grand Lodge is the authority that administers the rituals and legislation for the
lodges in a particular area or region. In the United States, each state has its own Grand
	  

	  

53	  

Lodge. The organization of Grand Lodges can vary according to the country. For
instance, England and Scotland each has its own Grand Lodge that administers the ritual,
rules, and regulations for all the lodges within the country. For the United States, there is
no overarching “national” Grand Lodge. Each state governs its lodges. The Grand Lodges
within the United States each have their own particular rules, traditions, bylaws, and
rituals; moreover, each governs itself independently.
In addition to the Blue Lodge degrees, Freemasonry in the United States has two
branches, known as systems, called the York Rite and the Scottish Rite. There is an entire
system of degrees for the York Rite and Scottish Rite, and they are managed and
governed independently from the Blue Lodges. Grand Lodges establish standards for
regularity, which are basic membership requirements. Each Grand Lodge maintains a list
of other Grand Lodges that they recognize. Regularity in a jurisdiction is based on these
membership requirements, otherwise known as Masonic Landmarks. The most
commonly shared rules for recognition (based on regularity) are those established by the
UGLE in 1929:

1. Regularity of origin; i.e. each Grand Lodge shall have been established
lawfully by a duly recognized Grand Lodge or by three or more regularly
constituted Lodges.
2. That a belief in the G.A.O.T.U. and His revealed will shall be an essential
qualification for membership.

	  

	  

54	  

3. That all Initiates shall take their Obligation on or in full view of the open
Volume of the Sacred Law, by which is meant the revelation from above which is
binding on the conscience of the particular individual who is being initiated.
4. That the membership of the Grand Lodge and individual Lodges shall be
composed exclusively of men; and that each Grand Lodge shall have no Masonic
intercourse of any kind with mixed Lodges or bodies which admit women to
membership.
5. That the Grand Lodge shall have sovereign jurisdiction over the Lodges under
its control; i.e. that it shall be a responsible, independent, self-governing
organization, with sole and undisputed authority over the Craft or Symbolic
Degrees (Entered Apprentice, Fellow Craft, and Master Mason) within its
Jurisdiction; and shall not in any way be subject to, or divide such authority with,
a Supreme Council or other Power claiming any control or supervision over those
degrees.
6. That the three Great Lights of Freemasonry (namely, the Volume of the Sacred
Law, the Square, and the Compasses) shall always be exhibited when the Grand
Lodge or its subordinate Lodges are at work, the chief of these being the Volume
of the Sacred Law.
7. That the discussion of religion and politics within the Lodge shall be strictly
prohibited.
8. That the principles of the Antient Landmarks, customs, and usages of the Craft
shall be strictly observed. (UGLE, 1929 from Snoek, 2014)

	  

	  

55	  

The process of joining a lodge also can vary depending on the jurisdiction. In
some places, a friend or relative introduces a potential member to the lodge. In other
places, a prospective member just locates a lodge nearby and contacts it to inquire about
membership procedures. Grand Lodges then have established procedures on how their
membership is considered. Once a candidate applies to join, he is interviewed and the
lodge votes on his pending membership. Requirements vary by jurisdiction, but there is
often a minimum age requirement (typically 18–21 in the United States) and, in most
Grand Lodges, the candidate must also believe in a supreme being (which can vary by
jurisdiction, if the member must belong to a specific religious tradition).
Masonic Special Collections
The origin of Freemasonry has been one of the most extensively researched
subjects about the fraternity, including the year of founding of the order. Currently
housed in the British Museum, the oldest document associated with Freemasonry is
called the Regius Manuscript, which dates to about 1390. Also known as the Halliwell
Manuscript, the poem is about the constitutions of Freemasonry. It is an early governing
document of the organization and known as “Old Charges” or “Gothic Constitutions.”
When this document was first discovered, its contents were listed incorrectly in David
Casley’s Catalogue of the Manuscripts of the King’s Library: An Appendix to the
Catalogue of the Cottonian Library (1734); Casley listed it as “A Poem of Moral Duties.”
In 1838 scholar and collector James Halliwell-Phillipps revealed the true contents
of the manuscript in a paper he presented to the Society of Antiquaries with additional
details in his subsequent publication Early History of Freemasonry in England (1844).

	  

	  

56	  

Halliwell-Phillipps described the manuscript as “a duodecimo manuscript on vellum,
written not later than the latter part of the fourteenth century” (Halliwell-Phillipps, 1844,
pp. 8–9). This “curious English poem” (as Halliwell-Phillipps called it) was mislabeled
by David Casley in his creation of the catalogue. Casley worked as the deputy to Richard
Bentley, who was the keeper of the Royal Library and the Cotton Library (also known as
the librarian). Casley was the equivalent of a cataloging librarian of the time and
compiled the inventory by simply copying it from another catalog.
Halliwell-Phillipps claimed that Casley “took the erroneous description” from
Edward Bernard’s Catalogus manuscriptorum Angilae et Binerniae (1697) (HalliwellPhillipps, 1844, p. 9). And although Halliwell-Phillipps claimed that Casley’s work was
“for the most part very carefully executed” (Halliwell-Phillipps, 1844, p. 9), other
scholars, such as Rev. William Cole, said of Casley: “[He] was ‘an ingenious man, and
understood old writings and ancient hands well’ [but] . . . there were many mistakes in
his transcripts” (Harris, n.p.). Having an error such as this incorrectly describe this
Masonic artifact for hundreds of years is only one example of rare and unique materials
worth saving that are “hidden” in the stacks. The words of the poem itself are interesting
to examine:
Here begin the constitutions of the art of Geometry according to Euclid.
Whoever will both well read and look
He may find written in old book
Of great lords and also ladies,
That had many children together, y-wisse [certainly];
And had no income to keep them with,
Neither in town nor field nor frith [enclosed wood];
A council together they could them take,
To ordain for these children’s sake,

	  

	  

57	  

How they might best lead their life
Without great dis-ease, care, and strife;
And most for the multitude that was coming
Of their children after their ending
They send them after great clerks,
To teach them then good works.
—Regius Manuscript, 1390
The Regius Manuscript is just one of countless rare documents that have been
hidden or mislabeled within special collections. There are numerous others yet to be
found. The Grand Lodges within the United States have each created and written their
own unique histories. In that process, material culture has developed within the groups as
they have evolved as a fraternity. Artifacts, books, and countless items of memorabilia
have accumulated and now often are overlooked for research, preservation, and/or
deaccession. What happens next to the material culture history of the Freemasons is
entirely up to the members.

	  

	  

58	  

Chapter 5
Findings
To live in the world without becoming aware of the meaning of the world is like
wandering around in a great library without touching the books.
M. P. Palmer, The Secret Teachings of All Ages, 1928

One of the most requested books in any Masonic library is Manly Palmer Hall’s
The Secret Teachings of All Ages, published in 1928. It is likely the mystery of the
esoteric topics that attract people to the book. Or, maybe it is the size of the book, which
is 12.5 x 19 inches, or the hand-painted, colorful illustrations done by J. Augustus Knapp.
Patrons are attracted to its binding, which is made of vellum-backed batik boards, a
morocco spine label, featuring top edges gilt, and usually a wooden slipcase with cloth
and batik covering. For the average person, holding in one’s hands and reading a book
like this is a unique experience. Helping students and scholars be able to read and
research from books like this is one reason why librarians and archivists of special
collections attempt to preserve these rare materials for future generations.
Rare books, artifacts, minutes, correspondence, scrapbooks, periodicals and
manuscripts continue to exist because of the work of librarians, collections managers,
archivists, curators and others with a passion for caring for these materials. It is these
caretakers who are most able to speak about the work of caring for the collections and
their long-term preservation. The findings of this study are divided into three categories:
the first two categories respond to the guiding research questions namely: 1) ways
Masonic libraries, museums, and archives with special collections are adapting to
	  

	  

59	  

changes in access, technology, and space; and 2) what their challenges are and what
methods and practices are being utilized for long-term preservation of special collections.
The third category discusses the way in which special collections have been described
based on responses from the participants. This third category is reflective of the definition
of special collections used in this study, “library and archival materials in any format
(e.g., rare books, manuscripts, photographs, institutional archives) that are generally
characterized by their artifactual or monetary value, physical format, uniqueness or rarity,
and/or an institutional commitment to long-term preservation and access” (Dooley &
Luce, 2010, p. 16).
A description of each institution follows with context provided as to why it was
chosen for the study. The institutions represent various locations throughout the United
States, large and small memberships, staffed and volunteer managed, fully open to the
public for research and tours, as well as those that are limited or currently inaccessible for
use. The sites specifically were chosen to represent the range of Grand Lodge libraries in
the United States. They are presented in alphabetical order by state. Each begins with a
story about a unique piece or artifact that it is responsible for preserving. There is also a
brief historical background and institutional profile. The participants of this study were
interviewed without concealing their identity; therefore, the descriptions of the
institutions that follow will provide valuable historical and current institutional data. The
sites include Grand Lodge of California, Grand Lodge of Louisiana, Grand Lodge of

	  

	  

60	  

Nebraska, Grand Lodge of New Jersey, Grand Lodge of New Mexico, and Grand Lodge
of Pennsylvania.
Site One
Grand Lodge of California, F. & A. M.
San Francisco, California, 2012
In 2011 a gemologist in Massachusetts contacted the National Heritage Museum
(also known as the Scottish Rite Masonic Museum and Library) in Lexington,
Massachusetts, because he acquired what looked like a unique Masonic jewel. And it
was.
The stunning, uniquely designed jewel is crafted with 14-carat gold. It is
decorated with nine old European cut diamonds and 11 smaller diamonds, totaling
2.59 carats, along with twenty 4.00 carat rubies and 25 smaller rubies, which total
0.25 carats (see Figure 1).
But it isn’t the gold, rubies, or diamonds that make this item a treasure. It is the
provenance. Inside the jewel is a hidden inscription engraved with the owner’s name,
Charles F. Crocker. Crocker was a famous railroad baron who came to California during
the gold rush. He is known for his efforts to help build the western portion of the
transcontinental railroad. Luckily, the staff at the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction in
Massachusetts knew the importance of the jewel to California history, and they contacted
Adam Kendall, the director of collections at the Grand Lodge of California, to see if he
might be interested in the jewel. Of course, Kendall wanted to preserve and acquire the
jewel for the Grand Lodge of California’s collection, but he needed to secure funding to

	  

	  

61	  

Figure 1: Charles F. Crocker Jewel
Courtesy: Henry W. Coil Library and Museum, Grand Lodge of California

	  

	  

62	  

purchase it. Fortunately, due to a generous gift from California Lodge No. 1, the
Crocker Jewel is now located back home in California, on display at the Henry W. Coil
Library and Museum of Freemasonry.
Gold was discovered in California in 1848, and after the Treaty of Hidalgo
transferred the land to the United States, it was only two years before California was
admitted to the Union in 1850. Early settlers to the state often came for the gold rush, and
many of the early Masonic lodges were started in mining towns. The first charter of a
California lodge was issued in 1848 by the Grand Lodge of Missouri to form Western
Star Lodge No. 98 in Benton City, California (Coil, 1961, p. 113). Representatives of five
lodges initially formed to create the Grand Lodge of California; they were from Western
Star No. 98 of Missouri (now Western Star No. 2 of Shasta); Pacific Lodge at Benecia,
Connecticut No. 75 of Connecticut (now Tehama No. 3 of Sacramento); and New Jersey
Lodge at Sacramento. They met and adopted a constitution, but some transactions
indicate problems because California No. 13 of the District of Columbia (now California
No. 1 of San Francisco) was not in attendance, and Pacific Lodge (now Sublime-Benicia
No. 5 of Benicia) was not considered a “regular” lodge, given that it had been chartered
by the Grand Lodge of Ancient York Masons of Louisiana (Coil, 1961, p. 113). Several
of these lodges reassembled and reorganized in April 1850 in Sacramento, thus forming
the Most Worshipful Grand Lodge, Free and Accepted Masons of the State of California.
Jonathan D. Stevenson of San Francisco became the first Grand Master. The same year
that California became a state, the Grand Lodge of California was established.

	  

	  

63	  

The Grand Lodge of California emerged during the site selection process because
of its unique urban location on the West Coast, its commitment to preserving California
history, and its larger membership base. The current building was a unique site to
examine, as the collections are located and displayed at a building where a large
auditorium features regular concerts and events not necessarily related to the fraternity.
The California Masonic Memorial Temple is located at 1111 California Street in
San Francisco. It was designed by Albert Roller and dedicated on September 29, 1958.
The building houses the Masonic auditorium, the Grand Lodge of California, and the
Henry W. Coil Library and Museum. It also contains rare and valuable artwork on both
the inside and outside of the building. The Grand Lodge Library and Museum was
formally established as the Henry W. Coil Library and Museum of Freemasonry in 1996
by a gift from Henry Wilson Coil Jr. (although the collection has resided there much
longer). These collections and archives cover centuries of Masonic history as well as
more than 150 years of Freemasonry in California. The current membership of California
is 55,893 members (MSA stats) with 338 lodges (List of Lodges, 2014, p. 24).
Site Two
Grand Lodge of Louisiana, F. & A. M.
New Orleans, Louisiana, 1825
On a Thursday evening in 1825, the Freemasons of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana
welcomed the illustrious Brother Marquis de Lafayette to their lodge. The meeting was
held in a spacious room that had been transformed into a majestic temple. There were

	  

	  

64	  

crimson draperies covering the walls, and the altar was richly decorated. Incense burned
before the altar, and the lighting was set in a subdued fashion. A throne was placed in the
East with purple draperies surrounding it, embroidered in gold. There were two seats
here, one for the Grand Master and the other for the distinguished Mason who was the
guest of honor. Other dignitaries sat in appropriate places around the room under grand
canopies that were not as distinguished as that in the East.
Among those in attendance was Louis Casimir Elisabeth Moreau Lislet. Lislet
was a French refugee from Santo Domingo who had fled to the United States. He was
later known for writing the Louisiana Civil Code. Lislet was also a very active
Freemason, having joined the Order prior to arriving in America. One of the more unique
pieces at the Grand Lodge of Louisiana is a rare portrait of Lislet, painted by Louis
Nicholas Adolphe Rinck. (Rinck is often misidentified as Adolph D. Rinck.) This
painting currently hangs in the boardroom at the Grand Lodge of Louisiana (see Figure
2).
The Grand Lodge of Louisiana was formally established June 20, 1812. However,
the history of the Masons in the state of Louisiana can be traced back to the late 1700s.
There were two Masonic paths that evolved in Louisiana Freemasonry; one was French
and the other was American, and both originated in England (Greene, 1962, p. 24).
Unfortunately, there is no record of when the first Mason came to Louisiana. It is likely
that these first Masons settled and met in the area of the French Quarter by 1780. Early in
the 1790s, two lodges emerged at about the same time ⎯L’Etoile Polaire (Polar Star) and
Parfaite Union (Perfect Union) (Greene, 1962, p. 36).
	  

	  

65	  

In 1793 Laurent Sigur presided over a meeting of 14 Masons in order to organize a local
lodge. Those present wished to petition the Grand Lodge of South Carolina for a
charter. Work began immediately, and the charter was granted and presented on March
30, 1794 (Greene, 1962, p. 37). Also in 1794, another group of men petitioned the
Provincial Grand Lodge of Marseilles, France, for a charter as L’Etoile Polaire, which
was received December 27, 1798 (Coil, 1961, p. 385). Other lodges were formed, and it
wasn’t until 1807 that the first lodge in Louisiana to work in English was established—
Louisiana No. 1—which was chartered by the Grand Lodge of New York (Coil, 1961, p.
385). Louisiana was admitted to the Union in 1812 and, at that time, there were seven
lodges in the state. A convention was held to form a Grand Lodge, and five of the seven
lodges formed the Grand Lodge of Louisiana. The current membership of Louisiana is
19,431 (MSA stats) with 252 lodges (List of Lodges, 2014, p. 55).
The Grand Lodge of Louisiana emerged as an institution to examine in this study
during the site selection process because of its unique history in the southern part of the
United States. New Orleans, in particular, held an international population of immigrants
that established Freemasonry in the early years of Louisiana history. Differences in
cultural, political, and social dimensions allowed the fraternity to develop in a unique
way in comparison to the remainder of the United States. The site was of particular
interest because in the latter years of being housed in New Orleans, the library fell into
disrepair. Many documents and artifacts were stored in the damp basement. Even worse,
items were being stored in an empty swimming pool, which eventually held water from a
leaky roof.

	  

	  

Figure 2: L. C. Moreau Lislet, 1818, Grand Lodge of Louisiana.
Image courtesy the author.

	  

66	  

	  

67	  

This tragic state of events is of special interest to scholars who might encounter similar
situations in their own repositories. The Grand Lodge of Louisiana moved from its
historic building in New Orleans to a newly constructed one in Alexandria, where
conditions for the collections improved. This fact was an interesting occurrence to study.
Site Three
Grand Lodge of Nebraska, A. F. & A. M.
Omaha, Nebraska, 1800s
The Grand Master of Masons in Nebraska in 1877, George Washington Lininger,
was a businessman and civic leader in Omaha. He began collecting artwork early in life
and eventually had so much that he added a gallery to his home. His collection included
more than 300 works of art, including 60 paintings by Old Masters. He joined
Freemasonry in 1856 and, by the 1880s, he had one of the “most complete Masonic
libraries in the world, especially in the early recorded proceedings of the English Grand
Lodge” (Sorenson, 1888, p. 62). Lininger wanted to study Masonry in Europe and, as he
was doing so, he also collected artwork, which grew into the most extensive collection in
the state of Nebraska. When being interviewed, he once said of his artwork, “What is an
art gallery for but to let your friends see it? And I consider any one who has love for art
as my friend and I am glad of the opportunity of inviting him to my gallery” (Omaha
World-Herald Newspaper, 1907).
Legend has it that the Freemasons supposedly were going to inherit parts of this
valuable collection yet, upon the death of Lininger’s widow, the collection was broken
apart and sold. Some objects are now located at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln, and

	  

	  

68	  

many others have made their way back to the Joslyn Art Museum in Omaha. Yet a few of
his fabled books, originally constituting one of the finest collections in Masonry, are now
among the collection of the Freemasons of Nebraska.
The first lodge in Nebraska was chartered from Illinois in 1855. Several others
were chartered through 1857, when a convention of representatives of the three lodges
came together and formed the Grand Lodge of Nebraska on September 23, 1857 (Coil,
1961, p. 436). The current membership in Nebraska is 10,900 (Grand Lodge of NE) in
134 lodges (List of Lodges, 2014, p. 72).
The Grand Lodge of Nebraska emerged as a site to examine because it had
undergone a move where all of the collections were boxed and put into storage in the
basement of the Lincoln Masonic Temple because the Grand Lodge offices weren’t large
enough to store them. The Grand Lodge built a new building in 2012, but only a portion
of the collections was retrieved; other parts of the collection remain in storage. The
Masonic Heritage Committee is currently working on a plan to address the future of their
collections. The fact that these collections have remained in storage for so many years is
significant and worth exploration.
This site was chosen as one to examine because of the current state of the
collections. The majority is in storage or still packed. This poses several problems and
concerns for its future. The site also was chosen for its location and connection to the
state’s history. It will be a good balance to examine this type of situation versus other
collections, which are more fully cataloged and available for access.

	  

	  

69	  

Site Four
Grand Lodge of New Jersey, F. & A. M.
Trenton, New Jersey, 1700s
A signer of the United States Constitution, David Brearley was born near
Lawrenceville, New Jersey, in 1745. He attended the College of New Jersey (now
Princeton) and became a lawyer in 1767. Brearley served as a captain in a New Jersey
regiment and rose to the rank of colonel within a year in 1776. It was likely during this
time in the military that he joined a Masonic lodge. His lodge affiliation is unknown, but
it is presumed that he was initiated into Military Lodge No. 19 A.Y.M. of Pennsylvania
sometime during 1776–1778. Brearley was elected chief justice of the New Jersey
Supreme Court in 1779 at the age of 34. At age 42, he served as a delegate to the
Constitutional Convention and signed the Constitution. President George Washington
appointed him first judge of the U.S. District Court in New Jersey in 1789. Sadly, he only
served about two years before his death. Brearley’s Masonic apron now resides in the
Grand Lodge of New Jersey, Museum of Masonic Culture, on display among countless
other rare and unique Masonic artifacts in New Jersey.
George Harrison, the Provincial Grand Master of New York, established the first
lodge in New Jersey in Newark on May 13, 1761. The lodge finally emerged named as
St. John’s Lodge No. 1 (Coil, 1961, p. 443). Several other lodges were established in
New Jersey through the years; only two remained in existence after the Revolution. In
1786 a notice (likely from Baskingridge Lodge No. 10) was circulated and called a
convention of Masons in the area to convene and establish a Grand Lodge (Coil, 1961, p.

	  

	  

70	  

443). The Grand Lodge of New Jersey was then organized on January 30, 1787. David
Brearley was installed as the Grand Master.
The current location of the Grand Lodge of New Jersey is in Trenton. Dedicated
in 1926, the Historic Trenton Masonic Temple is located opposite the colonial-era Old
Barracks. A unique historic fact is that it sits on the site of the first Masonic temple in
New Jersey, which was built in 1792. The first temple was moved in 1915 so that the new
temple could be erected. There is but one Masonic lodge that meets in the space, so it is
more often used as an administrative headquarters for the state, as well as meeting space
(available for rentals), and as a Masonic library and museum. New Jersey currently has
22,523 members (MSA Stats) in 120 lodges (List of Lodges, 2014, p. 75).
The Grand Lodge of New Jersey emerged as an institution to examine in this
study because of its recent combination of two Masonic collections. This unique story of
the closing and sale of a Scottish Rite facility in the state and the move of its collections
to Trenton resulted in a merger of two distinct Masonic collections. This was a rare
occasion and worth additional in-depth exploration. The additional challenges that the
renovation of the current Masonic temple experienced allowed for further study into the
ways in which the artifacts, books, and archives could be presented and preserved.

	  

	  

71	  

Site Five
Grand Lodge of New Mexico, A. F. & A. M.
Santa Fe, New Mexico, 1850s
Notice is hereby given to all persons, that Christopher Carson, a boy about 16
years old, small of his age, but thick set; light hair, ran away from the subscriber,
living in Franklin, Howard County, Missouri, to whom he had been bound to
learn the saddler's trade. . . . One cent reward will be given to any person who will
bring back the said boy.
—Missouri Intelligencer, October 12, 1826
A boy of about 16 or 17, Kit Carson grew bored of being an apprentice to the
saddle trade, so he ran away and joined a caravan of fur trappers. They were headed on
the Santa Fe Trail to Santa Fe, New Mexico. He settled in Taos and became a hunter and
trapper. He even helped lead expeditions to California. In 1854 Carson received his
Masonic degrees from Montezuma Lodge No. 1 in Santa Fe. He later helped create Bent
Lodge in Taos.
One of the most prized possessions found in New Mexico Freemasonry belongs to
Kit Carson’s former Masonic lodge. It is his Hawken .54 rifle. It weighs more than 9
pounds, 6 ounces and was given to the lodge by another Freemason, Major J. Thompson
of Fort Garland, Colorado. The rifle is one of the finer Hawken rifles known, and a
firearms specialist claimed that because it belonged to Kit Carson, that “makes it the most
valuable Hawken rifle in existence” (Hall, 1928, p. 15).
Legends of the Wild West accompany the history of places such as New Mexico.
Freemasonry arrived to the territory of New Mexico during the Mexican-American War

	  

	  

72	  

(1846–1848). Yet it wasn’t until a few years later that the Grand Lodge of New Mexico
was formed at a convention on August 6, 1877. Representatives of the Montezuma,
Chapman, Aztec, and Union Lodges met to form the new governing body. Silver City
and Cimarron Lodges opposed joining but later conceded. The Grand Lodge also
chartered one lodge outside the state, which was originally part of the territory of New
Mexico, White Mountain Lodge No. 5, at Globe, Arizona.
The Grand Lodge of New Mexico materialized as an institution to examine in this
study because of its location in the southwestern United States. When examining the
history of Freemasonry, often the focus is on the eastern United States. Therefore, it was
important to include sites that were clearly not part of the traditional historian’s story.
New Mexico is also one of the smallest jurisdictions in the United States in terms of
membership. In 2014 New Mexico had 56 lodges with 4,669 members (List of Regular
Lodges, 2014, p. 76 and MSA). The only other states with similar numbers of less than
5,000 members include Alaska (1,797), Delaware (4,843), District of Columbia (4,091),
Hawaii (1,787), Idaho (3,567), Nevada (4,085), North Dakota (2,885), Rhode Island
(3,444), and Wyoming (3,417) (MSA, 2013). It is helpful to have a representative sample
of these smaller jurisdictions (in terms of membership) and sparsely populated states.
The collections of the Grand Lodge of New Mexico have been located in one
building since a move in the late 1960s, after a fire devastated the historic temple
downtown on Central and Seventh Streets. The historic temple burned on the evening of
April 15, 1967, causing a complete loss of the lodge rooms and building, but
	  

	  

73	  

“miraculously most of the records of Temple Lodge, the Grand Lodge, and the Shrine
were saved” (Langston, 1978, p. 183). All the rescued materials were stored at 412 Fruit
Avenue NW in Albuquerque until they constructed and moved into the buildings (one for
Grand Lodge and one for Temple Lodge No. 6) on University Boulevard in 1969. For
being located in the Southwest, where fire traditionally spelled a complete loss, their
special collections have survived the elements and thus warrant further research.
Site Six
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, F. & A. M.
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 1784
Legend has it that the Masonic apron belonging to George Washington was
embroidered by Madame Lafayette and presented to Brother Washington by Brother
Marquis de Lafayette in August 1784. Records have been unable to document the exact
provenance, though. The apron did belong to Washington and was presented to the Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania by the Washington Benevolent Society on July 3, 1829. But the
true story of its origin might never be known. The Masonic apron is one of the great
treasures of the Freemasons and is currently on display in the Grand Lodge Museum and
Library at the Masonic Temple in Philadelphia (see Figure 3).
Freemasonry has been in Philadelphia since the 1730s. The full history of
Masonry in America is outside the scope of this study. Despite the arguments of Boston,
Philadelphia is credited with the first organized Lodge in America—known as the Tun
Tavern Lodge. By 1758 the first warrant issued for America by the Ancient Grand Lodge
	  

	  

74	  

of England was for Lodge No. 69 at Philadelphia (Coil, p. 1961, 468). In September
1786, the Ancient Provincial Grand Lodge declared its independence of the Grand Lodge
of England and closed. The following day, representatives of the 13 lodges met to form
the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, Free & Accepted Masons (Coil, 1961, p. 468). The
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania was chosen as a site for this study due to its longestablished history as having some of the older lodges in America and therefore some of
the older records. The lodge also has been fortunate to survive without devastating fires
or other natural disasters. The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania is the largest Grand Lodge
in the United States in terms of membership, with 421 lodges and 107,731 members in
2014 (List of Lodges, 2014, p. 96 and MSA). The records and collections of Pennsylvania
have been kept in one location since 1873, at the Grand Lodge at One North Broad Street
in Philadelphia. This stability for their collections is almost unmatched among Grand
Lodges in the United States; therefore, this lodge provides a unique look at possible ways
to preserve and maintain a special collection.
Six very different locations across the United States have each preserved rare and
valuable artifacts important for the history of the fraternity and the history of American
culture. In each case, these material objects were considered average items at the time—a
painting, a gun, a piece of jewelry—yet understanding the human experience can occur
through examining pieces of material culture. These objects aren’t just representative of
their time period of origin; they also can reveal essential pieces of information about the
owner, the larger organization, and history in general.

	  

	  

Figure 3: George Washington’s Masonic Apron embroidered by Madame Lafayette.
Image courtesy the author.

	  

75	  

	  

76	  

Views on Defining Masonic Special Collections
At the start of this study, the definition for special collections was established as
“library and archival materials in any format (e.g., rare books, manuscripts, photographs,
institutional archives) that are generally characterized by their artifactual or monetary
value, physical format, uniqueness or rarity, and/or an institutional commitment to longterm preservation and access” (Dooley & Luce, 2010, p. 16). This definition of general
special collections was the guiding force for the sites selected; however, to gain a better
understanding of the participants’ perspective about their own collections, the question
“How do you define Masonic special collections?” was asked as part of the interview
protocol. There were varying answers to this question that helped to inform the study.
The most common responses from participants included collecting materials
specifically about Freemasonry, fraternal organizations, and history. In many instances
the findings were similar among the institutions. They shared their methods of caring for
the collections as they responded to questions. They also considered their own role in the
process and that of other key individuals who help to preserve special collections at their
institutions as important to the discussion and larger efforts to preserve materials.
The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania librarians had a particularly valuable definition
of Masonic special collections. According to them, a Masonic special collection is
A. one that has a goodly number (whatever that means—certainly more than one
or two) rare books and periodicals concerning Freemasonry and/or related
organizations (e.g., Knights Templar) and/or written by, owned by, about wellknown Masons (e.g., Ben Franklin, G. Washington . . . );

	  

	  

77	  

B. that has manuscripts, of which each will be unique, of course. We have letters
of Washington, a land patent signed by Franklin. . . . .;
C. it has especially old/original petitions, warrants (necessary to form lodges),
lodge histories;
D. is focused on, or kept for the information, edification, interest, and even
amusement of the group; i.e., Freemasons.
They also defined what a rare book is in the Masonic repository:
1. Any book printed before 1820.
2. A significant association or provenance.
3. An unusually fine binding.
4. A specially illustrated edition.
5. Special paper, printing, or unusual dimensions.
6. A very limited edition (even if brand new).
7. Extremely odd or unique subject matter.
Other Grand Lodge collections looked at defining Masonic special collections
similarly. A brother from the Grand Lodge of Louisiana responded,
To me a Masonic special collection is any collection of related items that are
unique to the history of Masonry of the area around the institution holding the
collection. There are many very common Masonic books that make up the bulk of
most “Masonic” libraries (be they Grand Lodge libraries, or Masonic sections at
non-masonic institutions, for example “Masonry Defined”, “Coil’s Encyclopedia
of Freemasonry”, and of course “Morals and Dogma”, but these common books
do not rise to the level of a Special Collection. A Special Collection doesn’t even
have to be books. It is, however, unique and possesses the character of the
Masonry it came from. Examples could include holdings of historical local or
extinct lodges, photograph collections documenting the history of some Lodge or
Grand Lodge, or even a collection of Past Grand Master’s jewels.
His definition explains that a special collection is more than just books. He included
ephemera and memorabilia of the larger history of Freemasonry in his state.

	  

	  

78	  

A similar response from New Mexico was, “I would define a Special Collection,
within a greater Masonic or other Fraternal Collection, as one that is tightly developed
around a very narrow concept or cue” This respondent went on to elaborate in detail,
saying,
I can think of two categories around which a Special Collection might be defined
and formed.
One would be by the source of the material. The personal library of a particularly
respected or noteworthy researcher or writer, for instance, would constitute a
Special Collection within a greater library, and as such should be shelved and
handled separately from the main body of the receiving/curating institution's other
books. Similarly, the regalia, medals, awards, certificates, and general material
culture issuing from a particular institution, which is noteworthy for it's [sic]
production of such, might be another example. This can be identified on a smaller
scale: the fezzes of Algeria Shrine are noteworthy, and a collection of them might
stand apart from a general fez collection. Or it could be seen on a larger scale: a
collection of Shrine fezzes more generally could be a free-standing Special
Collection within a larger fraternal collection or museum.
The second axis around which a Special Collection might be formed, could be the
absolute rarity of the objects—one of a kind objects, whether falling, for instance,
more under the rubric of "folk art," or being exquisite and unique artisanal
objects. Granted, this also somewhat dances around the edges of being defined by
the source, as in category one above. The defining difference between the two
remains the scarcity of the individual objects. Whereas above, the scarcity would
hinge on the completeness of the greater collection, though the individual objects
might be themselves not cripplingly rare; in this artisanal category, the rarity of
the individual objects is almost non-measurable*—there is only this one, though it
belongs to a tradition of such objects.
(*Example through hyperbole: is our sun rare? Well . . . it's the only one that we
have. . . .)
The curator at the Grand Lodge of New Jersey said, “I would define a ‘Masonic
Special Collection’ as a collection which goes beyond the normal structure of a Museum
Exhibit in the manner of Value (Cultural, Masonic, Financial) and Interest to those who

	  

	  

79	  

view it. Something that you don't see every day!” A heritage committee member in
Nebraska referred to a special collection as “a distinct collection of items that fall within
at least a broad category, be it books, historic items, or specific sets of items, like a
collection of lapel pins spanning different Masonic bodies and many years or a Past
Grand Master's papers and memorabilia which are kept together as his collection.” He
also pointed out that “[i]f [the] Grand Lodge decided to acquire it and declared it to be a
special collection and considered it unique enough to merit some distinction, it is a
‘special collection’”.
California answered similarly, saying, “My special collections would comprise
the rarest, or most historical, of each overlapping section. For example, I could include
my first edition of Anderson's Constitutions in the library collection, but because of its
age and provenance, it is a part of the museum collection. And, on top of that, it has a
restricted access in a special collection”. Each respondent clearly pointed out both
general and specific items that constitute their collections, as well as the overlap that their
museum, library, and archival materials have. Each also mentioned specific traits that
make it a collection special to the subject of Freemasonry.
All the sites mentioned that by preserving the history of Freemasonry, they were
essential in protecting the history of their states. In particular, the Western sites I
examined—California, New Mexico, and Nebraska—specifically mentioned that the
founding leaders in the western United States were often also members of the fraternity.
Clearly, the history of Freemasonry in many states was also the history of their states.

	  

	  

80	  

And, finally, when defining a Masonic special collection, one of my favorite responses
was “someone has to apply some distinction of ‘specialness’ to the collection. My
shoebox of 2,000 Masonic lapel pins at home is not a special collection.”
Challenges of Masonic Special Collections
One of the guiding research questions in this study, “What are your biggest
challenges?” was intended to understand better the approaches that the various
institutions had in working with their special collections. Each site told a different story
about how it worked with artifacts, books, archives, photographs, ephemera, and more.
Each site discussed distinctive ways in which it has been able to manage (or attempt to
manage) these items in its custody. Differences and similarities will be examined in this
analysis. In this study, themes emerged outside the conceptual framework that were
similar among the institutions and will be presented in the combined manner. In the case
of similarities occurring between the institutions, the findings are combined with
particular examples and quotes.
Space and Storage among Grand Lodges
Across each of the sites, the biggest challenge by far is having appropriate space
and storage to care for the collections. The areas in which the collections are kept, stored,
preserved, and displayed are central to maintaining any collection. Unfortunately, special
collections are often relegated to the most inhospitable areas for preserving artifacts,
archival materials, and books. Frequently, the areas are without proper temperature and
humidity controls. Acquisition of new materials is always a challenge if space is lacking.

	  

	  

81	  

Masonic collections are held or kept in Masonic buildings, which can vary,
depending on the buildings’ use. The majority of collections are located in a Masonic
Lodge or Temple (it varies by place whether something is called a “Masonic lodge” or
“Masonic temple”). Some are simply office buildings, while other locations have
multiple uses. With many Grand Lodge collections, the building is a typically a multipurpose facility with administrative offices and meeting rooms. For larger groups, it may
include a banquet hall, kitchen, and/or an auditorium or theater, lodge meeting rooms,
and more. All of the sites in this study have dedicated rooms for special collections.
Some are labeled as a “museum,” others as a “library,” some as “archives,” and several
are called both “museum and library”—with collections organized and housed together.
The archives of all of the sites examined were included as part of the overall collections
(meaning they were mixed in as part of the library and/or museum’s holdings). Three of
the buildings that house collections in the study (Nebraska, New Mexico, and Louisiana)
are exclusively offices and administrative space, with a dedicated room or spaces for the
library, archives, and/or museum. These three sites do not have any local lodges meeting
at their buildings, so they are exclusively used as administrative space.
The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania is unique among Grand Lodges in many ways.
Since 1873 the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania’s home has been located at One North
Broad Street in Philadelphia. Designed by architect James H. Windrim, it is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places and is also a National Historic Landmark. It is also
distinctive in that the Grand Lodge is one of the older in the United States, established on

	  

	  

82	  

September 26, 1786. The material culture history of the Freemasons of Pennsylvania has
been accumulated in one space and place for more than 140 years.
In terms of space for the collections within the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania, the
museum is well appointed with display cases where materials can be changed for various
exhibits. The library reading room and stacks are adjacent to the museum space. In terms
of challenges, the collection has an adequate but tight space. The tight feeling noticed at
this site was because the collections simply have outgrown some of their spaces.
The most specific challenge in terms of space in Philadelphia was the area for
oversized items. Many older minute and record books are rather large in size, heavy, and
often don’t fit in traditional library shelving. This is the case in the collections in
Philadelphia. The current library storage “stacks” are lacking in adequate space,
particularly for additional oversized materials. They are quite fortunate, however, that in
such a large building, there are other storage areas and rooms located throughout the
building for archival materials, photographs, artifacts, and related materials. (See Figure
4.)

	  

	  

Figure 4: Stacks at the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania.
Image courtesy the author.

	  

83	  

	  

84	  

Another challenge that was apparent in Pennsylvania was having enough room to
process, catalog, and work on materials such as archival collections. They often rehouse
materials into proper archival storage containers. As one staffer noted, “Anything done is
to load up with supplies and work from there on the desk. There is no work room.”
Archival materials arrive “in cardboard boxes and get put into envelopes or folders that
are acid free and then it’s labeled and placed into big manuscript boxes” for storage. The
storage for materials other than the books is typically in a “huge room in the subbasement . . . which covers the whole northwest quadrant full of stacks.” Fortunately, for
Pennsylvania, their overflow areas for storage make up for the fact that their book/library
stacks have become full. (See Figure 4.)
In regard to their location, Pennsylvania’s collections are also maintained in a
historic building. This poses other space challenges, as the book stacks cannot be moved.
They are restricted to using the space as it is. They could easily move portions of their
books into other areas of the building, and this might provide additional storage solutions.
Unfortunately, it would also create access and security concerns if books, or other
materials, were housed outside the library and museum proper.
Louisiana and New Mexico both have dedicated space for museum artifacts as
well as areas for reading and research. Both are quite similar in space and storage.
Overflow materials in New Mexico reside in the basement (which is rather safe due to the
dry desert location). Louisiana has a main library/museum space as well as overflow and
extra storage in a separate outer building. Both Louisiana and New Mexico’s overflow
storage areas consist of countless duplicate books; large or odd-sized artifacts that don’t

	  

	  

Figure 5: Reading Room at the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania
From the author’s collection

	  

85	  

	  

Figure 6: Grand Lodge of New Mexico Library and Museum.
Image courtesy the author.

	  

86	  

	  

Figure 7: Grand Lodge of New Mexico Library and Museum.
Image courtesy the author.

	  

87	  

	  

88	  

fit in the current display space; extra shelving and a variety of materials (props, costumes,
aprons, furniture, lamps, etc.) from lodges that have surrendered their charters.
Space was cited as one of the biggest concerns from each of the sites examined.
And yet a quick search online reveals Masonic temples for sale across the country in St.
Louis, Missouri; Vancouver; Washington; Grand Island, Nebraska; Raleigh, North
Carolina; Los Angeles, California; and the list goes on. Almost all are for sale because
the organization no longer needs the immense amount of space that Masonic temples and
lodges originally designed for or needed. In Fort Smith, Arkansas, members lament, “The
Masonic Temple is for sale,” said David Arnold, a member of the Belle Point Lodge and
Western Arkansas Scottish Rite, which owns the stone building. “It has a long history.
We’re kind of sad. But the building is getting a little out of repair and costly to keep up”
(Hunter, 2013). Arnold’s story is nothing new. Maintaining these large and outdated
buildings is one reason that places such as Louisiana and Nebraska have relocated to
newer, more modern facilities that are used only for administrative purposes.
Moving Special Collections
In examining the sites for this study, three of the six sites have moved their
collections in the past five years (Nebraska, New Jersey, and Louisiana). The Grand
Lodges of New Mexico, California, and Pennsylvania have been located in their present
buildings for almost 50 years each, with Pennsylvania being in the same location since
1873, California since 1958, and New Mexico since 1968. These moves of Louisiana,
Nebraska, and New Jersey are of interest to the study because they have each impacted
the collections in both positive and negative ways.

	  

	  

89	  

In 2004 New Jersey moved its Grand Lodge from its location at the Masonic
Home in Burlington, as it took ownership of the historic Masonic Temple located in
Trenton. The Grand Lodge embarked on a multimillion-dollar restoration project to
preserve and restore the building to its original condition. Work was completed in 2009,
with the assistance of a grant from the New Jersey Historic Preservation Trust. In 2010
the New Jersey Grand Lodge and Grand Master’s offices returned to a newly renovated
space in the historic temple. A museum and library with various special collections were
part of this move. All the items were boxed and moved from Burlington to Trenton,
where they were stored in various locations throughout the building and the older
Masonic building next door.
In addition to the move of the collections of the Grand Lodge of New Jersey, the
collections of the Charles D. Visscher Museum of Masonic Culture were merged with the
Grand Lodge of New Jersey Masonic Museum. They were combined because the
Scottish Rite Valley of Northern New Jersey sold its building in Lincoln Park, New
Jersey, leaving the collections of the Valley of Northern New Jersey in need of a new
home. Brother Charles D. Visscher founded the Museum of Masonic Culture at the
Valley of Northern New Jersey in 1998 (Visscher, 2012, p. 19). There, the museum
acquired donations from various Brethren and grew into a full-scale repository of
Masonic collectibles. It began as “a few boxes in a closet” and eventually “encompassed
six rooms packed with treasures from Masons of the entire region” (Visscher, 2012, p.
19).

	  

	  

90	  

Luckily, the Visschers, a local Masonic family, took a great interest in the future
of the collections and helped to move, organize, and reestablish the combined collections
as the Grand Lodge of New Jersey Museum of Masonic Culture. Following major
renovations to the historic temple, particularly the roof, a grand opening was held in
September 2012 at the 225th Anniversary Gala, when the public was welcomed to come
and enjoy the new setting for the Masonic collections of New Jersey (Visscher, 2012, p.
19). The new renovated and updated space at the historic Masonic Temple has become
the perfect home for the Masonic collections of New Jersey. Storage areas are plentiful
and there are places where the remainder of the collections can be sorted, organized, and
stored.
Currently located in Alexandria, Louisiana, the Grand Lodge of the State of
Louisiana, F. & A. M. officially was established in 1812. Masonic history in the state can
be traced to the 1700s, however. Preservation efforts have been ongoing throughout the
years to collect and preserve the history of Freemasonry in Louisiana. Unfortunately,
despite its preservation efforts, the library was missing the older records and documents
because several fires in the late 1800s and early 1900s destroyed many of the early
records and holdings in the Grand Lodge and its library (Louisiana Proceedings, 2009).
The current location of the library, museum, and archives is at the Grand Lodge
building located at 5746 Masonic Drive, Alexandria, Louisiana. This site was part of the
original land of The Masonic Home for Children, which was built in 1925. The Grand
Lodge moved to Alexandria in 1996 and constructed a new building for the
administration, library, and museum of the Grand Lodge.

	  

	  

91	  

Unlike the collections in New Jersey, which were originally housed in fairly safe
locales, Louisiana’s Grand Lodge was housed in downtown New Orleans. The library
occupied the 13th floor of the historic Grand Lodge building at 333 St. Charles Avenue,
New Orleans. The New Orleans Grand Lodge building was legendary; it was a
magnificent 18-story Gothic Revival–style building and the first skyscraper in New
Orleans. Designed by architect Sam Stone Jr. and built by James Stewart & Company,
the building had a grand cornerstone laying in 1926, when the Grand Chaplain, Rev. Bro.
Robert H. Harper delivered an oration:
Nature seems to smile upon us as the thousands are gathered on this solemn
occasion to lay the corner stone of this Masonic Temple. The mists of the
morning have cleared away and, in the glorious sunlight of the mid-afternoon and
in the air which is balmy and prophetic of the coming springtime, we meet to lay
the foundation stone of this great and beautiful edifice. . . . And today we would
confess our debt to all the builders who have gone before us, and we rejoice that
because of their labours and by reason of our own handiwork of the present day
we are met to lay the corner stone of this great and beautiful temple. (Louisiana
Proceedings, 1927, pp. 17–22)
Unfortunately, over time, the home of the Grand Lodge of Louisiana fell into
disrepair and the once magnificent Masonic building began to crumble. The special
collections of the Grand Lodge were moved from their home in New Orleans to the
Masonic Children’s Home property in Alexandria, Louisiana, which had been closed as
an orphanage in 1994 (Louisiana Proceedings, 1997, p. 54).
The Grand Secretary’s report of 1997 reads:
This was a year of sadness, frustration, joy and anticipation. . . . It was a day of
sadness when the last truck pulled out of New Orleans for our new home in
Alexandria. . . . The frustration came as we unpacked and located furniture,
equipment and records. . . . A move is traumatic under the best of conditions. To

	  

	  

92	  

relocate 200 years of accumulated records, etc., plus your personal household
borders on going insane. (Proceedings, 1997, pp. 22–23)
Sadly, before the collections moved to Alexandria, it was reported that “[i]n the
latter years of being housed at this location, the Library fell into disrepair, with
documents and artifacts being stored in the damp basement, and many items being stored
in an empty swimming pool” (Proceedings, 2009). In the mid-1990s,
the records and artifacts were hurriedly shipped to the old Masonic Children’s
Home located there. In preparing for this move, many items were carelessly
“thrown away or pilfered.” After the move to Alexandria, most of the items
moved were left boxed and/or scattered about various buildings on the campus
with little to no regard to their historic value, with no maintenance, and with no
security. Many items were found to be damaged and full of mold and mildew.
(Proceedings, 2009)
Realizing the need to preserve and protect their history, the Masons of Louisiana
made drastic changes to protect their collections. The Masonic Library/Museum
Foundation of Louisiana was first established, by edict, in 2009, and was formally
adopted, according to Masonic Law, by Resolution #2010-10. It formally established a
Board of Trustees to care for the collections. Resolution #2010-10 states:
The said Board of Trustees shall have full and complete control of all books,
documents, portraits, art, relics or other items of whatsoever nature or kind
comprising the library and museum heretofore maintained by the Grand Lodge of
Louisiana. (Proceedings, 2010)
Of the sites examined in this study, the collections in Nebraska are clearly in the
most need of attention. They are stored in various locations throughout the state, mostly
in basements and closets. The Grand Lodge doesn’t have the same kind of space for

	  

	  

93	  

maintaining a large accessible museum or housing a working library. When discussing
their current storage and display situation, they noted,
Nothing is stored even remotely appropriately. The Grand Lodge of Nebraska
moved and it is a bunch of boxes sitting in storage. The gavel Harry Truman
presented the Grand Lodge in 1948 is just sitting on the floor. It’s in a locked
room, but otherwise it’s just sitting there.
The collections in California also have a very unique challenge related to space.
The museum was founded in 1996 by a generous contribution from Henry Wilson Coil,
Jr., who was a local Mason and son of the author Henry Wilson Coil Sr., who compiled
the reference source Coil’s Masonic Encyclopedia over a period of 25 years. The
collections of the library, archives, and museum include Masonic history with an
emphasis on more than 150 years of Freemasonry in California.
The current location of the Grand Lodge of California is at 1111 California Street
in San Francisco. The building was designed by Albert Roller and dedicated on
September 29, 1958. In 2014 the space underwent extensive renovations and is now also
used as a theater space and concert venue managed by the vendor LiveNation. In fact, the
renovations include “a brand-new concert stage, state-of-the-art sound system tailored
specifically to the room, and a new general admission open floor with tiered levels,
bringing the venue’s general admission capacity to 3,300”
(http://sfmasonic.com/history/). In order to get to this concert space, a theater patron (or
rock concert attendee) must walk through the areas where the Henry W. Coil Sr. Masonic
Library and Museum’s collections are on display.

	  

	  

94	  

The Grand Lodge sought to increase the use of its theater space and embarked on
this improvement project in 2014. One of the rooms that originally had been dedicated to
museum and library space was taken for rental space. Then, by September 2014, artist
Beck was headlining at “The Masonic” (Speer). Not only did the space receive a
renovation, but it also was rebranded with a new, more modern and attractive name, “The
Masonic.”
The library and museum in California have a storage area, referred to as the
“archives,” and a museum display room with reading and research space. Each time there
is a concert, graduation ceremony, or any other event, the director of collections must
secure the items related to the museum (displays, signage, artifacts, etc.) in order for the
collections to remain safe. Display and storage in the other areas is limited and restricted.
Although using the building to generate additional income through concerts and events
helps defray building costs, the collections of the Grand Lodge of California are at risk.
Each time the artifacts are moved, there is the potential for damage or loss.
Technology in Grand Lodge Collections
The majority of patrons in Masonic libraries are, naturally, Freemasons. Some are
new members coming to study and learn about the group they just joined. Others are
historians, scholars, and students. The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania boasts one of the
most complete Masonic collections in the world. Often, Masonic collections do not have
the resources to digitize materials or place their collections online. The Grand Lodge of
Pennsylvania is an exception, with more than 95% of its library collection online in a
	  

	  

95	  

searchable OPAC. Accessed through the website of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania,
(pagrandlodge.org), the OPAC is located at
http://67.21.204.162/MasonicLibrary/Portal.aspx.
In an age when many Masonic collections are unable to pay staff members to care
for their special collections, it is a labor of love and dedication to see that the Grand
Lodge collections of Pennsylvania are in such order. In fact, one of the librarians joked
that she “wouldn’t retire” until the collection “was entirely cataloged and online.” She is
now working in a part-time capacity, yet her tireless efforts are very evident in the
organization of the library in Philadelphia. The Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania has a
Masonic collection that is accessible, searchable, and online for patrons’ research.
When one thinks of special collections, the word “technology” doesn’t often come
to mind. Rather, dusty old books and handwriting that is difficult to read on curled-up
pages of paper might come to mind. The Masonic library and museum community is
even slower than other similar groups to use technology. When examining the sites for
this study, all six had an online web presence:
Grand Lodge of California: freemason.org
Grand Lodge of Louisiana: la-mason.com
Grand Lodge of Nebraska: glne.org
Grand Lodge of New Jersey: newjerseygrandlodge.org

	  

	  

96	  

Grand Lodge of New Mexico: nmmasons.org
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania: pagrandlodge.org
California and Pennsylvania both have searchable online catalogs, with
Pennsylvania’s using an Online Public Access Catalog managed by SydneyPLUS
v4.2.3.25 for their library and California using PastPerfect for both library and museum
collections. Louisiana has a website with various digitized versions of materials, such as
Grand Lodge Proceedings, that can be accessed and downloaded. New Mexico,
Nebraska, and New Jersey do not have Online Public Access Catalogs (OPAC) or a
searchable database of any type. New Jersey is currently in the process of cataloging its
museum artifacts. A recent meeting (October 2014) of the Masonic Library and Museum
Association was held at the historic temple in Trenton, where librarians, curators, and
archivists from around the country gathered for their annual conference and spent hours
assisting the Visscher family and New Jersey Masons in their efforts to catalog the
materials on display.
Through the years, New Mexico has had a number of well-meaning Brethren and
friends organize the library and museum and make lists of the book collection, but it has
not been put online or in a database in any searchable format. An effort was made to
share lists of books with the House of the Temple in Washington, D.C., but after an initial
list, the project dwindled due to a lack of interest in New Mexico.
Sadly, the story of Nebraska’s library is more commonly heard than any other.
Not only are the collections sitting in storage, another problem occurred when the
company they were using for their library database went out of business. Nebraska was

	  

	  

97	  

using a company called Stagecoach that folded into another company and then it went out
of business and sold. Eventually, when the librarian retired, the data was no longer
accessible. Yet, the “books don’t have the ISBN number so we can’t just do this the easy
way,” said one respondent. What he describes is a common problem, meaning that they
can’t just use copy cataloging, as other libraries do to organize their resources efficiently.
So, the library was left without access to its data. Members tried to recover the data with
no luck. This type of situation often occurs when small special collections invest in
affordable software, which is quickly outdated through advances in technology. Now,
after so many years of not converting their catalog to a new software program, access to
the catalog has completely disappeared.
In 2003 Google announced that it would digitize the holdings of several major
research libraries to assemble more than 10 million volumes by 2012 (Blouin, 2011, p.
183). By 2013 the number of scanned books was at 20 million. Having digitized and
searchable information would allow scholars to conduct research around the world.
Masonic libraries, though, have not yet joined this digital age.
When asked how they promoted their collections, many librarians discussed
contributing to the publications of their own Grand Lodges as a main way to reach
Brethren. The staffs at California, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey have written articles in
The California Freemason, The Pennsylvania Freemason, and The New Jersey
Freemason to promote the collections in various ways. For example, the January 2014
issue of The Pennsylvania Freemason features a book review from the assistant librarian,
Cathy Giaimo, on Observing the Craft: The Pursuit of Excellence in Masonic Labour

	  

	  

98	  

(2010) by Andrew Hammer. The publications of the Grand Lodges come out in quarterly
and bimonthly magazines. New Jersey and California also mentioned doing “talks around
the state” and “setting up tables” or “exhibits” at Grand Lodge events.
Despite being very cost effective, if not free, social media is a newer technology
for the Grand Lodges. Only one of the sites has its own Facebook page specifically for
the collections, which is Grand Lodge of New Jersey—Museum of Masonic Culture.
New Jersey has a following of more than 3,900 followers and growing. They post simple
snapshots of their collections, featured artifacts, and the larger museum. The other sites
all have Grand Lodge Facebook pages, where artifacts, books, exhibits, old photographs,
and other memorabilia are occasionally featured. The only site with a Twitter account is
the Grand Lodge of California, and it isn’t specific to the collections.
Technology committees are now becoming more prevalent in Grand Lodges and
are tasked with outreach, public relations, and website maintenance as well as creating
social media policies for lodges and members. One of the first to initiate technology as a
resource in 2002, the Grand Lodge of New York charged a new technology committee to
“assist Brother Masons and the Grand Lodge of the State of New York to improve
operations, attract new members and inform the community of Masonry’s good works”
(Grand Lodge of NY, Technology Committee, 2014). Now, most jurisdictions have some
type of technology committees that meet, create, and monitor information and
technology.

	  

	  

99	  

Materials in the Collection
When asked, “Tell me about your collection,” the responses from each of the sites
varied. Nebraska explained how it has valuable historic artifacts, but “most are in storage,
so we are unaware of everything we actually have.” The collections in Nebraska started
accumulating with the beginning of the Grand Lodge “in 1857 or about then.” In regard
to their books, they noted that they have about “2,500 in Grand Lodge and another 2,500
around the state,” although they are unorganized and uncataloged. Nebraska went on to
describe its holdings.
We have a vast number of books from the 19th century, transactions, magazines,
and other Masonic books. We have books that came in the 1950s from Bill Dean,
who was a salesman and gave us books. But, sadly, after the librarian of many
years retired . . . the library has been a graveyard of books.
In Nebraska, when a “member dies, a widow brings a box of books and leaves it. It is a
library and book graveyard.”
In comparison to this almost dismal situation, when asked to discuss its collection,
California highlighted some rare, valuable, and historic items. California has an “apron
collection that is a mirror image of that of the Scottish Rite, Northern Masonic
Jurisdiction.” The Northern Masonic Jurisdiction is well known for its apron collection
as one of the finest in the world, boasting more than 400 Masonic and fraternal aprons.
The interesting thing California pondered was, “How we got the same aprons is really a
mystery.” Yet, he also pointed out that the fact that these Masonic aprons located in

	  

	  

100	  

California are so similar to the collection in Massachusetts is likely due to the gold rush
and the men who came to the West Coast from back East.
California also has a “wide variety of textiles, metal, wood, archival objects,
lodge certificates, lodge records, and photographs.” It also boasts a “First edition of
Anderson’s Constitution, a Geneva Bible from 1599, jewels likely from Sierra gold,
Comstock silver jewels, a trowel used in the dedication of the U.S. Mint in San
Francisco, and the Crocker Jewel.” It continues to collect materials related to
Freemasonry and California history.
In this study, Pennsylvania clearly has the most impressive collection of Masonic
special collections. These include hundreds of portraits and various works of art—
including sculptures, glass, porcelain, china, antiquities, jewelry, regalia, timepieces—
that total more than 30,000 pieces. George Washington's Masonic apron—presented by
Brother Marie Joseph Paul Yves Roch Gilbert du Montier, also known as the Marquis de
Lafayette—is often the highlight of the collection at the Masonic Library and Museum of
Pennsylvania. Other highlights are General Tom Thumb’s Masonic apron and Brother
Benjamin Franklin's Masonic sash, which was worn when he was Master of the lodge in
Paris, as he guided Brother Voltaire. The museum was founded in 1908 and dedicated by
Brother John Wanamaker, a Philadelphia merchant who was the first chair of the Library
Committee. Pennsylvania also has just regular Masonic items, as Librarian Dr. Waldman,
of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania pointed out: “We have CDs, a music collection,
copies of The Freemason, proceedings of other grand lodges, etc.”

	  

	  

101	  

As we were exploring the stacks, I asked, “What is your most valuable item?” and
Dr. Waldman pointed to a book. We pulled out a huge volume. The book was an
incunabulum (which is a book printed before 1501); this particular volume was printed in
Basel in 1489. It was actually two books bound together, one by St. Augustine on the
Trinity, and the other by Robert Holkot on the apocryphal book The Wisdom of Solomon.
The museum artifacts of Masonic groups vary from rare and exquisite to common
white Masonic aprons and Scottish Rite caps. Each of the sites mentioned the traditional
and classic books that they had on hand, such as Morals and Dogma (Albert Pike), sets of
Mackey’s Encyclopedia (Albert Mackey), 10,000 Famous Freemasons (William
Denslow), and A Dictionary of Freemasonry (Robert Macoy). All of the sites mentioned
hundreds, if not thousands, of ephemeral materials such as photographs, correspondence,
charters, documents, serials, and patents. It is these archival items that are clearly sitting
untouched in various special collections despite their value.
Funding
Many libraries and special collections have been forced to reduce budgets in
recent years, particularly since the economic downturn of 2009. Fundamental changes in
the economic structure of library and information services are encouraging staff to
examine the principles and policies that serve as the basis for their practices. As the
demand for technology increases, this also adds pressure to the already tight budget.
Masonic special collections are lacking adequate funds at a greater rate than colleagues at

	  

	  

102	  

other libraries. Many of the funding issues in Grand Lodge collections are directly related
to the decline in membership.
In Louisiana, “the library and museum foundation gets a 50 cent per capita
assessment from each member in the jurisdiction,” and the foundation also “gets the
revenue from the Grand Lodge license plate special fee, which is approximately $12.00 a
plate.” Unfortunately in 2015, some regular funds were not given.
The Board of Charities usually makes an approximately $20,000 donation each
year, but this year [2015], they did not. The Grand Master usually makes some
sort of donation out of his fundraising project (usually ~$7,500), but this year did
not.
In 2006–2007, Mel Stein, the Past Grand Master of California, created the
Heritage Fund to help protect and preserve Masonic history in the state of California.
Several hundred thousand dollars were raised for this project, which was also Stein’s
Grand Master’s project (Berman, 2009, p. 9). This major renovation took a room full of
artifacts and other items and turned it into a first-class archival facility. The restoration
also included the unveiling of masonicheritage.org, where the library and museum could
maintain a catalog of collections, both in the museum and library.
When examining the sites in this study, Pennsylvania and California are set apart
from other Grand Lodges in many ways due to their larger membership base. Both have
paid staff members who care for their special collections. Pennsylvania has one full-time
librarian, one part-time librarian, and a full-time curator. California has one full-time
director of collections. Trained professionals with academic degrees hold all these
	  

	  

103	  

positions, and they are paid. Having full-time, paid employees caring for the collections
makes a significant difference in the ability to manage the collections adequately.
Other Grand Lodges are not as fortunate. Louisiana has a part-time staff person
who spends a majority of his time with genealogy requests and basic watch over the
reading and research room. He is not a trained librarian, curator, or archivist. He works
six to seven hours about three days per week. New Jersey has a significant group of
dedicated members and their family members who work on the collection on a volunteer
basis. Yet these volunteers have no professional training in the care of collections. New
Mexico and Nebraska do not have staff members to care for the collections. In both of
these locations, if new items come in (books, artifacts, photographs, etc.), typically the
Grand Secretary (or an administrative helper) adds the items to the current display(s) or
simply places the items in storage. The latter story is, sadly, more typical than those
libraries with paid staff members.
California and Pennsylvania are also unique in that they have more significant and
dedicated budgets. Pennsylvania didn’t release its exact budget, but instead commented
when asked if it had a budget, “We’ve never had a problem buying books or supplies. We
have a credit card. And, if we need something, we can get it.” California, on the other
hand, has an $8,000 budget, “with $1,500 already committed to cleaning.” Despite
Nebraska’s collection still being in storage, “We have a budget of $1,000 to acquire
software and some new additions [books].” New Mexico accepts donations on a regular,
ongoing basis and buys limited supplies, if needed.
	  

	  

104	  

With membership in decline, it is imperative that special collections work on
simply managing the volume of materials they have in their collections. For instance, in
Nebraska, the Grand Lodge moved from its location in Omaha to Lincoln. The special
collections were boxed and moved to Lincoln, where they were placed in basements and
closets in local lodges. They remained in these storage areas because the Grand Lodge
didn’t have adequate space to store the items. Although the Grand Lodge recently
relocated to a new space in 2012, the collections have remained in storage, where they
remain today.
Preservation
Berman, describing the condition of the Grand Lodge of California’s collections
prior to 2007, noted:
Everything was on metal shelves in an unpainted cement room in the basement.
There was no space for people to work, and most of the items were catalogued in
card files. We had everything from old Masonic uniforms to gavels to important
historical documents, but it wasn’t organized at all. (Berman, 2009, p. 8)
Renovation to this space included gutting the archives room and installing collapsible
shelving, which more than doubled the amount of space for storage.
When the current curator began his work in 2006, he found countless objects with
scotch tape attached in one form or another. In fact, most of their objects had some kind
of scotch tape with a description of the item or some kind of notation. Tape typically has
an acidic glue or acidic cellophane on it and will discolor the document (often turning

	  

	  

105	  

yellow) or worse. Tape wasn’t limited to paper and photographs. In fact, the curator
recalled, “Scotch tape was on everything . . . artifacts, textiles, wood, metal, and literally
any kind of object that would hold tape; it had it.” This tape was one of the first things
Kendall had to tackle in his efforts to preserve materials in the library and museum.
Unfortunately, the condition found at this Grand Lodge isn’t much different from that in
evidence at others.
Nebraska is hoping that with its ongoing efforts, it can address preservation
issues. “We have a collection of artifacts, but we need to store and display them properly,
rather than just write, ‘Scottish Rite Hat, donated by Joe’.” They are aware that the
collections need additional care. “Security is an issue, climate is an issue; we need some
kind of vault for rare items. We need acid free boxes and supplies, and the budget for this
is zero.” A Masonic Heritage Committee is going to meet in February 2015 to make some
important decisions about what to do with the materials. Nebraska’s collections can’t be
viewed or accessed because the data has been lost and the rest are all in storage. If they
remain in storage, the condition of the materials will continue to deteriorate and priceless
items from history may be lost forever.
Pennsylvania has done an above-average job with books and artifacts and is now
working toward the preservation of other collections. With regard to their photographs,
they “get stored as best as they can,” and the staff is working on separating some unique
items to keep them with like material. For instance, “Everything was in order together in
a box (a plate, image, letter, etc.).” This means that when the librarians are going through

	  

	  

106	  

the boxes, items that were of a certain time period, or date, were placed together, despite
being different mediums.
Grand Lodges and Hidden Collections
Archivists, curators, and librarians are working to tackle the challenge of hidden
collections by helping to provide access to materials by processing and cataloging them,
therefore making collections searchable. Yet special collections located among the Grand
Lodges are unknown. When asked what their biggest challenge was, the staff at the
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania replied, “Getting people to use our collections.”
Pennsylvania has more than 95% of its collections listed in its OPAC (which means their
books are almost all listed in their online catalog). However, patrons are not coming in to
use the materials.
Each Grand Lodge has a unique story for why its collections are not being
accessed or used in a significant way. For Louisiana, it moved to a central part of the
state, to the city of Alexandria, while the majority of the membership lives in or near the
cities of New Orleans or Baton Rouge. Alexandria is not a regular “destination” for
research, as the majority of colleges and universities are also located in the cities.
Therefore, if someone were to want to do significant research with the collection, they
would need to schedule a visit and stay in Alexandria. The location of its library and
museum are a challenge for both use and growth. Albeit Louisiana has materials that
have been somewhat organized, there unfortunately aren’t finding aids or any type of
online catalog that could be searched.
	  

	  

107	  

For New Mexico, the Grand Lodge has a well-organized collection of materials,
with beautiful display cases and shelves for both books and artifacts, but it has no web
presence, catalog, or finding aid for its materials. The books are simply shelved together
by subject matter. So, if a patron were to do research, it might take some time to locate
the subject matter or topics of interest. Archival material is located within the Grand
Secretary’s office and (with permission) could be accessed. Much of this archival
material is organized in folders, held in file cabinets, and labeled by lodge number.
New Jersey has a unique challenge, in that it has wonderful areas for displaying
and storing artifacts in its museum, yet it is unable to use its library space as a library.
The library room functions as a meeting space, so tables and chairs are moved around in
various positions depending on the meeting to be held in the room. Having a more
permanent area for tables and chairs to remain set up for reading and research is not
possible in this space if the room is to continue to be used for meetings, lectures, and
other functions. The room is regularly used for Masonic activities but also for rental
events including parties and weddings; therefore, the library is unable to function as a
library room.
The books in New Jersey are stored on locked shelves. If a patron wanted to use
the materials, they could be accessed, but it would be difficult to do research. Given that
the library doesn’t have a dedicated reading or research space, the volunteers would be
scrambling to find a place to read or study. Another challenge to using or accessing the
collections in New Jersey is that there is no catalog or inventory of the books. This means
	  

	  

108	  

that nonmembers would not know of the books’ existence, and members might be
reluctant to try to do research in a place with little or no organization.
The Grand Lodge of California has a portion of its collections cataloged (and
more added regularly in an ongoing process) and listed online at masonicheritage.org
using PastPerfect, yet using the collection can be a challenge. The Grand Lodge building
and library have regular hours of operation, but these are during traditional business
hours (Monday and Tuesday, 10 a.m.–3 p.m.; Wednesday, 10 a.m.– 5 p.m.; Thursday, 10
a.m. –3 p.m.; and by special appointment). The collections manager can set arranged
hours outside the traditional business hours, but typically students contact him right
before an assignment is due, leaving little time to assist with reference or research.
Scholars often have full-time jobs, so the operating hours are limited for their use as well.
Another problem with accessing the collections in California has been the
concerts and events that occur in the building on a regular basis. Every time a concert
occurs, the items normally on display in the mezzanine area are moved into the
library/museum spaces to protect them from damage or theft during concerts. The
materials are moved back and forth for each concert and/or event. This is not only a
waste of the collections manager’s time, but it puts the collection at risk each time the
items are moved.
The most complete, cataloged, and organized collections of those examined for
this study are located at the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. The collection boasts an
impressive array of approximately 75,000 monographs including biographies,
	  

	  

109	  

autobiographies, anything on or related to Freemasonry, religion, philosophy, and history.
Pennsylvania also has a wealth of related materials, including manuscripts and more than
30,000 objects.
An ongoing project to uncover more hidden treasures is to catalog letters and
correspondence from the beginning of the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania from 1783
through the early 1880s. These letters are from the lodges to the Grand Lodge, and they
are being scanned and organized by year and/or lodge. Another unique and little-known
part of this collection is a music collection, totaling eight manuscript boxes. These were
from the collection of Richard Kern (1891–1982, Grand Master 1946–1947). Kern was a
local physician and professor at Jefferson University who loved to sing. His impressive
collection of sheet music includes both Masonic and non-Masonic pieces.
Sadly, the collections of the Grand Lodge of Nebraska are still in storage and
therefore completely hidden. It is these treasures that have potential, yet their value has
gone unnoticed. Some positive efforts for the collections are that the members have a
number of ideas currently being discussed, such as retrieving the materials and creating
an online exhibit similar to that of the Phoenix Masonry Masonic Museum and Library
(phoenixmasonry.org) to highlight its collections. They also would like to collaborate
with the local Nebraska State Historical Society and the Douglas County Historical
Society in order to have their presence known and have those groups send potential
fraternal research their way. They also plan to take items “on the road in a small exhibit”
so that they could generate interest at events. (See Figure 8)

	  

	  

110	  

	  

Figure 8: Grand Lodge of Nebraska, artifact storage.
Image courtesy Micah Evans

	  

	  

111	  

Chapter 6
Discussion and Analysis
But when I turned to Masonic sources, either on the Internet or as published
materials, I found most of what was available extremely frustrating. Local lodge,
research lodge and Grand Lodge websites, proceedings, periodicals, statistics,
facts and figures—the very stuff of history—was usually dispersed, disjointed and
more often, contradictory. (Tabbert, 2006, p. 70)
As he was working on his 2002 museum exhibit “To Build and Sustain:
Freemasons in American Community” and, only a few months later, while working on
his 2004 book, American Freemasons, Mark A. Tabbert found it difficult to locate correct
data as well as access primary materials on the history of Freemasonry. His tale of the
challenges of conducting research on Masonic topics is similar to many others.
Tabbert’s efforts since have developed into a full-time job to create virtual
“repositories” to digitize and access Masonic materials on a nationwide level. In his 2006
Blue Friar lecture, Freemasonry and the Digital Revolution, Tabbert proposed six online
national projects, including:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.

Digitization of every Grand Lodge Proceedings, 1733–present
National database of U.S. Regular Grand Lodges, 1730–present
National database of U.S. Masonic Lodges, 1730–present
National database of deceased U.S. Freemasons, 1700–1980
Unified Online Catalog of Masonic Libraries
Unified Online Union Catalog of Masonic Artifacts (Tabbert, 2006, pp. 75–
78)

Creating national databases of Grand Lodge proceedings and other databases of
Masonic subjects, either hosted or led by the George Washington Masonic National

	  

	  

112	  

Memorial, is only one step in preserving the history of Freemasonry in the United States.
Efforts already have been made by a select group of Grand Lodges and appendant bodies
with some resources.
Some Masonic libraries, such as the Grand Lodge of New York’s Livingston
Library, the Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania and the House of the Temple’s library
have embraced the digital age. They are producing on-line library catalogs,
databases of Masonic artifacts and highly informative websites. (Tabbert, 2006, p.
71).
Tabbert clearly explains that the main problem is that “there is no central access to this
Masonic history” (Tabbert, 2006, p. 73). Even worse, efforts to preserve the materials
are becoming less common. “Other Grand Lodge libraries and museums are moving by
fits and starts into the digital age, while some remain no more than rooms full of old
books and proceedings that go unused or unappreciated” (Tabbert, 2006, p. 71). A
commentator from one of the sites indicated,
We are still stuck in a holding pattern as we figure out what percentage of that
room is dedicated to a library (versus a book graveyard), a "museum" (or rotating
display of interesting items changed out periodically for the amusement of the
[board]), and an archive that stores the accumulated knowledge of the Lodges and
Grand Lodge in a way that both materially saves the documents and theoretically
encourages proper research.
This study explored how Masonic special collections have addressed their
challenges considering the decline in funds and membership in the fraternity. It also
looked further into how these challenges have impacted plans for the future of the
libraries and museums. As a result of this study, I was prepared to hear that some
collections had lost space, funding, or support because of the changes. I also thought that

	  

	  

113	  

those who moved would have significantly more problems, but this was not the case.
What I actually found was the opposite—that the changes in their structure due to
challenges often have enhanced their situations.
Governance, Staffing, and Survival
“We have interesting stories to tell. We want to make our library into a real
resource. We have the books. We might as well stick them on eBay or send them to
another library if we don’t change anything,” claimed one member who was vastly
interested in saving his Masonic collections. Unfortunately, the survival of these unique
special collections is questionable at best.
In my research, this was most clear when I asked, “What is your biggest
challenge,” and one librarian replied, “We are not very visionary people.” When I
followed up by asking how many visitors they normally had conducting research at the
library, she said, “Last year we had two.” Although this didn’t include building or
museum tour visitors, or the countless people who email or call with reference questions,
her answer was quite telling about the future of these collections. If something isn’t done
to change their present-day use, they will not exist in their current state much longer.
When asked, “Do patrons use your collection?,” one collections manager said,
“No, people don’t use the library.” He continued, “It is really for reference only. And by
appointment.” This comment reminded me of my visit to the library at the Grand Lodge
of New Jersey. As part of my research and tour, we attempted to view the library, but
someone was presenting a speech when we went in the room. We returned following the

	  

	  

114	  

lecture to explore the room. The books were all locked inside glass shelves and cabinets.
The room was set up for lectures and easily could be used for other events. But, sadly, it
had no desk, no place for a student to do research. In fact, none of the books was
cataloged, so they were just gathered together by subject matter. If someone wants to use
a book, the curator happily obliges and will retrieve it, but no serious scholarship can be
conducted this way.
Another factor to consider when gauging the future of these collections is whether
the officers and administration support them. A complaint I heard more than once was
that the collections managers were “fighting for legitimacy.” “Supporting the staff,” “a
clear expression of goals,” and a “commitment to core values with the institution in
mind” were said at more than one site I visited. Each wanted the full support of its
governing bodies.
Several sites also mentioned the fact that since their collections were labeled as a
museum, they are considered a 501(c)(3) foundation. This 501(c)(3) status grants the site
tax exemptions. This was a sensitive topic, as all of the sites were reluctant to discuss it.
But one member replied that some people “really don't want the extra foot traffic coming
to the building (which is more of an office than a museum).”
Some collections have been more fortunate through the years to have support of
various kinds. The Grand Lodge of California had a Past Grand Master interested in
preserving its history, so he made it his project to renovate the space and raise funds to
preserve the collections. Louisiana’s collections have been reorganized and a new

	  

	  

115	  

governing body established to preserve their collections. Pennsylvania, New Mexico, and
New Jersey similarly have institutional support and space as needed. But other Grand
Lodges aren’t as fortunate. Nebraska still waits for a champion to gather its history,
promote it, advertise it, and preserve it for future generations.
Fortunately, some of the Grand Lodges have identified the risks to their
collections and have instituted changes. In Louisiana, they have implemented new
initiatives to preserve their history, saying,
The task of preserving our Fraternal history and treasures falls on the shoulders of
each of us. We are urging our members, and Lodges, to help support “our”
Masonic Library/Museum with donations of Masonic Books, Documents,
Artifacts and funds. (The Masonic Library/Museum Foundation of Louisiana)
Owing to the damage to the collections in Louisiana, drastic changes were made in
governing the material that will result in better preservation of the collections. For
instance, the Grand Lodge of Louisiana implemented a mission statement in 2009:
The purpose of the Masonic Library/Museum is to promote Louisiana's rich
Masonic heritage. The Library/Museum works to preserve and make available the
information and materials held by the Grand Lodge of the State of Louisiana and
its constituent lodges. (http://library.la-mason.com/)
They also established the Louisiana Masonic Library/Museum as a separate entity from
the Grand Lodge of Louisiana. An elected board of trustees serves five-year rotating
terms to manage the library and museum. The Masonic Library/Museum Foundation of
Louisiana is also a 501(c)3 tax-exempt charity.
This Committee continues to work and assist the Lodges of Louisiana
encouraging each Lodge to create and maintain their history. There is so much
history in each Lodge that needs to be captured for future generations. Each

	  

	  

116	  

Lodge has its own individuality i.e. its origin, name, furniture, papers, etc.
This information should be used for the education of its members and future
generations. This committee also encourages a complete inventory of its
properties, real and moveable. Should Lodges be destroyed, fire, storm, etc. this
would be valuable for insurance claims. Copies of history’s [sic] and property
should be sent to the Grand Lodge Museum and Library for sharing with our
Great History of Masonry in Louisiana. Our Committee stands ready to assist all
Lodges in preserving our rich history. (Louisiana Proceedings, 2013, p. 75)
Other Grand Lodge collections are governed in a similar manner. They often have
a board of directors made up of Past Grand Masters and interested individuals. The Grand
Lodge of Pennsylvania is “governed by a board, officially the Masonic library and
Museum of Pennsylvania—which includes nine officers and three consultants.” This has
been the case since the establishment of the museum in 1908. Materials had accumulated
for many years prior to 1908, but it wasn’t until the early 1900s that a formal governing
board was established.
Staffing varied at each of the sites. The best-case scenario was Pennsylvania, with
four paid staff members, one full-time librarian, one full-time curator, one part-time
librarian, and one temporary, part-time assistant. Both librarians have a professional
library degree and the part-time librarian also has her doctorate. There is one full-time,
paid staff member at the Grand Lodge of California, and his title is collections manager.
His formal training, background, and education is in art history. There is one part-time,
paid staff member at the Grand Lodge of Louisiana. He does not have any formal training
in library, museum, or archival work. The Grand Lodge of New Jersey has an active
group of unpaid volunteers who work with the collections on a regular basis. They have
one person in the volunteer role serving as the curator. He is a member of the

	  

	  

117	  

organization, but he is not professionally trained in collections management; he does
have a doctorate in another field.
New Mexico and Nebraska do not have any regular staff (paid or unpaid) who
work with the materials. Both have volunteers interested in the history of the state and the
fraternity, yet they are not currently doing any work with the collections. Both collections
are located in administrative buildings where the Grand Secretary and other staff
members can assist with showing people into the library and museum rooms. The Grand
Secretary and their staff also can assist in looking up membership data for deceased
members, but these states are limited in being able to provide any other type of research
assistance. Neither site has the funds or staff to provide other support. On a positive note,
New Mexico and Nebraska have members passionate about the history of the fraternity in
their respective states, so they continue to work to make sure the collections are
maintained.
The special collections at all of the Grand Lodge sites are cared for by both
professionals and volunteers, but the governing boards and administrative personnel are
not actively involved in the day-to-day work of caring for the collections. In one location,
there was no board, just the manager of the collections and a Grand Secretary. At another
site there was a well-meaning volunteer caring for the collections and a Grand Secretary
providing funds, as needed; and at another site, it was a Grand Secretary who was getting
too involved in the management of the collections, prohibiting them from becoming a
true asset for the fraternity.

	  

	  

118	  

Collaborations and Partnerships
Masonic libraries and museums are becoming scarcer as time progresses.
Therefore, through this study, it was apparent that the partnership these repositories have
with one another is their greatest asset. For example, one connection between these
special collections is the Masonic Library and Museum Association. Started in 1995,
[t]he mission of the Masonic Library and Museum Association is to assist and
support, through education, facilitation of communication, coordination of effort,
and other means, those individuals charged with the collection, management, and
preservation of the Masonic heritage. (By-laws, Article 2)
This group has encouraged collaboration among the libraries, museums, and
professionals. Artifacts are loaned between the sites. Staff write blogs to discuss the care
of collections and colleagues presenting at various academic conferences help the
professionals who care for the materials to advertise to students and scholars the
availability of their materials for research.
Another successful venture implemented by the collections managers is the
creation of the Quarry Project (http://www.thequarryproject.com/). Professionals who
already worked in the field of Masonic collections realized that many members of their
affiliated groups were interested in preserving their materials but didn’t have formal
training. These librarians, curators, and archivists created the Quarry Project, which is a
Masonic research and preservation conference for training interested parties. The first
conference was held in 2013 in Alexandria, Virginia, and a second will be held in
Indianapolis, Indiana, in fall 2015. Topics include research methods, collections

	  

	  

119	  

management, working with primary sources, interviewing techniques for oral histories,
preservation, working with catalogs and databases, digitization, and more.
One of the Grand Lodges in this study began an effort to partner with those in
academia. Larry L. Adamson, the Grand Master of California, in 2009 began a project to
fund the study of Freemasonry at the University of California–Los Angeles. In a letter
dated August 3, 2009, Adamson states,
In my travels this past year, it has become clear that this project addresses one of
our fraternity’s most urgent and compelling needs. There is a vast discrepancy
today in the world’s perception of Freemasonry and the reality of our history and
our significance. I truly believe that this project will help bridge that gap. Rather
than passively allowing others to define us in their own—often, misguided—
terms, we will honor our legacy by actively defining Freemasonry to the world.
Now known as the Freemasonry and Civil Society program, UCLA’s history
department—in collaboration with the Grand Lodge of the state of California and its
Masonic Foundation—have developed a working relationship that allows a faculty
member and an advanced graduate student to develop and teach courses on the history of
Freemasonry in Europe, America, and Latin America within the context of civil society.
One of their most recent outreach efforts included a lecture event with various speakers
titled: Secrets Revealed! Freemasonry and the Conspiracy Theories It Evokes. These
public events have worked to foster ongoing dialogue between academics, members of
the organization, and the general public interested in learning more about Freemasonry.
Other research groups and societies have been created by academics
internationally in order to assist in the study of Freemasonry. Known as the OVN, a

	  

	  

120	  

group in the Netherlands was founded in 2001 as a private initiative by researchers from
various disciplines interested in the history of Freemasonry. The OVN is an independent
academic organization, which promotes professional research and a historical approach to
the discipline. Their website (http://www.stichtingovn.nl/) points toward various
information resources beneficial for research. The foundation is independently run and
governed by a board of academics from various universities in Europe and the United
States. Collaborations such as this point toward the potential for awareness of special
collections and their value. One of their more useful tools is their “archive pointer” and
their “information portal.” These are simply lists with URLs directed to other libraries,
museums, archives, and academic related resources, but they are invaluable when
conducting research on this specific discipline.
Another useful tool in Masonic research is the research lodge. These are located
in almost every jurisdiction. These lodges, in particular, have an interest in promoting,
studying, and researching the history of Freemasonry. For instance, the preamble and
mission statement of the Lodge of Research of New Mexico states:
The Lodge of Research, A. F. & A. M. of New Mexico, is organized to promote,
encourage, conduct and foster Masonic research and study, for the purpose of
spreading Masonic Light and knowledge.
New Mexico is just one example; other research lodges are larger and more prominent in
the United States, such as the Southern California Research Lodge (SCRL). The SCRL is
committed to its mission of being an education and information lodge. It doesn’t perform
ritual or initiate members into Freemasonry, but it educates. There are approximately

	  

	  

121	  

3,000 members, in every U.S. state plus 30 foreign countries. Created in 1958 in Waco,
Texas, the Texas Lodge of Research (TLR) offers similar benefits. They have quarterly
meetings and produce a regular publication “inspiring lodges all over the world to
conduct research in the mysteries of Masonry and the history of our Craft”
(http://www.texaslodgeofresearch.org/) “for the purpose of promoting, encouraging,
conducting and fostering Masonic research and study.”
Research lodges such as the SCRL and TLR work toward sharing history, but
their members are also the people most interested in using the primary sources and other
materials in their research. The premier lodge of Masonic research is Quatuor Coronati
Lodge No. 2076, founded in 1884 in England. No American counterpart has rivaled the
research and scholarship of Quatuor Coronati; its closest peer would be the Scottish Rite
Research Society (SRRS). The SRRS was founded in 1991 and has grown to include
more than 4,000 members. Its research examines all types of Masonic topics, and it
places an emphasis on preserving materials and republishing historic out-of-print
materials. By emphasizing the importance of these materials to research lodges,
collections managers, curators, and librarians could help gain support and potential
interest in the use of their collections.
Other efforts, such as enhancing website information, have improved access to
resources. One of the more useful resources is the content that Louisiana has digitized
and placed online. Past proceedings from 1821 to 2013 are all accessible online at

	  

	  

122	  

http://library.la-mason.com/pastproceedings.html. It also has created other outreach
resources that can be used for research and teaching. Its curriculum packet features
exercises for teachers and students to learn more about Masonic topics (http://library.lamason.com/curriculumpacket.pdf). Other Grand Lodges that have not been included in
the scope of this project have similar digital resources. For example, the Grand Lodge of
Maine has a historical documents website at
http://www.mainemasonrytoday.com/history/index.htm. At this site, one can read digital
copies of the proceedings of the Grand Lodge of Maine since 1820. Other historical
resources on the history of Freemasonry in Maine can be found and accessed on this site.
These types of digital resources are helping patrons to locate appropriate documents,
photographs, and books relevant for their research.
Security and Deaccession
When on tour at the Grand Lodge of Louisiana, we went to the storage room
located behind the building; when we came back to the administrative building, the door
that we exited was wide open. This door leads straight to the library and museum. And it
was clearly not the first time that this had happened. The members mentioned the fact
that they had numerous individuals work on attempting to repair the door in order to have
it securely close when exiting the building. But it was clearly a security breach that
continued to occur.
Theft has been a problem with several of the collections. There are security
cameras located at both Pennsylvania and Louisiana, and the items taken aren’t always of

	  

	  

123	  

any real value, such as fiction books or lapel pins. A majority of the repositories have
other locations for the more valuable items, including locked areas, safes, and vaults. A
majority of the places said that they have staff on hand if someone is present using the
collection, browsing the books, or taking a tour. Just because someone is present doesn’t
mean theft will stop entirely. There are no cameras in a majority of the locations, yet they
attempt to protect the materials as best they can. Adding additional levels of security to
all the sites would be an improvement in protecting the materials. For those sites that
cannot maintain adequate security, they should consider possible long-term loans to other
repositories, or deaccession might be necessary.
When posed with the problem of a lack of staff, storage, and funds, often the
notion of potentially deaccessing materials arises. Deaccession is to remove an object or
objects from a collection. Both deaccession and weeding can help in reducing overall
costs of maintaining special collections. According to Professor Kristin Fontichiaro,
“Libraries can no longer count on describing themselves as the repositories of stuff”
(Janes, 2013, p. 7). Not all stuff is created equal. Some things in the library should be
discarded, sold, given away, weeded, and deaccessed. In fact, many of these items should
have been removed long ago. Duplicates are a perfect example. In the Grand Lodge of
Louisiana, there were countless shelves in the main library and in various locations
throughout the room with the exact same books. In a Masonic collection, this is typically
the proceedings, transactions, and various dictionary- and encyclopedia-style books.
Just look at the popular blog Awful Library Books (awfullibrarybooks.net), in
which librarians Mary Kelly and Holly Hibner feature real treasures found among the

	  

	  

124	  

stacks. Books with titles such as Yule Be Mine, (a romance novel), How to Live with a
Neurotic Wife (would that be self-help or humor?), and Those Amazing Leeches
(featuring a cover photo of live leeches sitting on a man’s poorly manicured foot) are all
examples of publications that we hope don’t make it back to the library in the next batch
of donations.
Hibner and Kelly humorously promote collection maintenance on their blog, yet
they also have authored the book Making a Collection Count: A Holistic Approach to
Library Collection Management (2010), which focuses specifically on collection quality,
with highly practical guidance for selection, cataloging, shelving, circulation, staff
management, budgeting, and weeding. Having a good and current collection management
policy allows decisions to be driven based on the policy and helps staff to make
appropriate assessments that affect the rest of the collection (Hibner & Kelly, 2010, p. 2).
Collection maintenance is one of the key actions within any library, museum or archive,
but it is the action of deaccessing that causes much concern in a collection. According to
Will Manley, author of the column “The Manley Arts" in Booklist, “Next to emptying the
outdoor bookdrop on cold and snowy days, weeding is the most undesirable job in the
library. It is also one of the most important. Collections that go unweeded tend to be
cluttered, unattractive, and unreliable informational resources" (Manley, 1996, p. 1108).
Deaccession is the “process by which an archives, museum, or library
permanently removes accessioned materials from its holdings” (Moses, 2012).
Deaccessioning is also known as permanent withdrawal. And in libraries, it is often
	  

	  

125	  

called weeding. Yet deaccession is often seen as a bad word. Although many think of
deaccession as negative, it is because it is often associated with removing items from a
collection to sell to raise funds. Nonetheless, deaccession and weeding are an essential
and vital part of collection maintenance.
In order to deaccess materials, each institution must examine its collecting policy
and determine ownership (whether owned by the repository or the donor) prior to
reappraisal or deaccession (Blodgett, 2011, p. 11). After examining one’s own
institutional policies, each repository should consider the legal, ethical, donor relation,
and resource allocations in the review process (Blodgett, 2011, p. 7). Once the essential
information has been gathered, the final decision to retain, deaccess, or defer can be made
by the staff and/or repository (Blodgett, 2011, p. 12). Options for material removed from
a collection typically include transfer of materials, return to the donor, sale, and
destruction.
Officially removing items from the listed holdings of a library, museum, archives,
or art gallery are controversial but necessary. The decision to deaccess or weed a
collection ultimately remains in the hands of the collection manager—a librarian,
archivist, or curator.
Masonic collections are some of the last to admit that they should consider
deaccession, yet three of the sites I visited admitted that literally “no one” was using their
books. One was entirely in storage, one was in locked glass cabinets in an events room,

	  

	  

126	  

and another was in a “functioning” library that was often inaccessible and not often open
to the public. Despite the difference in the settings, the books are going unused in all the
locations.

	  

	  

127	  

Chapter 7
Conclusion and Future Research
One day I was asked to help a Masonic Lodge go through its historic collections
to see if it had anything of value to preserve. Located among plastic boxes full of
hundreds of items, we found a gavel used by James Hoban, the architect of the United
States Capitol. In another box, we found a signed letter and certificate from J. Edgar
Hoover. In yet another box, we found the Bible used at the funeral of none other than
President George Washington, belonging to Federal Lodge No. 1, of the District of
Columbia. This lodge received its original charter September 12, 1793, by the Grand
Lodge of Maryland as Federal Lodge #15 (now Federal Lodge No. 1 of Washington,
D.C.) Luckily, each of these items is now located in special storage and/or on display in
local museums in the Washington, D.C., area. But imagine if some well-meaning person
didn’t think to save these treasures; that history would be gone forever.
Decline in Fraternal Membership
The probable extent of the influence of secret society life may be inferred from
the fact that more than 6,000,000 Americans are members of 300 such
organizations, which confer about 1,000 degrees on 200,000 novitiates annually,
aided, in instances, by a wealth of paraphernalia and dramatic ceremonials which
rival modern stage effects. (Stevens, 1907, p. iv).
W. S. Harwood is credited as one of the first to label the heyday period of
fraternal organizations as the “Golden Age” of fraternities. In his 1897 article in the
North American Review, he wrote, “These closing years of the century might well be

	  

	  

128	  

called the Golden Age of fraternity” (Harwood, 1897, p. 623). During what Harwood
referred to as the Golden Age of fraternity, membership in Freemasonry peaked in 1927
(Putnam, 2000, p. 438). Half of all the large associations were founded between 1880 and
1910 (Putnam, 2000, p. 384). In 1907 Albert C. Stevens wrote about the proliferation of
organizational membership at the turn of the century. Men and women were joining
groups, clubs, and organizations in record numbers. In fact, “civic inventiveness reached
a crescendo unmatched in American history” during the years from 1870 to 1920
(Putnam, 2000, p. 384). This “civic inventiveness” was the creation and formation of
numerous voluntary associations.
According to the Masonic Service Association of North America, membership
peaked in 1959 at 4,103,161 members in the United States (Masonic Service Association,
stats). This number has declined to 1,246,241 in 2013, which was the most recent
national membership data released from the MSA. (See Table 1.) The national decline in
membership is something that my colleague Dr. S. Brent Morris has studied for many
years. In his 2000 article, “Voting with Their Feet,” Morris described the decline and
proposed a possible answer to this loss in membership, saying that “traditional Masonic
bodies are overburdened with constricting rules and nitpicking regulations” (Morris,
2000). Morris discussed the structure of Masonic leadership and specifically analyzed the
rise and fall of the membership of the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry compared to the York
Rite Masons. One of the main differences between the groups wasn’t the rituals, the
brotherhood, or the activities offered; Morris claims it was the tenure of those in the

	  

	  

129	  

leadership positions and chief officers. He also points out that having leaders in place for
a longer term in the Scottish Rite branch of the fraternity has resulted in “organizational
continuity of significant programs and policies, rather than the mindless maintenance of
the status quo” (Morris, 2000).
Grand Lodges are specifically burdened with a centralized authority as “multimillion dollar operations, but they lack the managerial and organizational continuity they
need to thrive” (Morris, 2000). This problem is even more pronounced and significant
than in other voluntary organizations. So, what should be done? According to Morris, the
most urgent changes are administrative. By making changes to the structure of the Grand
Lodges, by possibly having officers serve longer terms, or by copying the success of
smaller Masonic groups with less hierarchy, maybe more people would be interested in
participation. In conclusion, Morris encourages members to use their votes to improve
their own situation. In 2015, none of the changes suggested by Morris has been made,
and he has campaigned tirelessly as a member, officer, and prominent Masonic leader to
improve membership retention throughout the past 15 years. (See membership numbers,
Table 1.)
Morris isn’t the only one suggesting changes for the fraternity. Other colleagues
have pointed out similar efforts to create change, but for other reasons. In Thomas W.
Jackson’s 1997 article “What Are We Trying to Save,” the former Grand Secretary of
Pennsylvania suggested that the quality of the membership is of utmost concern. In
regard to the decline in membership, he states, “We look at the loss of membership and

	  

	  

130	  

interest and have the tendency to blame ourselves for what we deem to be a failure in our
structure and our leadership” (Jackson, 1997). Then he asks, “What are we trying to save
—the name, or the ideal?” (Jackson, 1997). He says that although Freemasonry has
evolved into “the world’s greatest charitable organization,” the truth is it is not really a
charity (Jackson, 1997).
Jackson believes that the survival of the fraternity will be because of quality—of
the members and the fraternity. Since the time of his article, the proliferation of new
ideas such as “traditional observance lodges”—which incorporate higher dues, have
festive boards, a specific dress code, and higher standards of ritual—seem to incorporate
these ideas. Is this just a trend or fad? The question remains: Will this type of movement
improve the outlook of the fraternity?
The Future of Masonic Collections
In the United States, the Masonic fraternity is older than the country itself. In fact,
by 1776 there were approximately 100 lodges throughout America (Coil, 1961, p. 37).
During these years, the fraternity created a wealth of material culture to support the work
in the lodges. These items that have been used in years of fraternal practice are beginning
to collect in storage rooms, attics, and basements; if we are lucky, they are donated to a
library, museum, or archive for long-term preservation. Preservation is essential in the
care of special collections. Yet, as a part of the library, special collections are not given
the attention that they deserve. Only slightly more than 22% of faculty surveyed in The
Survey of Higher Education Faculty: Use of Special Collections Maintained by Academic

	  

	  

131	  

Master	  Masons	  in	  United	  States	  Grand	  Lodges	  	  	  

4,500,000	  
4,000,000	  
3,500,000	  

Members	

3,000,000	  
2,500,000	  
2,000,000	  
1,500,000	  
1,000,000	  

0	  

1924	  
1927	  
1930	  
1933	  
1936	  
1939	  
1942	  
1945	  
1948	  
1951	  
1954	  
1957	  
1960	  
1963	  
1966	  
1969	  
1972	  
1975	  
1978	  
1981	  
1984	  
1987	  
1990	  
1993	  
1996	  
1999	  
2002	  
2005	  
2008	  
2011	  

500,000	  

Year	  
From	  Masonic	  Service	  Association:	  http://www.msana.com/msastats.asp	  

Figure 9: Masonic membership in the Unites States of America
Information courtesy the Masonic Service Association, msana.com

	  

	  

132	  

Libraries (2009) used special collections at any college for teaching or research in the
past year (Primary Research Group, 2009, p. 28). And, not surprisingly, use of collections
increased with the age of the faculty member (Primary Research Group, 2009, p. 28).
If the items are not being used for research, then what is the future of special
collections? When the collections manager began his work at the Grand Lodge of
California, everyone referred to the archives as “the morgue.” One of the first things he
did was to correct everyone about the term they were using. No longer would they be
allowed to refer to the archives room as the morgue, and they were not to call the
collection “stuff” any longer. Disrespect of the collection was stopped and by changing
the terminology people were using, it helped to improve the way the collections were
viewed by everyone. Another Grand Lodge claimed its collections were referred to as
“just a collection of stuff,” which proves this isn’t an isolated case.
The Grand Lodge of California isn’t alone in its efforts to change how people
view Masonic memorabilia. Stereotypes are often a problem among special collections.
Many think of special collections as a place where only the most esteemed scholar can
conduct research. We encounter preconceived notions of the archives itself (a dim edifice
housing cold reading rooms); the staff (fussy, aged librarians); and the collections they
surely hold (musty and irrelevant esoterica) (Samuelson, 2014, p. 54). This stereotype of
the collections and the people who work with the materials is incorrect and is changing.
Where once the rare book room was thought of as mostly the province of single-minded
scholars writing specialized tomes destined to be read by only tenure-review committees,
	  

	  

133	  

increasingly they are being utilized by everybody from journalists to graphic designers to
T-shirt manufacturers to documentary film producers to public relations and marketing
firms to web designers (Smith, 2006, p. 35).
In fact, the idea of special collections and the people who care for the objects is
changing thanks to popular culture. Reality shows have made collectibles “cool” once
again. Television shows that feature rare and unique artifacts include Antiques Roadshow,
which was first aired on PBS in 1997. People bring their family heirlooms to meet with
appraisers and find out what they are worth. The spots that appear on air include a history
lesson about the artifact and its use. Newer shows that focus on antiques, collectibles, and
vintage finds include Pawn Stars, which has been on the History Channel since 2009.
This show features the Gold and Silver Pawn Shop in Las Vegas, where three generations
of the Harrison family run the family business. As clients bring items to pawn, the family
often brings in curators and other specialists, not just to appraise the item but to tell the
history of the artifacts as well. American Pickers Mike Wolfe and Frank Fritz ride around
in a van across the country to rummage through the contents of garages, attics, and barns
hunting for antique treasures to sell in their shop. The show has aired on the History
Channel since 2010. Unintentionally, these shows have brought an understanding and
appreciation for collectibles and an awareness of the value of these unique, hard-to-find,
and rare items.
Today Masonic groups have worked to overcome the old and outdated stereotype
that they maintain or promote hidden information and secrets. In fact, Ronald A. Seale,

	  

	  

134	  

the head of the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, Southern Jurisdiction, known as the
Sovereign Grand Commander, has worked tirelessly in his efforts to change the image
and perception of not only the Scottish Rite but Freemasonry in general. He often tells
audiences in talks and lectures that all the secrets one could want to read about can be
found on Google or in a library. In his words, “The real secret is that there are no
secrets.” His portrayal of the organization as an open and inviting organization that works
to make good men better is paying off with increases in membership among younger
people.
Masonic special collections have had a unique past in their use, storage, and
display. The priority of these collections is often determined by the leadership, the
popularity of the group at the time, and/or changes in the membership of the
organizations. Since the late 1950s, membership in Freemasonry in the United States has
been in decline. Gone are the years when hundreds of men came to join the secret men’s
club. Yet its influence in American history is unmistakable. President George
Washington, Kit Carson, and President Truman all claimed membership in the fraternity.
It is a unique and fascinating part of American history.
Along with creating and joining the myriad clubs, the members also were
constructing buildings to house their rituals, meetings, and ceremonies; and these
buildings, known as lodges and temples, were where the groups would collect countless
objects to perform their activities. The largest of the buildings that house Masonic groups
are those of the Scottish Rite of Freemasonry. These buildings were constructed during

	  

	  

135	  

the heyday of joining Masonic and fraternal orders, and they have elaborate theatrical
settings with a variety of costumes and props to perform the ceremonies. However, they
are rapidly falling into disrepair, and the contents found within are disappearing.
In 2004 the Grand Lodge of Massachusetts decided to place its artifacts on longterm loan at the museum at the Scottish Rite’s Northern Masonic Jurisdiction
headquarters in Lexington, Massachusetts. This agreement was one of the first efforts of
a Grand Lodge to plan and implement an organized effort for the preservation of its
priceless artifacts. This move was bold—to hand over its museum, all the artifacts, to a
sister museum managed by a separate Masonic group. Although located nearby, the
museum was outside the city of Boston. Mark Tabbert, then curator of the collections,
claimed that this collection was “arguably one of the most important collections in North
America” (Tabbert, 2005, p. 8).
In the process of transferring the collections to the Northern Masonic Jurisdiction,
several key items were discovered. One interesting group of materials were “350 portraits
of both famous Americans and important American Freemasons,” including an original
engraving of the well-known A Freemason Form’d Out of the Material of His Lodge,
dated 1754 (Tabbert, 2005). This unique piece was engraved by Alexander Slade in
London and was stored away among the Grand Lodge’s engravings. Other rare artifacts
included items from the Morgan Affair and the Anti-Masonic period of the 1820s and
1830s. As Tabbert (2005) notes, “A perfectly preserved anti-Masonic broadside from
1830 announced the lecture of a well-known Anti-Mason, Avery Allen at Boston’s
Pantheon Hall” (10). These and countless other objects still remain the property of the

	  

	  

136	  

Grand Lodge of Massachusetts, yet they are now housed and cared for in a museumquality environment, with security, climate control, and proper housing for the materials.
It is up to archivists, curators, and librarians of special collections to ensure that
rare and unique artifacts and pieces of history are preserved. Masonic collections are no
different. They deserve attention in order to preserve valuable pieces of history. When a
community has created the right kinds of institutions, its citizens can discover in
themselves what de Tocqueville called “the habits of the heart”—the ways that prove and
shape our common character (Carr, 2011, p. vii). Each cultural institution—whether it is
an archive, library, or a museum—works to preserve and conserve “memories,”
otherwise known as information. Ways to collect, share, and find information always will
be something people do in the library. The way the library provides this information will
continue to evolve and change. Teaching will change. Research will change. And the
library will change along with them.
Potential for the Future
The purpose of this study was to understand how Masonic special collections
have managed challenges. The research collected during the site selection helped to
determine several sites of interest to explore in more detail. My goal was to explore the
actions of each of the six sites and determine the biggest challenges, helping to inform
similar special collections. The members, directors of the collections, board members,
and officers were all very generous with their time. Many answered numerous follow-up

	  

	  

137	  

questions regarding their interviews. They each displayed a genuine concern for their
collections and future.
In order for many of the Masonic special collections to stay relevant, they must
work toward collaboration efforts. In recent years, efforts have been made to help the
Grand Lodges collaborate. The director of collections at the George Washington Masonic
National Memorial in Alexandria, Virginia, Mark A. Tabbert, has worked tirelessly to
emphasize the need to obtain transactions and proceedings of Grand Lodges (and other
Masonic bodies) to have them digitized. The Grand Archivist and Grand Historian of the
Scottish Rite of Freemasonry, Southern Jurisdiction, Arturo deHoyos, has amassed a
fraternal ritual collection that surpasses any other in the world. Similar efforts are found
throughout the country.
Working in this field for so many years, a day rarely would pass when I wouldn’t
hear one particular phrase, “My grandfather was a Mason.” Still, to this day, when I tell
people of my former employer, they almost always mention that they have a relative who
was a member. This happens in Masonic libraries all the time. Through countless calls,
emails, and visits, people ask if their relatives were a member of the fraternity. In
Pennsylvania, the librarians mentioned that patrons would say something like, “Was my
grandpop a Mason?” That prompted the librarians to begin the “search” for these
ancestors. In order to find out at the Pennsylvania library, the librarians conduct a
treasure hunt of sorts. The “first 110 years are on old membership books.” The librarians
then record and save the names; when they get several names, they go to the archives and

	  

	  

138	  

look up member records in these huge old volumes. And this is just the process of
hunting down an ancestor in Pennsylvania.
There is a value and potential in genealogy research assistance that could be
explored and developed in much more detail. Each Grand Lodge has thousands of
members’ records and data collected for hundreds of years. Where a man was born, what
kind of job he held, and all types of other questions were asked as part of the initial
membership application. Much of this data was captured and saved at Grand Lodges. In
some cases, the data is located on their member record, particularly for those deceased
members. This information has been digitized at many of the Grand Lodges and can be
accessed through current technology. Given that genealogy is one of the fastest growing
hobbies in the United States, the potential to involve interested individuals warrants more
attention. There is also potential in additional research using genealogy for generating an
income in possible library fund-raising. Possibilities are endless. As one site mentioned,
“We are the only masonic library in Nebraska . . . if you want to research your
grandfather’s history, you come to us.”
Other possibilities to preserve materials on a long-term basis include collaborating
with non-Masonic institutions. For instance, colleges and universities would be one of the
first places I would recommend for Masonic groups to reach out for collaborative efforts.
One successful example of this was the 1995 loan of the materials of St. James Lodge
No. 47 in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. It is a local lodge under the Grand Lodge of
Louisiana. Many historic documents and other items were located throughout their old
lodge building, but they were not being adequately cared for. So, the lodge decided to

	  

	  

139	  

find a suitable place to maintain the records for the long-term. The library at Louisiana
State University (LSU) has a regional special collection known as the Louisiana and
Lower Mississippi Valley Collections at the Special Collections of the Hill Memorial
Library at LSU.
LSU was the perfect place for these items to be given. The papers document the
life of the lodge through minutes of meetings, membership files, financial records, and
correspondence between St. James and other lodges and related organizations (such as
Knights Templar and Odd Fellowships) throughout the United States and in Mexico and
Canada. More details of the holdings can be found in their finding aid	  
http://www.lib.lsu.edu/special/findaid/2860.pdf In the course of moving the materials,
other valuable records were found with unique regional history, including the Battle of
Baton Rouge surrender papers. This loan is just one example of valuable records held by
a Masonic group that were properly preserved because of members who realized their
building was not the safest location for such important history.
Other collaborative efforts are ongoing, led by the Masonic Library and Museum
Association. This group, founded in 1995, is an international organization of librarians,
archivists, curators, and directors of Masonic collections. They work to share their
knowledge with like institutions and interested individuals. Nebraska specifically
mentioned how it particularly would want to collaborate with other similar groups and/or
special collections for “purchasing of supplies, mainly because the cost is prohibitive,”
but if they had a partner to buy in bulk, they could purchase much needed supplies.

	  

	  

140	  

A majority of the sites examined did not have a clear vision, mission statement, or
goals. They also didn’t have a collections policy, acquisitions policy, deaccession policy,
or any other type of strategic plan in place for the future. By creating some guidelines,
each site could benefit from the implementation of better governance. Albeit it would be
easy to say that each needed better funding and staff, this is an unrealistic expectation.
I agree with my colleague Mark Tabbert, who advocates for a central place to
access information. He has stated,
We are, however, in desperate need of one unified place where honest researchers
and professional scholars can start their journey from ignorance to the light of
Masonic knowledge. What they need is a solid, veritable and open doorway that
will lead them to the most creditable information, the best person to answer their
questions and the greatest repositories of knowledge. (Tabbert, 2006, p. 73)
Having some of the leaders of the Masonic libraries (including New York, Pennsylvania,
Iowa, the Northern and Southern Masonic Jurisdictions of the Scottish Rite) collaborate
with one Online Public Access Catalog for access to books, artifacts, documents, and
photographs would change research and scholarship in this field. I also agree with
Tabbert’s conclusion, “If Freemasonry does not present its history and encourage the best
scholarship, it will be exploited.” (Tabbert, 2006, p. 79).
This study conducted interviews with people working with or in Masonic
collections across six institutions in the United States. Some were volunteers and others
were paid staff members. The study also included primary materials, supplementary
documents, and third-party input from officers and scholars in the field of Freemasonry.

	  

	  

141	  

All the participants were interested in telling their site’s story. They were open and
honest about the collections and their opinion on their future. Other topics emerged
during the research, yet due to the time constraints, they were not included as part of this
case study.
The study examined those working with the collection in a staff role, but it would
be interesting also to examine the student researcher or scholar who would be interested
in using this type of collection. Do this person find the collection adequate? Is it difficult
to use? Are there items missing that would be of importance to that person’s research?
How would this person better make use of the collection? The perspective would
contribute to the larger discussion of Masonic special collections and their future.
It also would be beneficial to examine several sites that already have been forced
to close. Their viewpoint would add to the research and the discussion of viability. Three
of the sites I examined discussed ideas such as “taking it to the next level.” So, perhaps it
would be beneficial for them to partner with other more stable and established collections
for advice and input. There were a number of sites that would have been interesting and
constructive to incorporate in this research, including the Grand Lodge of Iowa, the
Grand Lodge of New York, and the Grand Lodge of Texas, to name a few. Nevertheless,
the study was limited in order to cover the most data in the time frame and scope of this
project. In the future, I would hope to add additional research to the project by examining
other successful Grand Lodge collections. This would allow more insights about longterm preservation to emerge.

	  

	  

142	  

Concluding Thoughts
As I walked through the hallways of the House of the Temple in Washington,
D.C., I often thought about the future of the collection. Would it be there in 10 years, 30,
or 50? And, if so, would the same organization be managing it? Or would the
organization have changed so much that it was unrecognizable? Masonic collections have
been around since the organization began. There is evidence of the use of material culture
almost from the beginning of Freemasonry. Bernard Picart’s engraving of 1736
(Ceremonies et coutumes religieuses de tout les peuples du monde) shows members in
regalia, already wearing collar jewels, and holding various tools such as compasses and
set squares (Dennis, 606). How different is that 1736 image from the most recent
photographs taken in 2015 and posted on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram of members
at their latest Masonic event?
Archivists, librarians, and curators work to preserve memories for future
generations. The societal value of libraries is and always has been important to
communities. Michael Gorman believes in the common good of libraries, stating,

Libraries, which are quintessential manifestations of the common good, have
always favored order and society over individualism. Individualistic shelving
arrangements, classification schemes, instruction programs, and collection
development have never found favor with those who run libraries, work in
libraries and use libraries. (Gorman, 2006, p. 139)

	  

	  

143	  

Special collections preserve one-of-a-kind resources that can’t be found elsewhere. They
are at a crisis point, however, because there is no real consensus on how to manage
digital information. Institutions are understaffed and without adequate funds for
management of current collections, much less the rapidly developing emerging
technologies. Archives are out of space to collect, acquire, and house new artifacts.
Museums are unable to pay the bills on their older failing buildings, and are closing and
donating their special collections to colleges and universities nationwide.
Special collections need more integrated access to information resources. Vendors
provide “access” for a price. If your repository can afford the cost of a database or
resource, then your patron will have access to the information he is seeking. For many, it
is better to provide some level of access to all materials than to provide comprehensive
access to some materials and no access at all to others (ARL, 2008, p. 2). The continued
focus on technology has taken us away from the more important issues facing our special
collections, which include access, funding, space, and preservation. Collaboration is the
key in the evolution of this future space. Even though libraries have had significant
portions of literature devoted to their ongoing development and future, it is a discussion
about special collections and long-term existence and improvement that is lacking in the
literature.
Special collections aren’t just found in the library or the archives. Even more
often, they are housed and displayed in museums. Although the museum has emerged as
an important civic institution in American life, the literature on museums has not received
	  

	  

144	  

the critical attention it deserves (Shapiro, 1990, p. xi). Our work is yet to be done in
researching and documenting museums, archives, and special collections. Little is
mentioned about the artifacts, other than some how-to books on conservation and storage,
and the literature lacks any real attention to plans or details for the future. Staff work to
preserve, save, and expose hidden collections, yet they need more to do their jobs
effectively. This point is also supported in the 2014 article, “The Material Culture of
Freemasonry,” where Mark J. R. Dennis stated, “The comparative analysis of material
culture of Freemasonry is in its infancy” (Dennis, 2014, p. 621). Masonic museum and
artifact collections are just beginning to be explored in more detail. Yet material culture
is central to the practice of Freemasonry, and Freemasons have been influential in
generating its design and creation. (Dennis, 2014, p. 621).
Near the beginning of the Spanish novel Don Quixote de la Mancha, Quixote
returns from his first adventure. His friends decide that he is going mad because of his
love of books. They decide that, in order to cure him, they will burn most of his books
and break up his library. Librarians, archivists, and curators face this same dilemma as
they decide what to preserve and what to discard. Although books (and archives) are not
being “burned,” so to speak, they are being scrutinized for their value. The same goes for
all artifacts found in special collections.
In Washington, D.C., one Masonic library boasts a collection of virtually every
major American Masonic periodical from the early 19th century to those currently in
print. This library also has some of the rarer and more valuable Masonic imprints known–
	  

	  

145	  

e.g., one of 12 known copies of Benjamin Franklin’s The Constitutions of the FreeMasons (Philadelphia, 1734), which was the first printed Masonic book in America, as
well as the first songbook. Other rare works include the only known copy of The Post
Boy (London, 1723), which is one of the earliest printed exposures of Masonic ritual, as
well as an original copy of William Morgan’s infamous Illustrations of Masonry by one
of the fraternity (Batavia, 1826), which precipitated the political “anti-Masonic
excitement” of 1826 to 1842. The literature of Freemasonry also includes myriad writings
on history, jurisprudence, philosophy, symbolism, etc. This library, museum, and archive
is near and dear to me. Its future existence depends on the interest of students, scholars,
collections curators, librarians, and members of the organization in order to maintain its
current operating capability.
It is up to special collections and the staff who work therein to continue to
document and preserve the human experience. Documenting these benefits and
articulating their relation to the mission of the research library and the university will be
one of the great tasks that lie ahead (Panitch, 2001, p. 61). The library, with its special
collections, will continue into the future as an active and engaging place where people
share knowledge and access information.
These are the facts. The old library was passive, asleep, an arsenal in time of
peace; the librarian a sentinel before the doors. . . . The new library is active, an
aggressive, educating force in the community . . . an army in the field with all
guns limbered; and the librarian occupies a field of active usefulness second to
none.
—Melvil Dewey, 1888
	  

	  

146	  

References
American Alliance of Museums. (2000). Code of ethics. In Code of ethics for museums.
Retrieved from http://www.aam-us.org/resources/ethics-standards-and-bestpractices/code-of-ethics
American Library Association, Reference and Adult Services Division, Collection
Development and Evaluation Section. (1993). The relevance of collection
development policies: Definition, necessity, and applications. RQ, 33(1), 65–74.
Anderson, R. (2014). Can't buy us love: The declining importance of library books and
the rising importance of special collections. Ithaka S+R. Retrieved from
http://www.sr.ithaka.org/sites/default/files/files/SR_BriefingPaper_Anderson.pdf
Association of Research Libraries. (2008). 2008 special collections task force final status
report, 2006. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org/storage/documents/publications/special-collections-task-forcefinal-status-report-july2006.pdf
Axelrod, A. (1997). The international encyclopedia of secret societies and fraternal
orders. New York, NY: Facts on File.
Berman, R. (2009, August/September). The heritage project. California Freemason.
Retrieved from
https://www.freemason.org/doc/AugSep%202009%20(2.5MB).pdf?id=229
Blodgett, P., Brett, J., Carmack, C., Foster, A., Uglean Jackson, L., Scott Weber, C.,
Wiget, M. (2011). Guidelines for reappraisal and deaccessioning. Retrieved from
http://www2.archivists.org/groups/technical-subcommittee-on-guidelines-forreappraisal-and-deaccessioning-ts-grd/guidelines-for-reappraisal-and-deaccession
Blouin, F. X. (2010). Archives, documentation, and institutions of social memory: Essays
from the Sawyer seminar. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Blouin, F. X., & Rosenberg, W. G. (2011). Processing the past: Contesting authority in
history and the archives. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Bobinski, G. S. (2007). Libraries and librarianship: Sixty years of challenge and change,
1945–2005. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Brown, A. (2013). Practical digital preservation: A how-to guide for organizations of
any size. Chicago, IL: Neal Shuman.

	  

	  

147	  

Brown, D. (2009). The lost symbol. New York, NY: Doubleday.
Brown, J. S., & Duguid, P. (2000). The social life of information. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Carr, D. (2011). Open conversations: Public learning in libraries and museums. Santa
Barbara, CA.: Libraries Unlimited.
Claudy, C. H. (1931). Introduction to masonry (Vols. 1–3). Washington, D.C.: Temple
Publishers.
Clawson, M. A. (1989). Constructing brotherhood: Class, gender, and fraternalism.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Coil, H. W. (1961). Coil’s masonic encyclopedia. New York, NY: Macoy Publishing and
Masonic Supply Co.
Conway, M. O. H., & Proffitt, M. (2011). Taking stock and making hay: Archival
collections assessment. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research. Retrieved from
http://www.oclc.org/research/publications/library/2011/2011-07.pdf
Courant, P. (2008). The future of the library in the research university. In Council on
Library and Information Resources. No brief candle: Reconceiving research
libraries for the 21st century. Washington, D.C.: Council on Library and
Information Resources.
Covi, L. M., & Cragin, M. H. (2004). Reconfiguring control in library collection
development: A conceptual framework for assessing the shift toward electronic
collections. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 55(4), 312–25.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five
approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
deHoyos, A. (2014). Masonic rites and systems. Handbook of freemasonry (pp. 355–77).
Boston, MA: Brill.
Dennis, M. J. R. (2014). The material culture of freemasonry. Handbook of freemasonry
(pp. 606–23). Boston, MA: Brill,.
Dewey, M. (1888). Libraries as related to the educational work of the state. Albany, NY:
n.p.
	  

	  

148	  

Dooley, J. M., Beckett, R., Cullingford, A., Sambrook, K., Shepard, C., & Worrall, S.
(2013). Survey of special collections and archives in the United Kingdom and
Ireland. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research. Retrieved from
http://www.oclc.org/resources/research/publications/library/2013/2013-01.pdf
Dooley, J. M., and Luce, K. (2010). Taking our pulse: The OCLC research survey of
special collections and archives. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research. Retrieved from
http://www.oclc.org/research/publications/library/2010/2010-11.pdf
Dumenil, L. (1984). Freemasonry and American culture, 1880–1930. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Eastwood, T., & MacNeil, H. (2010). Currents of archival thinking. Santa Barbara, CA:
Libraries Unlimited.
Glushko, R. J. (2013). The discipline of organizing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Golafshani, N. (2003). Understanding reliability and validity in qualitative research. The
Qualitative Report, 8(4), 597–607. http://www.nova.edu/ssss/QR/QR84/golafshani.pdf
Gordon, R. S. (2007). Information tomorrow: Reflections on technology and the future of
public and academic libraries. Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Gorman, G. E., & Shep, Sydney J. (2006). Preservation management for libraries,
museums and archives. London, UK: Facet Publishing.
Gorman, M. (2003). The enduring library technology, tradition, and the quest for
balance. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Grand Lodge of British Columbia and Yukon A.F. & A.M. The Halliwell manuscript.
http://freemasonry.bcy.ca/texts/regius.html, updated February 2, 2014; accessed
December 29, 2014.
Grand Lodge of California. www.freemason.org
Grand Lodge of the State of Louisiana. http://www.la-mason.com/
Grand Lodge of the State of Louisiana. Proceedings of the most worshipful grand lodge
free & accepted masons of the state of Louisiana. Past proceedings. Retrieved from
http://library.la-mason.com/pastproceedings.html

	  

	  

149	  

Grand Lodge of Nebraska. http://www.glne.org/
Grand Lodge of Nebraska. (2013). The Nebraska Mason 32(2). Retrieved from
http://www.glne.org/Portals/glne/pdfs/News/June13.pdf
Grand Lodge of New Jersey. http://www.newjerseygrandlodge.org/
Grand Lodge of New Mexico. http://www.nmmasons.org/
Grand Lodge of Pennsylvania. http://www.pagrandlodge.org/
Greene, G. L. (1962). Masonry in Louisiana. A sesquicentennial history 1812–1962. New
York, NY: Exposition Press.
Greene, M., & Meissner, D. (2005). More product, less process, revamping traditional
archival processing. American Archivist, 68(2), 208–63.
Griffiths, J. M. (2008). InterConnections: The IMLS national study on the use of
libraries, museums and the internet: Conclusions. Washington, D.C.: Institute of
Museum and Library Services.
Gyure, D. A. (2008, Summer/Autumn). The heart of the university: A history of the
library as an architectural symbol of American higher education. Winterthur
Portfolio, 4 (2–3), 107–32.
Hall, M. P., & Knapp, J. A. (1928). An encyclopedic outline of masonic, hermetic,
qabbalistic and rosicrucian symbolical philosophy: Being an interpretation of the
secret teachings concealed within the rituals, allegories and mysteries of all ages.
San Francisco, CA: n.p.
Halliwell-Phillipps, J. O. (1840). Early history of freemasonry in England. London, UK:
Thomas Rodd.
Hardesty, L. (2011). The environmental sustainability of academic libraries. Library
Issues, 32(1), 1–4. Retrieved from
http://www.libraryissues.com/sub/PDF3201Sep2011789056.pdf
Harwood, W. S. (1897, May). Secret societies in America. The North American Review,
164(486), 617–24.
Henry W. Coil Library and Museum of Freemasonry. http://masonicheritage.org/

	  

	  

150	  

Hernon, P., & Matthews, J. R. (2013). Reflecting on the future of academic and public
libraries. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Hibner, H., & Kelly, M. (2010). Making a collection count: A holistic approach to
library collection management. Oxford, UK: Chandos Publishing.
Higginbotham, B. B. (1990). Our past preserved: A history of American library
preservation, 1876–1910. Boston, MA: G. K. Hall.
Historic Trenton Masonic Temple. http://www.trentonmasonictemple.com/
Hunter, C. (2013, February 11). Monday matters: Historic masonic temple in Fort Smith
for sale. Times Record. Retrieved from http://swtimes.com/sections/news/mondaymatters-historic-masonic-temple-fort-smith-sale.html#sthash.tKSNe8JG.dpuf
Jackson, T. W. (1997–1998). What are we trying to save? Transactions Texas lodge of
research, 32,166–70.
Janes, J. (2013). Library 2020: Today's leading visionaries describe tomorrow's library.
Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press.
Jones, B. M. (2004). Hidden collections, scholarly barriers: Creating access to
unprocessed special collections materials in America’s research libraries. RBM: A
Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage, 5, 88–105.
Kendall, A. (n.d.). A California masonic treasure. Retrieved from
http://www.freemason.org/newsEvents/article.htm?id=10445
Kennedy J .R., & Stockton, G. (1991). The great divide: Challenges in remote storage.
Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Langston, L. (1978). A history of masonry in New Mexico, 1877–1977. Roswell, NM:
Hall-Poorbaugh Press.
Lepper, J. H. (1971). Famous secret societies. Ann Arbor, MI: Gryphon Books.
Leupp, H. L. (1924). The library the heart of the university. Bulletin of the American
Library Association, 18, 193–97.

	  

	  

151	  

Levasseur, A. A. (1996). A “civil law” lawyer: Louis Casimir Elisabeth Moreau Lislet
Journal articles. Paper 323.
http://digitalcommons.law.lsu.edu/faculty_scholarship/323
List of lodges. Masonic. (2014). Bloomington, IL: Pantagraph Printing and Stationery Co.
Long, M. P., & Schonfeld, R. C. (2014). Ithaka S+R US library survey 2013. ExLibris,
Gale CENGAGE Learning, JSTOR, and SAGE. Retrieved from
http://sr.ithaka.org/sites/default/files/reports/SR_LibraryReport_20140310_0.pdf
Louisiana Masonic Library/Museum. http://library.la-mason.com/
MacLeod, R. (2010). The library of Alexandria: Centre of learning in the ancient world.
London, NY: I. B. Tauris.
Manley, W. (1996, March 1). The manly arts. Booklist, 1108.
Masonic Library and Museum Association. http://www.masoniclibraries.org/
Masonic Library and Museum of Pennsylvania. http://www.pagrandlodge.org/mlam/
Masonic Service Association. (n.d.) Membership totals since 1924. Retrieved January
2015 from http://www.msana.com/msastats.asp
Matthews, G., & Walton, G. (2013). University libraries and space in the digital world.
Burlington, VT: Ashgate Publishing Company.
Maxwell, J. A. (2013). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Miles, M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2014). Qualitative data analysis: A
methods sourcebook (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Miller, K., & Morton, M. for Council on Library and Information Resources. (2011).
Observations on scholarly engagement with hidden special collections and archives:
Study report for year two. Retrieved from
http://www.clir.org/hiddencollections/engagement/engagement.html/Scholarly_Enga
gement_Interim_Report061611.pdf
Missouri Intelligencer. (1826, October 12). Franklin, Missouri Territory: Patten &
Holliday.

	  

	  

152	  

Modern Language Association. (1995). Statement on the significance of primary records.
Profession, 95, 27–50.
Moore, W. D. (1995). The masonic lodge room, 1870–1930: A sacred space of masculine
spiritual hierarchy. In Perspectives in vernacular architecture, 5. Gender, class, and
shelter (pp. 26–39).
Morris, S. B. (2000). Voting with their feet. Transactions Texas lodge of research, 33,
91–97.
Moses, R. P. (2012). A glossary of archival and records terminology. Chicago, IL:
Society of American Archivists. Retrieved from http://www2.archivists.org/glossary
New York Times. (1912, February 12). Student government at Wellesley and how it
makes for loyalty among the college girls and faculty. Retrieved from
http://query.nytimes.com/gst/abstract.html?res=F40712FD385E13738DDDAC0A94
DA405B828DF1D3
The Omaha World-Herald Newspaper. (1907, June 9). George W. Lininger passes from
life. Omaha, NE.
Panitch, J. M. (2001). Special collections in ARL libraries: Results of the 1998 survey
sponsored by the ARL research collections committee. Washington, D.C.:
Association of Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org/storage/documents/publications/special-collections-arllibraries.pdf
Pastore, E. (2009). The future of museums and libraries: A discussion guide. Washington,
D.C.: Institute of Museum and Library Services.
Polanka, S. (2011). No shelf required: E-books in libraries. Chicago: American Library
Association.
Porset, C. (2014). Masonic historiography. Handbook of freemasonry (pp. 117–35).
Boston, MA: Brill,.
Prescott, A. (2003). The study of freemasonry as a new academic discipline. Retrieved
December 2014 from http://www.freemasons-freemasonry.com/prescott03.html
Preston, W. (1867). Illustrations of masonry. New York, NY: Masonic Publishing and
Manufacturing Co.

	  

	  

153	  

Preuss, A. (1924). A dictionary of secret and other societies: Comprising Masonic rites,
lodges, and clubs; concordant, clandestine, and spurious Masonic bodies; nonMasonic organizations to which only Freemasons are admitted; mystical and occult
societies; fraternal, benevolent and beneficiary societies; political, patriotic, and
civic brotherhoods; Greek letter fraternities and sororities; military and ancestral
orders; revolutionary brotherhoods, and many other organizations. St. Louis, MO:
B. Herder Book Co.
Primary Research Group. (2009). The survey of higher education faculty: Use of special
collections maintained by academic libraries. New York, NY: Primary Research
Group.
Pritchard, S. M. (2009). Special collections surge to the fore. Libraries and the academy.
9(2), 177–80.
Prown, J. D. (1982, April 1). Mind in matter: An introduction to material culture theory
and method. Winterthur Portfolio, 17(1), 1–19.
Putnam, R. D. (2000). Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American community.
New York, NY: Simon and Schuster.
Roberts, A. E. (1985). Freemasonry in American history. Richmond, VA: Macoy Pub. &
Masonic Supply Co.
Samuelson, T., & Coker, C. (2014). Mind the gap: Integrating special collections
teaching. Libraries and the Academy 14(1), 51–66.
Scot, J. B. (1923). Outline of the rise and progress of freemasonry in Louisiana. From its
introduction to the re-organization of the grand lodge in 1850. New Orleans, LA:
Grand Lodge of Louisiana.
SF Masonic 1111 California Street. http://sfmasonic.com
Smith, S. E. (2006). From “treasure room” to “school room”: Special collections and
education. RBM: A Journal of Rare Books, Manuscripts, and Cultural Heritage,
7(1), 31–39.
Snoek, J. A. M. (2014). Relationships between grand lodges. In Handbook of
freemasonry (pp. 378–86). Boston, MA: Brill.

	  

	  

154	  

Society of American Archivists. (2012). Core values statement for archivists and code of
ethics for archivists. Retrieved from http://www2.archivists.org/statements/saa-corevalues-statement-and-code-of-ethics
Sorenson, A. R. (1888). Omaha illustrated: A history of the pioneer period and the
Omaha of today embracing reliable statistics and information, with over two
hundred illustrations, including prominent buildings, portraits, and sketches of
leading citizens. Omaha, NE: D. C. Dunbar & Co.
Speer, D. (2014, September 9). SF Masonic Rechristened. Pollstar. Retrieved from
http://www.pollstar.com/news_article.aspx?ID=813910
Stevens, A. C. (1907). The cyclopædia of fraternities. New York, NY: E. B. Treat and
Co.
Swartzwelder, J. (Writer), & Reardon, J. (Director). (1995). Homer the great. [Television
series episode]. In M. Groening (Executive Producer), The Simpsons. New York,
NY: Twentieth Century Fox.
Tabbert, M. (2005). American Freemasons. Three centuries of building communities.
New York, NY: New York University Press.
Tabbert, M. (2005). Highlights from the Massachusetts grand lodge collection. The
Northern Light.
Tabbert, M. (2006). Freemasonry and the digital revolution. Society of Blue Friars’
Lecture. The Plumbline, 14(1).
Turnbaugh, R. C. (2002). What is an electronic record? In Effective approaches for
managing electronic records and archives (pp. 23–34). Lanham, MD: Scarecrow
Press.
Visscher, G. T. (2012, Winter). Treasures in library and museum of masonic culture. The
New Jersey Freemason.
Weinberger, D. (2007, November 19). The future of book nostalgia. JOHO Newsletter.
Retrieved from http://www.hyperorg.com/backissues/joho-nov19-07.html#book
Whalen, W. J. (1966). Handbook of secret organizations. Milwaukee, WI: Bruce
Publishing Co.

	  

	  

155	  

Williard, A. R. (1897). The development of college architecture in America. New
England Magazine, 16(5), 513–34.
Wood, E. J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Young, P. R. (June 1994). Changing information access economics: New roles for
libraries and librarians. Information Technology and Libraries, 103–14.

	  

