BEHIND THE SEARCH BOX: THE POLITICAL ECONOMY OF A GLOBAL INTERNET
INDUSTRY

BY
SHINJOUNG YEO

DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2015

Urbana, Illinois
Doctoral Committee:
Professor Dan Schiller, Chair
Professor Linda Smith
Professor Christian Sandvig, University of Michigan
Professor Fred Turner, Stanford University

ProQuest Number: 3738006

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 3738006
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract
With the rapid proliferation of the Web, the search engine constituted an increasingly vital
tool in everyday life, and offered technical capabilities that might have lent themselves under
different circumstances to a sweeping democratization of information provision and access.
Instead the search function was transformed into the most profitable large-scale global
information industry.
This dissertation examines the evolution of search engine technologies within the context
of the commercialization and commodification of the Internet. Grounded in critical political
economy, the research details how capital has progressively shifted information search activities
further into the market, transforming them into sites of profit-making and poles of capitalist
growth. It applies historical and political economic analysis by resorting to an extensive array of
sources including trade journals, government documents, industry reports, and financial and
business newspapers.
The first chapter situates the development of the search engine within the wider political
economy of the Internet industry. The second shows how the technology of search was
reorganized to enable profitable accumulation. The third and fourth chapters focus on another
primary concern of political economy: the labor structures and labor processes that typify this
emergent industry. These pivot around familiar compulsions: profit-maximization and
management control. The search industry is famous for the almost incredible perks it affords to a
select group of highly paid, highly skilled engineers and managers. However, the same industry
also relies not only a large number of low-wage workers but also an unprecedented mass of
unwaged labor. Google and other search engines also have found means of re-constructing the
practices of a seemingly bygone industrial era of labor control: corporate paternalism and



scientific management.
Today, the search engine industry sits at the “magnetic north pole” of economic growth –
the Internet. This vital function of search is controlled disproportionately by US digital capital,
mainly Google. US dominance in search seems to carry forward the existing, deeply unbalanced,
international information order; however, this US-led industry actually faces jarring oppositions
within a changing and conflicted global political economy. Chapter Five investigates two of the
most important and contested zones: China, whose economic growth has been unsurpassed
throughout the entire period spanned by this study of the search engine’s development, and
which has nurtured a highly successful domestic Internet industry, including a search engine
company, Baidu; and Europe, US’s long-time ally, where units of capital both European and
non-European are struggling with one another. By situating search within these contexts, this
chapter sheds light on the ongoing reconfiguration of international information services, and on
the geopolitical-economic conflicts that are altering the dynamics of information-intensive
transnational capitalism.
There is a well-developed critical scholarship in political economy that foregrounds the
role of information in contemporary capitalist development. This dissertation contributes to and
expands this research by looking at search to uncover the capital logics that undergird and shape
contemporary information provision.




To my parents and James




Acknowledgements
My dissertation is far from my individual struggle to answer scholarly inquiries; rather it
is the fruit of a collective endeavor. I cannot thank Professor Dan Schiller enough as he has not
only been my intellectual mentor, but taught me scholarly integrity, commitment, humility, and
intellectual confidence. He is my teacher, friend, and colleague. I would like to thank my
committee members Professor Linda Smith who never hesitated to give me support and
unconditional care; Professor Fred Turner who always offered his time and advice with
generosity and Professor Christian Sandvig whose perspectives and input were extremely
valuable in shaping my research.
Thanks also to my San Diego comrades Anita Schiller, Mary Lou Locke, and Jim Jacobs
with whom I passionately debated issues surrounding libraries, information, and culture. I deeply
thank my friend Ellen Riordan who gave me constant support and came all the way from Florida
for my dissertation defense, and Chris Darpa and Lucy Moynihan who always welcomed me into
their house and whose friendship comforted me.
I’m grateful to Professor Dorothy Kidd who showed me what real academic care for
social justice looks like, Kyoko Sato who made me laugh and kept me company deep into the
night, and my writing group members Morgan Ames, Lilly Irani, and Daniela Rosner who
provided moral support and a community off of which to bounce ideas.
I’m thankful to Fred and Nancy Jacobs who quietly supported me with love. Many thanks
to my parents, who trusted me and allowed me to take my life to an unknown journey to a
foreign land. My dissertation would not be finished without James Jacobs who is my friend,
partner, and comrade. I tested his patience and love over and over during my writing, but he
never failed. James, this is your work. Thank you.



Table of Contents

Introduction ………………………………………………………………………………………1
Chapter 1
Situating Search ………………………………………………………………………………... 20
Chapter 2
Monetizing User Traffic: The Development of Search Advertising Systems …………………. 66
Chapter 3
Laboring behind the Search Engine …………………………………………………………....105
Chapter 4
Digital Welfare Capitalism …………………………………………………………………….143
Chapter 5
Market Dynamics and Geopolitics: A Search for Stability …………………………………....185
Conclusion ……………………………………………………………………………………..255
Bibliography [Books and Peer-Reviewed Journals] …………………………………………...265






Introduction
“New” Digital Economy
In announcing that 2.5 million jobs were lost to the global economic crisis in
2008, President Obama vowed to renew the “information highway” in order to create jobs
and strengthen America’s “competitiveness” in the world.1 This was followed by his visit
to Silicon Valley – the epicenter of the “new” economy – to meet with high tech industry
CEOs including the late Steve Jobs from Apple, Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, Oracle’s
Larry Ellison, Google’s Eric Schmidt, Yahoo’s Carol Bartz, Cisco Systems’ John
Chambers, Twitter’s Dick Costolo, and Netflix’s Reed Hastings.2
Obama’s visit to Silicon Valley was not merely to express his gratitude toward the
tech giants which were the largest of his presidential campaign contributors, but was also
to discuss the “partnership” between the public and private sectors to reboot the process
of capital accumulation3 through the Internet sector in order to shore up the depressed
capitalist economic system. The search engine industry lies at the center of this larger
effort.
The Internet sector is a strategic growth industry, which has been refueled by
fresh capital to jolt the capitalist economy. In the midst of one of the worst global
economic crises, when millions of people were losing jobs, homes, pensions, and social
welfare rights around the world, the Obama Administration – as part of its stimulus

1

David Rochelson, “President-elect Barack Obama lays out key parts of Economic Recovery Plan,” The
Office of the President-Elect, December 6, 2008,
http://change.gov/newsroom/entry/the_key_parts_of_the_jobs_plan/.
2
Lance Whitney, “Obama dines with Jobs, Zuckerberg, other tech honchos,” CNET, February 18, 2011,
http://www.cnet.com/news/obama-dines-with-jobs-zuckerberg-other-tech-honchos/.
3
Marxist theory defines accumulation as the process of converting surplus value into production in order to
generate more surplus.

1


package in 2009 – funneled billions of dollars to incorporate and expand new Internetbased technologies into medicine, education, energy, transportation, federal IT
infrastructure, and manufacturing industries in order to extend and open up vast new
information businesses for capital with the promise of economic recovery, prosperity,
creation of quality jobs, transparency, and a more democratic society.4
Under the stimulus, the administration orchestrated a series of “public and
private” initiatives to enlarge the Internet sector – including a project called Digital
Promise backed by the Department of Education, academia and the tech industry to
create “smart demand” to move the education system further toward being an appendage
of the market;5 electronic medical records being mandated by the federal government to
open up a new billion dollar health IT market;6 promoting a smart grid by the Department
of Energy for trade and investment around the world; and, all in the name of
transparency, the White House pushed its open data policy, requiring government
agencies to release government data and in effect turning over valuable government data
like weather, climate, health, and geographic data collected at tax payer expense to the
information market.
The US has been aggressively reorienting its domestic economy to aid digital
capital enlarging in restructuring the Internet as a transnational economic platform. The
Obama Administration has placed an unprecedented emphasis on “digital trade” –
commerce over the Internet – and mobilized major government agencies including the


4

Office of the President of the United States, “Issues: Technology,”
http://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/technology.
5
The White House Office of the Press Secretary, “White House to Launch Digital Promise Initiative,”
September 16, 2011, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/09/16/white-house-launch-digitalpromise-initiative.
6
Nicole Freeman, “Electronic medical records market to expand by 2017,” February 6, 2014,
http://ehrintelligence.com/2014/02/06/electronic-medical-records-market-to-expand-by-2017/.

2


Department of State, Department of Commerce, and International Trade Commission in
order to remove a range of obstacles for US digital capital to reach global markets over
the Internet. The US search engine industry is playing a leading role in organizing the
Internet as an economic growth zone and in expanding digital capital across industries
and geographical territories.
The search engine has evolved beyond the simple information retrieval system,
positioning itself strategically within the complex and dynamic territory of the Internet.
And Google is the globally dominant force within search. As journalist Ken Auletta has
stated, search engine giant Google “encroaches on every media industry from telephone
to television to advertising to newspapers to magazine to book publishers to Hollywood
studios to digital companies like Microsoft, Amazon, and Apple.”7 As Google weaves
itself inexorably into the Internet “ecosystem,” the company is playing a significant role
in reconfiguring the existing information industry as a whole, and at the same time
affecting the setting of a wide range of technical standards and information policies
surrounding the Internet: search algorithms, e-books, intellectual property, privacy, net
neutrality, broadband, wireless, labor policy and beyond.
Google alone generated almost $60 billion in revenue in 2013, with over 90% of
its revenue from online advertising. If Google were compared to a country, based on its
revenue, it would rank 71st in the world in terms of GDP – ahead of countries such as
Uruguay and Costa Rica. Google operates in more than 115 countries, and offers its
services in more than 114 languages, while Yahoo! and Bing operate in 35 countries.


7

Ken Auletta, Googled: The End of the World As We Know it (New York: Penguin Press, 2009), xii.

3

Google accounts for nearly 25 percent of Internet traffic in North America – bigger than
Facebook, Netflix and Twitter combined.8
While Google’s market share in the US hovers around 66%, its market share in
many big European markets and Latin America is over 90%. As of 2013, 58% of
Google’s revenue comes from the international market.9 Google controls over 33% of
global online ad revenues, and combined, Google, Bing, Yahoo!, AOL and Facebook
control 68% of global online marketing while Google, Bing and Yahoo! control almost
72% of the global desktop search market. Google takes half of all global mobile Internet
ads revenue.10 According to a 2011 report by the management consulting firm McKinsey
& Company, global search activity reached an annual value of $780 billion in 2009 –
equivalent to the GDP of the Netherlands or Turkey.11 This number actually is considered
a relatively conservative estimate given that the research only looked at nine sources of
value for 11 constituencies in five countries.12 While this kind of research does not offer
an accurate accounting, it provides some idea of the actual size of the industry. Not only
have search engines become multi-billion dollar global businesses, but they are actually
changing our social and cultural practices. And this new, immensely lucrative
information market is dominated by US-based search engines Google, Bing, and Yahoo!.

8



Chris Boyette, “Google makes up 25% of Internet Traffic,” CNN, July 23, 2013,
http://money.cnn.com/2013/07/23/technology/google-internet/index.html.
9
“Google’s 2014 income statement information,” https://investor.google.com/financial/tables.html.
10
“Google Takes Home Half of Worldwide Mobile Internet Ad Revenues,” eMarketer, June 13, 2013,
http://www.emarketer.com/Article/Google-Takes-Home-Half-of-Worldwide-Mobile-Internet-AdRevenues/1009966.
11
Jacques Bughin and Laura Corb, “The Impact of Internet Technologies: Search,” McKinsey & Company,
July 2011, http://www.paleycenter.org/assets/international-council/IC-2011-LA/Mobile-App/2011-08-18Impact-of-Internet-technologies-Search.pdf.
12
The nine sources of search value are included in the research are: better matching, time saved, Raised
awareness, price transparency, long tail offering, people matching, problem solving, new business models,
and entertainment. Constituencies include advertisers, retailers, entrepreneurs, content creators, enterprise,
consumers, individual content creators, individual information seekers, health care, education and
government.

4


This new wave of US information industry is expanding its business profile around
the globe. The US search engine industry, and in particular Google, has transformed the
search function on the Internet into an ever more powerful extraterritorial information
system and information infrastructure, and has deepened the information market on a
transnational scale. However, this US-centered system is heavily contested and resisted
by social and political forces as it collides with other states and rival units of capital. As
Dan Schiller puts it, the construction of extraterritorial information networks is pivotal in
expansion of capital and capitalist economy, but its processes are complex and conflicted
given that they are involved with various interests of stakeholders – geopolitical rivals,
domestic and foreign capital, corporate users and other social and political actors.13
Thus, behind the seemingly clean and simple interface of the search box, there is
an immense and swiftly changing political economy of information provision; however,
there is little scrutiny on how the global search engine industry is organized, structured,
and under what principles it operates across territories. This emergence of transnational
search engine services cannot simply be explained by reference to a natural technological
progression.
Given this context, this dissertation draws from the tradition of Critical Political
Economy of Information (PEI) and attempts to offer a full political economy of search, to
uncover important ongoing structural changes within a rapidly evolving system of
information provision. To that end, critical questions demand scrutiny: how did the
search engine – which interacts with a basic human activity – evolve into an ubiquitous
commercial service and a key component of today’s “new economy,” a dynamic global

13

Dan Schiller, “Geopolitical-economic conflict and network infrastructures,” Chinese Journal of
Communication 1, no.1 (2011): 90.

5


information business that is in the process of restructuring both the wider information
industry and our very social lives? How has this occurred? How is search technology
being used and designed, for what purposes, by whom and for what? Who is actually
laboring behind this enormously profitable information industry? Can the US continue to
hold its supremacy over this newfound economic growth zone?
To engage these fundamental questions, the project provides a systematic critical
analysis of the political economy of the global search industry, specifically,
commodification, commercialization, technical infrastructure, labor and geopolitical
aspects of information in order to understand capital logics, accumulation strategies, and
various social and political actors, and their relationships to each other in the
development and expansion of global search engine industry. Specifically by looking at
the search engine industry in the United States, the People's Republic of China (PRC),
and the European Union – global political economic power centers – this dissertation
attempts to reveal characteristics of social, and political struggles around the new
economic growth zone of search and their relationship to the changing dynamic of USled transnational capitalism.
Literature Review
As the search engine has become the major gateway to information, there has
been a growing interest among scholars from a range of fields beginning to recognize the
implications of its social, political and technical functions. A number of scholars rightly
question and refute the popular belief of the search engine as a neutral medium or a new
democratizing alternative medium providing diverse voices.14 Rather, they point out that


14

Matthew Hindman, The Myth of Digital Democracy (Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2009); Lucas Introna, and Helen Nissenbaum, “Shaping the Web: Why the Politics of Search

6


search engines often reinforce dominant cultures and social hierarchies. These critiques
are useful in drawing attention to the growing power of the search engine, and how it
functions in and has consequences on our social, cultural and political lives.
However, there has been little scholarship that directly addresses the political
economy of search, though there are many journalistic accounts of the search engine
industry.15 The exception is Elizabeth Van Couvering, who offers the first political
economy of the search industry, locating the industry within the larger media and
communication industry and identifying a search industry that sells Web traffic rather
than access to audience attention as traditional media industry does.16 She examines the
history, ownership structure and the development of business models of the search engine
industry. Her analysis extends to four different countries: China, Japan, Germany, and
South Africa, and illustrates the dominance of US-based search companies worldwide as
well as the existence of local companies – particularly in China – countering this USbased dominance. Tim Wu’s Master Switch focuses on the US side of the equation, and
more specifically on Google, and argues that information industries tend to go through
open and closed restructuring cycles; so, according to Wu, the current dominance of


Engines Matter,” The Information Society 16, no. 3 (2000): 169 –185; Eszter Hargittai, “ Do You 'Google'?
Understanding Search Engine Use Beyond the Hype,” First Monday 9, no. 3 (2003),
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1127/1047; Alexander Halavais,
Search Engine Society (Cambridge: Polity, 2009); Siva Vaidhyanathan, The Googlization of Everything:
(and Why We Should Worry) (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2011).
15
Auletta, Googled; John Battelle, The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business
and Transformed Our Culture (New York: Portfolio, 2005); Jeff Jarvis, What Would Google Do? (New
York: Collins Business, 2009); Steven Levy, In the Plex: How Google Thinks, Works, and Shapes Our
Lives (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2011).
16
Elizabeth Van Couvering, “Navigational Media: The Political Economy of Online Traffic” in The
Political Economy of Media, ed. Dwayne Winseck & Dal Yong Jin (London: Bloomsbury Academic,
2011): 183-200; Elizabeth Van Couvering, “Search engine bias: the structuration of traffic on the WorldWide Web” (PhD diss., London School of Economics, 2010); Elizabeth Van Couvering, “New media? The
Political Economy of Internet Search Engines” (paper presented at Annual Conference of the International
Association of Media & Communications Researchers, Porto Alegre, Brazil, 2004).

7


Google (closed) is not permanent but part of the recurring “Cycle.”17 For Wu, monopoly
is an inevitable part of the business cycle and it is only a matter of how long this cycle
will last. He perceives the problem of the current political economy of search as a matter
of Google’s monopolistic business practices and an uncompetitive market environment.
While scholarly works on the political economy of search have so far been underdeveloped, there is a long and rich tradition of scholarship on critical political economy
of information (PEI) from which my analytical approach draws. Critical PEI focuses
specifically on the relationship between information and the overall process of global
capitalist development and of democracy by looking at structural changes in ownership,
market structure, division of labor, geopolitics of information, commodification of
information, privatization and commercialization of information, and government
policies. PEI’s primary concern is providing an understanding of the role of information
and its relationship with political economic system within which it operates.
Grounded in PEI tradition, Dan Schiller’s Digital Capitalism provides historical
context for the development of the Internet into a marketplace. He introduces the concept
of digital capitalism in which information and communication is the linchpin of the
changing capitalist political economy, and shows how the Internet developed by the US
government has been rapidly colonized by corporate interests and market logics,
interlocking with neoliberal policy.18 Schiller’s work, How to Think about Information,
offers the entry point for this project as his work provides an alternative theory of
information – information as commodity which is produced, distributed and controlled by


17

Tim Wu, The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,
2010).
18
Dan Schiller, Digital Capitalism: Networking the Global Market System (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
1999).

8


profit-making entities within particular historical conditions rather than having inherently
economic value.19 He posits that information is central to capitalist development and that
the “information commodity has become the prime site of contemporary expansion
within and for the world market system.”20 Information as a commodity form masks the
labor that produced the commodity, one of the key underlying dimensions for critical PEI
and central to my study of search.
Harry Braverman’s Labor and Monopoly Capital provides the first critical and
systematic analysis of changing labor processes with the growth of service sectors under
the capitalist mode of production.21 He refutes the common claim that modern work due
to deployment of science-based technology and automation would result in more “whitecollar” jobs that require higher levels of education and training and exercise more intense
intellectual work by workers while diminishing low-skilled production jobs. On the
contrary, he demonstrates that there has been a strong tendency for mechanization to
bring a systematic deskilling and degrading of many working class- as well as “whitecollar” jobs. Braverman states that under capitalism “a structure is given to all labor
processes that at its extreme polarizes those whose time is infinitely valuable and those
whose time is worth almost nothing.”22 Along with Braverman, David Noble’s work
America by Design is relevant to understanding the division of labor in Internet firms.
Observing the emergence of an engineer class that obtained control over scientific
knowledge in the late 19th century,23 Noble notes that professional engineers hired by


19

Dan Schiller, How to Think about Information (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2006).
Ibid., 41.
21
Harry Braverman, Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the Twentieth Century
(New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974).
22
Braverman, Labor and Monopoly Capital, 58.
23
David Noble, America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate Capitalism (Oxford;
New York: Oxford University Press, 1979).
20

9


corporations became major agents of corporate capital, showing how new technologies
are situated in social processes. Noble links the growth of engineers/managers and
science and technology to the building of US corporate capitalism. He demonstrates that
professional engineers under corporations promote scientific management as well as
automation of production processes with the promise of more control of production and
reduced dependence on a work force.
Building on Braverman, Ursula Huws’ The Making of a Cybertariat theorizes the
impact of information technologies on labor processes in domestic work.24 Huws
documents how household technologies such as the washing machine and stove cleaner
were promoted to “save” domestic labor; yet, they did not result in liberating women
from domestic labor as they had promised. She draws attention to the relationship
between domestic work and the adoption of new technologies in the service sector. Huws
points out that automation and routinization of service industries to increase productivity
and reduce labor cost led to the transfer of work to consumers, a large proportion of
which are often women.
Huws’ more recent work, The Underpinnings of Class in the Digital Age; Living,
Labour and Value, extends her labor theory to conceptualize “digital labor.”25 Resonating
with Dan Schiller’s work on labor theory in How to Think About Information, Huws
challenges the distinction between “mental” and “manual labor” in a digital-based
economy, and argues that, “digital labor cannot be regarded as a discrete form of labor,
separated hermetically from the rest of the economy.”26 Rather than dividing “mental”

24

Ursula Huws, The Making of a Cybertariat: Virtual Work in a Real World (London: Merlin, 2003).
Ursula Huws, “The Underpinnings of Class in the Digital Age; Living, Labour and Value,” Socialist
Register 50 (2014): 80-106.
26
Ibid., 86.
25

10


and “manual” labor, she sees that increasing deployment of information technologies
generates an ever more complex social division of labor, and posits that growing “digital”
or “virtual” labor facilitated by information and communication technologies depends on
a material and physical infrastructure. This view challenges autonomist Marxist scholars
such as Maurizio Lazzarato, Nick Dyer-Witheford, Michael Hardt, and Antonio Negri
who deploy a concept of immaterial labor, considered one of the characteristics of a postindustrial society and distinguished from “physical” labor that produces material goods.27
In particular, Tiziana Terenova, in her article titled Free Labor: Producing Culture for
the Digital Economy,28 associates immaterial labor with free labor on the Web as a
distinctive form of labor in the digital economy that builds websites, produces content,
offers feedback etc. and is appropriated for creating value for capital.
Richard Gillespie’s Manufacturing Knowledge and Stanford Jacoby’s work
Modern Manors are valuable to contextualize labor management within historical
development as this dissertation situates current labor control practices within a longer
historical trajectory.29 Stanford Jacoby provides detailed accounts on the development of
corporate welfare capitalism – corporations providing private welfare programs as a
corporate management strategy to counter the rise of labor unions in the 20th century –
and shows how it managed to survive over time. In the same historical period, Gillespie’s
work Manufactured Knowledge shows that at the peak of welfare capitalism, social and


27

Maurizio Lazzarato, “Immaterial Labor,” in Radical Thought In Italy: A Potential Politics, ed. Paolo
Virno et al. (Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1996), 133-149; Nick Dyer-Witheford,
“Empire, Immaterial Labor, the New Combinations,” Rethinking Marxism: A Journal of Economics,
Culture & Society 13, no. 3-4 (2001): 70-80; Michael Hardt and Antonio Negri, Empire (Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001).
28
Tiziana Terranova, “Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy,” Social Text 63 18, no. 2
(2000): 33-58.
29
Richard Gillespie, Manufacturing Knowledge: A History of the Hawthorne Experiments (Cambridge
[England]: Cambridge University Press, 1991); Jacoby, Sanford Jacoby, Modern Manors: Welfare
Capitalism Since the New Deal (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997).

11


behavior science were introduced to reduce conflict between labor and capital. The
scientific knowledge generated by social scientists on the factory floor presumed its
objectivity and became largely accepted by industrial capitalists as “science.” However,
Gillespie demonstrates that the experiments were constructed and manufactured by
paternalist capitalist management ideology, and ignored the power relations between
capital and workers. These precedents, I will show, possess a contemporary significance
in the Internet industry.
Shifting to the geopolitical dimension of information, Herbert Schiller’s Who
Knows: Information in the Age of the Fortune 500 illuminates how information
technologies had become central in the global political economy, and notes that, “the
information industrial power has become a vital determinant of existing and future power
relations within and between nations.”30 His work illustrates how, already by the late
1970s, the US had begun to exert political power to privilege US-based information
industries in a bid to restore declining US global political economic power.
Anthony Smith’s Geopolitics of Information reaffirms the idea that information
cannot be separated from other political economic conflicts.31 While witnessing the
movement for a New International Information Order (NIIO), Smith warned that new
electronics could be a greater threat to national sovereignty of developing countries than
colonialism itself. Taking into account that Smith was writing 30 years ago, geopolitics
and global political economy have changed. Yet, the geopolitical and economic aspects
of information have been heightened today with the emergence of the Internet as a new


30

Herbert, Schiller, Who Knows: Information In the Age of the Fortune 500 (Norwood, N.J.: ABLEX Pub.
Corp., 1981), 7.
31
Anthony Smith, The Geopolitics of Information: How Western Culture Dominates the World (London:
Faber & Faber, 1980).

12


marketplace, new information domains built over the Internet such as search engines,
social media, e-commerce, and mobile phones, and the current global economic crisis. In
Information and the Crisis Economy, Herbert Schiller offers an extremely germane
insight for today in understanding the role of information as the current economic crisis is
in the process of restructuring global capitalism.32 Schiller highlighted how information
technologies were utilized and reconfigured to overcome economic crisis and stimulate
and revive capitalism by Western nations in the 1980s. As a response to the crisis, there
was a rise of conflicts among nations as countries opened up to transnational capital to
privatize and commercialize information systems. In the 1980s, Schiller forecasted that
the role of transnational corporations (TNCs) would be accelerated in the development of
information systems.
Since this scholarship in the political economy of information noted above, there
has been a radical transformation of information technologies and international
information provision – one which is still taking shape as the Internet has begun to more
fully unleash its explosive potential for capital. My dissertation builds on the existing
literature and contributes to scholarship on the political economy of information.
Chapter Outline
Chapter one sets the stage by situating search within a broader system of
information provision, and illustrates how digital capital ceaselessly seeks to enlarge
information markets around the Internet and through the search engine industry. This
chapter shows how search engine firms, and in particular Google, were able to establish a
point of control on the Internet by examining their accumulation strategies in response to
other major dynamic information domains – social media, ecommerce and the mobile


32

Herbert Schiller, Information and the Crisis Economy (Norwood, N.J.: Ablex Pub. Corp., 1984).

13


Internet. Internet firms are moving into each other’s information domains to wrest control
over the Internet as they compete and ally to extend their positions of control. The
chapter explains that search is at the forefront in the deepening information market,
commercializing and commodifying information around the Internet.
While the first chapter describes the current information landscape, the second
chapter takes the reader through the history of search engines by tracing the evolution of
search business model and search technology. Today, the search engine industry is
supported mainly by advertising; however, search engine technology itself did not
inherently have economic value. Initially, search technologies developed in noncommercial spaces, and users vehemently resisted the idea of ads-based search engines,
believing that search results should not be influenced by commerce. How then has this
shift occurred? Chapter two illustrates digital capital’s efforts to construct advertising
systems that could convert search activities into profit-making businesses. It argues that
Google’s success is not purely about its superior search algorithm, rather it is capital’s
process of converting search results into a profit-making project.
Chapters three and four proceed to examine labor processes behind search
technologies. Chapter three offers an analysis of the emerging division of labor in the
search business. It sketches out three distinctive categories of work – highly skilled, lowwaged, and unwaged labor – and demonstrates how this highly automated search engine
industry has resulted in the generation of a large number of low-paid contingent workers,
and an army of unwaged workers in the form of Internet users. In particular, the chapter
illustrates capital’s long and persistent effort to incorporate diverse forms of unwaged
labor into capitalist accumulation projects.

14


While chapter three illuminates the labor structure behind search technologies,
chapter four extends to an analysis of the labor process and an examination of the
methods of labor management for both waged and unwaged workers. Google is known
for its unusual working environment where its highly paid workers are given
unprecedented freedom, voice within the company, and employee benefits, and unwaged
workers are given an array of “free” information utilities. On the surface, Google seems
to defy the traditional capital and labor relations and go against capital logic; however,
the chapter demonstrates that Google’s current labor control techniques are corporate
management strategies that stem from an earlier era of industrial economy.
Finally, chapter five explicates the role of geopolitics in organizing the search
engine industry and in animating transnational capitalist dynamics. Specifically, this
chapter examines the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and the European Union where
US-based digital capital is facing serious opposition. China constitutes an especially
significant exception to Google’s market dominance, because it is not only the world’s
largest Internet market by number of subscribers, and its most significant economic
growth zone, but also because its reentry into the US-led global capitalist system is
changing the geopolitical landscape. Meanwhile, Europe has been attempting to bolster
its information economy, and the tension over the control over information has once
again reignited with the emergence of the Internet. Further, Edward Snowden’s
revelations of US global surveillance programs have renewed deep-seated fears in Europe
of US domination. By analyzing these two different conflict zones, the chapter
illuminates the role of geopolitics in dynamics of today’s transnational capitalism – and,
in particular, with respect to the information industry.

15


Methods & Sources
This project is rooted within the tradition of critical political economy of
information (PEI). PEI tries to clarify social changes caused by the growth and global
expansion of information industries in terms of the ways in which power is used to
“shape the production, distribution, and use of information as a commodity.”33 PEI is
distinguished from mainstream economics, in as much as it is historical, and engages
with the questions of social justice, equality, and public good.34 Vincent Mosco describes
the four central characteristics of the political economic approach: 1) to understand social
and historical changes; 2) to investigate society as a whole or “totality of social relations”
including economic, social and cultural dimension of life; 3) to discuss social and moral
issues; and 4) to attempt to create social change by transcending the space between theory
and practice.35 Grounded in this intellectual tradition, this dissertation deploys a
multilayered historical, political, and international analysis to understand the political
economy of search.
This project draws on a wide range of scholarly and journalistic works,
government documents, trade/technology journals, major newspapers, industry reports,
and technology blogs. The archival trade press related to information industry is an
indispensable source to trace the evolution of the business model of search. It offers
insight into the interests of different stakeholders, contestations and agreement among
them, and policy issues. Given that search engines have evolved into an advertising
platform, advertising trade press and reports from trade associations like the Digital

33

Vincent Mosco, “Information in the Pay-per view Society,” in The Political Economy of Information, ed.
Vincent Mosco et al. (University of Wisconsin Press, 1988), 3.
34
Vincent Mosco, The Political Economy of Communication, 2nd ed. (Los Angeles: SAGE, 2009): 22-36.
35
Ibid., 2-5; Janet Wasko, “Studying the Political Economy of Media and Information,” Comunicação e
Sociedade 7 (2005): 26-27.

16


Advertising Alliance, and Interactive Advertising Bureau also provide an avenue to peer
into the dynamics between advertisers and publishers, search engine firms, and into
technical and policy issues in the early days of online advertising.
Alongside the trade press, search engine news/blogs such as John Battelle’s
Search Blog, Pandia Search World, Search Engine Round Table, Search Engine Land,
and Search Engine Watch are invaluable because they not only specifically document
search technologies, search engine marketing strategies, and the industry’s responses to
users but also other Internet industries that intersect with search such as social media,
mobile, and e-commerce. Meanwhile, market reports, industry forecasts, company
profiles, financial filings, search engine market data, and statistics indexed in
business/industry databases such as Data Monitor, Business Monitor Online,
Marketresearch.com, Forrest Research, Gartner Research, and Mintel present data on
specific search engine firm profiles, mergers & acquisitions, revenue sources, regulatory
issues, labor markets, market share, market expansion, and political risk in different
regions of the world. Additionally, company filings to the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) contain dense information on financial flows, revenues, competitors,
investment, shareholders, foreign ownership, corporate structure, and market size. These
industry resources assist in building the historical groundwork for pinpointing the
emergence and expansion of search as a business. They do not provide uniform narratives
about the development of search; rather, they open analysis to contradictions and
negotiations among various stakeholders and in adjacent industries.
To take into account the changing IT labor structure, National Science Board’s
Science and Engineering Indicators, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Labor Force Silicon

17


Valley Index by Joint Venture Silicon Valley and Silicon Valley Community Foundation,
OECD’s Science, Technology and Industry Outlook, and reports on the Silicon Valley
workforce from NOVA, a nonprofit, federally funded employment and training agency
are extensively examined to collect data on labor force, wage and income, and types of
work for the technology industry. This ensemble of resources offers an overarching
picture of the labor force and in general the broader trends in the IT workforce within
which the search engine industry is located. However, they are limited to identifying
specific data on the workforce in the search engine industry. To fill this gap, professional
career sites like LinkedIn, Glassdoor, Payscale.com, Indeed.com and companies’ human
resource pages have been utilized to find out the number of employees including contract
workers, types of jobs, and salaries. These databases do not offer accurate data, but they
are used as general indicators.
While resources around the US search engine market are easily accessible,
materials on the search engine industry in China and Europe are limited because of
language barriers, particularly in the Chinese case. Despite this limitation, the English
versions of Chinese news sources such as Xinhua, China Daily, Asian Business daily,
China Digital Times, and China Economic Review are foundational to tracing the overall
economic conditions and information industry in general. In addition, Chinese Internetrelated Websites such as China Online Marketing, China Internet Watch, and China
TechNews are valuable to locate information on business strategies, market
developments, as well as news on regulatory changes related to the Internet in China.
For the European Union market, JRC Information Society Unit, European
Commission publications and press release, European Commission’s Digital Agenda

18


give political context to understanding information policy, regulations, and the economic
role of the European ICT industry. Major European news sources and reports from IT
lobbying groups like Competitive Online Marketplace and Fair Search also help to
investigate transnational capitalist rivalries and track on public policy shifts related to the
industry. Finally, US government documents from Department of Commerce, Federal
Trade Commission (FTC), Federal Communications Commission (FCC), Department of
State, Office of the United States Trade Representative (USTR), and U.S. China
Economic and Security Review Commission are examined to understand the role of states
as well as geopolitical factors in shaping the direction of the search engine industry.

19


Chapter 1
Situating Search
The first chapter begins by situating the search engine industry within a broader
changing online information landscape in order to call attention to the larger process of
commodification in and around the Internet. It shows that the scope of search business is
expanding, as search engine firms – in particular Google – are no longer merely trying to
control this one domain. To maintain its dominance as well as to expand control over the
Internet, search engine giant Google is extending its profit-making endeavors across the
Internet, and opening up new “territories of profit” to use Gary Fields’ term.36
Two decades after the US government relinquished its publicly-funded Internet
backbone to private sector corporations, the Internet continues to be radically
reconstructed as a consumer medium and global market at the public’s expense.37 But,
there is still no shortage of stories exalting the promise of the Internet to lift the human
condition, from remote Africa to poverty-stricken rural India to the Amazonian jungle to
war-torn Afghanistan to Cairo’s Tahrir Square to inner-city America to homeless camps
in Silicon Valley. The pretext of promotion of Internet technologies in every part of our
lives rests persistently in reducing economic inequality, increasing political participation,
and enhancing education, health and democracy. The premise is that if we are all
connected to the Web, well-armed and skilled with information technologies, then society
could make the shift to becoming more just and equitable. If this utopian ideology is to be

36

Gary Fields, Territories of Profit: Communications, Capitalist Development, and the Innovation of G.F.
Swift and Dell Computer (Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University Press, 2004).
37
Vincent Mosco, The Digital Sublime: Myth, Power, and Cyberspace (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press,
2004); Schiller, Digital Capitalism; Schiller, How to Thinks about Information; Robert McChesney, Digital
Disconnect: How Capitalism Is Turning the Internet Against Democracy (New York: The New Press,
2013).

20


believed, Internet technologies as a transformative force are supposed to empower the
oppressed, challenge oppressors, facilitate the expansion of public goods and deliver a
better world.
Despite this persistent mainstream rhetoric, the structural changes that are occurring
in the information sphere today are leading in completely opposite directions. Far from
moving away from a market economy, the Internet is at the center of economic
development in which market logics prevail in determining the shape of the information
landscape. Instead of delivering an alternative space to capitalist society where public
interests are protected, commons are expanded, and democratic ideals are exercised, the
Internet has been turned into a battleground of labor conflict and units of capital for
control of new markets. The search engine industry, and in particular Google, is at the
fulcrum of this battle.
A Point of Control
The popular notion is that the Internet embodies a decentralized mode of provision;
thus, no one entity can control it. In the widely-cited book The Wealth of Networks,
Yochai Benkler celebrates this technical architecture of the Internet, posits how the
networked information economy is different from the industrial economy of the preInternet era, and promotes a new mode of production that is outside of the market
economy.38 Yet, contrary to Benkler’s optimism, capital has a firm grip over the Internet
while democratic information activities are mainly marginal. Google’s Executive
Chairman Eric Schmidt at the D9 conference in 2011 said that the “Internet is now ruled


38

Yochai Benkler, The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets and Freedom
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006).

21


by Google, Amazon, Apple and Facebook.”39 Along these lines, in 2012, cyberpunk
author Bruce Sterling wrote: “it made less and less sense to talk about ‘the Internet,’ ‘the
PC business,’ ‘telephones,’ ‘Silicon Valley,’ or ‘the media,’ and much more sense to just
study Google, Apple, Facebook, Amazon and Microsoft.”40
These descriptions are limited because participation in the full Internet political
economy is wider transnationally and multi-sectionally; however, they offer an entry
point to situate search industry within the larger information landscape. On the one hand,
these most dynamic information domains – search, social media, e-commerce, operating
systems, handheld devices – appear on the surface to be separate information spheres.
Yet, they are each moving into each other’s territories in order to defend their existing
profit centers and to cultivate new profit opportunities. They constitute centers of gravity
facing new major competitors and ever-changing alliances. The search industry therefore
takes us to the heart of the overall domain.
The search engine industry, as described by Van Couvering, started its core
business of navigation services predicated on media platforms that mediate between the
user and content in the networked environment.41 The industry is an intermediary, based
on creating and exploiting Web traffic as its primary asset or saleable good. Considering
this position strictly within the Internet “ecosystem,” the search business was technically
vulnerable. Whoever controlled the network infrastructure level – i.e., AT&T, Comcast
or other telecommunication companies – might attain leverage over search functions


39

Rafe Needeman, “Eric Schmidt: 'Gang of four' rules tech,” CNET, May 13, 2011,
http://www.cnet.com/news/eric-schmidt-gang-of-four-rules-tech/.
40
Jon Evans, “The Internet: We’re Doing It Wrong, 2013,” Tech Crunch, August 18, 2013,
http://techcrunch.com/2013/08/18/the-internet-were-doing-it-wrong/.
41
Van Couvering, “Navigational Media: The Political Economy of Online Traffic”; Van Couvering,
“Search engine bias.”

22


themselves.42 Yet, contrary to the limitation of technical structure, Google and the search
engine industry – extending to Yahoo! and Bing – without owning the backbone and its
own content were initially able to establish a new point of control on the Web by
focusing on the information discovery function.
By situating itself between users and the Internet, the search engine industry
established a critical point of control over information access. Tim Wu describes Google
as controlling the “Master Switch” on the Web in similar fashion to telephone girls at
switchboards in the past, who made connections between parties, and to the switch that
can determine who and what to connect.43 This rise of the search engines, in particular
Google, as an access point to the Internet has shifted the dynamics of and destabilized the
information landscape – and spurred the creation of Search Engine Optimization (SEO),
an entirely new parasitic multi-billion dollar marketing industry. The content industries
now have to rely on the search engine to reach potential audiences on the Web. Google’s
ongoing disputes with publishing, newspaper, music, and film industries over copyright
issues and privacy, computer and mobile industry over patents and antitrust cases and
telecommunication industry over “net neutrality” around the world are showing the battle
to be between different units of capital and the growing power of the search engine
industry over the Internet. How was it that Google and the other search engines, which
owned neither network nor content, were able to establish such a point of control on the
Web?
Traditionally, a search engine’s function is to point to content. Echoing this notion,
Google touted its success that it “…may be the only company in the world whose stated


42
43

Wu, The Master Switch, 284.
Ibid.

23


goal is to have users leave its Website as quickly as possible.”44 In 2010, Eric Schmidt
reiterated this point once again and said Google would not create content but simply be a
conduit for it; he was “careful to define a line where we don't cross into content” and
wanted to remain a “neutral platform for content and applications.” Yet, search engine
firms are no longer merely pointing to information; rather, increasingly they own,
manage, host, store, digitize and duplicate information to maintain and extend their
marketplace and to pre-empt potential high profit functions and services.
Search engine firms are increasingly expanding their ownership of Web properties
by creating “free” services, offering a wide range of data, content, services and
applications, and incorporating them into their domain of profit. As against Schmidt’s
claim that Google is merely a conduit to information, it is actually weaving through the
entire Internet commodity chain to extend its profit territories. The company has indeed
expanded its focus to encompassing the Internet backbone, hardware, content, services
and applications.
Google’s 2013 annual report corroborates that its business is no longer limited to
search. It reports that Google’s core businesses are search and display advertising, the
Android operating system platform, consumer content through Google Play, Enterprise,
Commerce and hardware products.45 The company competes with any companies that
“seek to connect people with information on the Web and provide them with relevant
advertising.”46 Google is undoubtedly one of the major players on the Internet; however,
its position of control on the Internet is far from secure given the Internet industry’s


44

Matt McGee, “Google’s New Philosophy: We’re A Portal,” Search Engine Land, September 9, 2010,
http://searchengineland.com/googles-new-philosophy-were-a-portal-50216.
45
Google Inc. 2013 annual report, http://investor.google.com/pdf/20131231_google_10K.pdf.
46
Ibid.

24


dynamism and volatility. Rather, the search giant is battling to keep its position as the
main gateway for consumers to the Internet as it tries to defend its core ads business as
well as diversifying into new markets to enlarge its profit territories – which lead it to
engagement in multipoint competition and strategic alliances across markets.
Unfinished Battle
Since early 2000, Google has been the unquestioned leader of the global search
engine market. This makes it seem as if the search market is fully stabilized; yet, in
reality, it is far from stable. Besides emerging competitors Baidu in China and Yandex in
Russia, Google’s major domestic search rivals Yahoo! and Bing are still in the game with
10.0% and 19.3% market share respectively in the US.47
While they have sustained a foothold, Yahoo! and Bing have not been able to earn a
bigger market share in search. Thus, in 2009, the two companies built a strategic alliance
to combat Google by striking a 10-year deal where Microsoft agreed to provide search
results on Yahoo!. In return, Yahoo! would be responsible for ads sales and for attracting
premium ads. Under the agreement, Microsoft will pay Yahoo! 88% of the revenue it
gains from search on Yahoo!’s site48 while it integrates Yahoo!’s search technology into
its own existing Web search platforms.49 For this deal, Yahoo! gave up its search
technologies and outsourced to Bing. Yet, the alliance did not bear the fruit that they
anticipated, and so far Yahoo! has been earning very little under Bing-powered search.50

47

“US Search Engine Ranking,” ComScore, September 17, 2014,
http://www.comscore.com/Insights/Market-Rankings/comScore-Releases-August-2014-US-Search-EngineRankings.
48
David Goldman, “Microsoft and Yahoo: Search partners,” CNN, July 29, 2009,
http://money.cnn.com/2009/07/29/technology/microsoft_yahoo/.
49
Ibid.
50
Danny Sullivan, “As The Yahoo-Microsoft Search Alliance Falls Short, Could A Yahoo-Google Deal
Emerge?” Search Engine Land, July 12, 2012,
http://searchengineland.com/yahoo-microsoft-search-alliance-google-127843.

25


In 2013, according to the Wall Street Journal, Yahoo!’s ad revenue from search dropped
10%, and its display-ad revenue, about 40% of the company’s sales, dropped 11% from
the previous year.51 Today, most of Yahoo!’s profits come from China-based ecommerce giant Alibaba, where Yahoo! still holds a 24% stake after selling back 16% to
Alibaba. Yahoo! received $7.6 billion in cash and stock to sell half of its holdings.52
With cash from its Alibaba holding, Yahoo! purchased the Tumblr social network
for $1.1 billion as well as nearly 40 other start-ups. After these acquisitions, many of the
products were shut down; Yahoo!’s intention was to obtain engineers. Since CEO
Marissa Mayer, a former Google executive, took over the company in 2012, Yahoo! has
been trying to revive its sagging business by focusing on the mobile market. Yahoo!
Senior Vice President of Mobile and Emerging Products Adam Cahan said, “we used
talent acquisition as one of those ways of getting us to scale … The vast majority have
been, by the numbers, talent deals.”53 Because of its acquisition spree, the number of
mobile engineers at Yahoo! increased from about 37 in 2012 to more than 500 in 2014.54
In 2012, the company formed its mobile unit and has reorganized most of its existing
Web properties, including Weather, Finance, Flickr etc., to make them compatible with
smartphones and tablets. As Yahoo! pushes for a mobile-first strategy, the company is
also beefing up its content business by launching a mobile-friendly digital magazine
platform and producing original content to host Yahoo!’s expansive native advertising.



51

Amir Efrati, “Yahoo's Ad Struggles Persist,” Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323346304578427052911177678.
52
Michale Liedtke, “Yahoo closes $7.6 billion deal with Alibaba Group,” Yahoo Finance, September 18,
2012, http://finance.yahoo.com/news/yahoo-closes-7-6-billion-deal-alibaba-group-161614948-finance.html.
53
Richard Nieva, “Yahoo's mobile chief: Acquisition spree about playing 'catch-up,'” CNET, June 8, 2014,
http://www.cnet.com/news/yahoos-mobile-chief-says-acquisition-spree-is-about-playing-catch-up/.
54
Ibid.

26


With 400 million monthly mobile users, Yahoo! is searching for new business
alliances since the company does not own the phone, operating system, browser or a
massive user base like Apple, Google or Facebook. Yahoo! CEO Mayer stated that the
company had to rely on strong partnerships with other Internet firms as Yahoo! aims to
increase its presence in mobile business. In particular, Yahoo! has been seeking a deeper
strategic alliance with Apple; Apple has captured the largest smartphone share and 60%
of all smartphone profits in the US,55 and Yahoo! is already supplying data to power
Apple’s voice-activated search Siri, and Yahoo!’s Finance and weather sites are
preloaded in iPhones and iPads.56 Through this strategic partnership with Apple, Yahoo!
intends to increase its Web traffic and turn into a bigger mobile player. Apple’s
partnership with Yahoo! is not altruistic or sympathetic toward struggling Yahoo!. It is a
way to push against Google, and to seek an alternative to Google’s content and services,
given Apple still uses Google’s search service as the default on Apple’s mobile devices.57
For Apple, Yahoo! is a perfect partner as there are no overlapping business interests
between them since Yahoo! owns neither hardware, operating system nor mobile app
store.58
Meanwhile, despite its struggles to gain search market share, Microsoft has so far
held onto its search engine Bing. As of 2014, Bing has 18.2 percent of all searches – an


55

Chuck Jones, “Apple's U.S. Smartphone Market Share Holding Steady Against Every Competitor,”
Forbes, April 7, 2014,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/chuckjones/2014/04/07/apples-u-s-smartphone-market-share-holding-steadyagainst-every-competitor/.
56
Amir Efrati and Jessica Lessin, “Yahoo, Apple Discuss Deeper iPhone Partnership,” Wall Street Journal,
April 9, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887324050304578413151401633878.
57
Ibid.
58
Ibid.

27


all-time high – and a gain from 16.3 percent in December 2012.59 Yet, even after allying
with Yahoo!, Bing hasn’t made a dent in Google’s search market dominance. Microsoft’s
Online Services Division is one of its most expensive operations, having lost around $11
billion since 2005.60 It is revealing that Microsoft apparently believes that it cannot afford
to ground its costly albatross Bing.
Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates sees search as a fundamental technology and core
business for Microsoft.61 Bing is integrated into various Microsoft products and services
including Windows Phone 7, streaming video, live TV on the Xbox, and Windows 8.62
Thus, it’s hard to untangle; but more importantly search is also a key strategic piece to
expand into the mobile sector. In 2013, Microsoft acquired Nokia’s smartphone business
and spent another $2.2 billion to license the company's intellectual property. By obtaining
a phone manufacturer, Microsoft is trying to follow Apple’s accumulation strategy model
that deeply integrates hardware, software, and services. Nokia is still the second biggest
phone maker in the world behind Samsung; thus, with this acquisition, Microsoft is now
the world's second largest cell phone manufacturer by sales. By leveraging its Nokia
market power, Microsoft is betting on a global mobile search engine to power its mobile
services. Yet, there is another reason for Microsoft to keep Bing, whose growth hinges on
the international market. Given global Internet penetration is still roughly 35%, there are
many countries where the search market has not been developed or occupied by Google

59

Matt McGee, “Bing Ends 2013 With All-Time High In US Market Share, But Google Also Up,” Search
Engine Land, January 15, 2014, http://searchengineland.com/bing-ends-2013-with-all-time-high-in-usmarket-share-but-google-also-up-comscore-181876.
60
Brad Reed, “Microsoft reportedly still refuses to give up on Bing,” BRG, September 3, 2013,
http://bgr.com/2013/09/03/microsoft-bing-future-plans/.
61
Greg Sterling, “Sell Bing? Makes No Sense, Says Microsoft’s Bill Gates — It’s A Core Business,”
Search Engine Land, May 7, 2014, http://searchengineland.com/bill-gates-bing-fundamental-technologymicrosoft-190793.
62
Tim Carmody, “Why Microsoft Can’t — and Shouldn’t — Give Up on Bing,” Wired, July 28, 2011,
http://www.wired.com/2011/07/future-of-microsoft-bing/.

28


or other search engine firms. Microsoft seeks its future growth in this still expansionary
international market.
Defending the Core
While Yahoo! and Bing are trying to maintain their footing in the search market,
Google is busy defending its core business – advertising. Google’s search ads remain its
essential profit source. However, as the nature of search shifts and people increasingly
use mobile devices to find what they want to buy, eat, entertain and learn, Google’s
desktop search ads are expected to decline. To mitigate future losses in desktop search
ads revenue, Google is looking for new ads venues for a bigger piece of the advertising
pie. And it has been turning its attention to display ads for brand advertising in which
Yahoo! was once the main player.63 Google sees display as one of the next big drivers of
its revenue growth, and it is readying itself to conquer this space. According to the Wall
Street Journal, approximately 1,000 of Google’s engineers have been deployed to work
on display technology.64 Due to the rise of online video, social media and mobile, the
online display ad market has been growing at 21% annually – opposed to 13 percent
annual growth for paid search – and is expected to reach $74.4 billion in 2016.65 Display
advertising across all platforms grew by 32.4% globally in 2013 – the greatest increase of


63

Mark Sweney, “Google targets big brand advertisers with 'game-changing' technology,” Guardian,
December 28, 2013, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/dec/29/google-advertising-viewabilitytechnology.
64
Amir Efrati, “Google Display Chief Makes Pitch to Publishers,” Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2011,
http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2011/06/23/google-display-chief-makes-pitch-to-publishers/.
65
Ginny Marvin, “Display To Eclipse Paid Search Ad Spend In 2016, Mobile Set To Become 4th-Largest
Ad Medium,” Marketing Land, April 7, 2014,
http://marketingland.com/display-eclipse-paid-search-ad-spend-2016-mobile-set-become-4th-largest-admedium-79309.

29


any segment in the ad market, but still only 4.5% share of the total.66 According to
ZenithOptimedia, spending on display advertising will soon overtake paid search.67
Google’s $3.1 billion acquisition of display ads company DoubleClick in 2007 was
a milestone in its efforts to extend its business beyond search ads.68 Google’s road to
display ads was paved by the state as the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) cleared the
merger between DoubleClick and Google despite opposition from privacy advocates who
pointed out that the deal would lead to the control of more private data by one single
company. DoubleClick had been the long-standing leader in behavioral advertising,
having built its business through consumer profiling during the dotcom era of the
1990s.69 By integrating DoubleClick into its massive advertising infrastructure, Google
was able to build the world’s largest display ads platform. With the acquisition of
DoubleClick, Google quickly captured 12.6 percent of the US display ads market.70
Google sells display ads on its own Websites, mainly on YouTube as well as
through more than two million Web publishers using an automated marketplace in
Google’s DoubleClick Ad Exchange.71 In particular, Google is augmenting YouTube
content and repackaging it to appease TV advertisers, given TV advertising revenue is

66

Ingrid Lunden, Internet Display Advertising Grew 32%” Tech Crunch, 2014, January 27, 2014,
http://techcrunch.com/2014/01/27/nielsen-internet-advertising-grew-32-in-2013-but-its-still-only-4-5-ofspend-vs-tv-at-57-6/.
67
Ginny Marvin, “Display To Eclipse Paid Search Ad Spend In 2016, Mobile Set To Become 4th-Largest
Ad Medium,” Marketing Land, April 7, 2014,
http://marketingland.com/display-eclipse-paid-search-ad-spend-2016-mobile-set-become-4th-largest-admedium-79309.
68
Catherine Holahan, “Google's DoubleClick Strategic Move,” Business Week, April 14, 2007,
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2007-04-14/googles-doubleclick-strategic-movebusinessweekbusiness-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice.
69
Crain, “The Revolution will be Commercialized.”
70
Megan Garber, “Google plans for “the second phase of the display ad revolution” with a focus on
smartphones and tablets,” Nieman Journalism Lab, June 28, 2011,
http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/06/google-plans-for-the-second-phase-of-the-display-ad-revolution-witha-focus-on-smartphones-and-tablets/.
71
Amir Efrati, “Google Display Chief Makes Pitch to Publishers,” Wall Street Journal, June 23, 2011,
http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2011/06/23/google-display-chief-makes-pitch-to-publishers/.

30


still the largest advertising segment. Google quickly realized that in order to attract more
premium advertisers, YouTube had to have high-quality, professionally produced content
to spur advertisers to spend premium ad dollars on branded programming.72
Hence, in an effort to enrich its content inventory, Google has even begun to invest
in content production to lure future advertisers. In 2011 – 2012, Google invested over 100
million dollars to produce and distribute professional quality video on its 100+ original
channels exclusively to its YouTube platform.73 Yet, this did not increase viewership as
the company had expected; so now Google is taking a different approach to be closer to
the content that can draw viewers. This time they’re doing that with physical production
spaces.
Google has been opening up studio space to provide creators with needed
production space and resources. The company has physical production sites in London,
Los Angeles, Tokyo, and New York where content creators can use the YouTube video
production facility free of charge. But then the question remains: Why is Google involved
in the movie Studio business and offering the space to content creators for free? This is
Google’s consistent business strategy. It offers “free” services in order to attain a
privileged market position; with this long view in mind, Google is betting that there is big
potential profit for the company by backing creators with “free” production resources.
Ultimately, Google’s aim is to generate more premium YouTube content, which it
hopes will lead to larger audiences, more ad revenues and diversified revenue sources.74
Google publicizes the studio as “free” space, but content creators must apply to use the

72

Matthew Garrahan, “Google invests in YouTube studio in LA,” Financial Times, July 12, 2013,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/3f4c846a-e9c1-11e2-bf03-00144feabdc0.html#slide0.
73
Jon Russell, “YouTube prepares its second Channels push, 60% of content partners to lose funding,”
TNW, November 12, 2012, http://thenextweb.com/media/2012/11/12/youtube-set-to/.
74
Garrahan, “Google invests in YouTube studio in LA.”

31


facility. In order to qualify, content creators must have YouTube channels with at least
10,000 subscribers and 100,000 views per month. While Google does not claim
ownership of the content, its strategy is to improve the quality of YouTube channel
programs to draw premium advertising and to expand its paid channels by investing in
resources. Paralleling the building of studio spaces, the company is boosting up its
content efforts by bringing in major partners including Fuji TV, TBS, Vicom and
Crypton Future Media, Dentsu and manga publisher Shuseisha to produce YouTube
channels and investing $35 million in Machinima, one of YouTube’s most popular
networks.75
Google, of course, isn’t the only company chasing after this growing display ads
market.76 Although Google pulled down $4 billion in the US display ad space in 2013,
players like AOL, Amazon and Facebook are closing the gap.77 In particular, social
media giant Facebook has been directly going after Google’s main ads revenue sources.
Facebook has been drawing on its massive user base and hoarding “intent data” which is
at the core of the search engine industry.78 As of 2013, Facebook had over 1.23 billion
active users who generate content, and data in interaction with each other.79 Facebook


75

Josh Ong, “Google’s YouTube Space production studio arrives in Asia with new Tokyo location,” TNW,
February 16, 2012, http://thenextweb.com/google/2013/02/14/googles-youtube-space-production-studioarrives-in-asia-with-new-tokyo-location/; Ryan Lawler, “Machinima Gets $35M In Funding, Led By
Google,” Tech Crunch, May 21, 2012, http://techcrunch.com/2012/05/21/machinima-youtube-35m/.
76
Frederic Lardinois, “ Google Launches Partner Select, A Programmatic Video Ad Marketplace For
Premium Content,” Tech Crunch, June 4, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2014/06/04/google-launchespartner-select-a-programmatic-video-ad-marketplace-for-premium-content/.
77
Kelly Liyakasa, “Facebook Pulls Ahead Of Google In US Digital Display Ad Revenues,” adexchanger,
March 11, 2014, http://www.adexchanger.com/online-advertising/report-facebook-pulls-ahead-of-googlein-us-digital-display-ad-revenues/.
78
Maurice Coyle, “How Facebook beat Wall Street with data and tripled its share price,” TNW, July 21,
2014, http://thenextweb.com/socialmedia/2014/07/21/facebook-beat-wall-street-data-tripled-share-price/.
79
Emil Protalinski, “Facebook passes 1.23 billion monthly active users, 945 million mobile users, and 757
million daily users,” TWN, January 29, 2014, http://thenextweb.com/facebook/2014/01/29/facebookpasses-1-23-billion-monthly-active-users-945-million-mobile-users-757-million-daily-users/.

32


challenges Google’s most lucrative business as it offers information through social
engagement within the Facebook platform, bypassing users’ need for Google. In
response, Google launched its own social media platform Google Plus (Google+) and has
been trying its hand in the social media market. It has not been able to combat Facebook,
and in July 2014 Google announced that its first social networking site Orkut – which had
been popular in Brazil and India – would be shutting down after years of struggling
against Facebook.
Facebook is now the second most visited Website in the world after Google, and
gets about 82% of its revenue from advertising, with the rest coming from fees resulting
from its Credit Platform, which provide payment services to gaming partners like Zynga.
It pulled in $7.8 billion in revenue in 2013, far behind Google’s $50+ billion revenue.
After its IPO in 2012, Facebook’s viability was questioned by its investors, as the
company had not been able to fully monetize its user traffic. This is rapidly changing,
particularly in the mobile space, which will be illustrated in more detail in a later section.
Facebook is turning into a mobile company with the potential to take a significant amount
of advertising dollars away from Google.
From a different direction, Amazon, Google’s biggest advertiser, is also threatening
Google’s core business. As more Internet users begin their searches on Amazon's
marketplace and bypass Google, Google loses an opportunity to show them ads.80 Over
the years, Amazon has become the search engine for e-commerce, which also cuts into


80

Rolfe Winker, “Amazon vs. Google: It's A War for the Shopping Search,” Wall Street Journal,
December 20, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304173704579265421113585650.

33


Google’s core function and pulls away searchers from Google’s own Web properties.81 If
Google has built its advertising business by transforming the Internet into an ads
platform, Amazon, the modern day Sears catalog, has built its business by organizing the
Internet as a vehicle for retail business. Since Google is selling ads and Amazon is selling
products, they would seem to be in two different business areas. However, since the same
companies who buy ads on Google are the companies who sell products on Amazon, if
searchers are going directly to Amazon and bypassing Google to find products to
purchase then those companies might pull or reduce ads spending on Google. So far,
Google has not lost traffic due to Amazon, but to defend if not extend its core business,
the company wants to deter searchers going straight to Amazon by becoming a
destination site, not just to offer information about products, but to sell them.82
Thus, Google is now moving into Amazon’s e-commerce domain. Google’s interest
in e-commerce goes back to 2000 when its shopping search engine was called Froogle,
but it remained a peripheral business. At that time, Google merely crawled and indexed
product data from vendors’ Websites and monetized it using AdWords ads platform.83
But in 2007, Froogle was renamed Google Product Search and was integrated into
Google Search; listings from the service appeared in Web search results. Google Product
Search was not even listed on the main home page and was under “More” options.84
However, by 2012, Google had fully engaged in the e-commerce business as it again
revamped and rebranded its product as Google Shopping. Google changed the service

81

Marcus Wohlsen, “Google’s Plan to Snatch Shopping From Amazon Is Working,” Wired,
http://www.wired.com/2013/01/google-takes-on-amazon/.
82
Ibid.
83
Wikpedia, “Google Shopping,” Wikipedia,” last modified August 24, 2014,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Google_Shopping.
84
Danny Sullivan, “Goodbye Froogle, Hello Google Product Search!” Search Engine Land, April 18, 2007,
http://searchengineland.com/goodbye-froogle-hello-google-product-search-11001.

34


from a free- to paid-for inclusion model in which merchants paid Google to list their
products, services and display images of said products on Google search results pages.
Google’s move to paid listings is a radical change from its original business
principles. Google distinguished itself from early paid search engines like GoTo.com in
which businesses had to pay in order to be included in search results. Google denounced
paid listings, saying it would never implement this practice. As Danny Sullivan, a
Founding Editor of Search Engine Land, quickly pointed out, when Google filed its IPO
in 2004, it specifically indicated that paid inclusion should be condemned, saying this
under the “Don’t Be Evil” section of the founders letter:85
Google users trust our systems to help them with important decisions: medical,
financial and many others. Our search results are the best we know how to produce.
They are unbiased and objective, and we do not accept payment for them or for
inclusion or more frequent updating.86
At that time, Google’s firm stand against paid listing even pressured Microsoft and
ASK.com to drop their paid inclusion programs, and Yahoo! finally dropped its program
in 2009.87 Why then did Google bring back the paid inclusion model that the company
had so vehemently denounced?
Google is waging a war against Amazon, which currently dominates Internet retail
and is threatening Google’s search business. In 2012, the Forrest Report claimed that
30% of all online shoppers started their product search at Amazon, which constitutes a


85

Danny Sullivan, “ Once Deemed Evil, Google Now Embraces ‘Paid Inclusion’,” Marketing Land, March
30, 2012, http://marketingland.com/once-deemed-evil-google-now-embraces-paid-inclusion-13138.
86
Ibid.
87
Danny Sullivan, “Google “Comparison” Units Get New Look; Change Highlights Paid Inclusion In
Some Vertical Search Areas,” Search Engine Land, April 30, 2012,
http://searchengineland.com/google-comparison-units-get-new-look-change-highlights-paid-inclusion-insome-vertical-search-areas-119865.

35


direct threat for Google’s core business.88 By incorporating retail business into Google’s
business domain, the company is trying to protect its search business as well as move into
the lucrative adjacent e-commerce market, which reached $225 billion in 2013 according
to the U.S. Department of Commerce.89
By leveraging its dominance in search, Google is today determined to take a bigger
piece of the e-commerce market as well. Google’s e-commerce ambition shows in
displays on its search results.90 For a long time, Google insisted that advertisers use only
small text ads, but now Google’s Product Listing Ads (PLA) first served up images along
with price at the top premium area on search results, then on top of ads results on the side
when users conducted searches for related products. In fact, Google’s product-listing ads
have been attracting advertisers, and Walmart and eBay Inc. are the top buyers of
Google’s product ads.91 It even launched Google Shopping Express same-day delivery in
San Francisco, Los Angeles, and New York City after Amazon announced it was offering
same-day shipping in 12 cities. Google wants to make sure that they are in every path of
users’ information activities from search to delivery of actual products direct to
consumers’ doors.
While both are profiting off Internet consumers, Amazon as a retailer generates its
profit directly through transactions while Google profits by sending traffic to merchants.

88

Rick Backus, “Google Drops Its Veil At Times, Reveals Ecommerce Ambitions,” Search Engine Land,
September 6, 2012, http://searchengineland.com/google-drops-its-veil-at-times-reveals-ecommerceambitions-131321.
89
Bruce, Kelly, “What's At Stake As Google Takes On Amazon?”
http://www.investopedia.com/articles/investing/053014/whats-stake-google-takes-amazon.asp.
90
Rick Backus, “Google Drops Its Veil At Times, Reveals Ecommerce Ambitions,” Search Engine Land,
September 6, 2012, http://searchengineland.com/google-drops-its-veil-at-times-reveals-ecommerceambitions-131321.
91
Rolfe, Winker, “Amazon vs. Google: It's A War for the Shopping Search,” Wall Street Journal,
December 20, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702304173704579265421113585650.

36


This is the key difference in accumulation strategies. Google doesn’t have Amazon’s
inventory nor an industrial-sized infrastructure by way of Amazon’s regional distribution
centers; instead, it relies on third-party retailers that consumers access through the
Google search engine.92 Amazon’s growth has come at massive capital cost with thin
profit margins,93 but Google, with its deep pockets and profitable ads business,
is enhancing its e-commerce business and at the same time protecting its advertising
business from Amazon.
Meanwhile, Amazon is also eyeing Google’s turf in online advertising as the
company is trying to diversify its revenue sources. Amazon has 237 million active
customers’ data collected over decades. It’s not merely clickstream data and payment
information, but also detailed shopping data of what people searched for.94 Madison
Avenue calls this “intent” data, which are used by marketers to target sales along with
demographics, geography, lifestyle, and purchasing patterns. Jeff Lanctot, the chief
media officer for Razorfish, the Seattle-based digital marketing agency, said, “Amazon
understands better than anyone else what consumers want.”95 Advertisers have been
demanding that Amazon disclose their consumers’ behavioral data, while Wall Street
would look to Amazon to generate profit from advertisers. Increased profit margins from
ad sales could help mitigate Amazon’s high capital costs and thin profit margin retail
strategy. Amazon has been experimenting with ad platforms, searching for advertising


92

Jess Bolluyt, “Google Takes on eBay, Amazon With Shopping and Search Update,” Wall St. Cheat
Sheet, June 20, 2014, http://wallstcheatsheet.com/technology/google-takes-on-ebay-amazon-withshopping-and-search-update.html/?a=viewall.
93
George Anders, “No Stores? No Salesmen? No Profit? No Problem for Amazon,” MIT Technology
Review, November 7, 2013, http://www.technologyreview.com/news/520801/no-stores-no-salesmen-noprofit-no-problem-for-amazon/.
94
Jay Greene, “Look out, Google: Amazon's eyeing your turf,” CNET, 2013, May 24, 2013,
http://news.cnet.com/8301-1023_3-57586017-93/look-out-google-amazons-eyeing-your-turf/.
95
Ibid.

37


strategies that won’t repel its customers, and developing ads for Amazon Prime Instant
and Kindle devices. Amazon incentivizes consumers to get used to its ads by offering
subsidized rates for devices with ads. While Amazon’s $1 billion ad revenue is still
merely 1% of their annual revenue in 2013, and nothing close to a threat for Google, it
has already increased its ads revenue higher than Twitter, Pandora and LinkedIn.96
An Economist article once equated the current battle over the Internet by major
Internet firms to George R.R. Martin’s fantasy novel Game of Thrones, complete with
power plays in fractious and rapidly changing landscapes.97 The battle here is among big
units of digital capital as they seek to control their own domains while extending and
searching for new territories to conquer.
Going Mobile
Google’s chief business officer Nikesh Arora once stated, “The fundamental tenet
is not to speak about mobile, mobile, mobile. It’s really about living with the users.”98
That is, the tenet of digital capital is not just maintaining dominance over one’s own
domain; rather, its aim is to organize and reorganize every inch of people’s social lives
into the profit domain. Given this expansionist ambition, mobile Internet is a vital
platform for digital capital, the goal to live with users and their always-on mobile devices
tied to an individual identification that can be tracked and monitored. The integration of
mobile phone and Internet connectivity allows for digital capital to overcome physical



96

Jay Greene, “Amazon easing into $1B sideline business: as sales,” Seattle Times, March 18, 2014,
http://www.seattletimes.com/business/amazon-easing-into-1b-sideline-business-ad-sales/.
97
“Technology Giants At War,” Economist, December 1, 2012,
http://www.economist.com/news/21567361-google-apple-facebook-and-amazon-are-each-others-throatsall-sorts-ways-another-game.
98
Claire Miller, “Revenue and Profit Rise at Google, but Mobile Is a Persistent Challenge,” New York
Times, January 30, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/01/31/technology/revenue-and-profit-rise-atgoogle-but-mobile-struggles-continue.html.

38


obstacles to reach consumers 24/7 and to expand space and time for capitalist production
in previously untapped markets.
By the early 2000s, Google had begun to test mobile services such as Google
search service over Google SMS service, maps and Gmail. Yet, its real mobile strategy
was revealed when it acquired mobile-phone software startup Android – which had been
founded by Andy Rubin, a former Apple hardware designer. And in 2007, Google
unveiled its Android mobile operating system shortly after Apple released its first iPhone
while Google was still an app partner for iPhone. Google’s introduction of Android was a
shot across Apple’s bow and into its mobile business turf.
These two firms have taken entirely different accumulation strategies – Android is
an open-source system while Apple is a closed system, a walled garden. Apple took a
closed system approach, allowing only Apple-approved applications on its devices; by
contrast, Google’s open-source approach gives Android OS away to be installed on as
many phone models as possible including Samsung, LG, HTC, Sony, and Motorola. Eric
Schmidt declared, “Android is by far the primary vehicle by which people are going to
see smartphones … Our goal is to reach everybody.”99 Google’s open source strategy is
able to reach mobile users widely, but the question remaining – whether open or closed
source – is how to generate revenue?
Since Android is free to device makers, Google couldn’t make money from the
devices themselves. So the options for Google’s mobile business were advertising and/or
subscriptions for Google services. Google’s choice took its most familiar route –
advertising. Google has been extending its ads business into the mobile space, all the


99

Vittorio Hernandez, “Google’s Eric Schmidt Foresees Android Smartphone Users to Hit 2 Billion in
Next 2 Years; Gives Thumbs Up to New Motorola Gadgets,” International Business Times, April 17, 2009,
http://au.ibtimes.com/articles/458005/20130417/google-s-eric-schmidt-foresees-android-smartphone.htm.

39


while not excluding other sources of revenue. Compared to Apple, which generates its
revenues from selling its hardware, Google’s revenue has been concentrated in mobile
ads placed on Google’s services that are preloaded on Android phones and Android
mobile apps.
In 2008, Google introduced AdSense for display ads on mobile phones,100 which is
similar to Google’s AdSense program that places ads on traditional Websites. Yet,
Google shortly thereafter acquired AdMob for $3.2 billion – the mobile ad platform
which offers advertising on mobile Websites as well as inside mobile apps.101 Google’s
AdMob deploys a platform-agnostic approach, allowing developers to place ads on
Android, iOS, and Windows phones. To compete against Google’s AdMob, Apple
launched iAds, its mobile ads platform, integrating advertisements into applications sold
only on its iOS App Store. Apple has been trying hard to chip away at Google AdMob’s
lead in mobile advertising and expanding its revenue sources. In 2012, Apple even
reduced prices for developers for iAd, dropping the minimum spending from $500,000 to
$100,000 and boosting developers’ ad revenue from 60% to 70%.102 Yet, Google still
remains in the dominant position in the global mobile ads market with 49.3%, even
though its market share has slightly declined from its 53% share in 2012.103 In the mobile
ads market, Google is increasingly facing off with Facebook – not Apple – on a number
of mobile advertising fronts.



100

“Why Google Is Buying AdMob,” Business Week, November 9, 2009,
http://www.businessweek.com/technology/content/nov2009/tc2009119_588360.htm.
101
“We’ve officially acquired AdMob!” Google Official Blog, March 27, 2010,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/05/weve-officially-acquired-admob.html.
102
Mark Bergen, “Build Your Own iAd: Apple Throws Open Door to Platform,” Advertising Age, April 1,
2014, http://adage.com/article/digital/apple-expands-iad-developers-adds-video-capabilities/292412/.
103
Jason Abbruzzese, “Google and Facebook Control Two-Thirds of Global Mobile Ad Market,”
Mashable, March 19, 2014, http://mashable.com/2014/03/19/google-facebook-dominate-mobile-ads/.

40


As late as 2011, Facebook had no mobile ad revenue. At the time of Facebook’s
IPO, Wall Street was still questioning whether the company would be able to monetize
millions of users’ activities. After Facebook’s IPO in 2012, the company was under
intense pressure from shareholders to make a profit off of its mountain of personal data
from 1 in 9 people on Earth.104 Today it is the second largest player in the mobile space
and has reached nearly 22% of mobile ads market share. This is more than triple its share
from 2012 to 2013, and Facebook now generates 59% of its ad revenue from mobile.105
The increased ads revenue provides financial resources for Facebook to expand its mobile
properties through acquisitions. Facebook acquired photo and video sharing service
Instagram for $1 billion in 2000. Before being acquired by Facebook, Instagram was
running on Amazon’s cloud computing service, but soon moved to Facebook’s data
center. Facebook claimed it would keep Instagram’s 20 billion-strong user data separate
from Facebook data to protect the privacy of Instagram users. Yet, soon after its
migration, Facebook changed its privacy policy to share data between Instagram and
Facebook. It has already begun to display ads on Instagram, and is building its mobile
brand advertising campaign platform. In 2014, the company also acquired the messaging
app WhatsApp for $19 billion, which had 450 million users, and added 50 million users in
the first few months after its Facebook acquisition.106
Facebook released its own ads network Audience Network, putting it into
competition with Google and Apple, and deployed a new Web profiling tool to gather

104

“With Facebook IPO, time to friend privacy,” Christian Monitor, February 1, 2012,
http://www.csmonitor.com/Commentary/the-monitors-view/2012/0201/With-Facebook-IPO-time-tofriend-privacy.
105
Austin Carr and Mark Wilson, “Facebook’s plan to own your phone,” Fast Company, 2014, Jun 17,
2014, http://www.fastcompany.com/3031237/facebook-everywhere.
106
Ibid.

41


Web surfing data on users for advertisers. Ads on Facebook were usually based on users’
own activity data and interests listed in personal profiles within the social media network,
but now it is more far reaching and aggressive in user data collection including users’
PCs and phone surfing data. Facebook even refused to honor the do-not-track setting on
Web browsers, reasoning that there is no industry consensus. Social-media competitors
Twitter and Pinterest have kept the do-not-track setting while Google and Yahoo! have
not.107 Advertisers still consider users’ search data as the closest link between a consumer
and actual sales. Facebook is trying to provide to advertisers the evidence that its new
Web tracking tool is effective, and helps move Facebook users toward actual purchases.
Google’s competition in the mobile space does not just come from Facebook and
Apple. Ironically it also comes from its main Android manufacturer Samsung, which
makes 65 percent of Android devices.108 Google’s original strategy for open source OS
was to rely on a number of different hardware companies to distribute Android and avoid
one company getting too big. But since Samsung is now selling the majority of Android
phones, Google could simply lose control over the mobile market if Samsung leverages
its market power against Google. Samsung recognizes that its devices are delivering more
consumers to Google and Google’s ads revenue growth and the company is reevaluating
its close links with Google and Android OS.109 Samsung is experimenting to see if the
company can ditch Android, and instead use its own OS. The company introduced its
own mobile OS Tizen and has even started paying developers to write apps for it. So far,

107

Jim Edward, “In a Further Humiliation to Microsoft, Facebook will not Honor ‘Do Not Track’ Signals
on Internet Explorer,” Business Inside, June 12, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/facebook-will-nothonor-do-not-track-2014-6.
108
Patrick Seitz, “Samsung controls 65% of the Android device market,” Investors, February 28, 2014,
http://news.investors.com/technology-click/022814-691660-samsung-dominates-android-smartphonemarket.htm.
109
Tim Bajarin, “The Next Major Industry Battle: Samsung Vs. Google,” PC Magazine, November 25,
2013, http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2427504,00.asp.

42


Google has been able to maintain its control over device manufacturers by closely
controlling its own closed-source Google apps platform.110 Android is free, but Gmail,
Play, and Maps can only be obtained through Google’s stringent and complicated
approval processes. Google can exercise its power to reject services in Android that
compromise its self-interest. For example when the mobile location service Skyhook was
chosen to be the provider of location to pre-Google owned Motorola and Samsung
Android phones, Samsung was forced to dump Skyhook mobile location service and to
use Google’s own system instead. Yet, Samsung’s strong market share in mobile devices
could shift the future direction of the Android “ecosystem” and weaken Google’s control
over Android phone.
Google’s acquisition of Motorola Mobility for $12.5 billion in 2012 – which makes
Android-based smartphones and tablets – was a way to prevent hardware manufacturers
like Samsung having too much control over Android.111 Yet, the acquisition did not turn
out as Google had expected and Google sold Motorola Mobility to the Chinese firm
Lenovo less than a year later – with Google keeping the majority of Motorola’s patents.
Giving up on its mobile phone manufacturing business has forced Google to strengthen
its partnership with Samsung for now. Recently, the two companies struck a licensing
deal that allows them to share key patents – an indication of their continuing alliance.
Meanwhile, Samsung’s increasing market power has also been a threat to Google’s
and Samsung’s competitor Apple, which has sued Samsung for patent infringement on
several occasions. As the competition within the Internet industry intensifies, patents

110

Ryan Whitwam, “Samsung has Android under its heel, and there’s nothing Google can do about it,”
Extreme Tech, March 20, 2013, http://www.extremetech.com/computing/151140-samsung-has-androidunder-its-heel-and-theres-nothing-google-can-do-about-it.
111
Amir Efrati, “Samsung Sparks Anxiety at Google,” Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424127887323699704578324220017879796.

43


have been increasingly used to monopolize power to shift market dynamics. Perversely,
the ongoing patent lawsuit between Samsung and Apple is considered to be Google’s
proxy war against Apple.112 In 2012, Apple argued that Samsung had copied its designs
of the iPhone and iPad and the court found Samsung guilty of infringing on Apple’s
design patents for smartphones, but not for tablets. In a second law suit, Apple alleged
that Samsung had sold phones and tablets violating five of its mobile software patents
while Samsung alleged that Apple had violated two patents related to photo albums and
videoconferencing.113 Tellingly, the majority of Apple’s patent-infringement claims
against Samsung were related to Android functions on its Android-based Galaxy S5.114
That meant that if Apple had won, Google would have had to make changes to those
Android features that Apple claimed to be patent infringements and Samsung and other
Android phone makers might have had to modify their phone software as well. Thus,
Google had a significant stake on this legal case between Apple and Samsung, and
Google engineers went so far as to take the stand to testify in Samsung’s defense. In fact,
Google has Mobile Application Distribution Agreements with all Android vendors
promising technical support, and other assistance to partners facing lawsuits.115 The court
found Samsung guilty of infringing on two other Apple patents, and awarded Apple just

112

David Kravets, “Who Cheated? Apple v. Samsung Patent Showdown Explained,” Wired, July 27, 2012,
www.wired.com/2012/07/apple-v-samsung-explained/; Victor Luckerson, “Definitive Proof the Apple vs.
SamSung Case is Really About Google,” Times, April 23, 2014, times.com/73902/apple-samsung-patentcase-involves-google.
113
Brian Chen, “Mixed Verdict in Apple-Samsung Patent Fight,” New York Times, May 2, 2014,
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/05/03/technology/jury-finds-apple-and-samsung-infringedpatents.html?_r=0.
114
Joel Rosenblatt, “Apple-Samsung $2 Billion Patent Case Over Google Near End,” Bloomberg New,
2014, April 28, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-04-28/apple-samsung-2-billion-patent-caseover-google-hits-last-round.html.
115
Shara Tibken, “Google agreed to pony up for Samsung's defense against Apple,” CNET, April 22, 2014,
http://www.cnet.com/news/google-agreed-to-pony-up-for-samsungs-defense-against-apples-patentinfringement-claims/.

44


$119.6 million – only 5.5 percent of the $2.2B that Apple had demanded. This was
considered a partial victory for Samsung as well as for Google.
In this brutally competitive mobile market, Amazon jumped in with the Fire Phone,
which runs its own Fire OS. The OS is modified (forked) so that it doesn’t include any of
the popular Google apps like Play Store, Gmail, or Google Maps; instead, it is loaded
with Amazon’s app store, cloud storage, streaming video content, and, streaming music
service.116 One of Firefly’s distinctive features is a barcode scanner and productrecognition app, which allows users to identify and compare prices of more than 70
million products and order them direct from Amazon.117 Firefly is at the core of why
Amazon released its smartphone118 to defend and expand its core retail business into the
mobile space.119 The Fire Phone seems to have failed as of September, 2014 – Amazon
recently dropped the price to $.99 – but this should be seen only as a setback as Amazon
will no doubt continue its attempts to push into the mobile market.
While competition over the mobile space has been intensifying among major
Internet firms from multiple fronts, capital is concurrently extending its mobile business
by building and deploying cloud infrastructures, which provide computing resources to
data-limited mobile devices.
To the Cloud
The combination of mobile devices and the Internet provides capital a giant step
toward marketplace ubiquity; however, there are technical barriers. Mobile devices have

116

Tony Bradley, “Why The Amazon Fire Phone Could Be A Smartphone Game Changer,” Forbes, July 2,
2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/tonybradley/2014/07/02/why-the-amazon-fire-phone-could-be-asmartphone-game-changer/.
117
Nick Statt, “Firefly is the Amazon Fire Phone's secret weapon.” CNET, June 18, 2014,
http://www.cnet.com/news/firefly-is-the-amazon-fire-phone-secret-weapon/.
118
Ibid.
119
Matthew Yglesias, “The big problem with Amazon's new phone — it's too good,” Vox, June 19, 2013,
http://www.vox.com/2014/6/19/5823814/the-big-problem-with-amazons-new-phone-its-too-good.

45


limitations in terms of processing power, battery life and data storage to live with users so
it is difficult to emulate all of the critical PC functions. Capital’s solution for these
technical constraints is deploying cloud computing where both the data storage and the
data processing happen outside of the mobile device. As centralized servers perform
computing-intensive tasks and store massive amounts of data, mobile devices can be
turned into data terminals rather than standalone machines.
Google’s profit-making mechanism for the mobile space goes hand in hand with its
cloud computing which allows for Google to transfer its services to mobile devices since
the applications do not reside on the devices, but on Google’s servers. In 2010 during his
first keynote address at the Mobile World Congress, Eric Schmidt announced Google’s
mobile first strategy and said, “If you don’t use the power of the cloud you will fail.”120
Google built its Android based on cloud services for many of its features. Deploying
cloud computing in parallel with mobile devices is a way for Google to extend the full
spectrum of its business beyond PCs.
In response, Apple has scrambled to integrate cloud features into its mobile
business. Apple’s urgency resonated in an email from then-Apple CEO Steve Jobs in
2010 as the company had fallen behind its competitors in cloud services. Jobs sent out an
email to the company urging Apple to get on the leading edge of this trend to “further
lock customers into our ecosystem.”121 Jobs even publicly announced that the Mac is



120

“Google embraces mobile, makes announcements,” Mobile Word Live, February 18, 2010.
http://www.mobileworldlive.com/google-embraces-mobile-makes-announcements.
121
Brad Reed, “How Apple blew its shot to rule the cloud,” BRG, May 13, 2013,
http://bgr.com/2014/05/13/apple-icloud-vs-google-vs-microsoft/.

46


merely another device, and said, “We’re going to demote the PC and the Mac to just be a
device. We’re going to move your hub, the center of your digital life, into the cloud.”122
When Apple launched its cloud business iCloud, it was already late in the game.
iCloud worked as more of a backup system within Apple's closed ecosystem, yet it had
neither a comprehensive online storage service nor email service to compete with Google
or Microsoft.123 Apple has FaceTime video chat, but it’s only available to iOS users and
doesn’t have cross-platform services in the same way that Google and Microsoft do.124
Apple’s iTunes has been one of its most profitable cross-platform businesses, but now
new popular music streaming services Pandora and Spotify are pulling users away from
iTunes.125 Apple recently decided to buy Beats Music and Beats Electronics for $3.2
billion, not for its famous hip-hop headphones, but for the fact that it could provide its
own cloud-based music streaming service.126 Apple has forged a partnership with IBM
that gives Apple inroads into enterprise cloud services while giving IBM access to
popular devices and more leverage to compete with other cloud businesses. As long as
Google’s Android remains the main competitor, Apple will face intense pressure to have
an array of cloud services as its Mac-PC sales slow down and users increasingly shift to
mobile devices.
While cloud computing is utilized by capital to extend mobile Internet business, it
is also becoming a key source of profit for the Internet industry as a whole and promoted
by information industries and governments, brushing off labor, environmental, security

122

Sean Ludwig, “Google vs. Apple - Two Views of the Consumer Cloud,” Venture Beat, October 28,
2011, http://venturebeat.com/2011/10/28/icloud-steve-jobs-legacy/.
123
Reed, “How Apple blew its shot to rule the cloud.”
124
Ibid.
125
Ibid.
126
Ibid.

47


and privacy issues.127 Cloud business is generally categorized into three different types.
First is infrastructure as a service (IaaS) where a service provider offers computer
resources including processor, storage, operating system, applications and network
capability. Second is Platform as a Service (PaaS) where a service provider offers more
than infrastructure, providing a set of application software that allows for a developer to
build an application to run in their cloud. Third is software as a service (SaaS) where a
service provider centrally hosts software and delivers to consumers on a subscription
basis. Each category of services is a market for Internet firms, which are engaged more or
less on all levels.
In particular, the Internet industry is aiming at business users for cloud computing
services, promoting it as a way to increase productivity and decrease costs by leveraging
and automating corporate technical infrastructure. In 2014, global business spending for
infrastructure and services related to the cloud is expected to reach an estimated $174.2
billion. And by 2017, enterprise spending on cloud computing will balloon to $235.1
billion, triple the $78.2 billion spent in 2011.128
Google is eager to take a piece of this growing market, and it is already enticing
app developers and corporations to shift to renting their IT infrastructure from Google
with its mega-data storage and computing power. As the company enters more deeply
into the cloud space, Google is facing off with Amazon, which has built strongly
positioned cloud services.



127

Vincent Mosco, To the Cloud: Big Data In a Turbulent World (Boulder, Colorado: Paradigm Publishers,
2014), 123-174.
128
“Cloud- Related Spending by Businesses to Triple from 2011 to 2017,” IHS inc., February 14, 2014,
http://press.ihs.com/press-release/design-supply-chain/cloud-related-spending-businesses-triple-2011-2017.

48


In 2006, Amazon launched its cloud computing platform Amazon Web Service
(AWS), and currently has between 80% to 85% of the cloud market share in terms of
providing platform as a service (PaaS). In PaaS, Amazon rents hardware, operating
systems, server-software, storage, and network infrastructure over the Internet as a
service to developers and business. Internet users may not be familiar with AWS, but
they are using its service as they watch movies on Netflix, book rooms on Airbnb, stream
music via Spotify, and click through Pinterest.129 Amazon has been selling its data
storage and processing power to companies around the world like Netflix and Shell,
Fortune 500 companies including Unilever and GE, as well as to government agencies
like the CIA and the US Navy.130 For years, AWS has been the leader in enterprise cloud
computing.131 Amazon’s cloud business generated an estimated $3.2 billion in revenue in
2013, and Amazon expects it to one day become even bigger than its core retail
operation.132
Google is trying to catch up to Amazon, and it is a threat to Amazon. For Google,
cloud computing is not new territory. Google’s most popular products like search, Gmail,
Google Docs, Google Maps, Google calendar, Google now, Google drive etc. are all
running on Google’s infrastructure where users’ information activity data are stored and
managed. All along Google has been running the biggest cloud-computing operation in
the world – but just with a different purpose.133 Google is already flexing its muscles in


129

Kevin Roose, “What Happens When Amazon and Google Start a Price War Over the Future of the
Internet?” New York Magazine, March 30, 2014, http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2014/03/whathappens-when-amazon-and-google-go-to-war.html.
130
Ibid.
131
Christopher Mims, “Amazon and Google are in an epic battle to dominate the cloud—and Amazon may
already have won,” Quartz, April 16, 2014, http://qz.com/196819/how-amazon-beat-google-attempt-todominate-the-cloud-before-it-even-got-started/#/h/61692,3/.
132
Roose, “What Happens When Amazon.”
133
Ibid.

49


consumer cloud storage business with Google Drive by offering larger amounts of free
storage space than its competitors. Google’s strategy has been consistent – free to control.
Google, aiming to increase its user base, raised the free limit from 5GB to 15GB
compared to 2GB for Dropbox and 10GB for Box respectively. In June 2014, Apple also
unveiled its new cloud-based storage system called iCloud Drive similar to Dropbox; but
iCloud only offers 5GB of free storage. The more data you upload to the Google cloud,
the less chance that users will want to move to another cloud service. Jeffrey Mann, Vice
President for research at Gartner said, “storage is where the stickiness is” and “It’s how
they hold a customer. If they store your stuff, they get to know you better.”134 In 2013,
Google disclosed that there were 120 million Google Drive accounts.135
Building on its consumer cloud services, Google packages a host of enterprise
cloud services (Google Apps) and sells them as Software as a Service (SaaS) to
corporations, government and educational institutions and is actively trying to gobble up
the enterprise business. Google Apps consists of cloud applications for document writing,
collaboration, text and video, so that no one ever needs to install software on their own
machines. It is a direct attack on Microsoft’s office products that has long commanded
the enterprise market – and caused Microsoft to recently form a partnership with
Dropbox.136 As of 2013, there are over 5 million organizations on Google Apps with 50


134

Quentin Hardy, “Google, Microsoft and Others Delve Deeper Into Cloud Storage for Businesses,” New
York Times, June 25, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/06/26/technology/google-microsoft-and-othersdelve-deeper-into-cloud-storage-for-businesses.html?_r=1.
135
Adrian Covert, “Will Google Docs kill off Microsoft Office?” CNN, November 13, 2013,
http://money.cnn.com/2013/11/13/technology/enterprise/microsoft-office-google-docs/.
136
Tom Warren, “Dropbox and Microsoft form surprise partnership for Office integration,” The Verge,
November 4, 2014, http://www.theverge.com/2014/11/4/7153975/dropbox-microsoft-partnershipmicrosoft-office.

50


million users.137 Google is gradually making inroads in the cloud-based enterprise market
as Google Apps has grown from 10 percent of the cloud-office market in 2007 to 50
percent in 2012.138
In particular, Google has long been aiming at one of the largest organizations in the
enterprise market – the US federal government. While corporations had been hesitant to
move their IT operations to the cloud, the US government became a leading cheerleader
in stimulating cloud computing and generating demand. The US government has been
facilitating the expansion of cloud computing by mandating the implementation of cloud
computing for federal agencies. The Obama Administration launched its “Cloud First
Policy” to shift federal IT infrastructure into cloud computing and endorsed cloud
computing in its 2010 budget request.139 According to the market research firm
MarketsandMarkets, government agencies will invest $18.48 billion dollars in cloud
computing by 2018.140
In 2010, Google won a major US General Services Administration (GSA) contract
to provide Google Apps including Gmail for the entire agency. Since then, Google has
scored 23 out of 42 US government contracts to adopt Google Apps compared to 10 for
Microsoft.141 Microsoft quickly countered Google with its own cloud-based enterprise
Office 365 suite, which is a hybrid cloud and conventional server service. Microsoft is

137

“47 Stats You Need to Know About the Google Apps Ecosystem,” Better Cloud Blog, October 23,
2013, http://blog.bettercloud.com/google-apps-stats/.
138
Ibid.
139
Doug Beizer, “Obama's cloud initiative. The Business of Federal Technology,” Federal Computer
Week, May 15, 2009, http://fcw.com/articles/2009/05/18/news-obama-in-the-cloud.aspx.
140
Saroj Kar, “Government Sector will Invest $18.48 Billion by 2018 in Cloud Computing,” Cloud Times,
January 2, 2014, http://cloudtimes.org/2014/01/01/government-sector-will-invest-18-48-billion-by-2018-incloud-computing/.
141
“The Office 365 vs. Google Apps Battle: Who Will Dominate Enterprise Software?” Cloud Tweak,
February 19, 2013, http://cloudtweaks.com/2013/02/the-office-365-vs-google-apps-battle-who-willdominate-enterprise-software/.

51


still the largest player and claims that its Office suite is installed on more than 1 billion
machines,142 but Google Apps is trying to swallow up the enterprise market by becoming
the standard for tech startups, small businesses and newer large companies.
To further extend into the cloud market, Google is now going after app developers
to draw them into Google’s infrastructure by launching a host of cloud services including
Platform as a service (PaaS) and Infrastructure as a service (IaaS) on Google’s
infrastructure. Google and Amazon are certainly not the only players in this space.
Windows Azure cloud, AT&T, Verizon, Rackspace, IBM, Cisco, Virtustream, GoGrid,
and Softlayer are all throwing their hats into the cloud ring and a host of smaller webhosting companies are also offering various cloud services as well.143 As the cloud war
has heated up, Google kicked off the price war to expand its user base by slashing prices
as much as 90% for some of its “Compute Engine” cloud computing facilities which has
pressured its competitors Microsoft and Amazon to cut their prices as well.144 Compute
engines allow developers to build faster services by having their data and virtual servers
in proximity. Compute engines are generally divided into geographic zones that map
close to data centers. To attract more developers, Google has recently offered 2 new
Compute Engine zones in the US and Asia-Pacific markets. However, they still trail
Amazon and Microsoft. Amazon offers three different cloud-based enterprise zones in the
US alone, has data centers in Ireland, Frankfurt, Singapore, Tokyo, Sydney, Sao Paulo



142

Adrian Covert, “Will Google Docs kill off Microsoft Office?” CNN, November 13, 2013,
http://money.cnn.com/2013/11/13/technology/enterprise/microsoft-office-google-docs.
143
Reuven Cohen, “Google Announces Cloud Infrastructure Service: Google Compute Engine,” Forbes,
July 28, 2012, http://www.forbes.com/sites/reuvencohen/2012/06/28/google-announces-google-computeengine-iaas/.
144
Tiernan Ray, “Google Cuts Cloud Prices, Rackspace Sinks, Amazon Slips; Battle Heating Up, Says
Baird,” Barrons, December 3, 2013, http://blogs.barrons.com/techtraderdaily/2013/12/03/google-cutscloud-prices-rackspace-sinks-amazon-slips-battle-heating-up-says-baird/.

52


and Beijing.145 Microsoft currently has thirteen different zones around the world,
including six in the US.146 The battle between and among these Internet giants is aimed at
taking a bigger portion of the total corporate IT spending which will be worth almost $1.4
trillion in 2014.147
For years, Google did not consider cloud computing part of its core business, but
now the company is looking to this space as a major source of profit. Urs Hölzle, a senior
vice president of technical infrastructure at Google, in an interview with Wired magazine,
said that the revenues from the cloud could exceed the revenue that the company
generates from online advertising.148 The resulting battle is set to be huge and protracted,
and will give rise to conflict over controlling the Internet infrastructure itself.
Internal Infrastructure
This battle over the Internet can be seen in the physical infrastructure of the Internet
firms. Since its Internet services hinge on networks, Google has overseen a massive
build-out of its Internet infrastructure. By 2013, Google had invested about $23 billion in
data centers which all require high-capacity backbones to transport data quickly and
efficiently.149 The company invested $2.35 billion on infrastructure in the first quarter of
2014 alone, increased from $2.26 billion in the previous year’s fourth quarter and almost


145

Frederic Lardinois, “Google Compute Engine Adds New Zones In US And Asia,” Tech Crunch, August
5, 2014, http://techcrunch.com/2014/08/05/google-compute-engine-adds-new-zones-in-us-and-asia/;
Amazon Web Services, “Products and Services by Region,” Amazon Web Service,
https://aws.amazon.com/about-aws/global-infrastructure/regional-product-services/.
146
Lardinois, “Google Compute Engine.”
147
Christopher Mims, “Amazon and Google are in an epic battle to dominate the cloud—and Amazon may
already have won,” Quartz, April 16, 2014, http://qz.com/196819/how-amazon-beat-google-attempt-todominate-the-cloud-before-it-even-got-started.
148
Cade Metz, “Google’s Bold Plan to Overthrow Amazon as King of the Cloud,” Wired, March 24, 2014,
http://www.wired.com/2014/03/urs-google-story/.
149
Gary Kim, “Does Google Want to Control More of the Internet Backbone?” TechZone360, December
17, 2013, http://www.techzone360.com/topics/techzone/articles/2013/12/17/363878-does-google-wantcontrol-more-the-internet-backbone.htm.

53


double the $1.2 billion in the first quarter of 2013.150 The majority of its capital
investments have been for data centers, servers, networking equipment, and property.
While it is invisible, Internet services rely on network infrastructure to compute and
transfer massive amounts of data back and forth. Early on, Google understood the
importance of network infrastructure in order for them to process the oceans of data that
the company handles on a daily basis. Since 2005, Google has been acquiring “dark
fiber,” the unused underground cable left dormant by the dot-com crash of the late 1990s
and early 2000s.151 In 2007, Om Malik from GigaOM pointed out that Google builds its
own network, data centers, servers and storage systems to deliver it services as fast and at
the lowest cost possible. He said, “Google’s gigantic infrastructure is the big barrier to
entry for its rivals.”152
Currently Google has 13 mega data centers, with 6 in the US and 7 across the globe
– Taiwan, Singapore, Chile, Finland, Belgium, Ireland, and Netherlands – and an
unknown number of collocation centers where Google rents data center space. Largescale data centers – sometimes called “server farms” – are centralized facilities that
primarily contain large numbers of servers and computer equipment used for data
processing, data storage, and high-speed telecommunications. There is a growing arms
race among leading Internet companies – Google, Microsoft, Amazon, Facebook etc. – in
building out these global large-scale data centers. In all, Google supposedly operated

150

Derrick Harris, “The price of being Webscale: Google spent $2.35B on infrastructure in Q1,” Gigaom,
April 17, 2014, http://gigaom.com/2014/04/17/the-price-of-being-Webscale-google-spent-2-34b-oninfrastructure-in-q1/.
151
Dan Rowinski, “White Spaces & Dark Fiber: Internet Giants Angle For Control Of The Internet's
Pipes,” Readwrite, December 17, 2013, http://readwrite.com/2013/12/17/internet-backbone-googleamazon-facebook-microsoft; Sam Gustin, “Google Fiber Issues Public Challenge: Get Up To Speed!” Time
Magazine, September 14, 2012, http://business.time.com/2012/09/14/with-google-fiber-search-giant-issuespublic-challenge-get-up-to-speed/.
152
Om Malik, “Google's Infrastructure is its Strategic Advantage,” Gigaom, December 4, 2007,
http://gigaom.com/2007/12/04/google-infrastructure/.

54


more than 1 million servers across its data centers in 2010 – more than 2% of all servers
in the world.153 By linking its numerous data centers together, Google operates one of the
largest private Internet infrastructures. By 2010, Google had a much larger Internet
infrastructure than Amazon or Microsoft and its global network was larger than all but
one of the companies that provide the Internet backbone.154 Today, Google owns and
controls more than 100,000 miles of fiber optic cable globally – compare that to Sprint,
one of the largest global network operators, which controls less than 40,000 miles.155
According to Craig Labovitz, founder of cloud and network infrastructure company
Deepfield, “more than 62 percent of the smartphones, laptops, video streamers, and other
devices that tap into the Internet from throughout North America connect to Google at
least once a day.”156 To handle its growth, and speed up its content delivery process,
Google has added thousands of servers – called Google Global Cache servers – to
Internet Service Providers (ISPs) around the world. These servers store the most popular
content from Google’s network and then serve it directly from the ISP’s data center,
rather than going through one of Google’s own data centers.157
While it is building out its own network infrastructure for its internal operations,
Google is also laying out ultrafast fiber optic networks to speed up the “last-mile”
Internet for users. This seems outwardly to be an extremely generous gesture, but
Google’s motivation is its own corporate self-interest – the more people who have access


153

“Google may own more than 2% of all servers in the world,” pingdom, August 24, 2009,
http://royal.pingdom.com/2009/08/24/google-may-own-more-than-2-of-all-servers-in-the-world/.
154
Cade Metz, “Google’s Bold Plan to Overthrow Amazon as King of the Cloud,” Wired, March 24, 2014,
http://www.wired.com/2014/03/urs-google-story/.
155
Mike Elgan, “Rise of the GoogleNet,” Datamation, December 18, 2013,
http://www.datamation.com/networks/rise-of-the-googlenet.html.
156
Robert McMillan, “Google Serves 25 Percent of North American Internet Traffic,” Wired, July 22,
2013, http://www.wired.com/2013/07/google-internet-traffic/.
157
Ibid.

55


to high-speed Internet, the more Google is queried, the more YouTube video is viewed,
the more Google Hangout is used, etc. which all mean more Google revenues.158
In 2012, Google launched its Google Fiber project to provide Internet access to
consumers at one GB per second which is 100 times faster than the average US
broadband service for $70 a month (and 5 Mbps fiber for free). Initially, the company
rolled out the service in Kansas City, KS and Austin, TX, – all subsidized by the
municipalities themselves – but the company recently announced plans to launch Fiber in
34 cities. When Google Fiber was announced, many suspected that the idea behind
Google’s venture was to spur the telecom and cable industries to improve their broadband
offerings, and enhance broadband speeds and penetration – all of which are necessary for
Google to expand its wide ranging services that require fast and wide-spread broadband
infrastructure to incentivize their adoption and use. Moreover, since Google Fiber is
connected to users’ homes, this offers another data collection point for Google to monitor
users’ information activities over the Internet.
Google fiber is fueling the broadband war. Google’s initial goal is succeeding,
given that telecommunications behemoth AT&T is investing in infrastructure and also
expanding ultra fast fiber services in 21 major metropolitan areas. AT&T recently
announced that it planned to challenge Google’s Fiber initiative by expanding its own
service to several important markets in the areas where Google is investing to build out
its Google Fiber project. Whether or not Google will directly move into the ISP business
still remains a question, but Google’s Fiber project is a direct challenge to telecom giants


158

Sam Gustin, “Google Is Making a Major Play to Provide Your Internet,” Time, February 19, 2014,
http://time.com/8958/google-fiber-expansion/.

56


like AT&T, Verizon and Comcast who have long battled over Internet services in an
attempt to generate more profit out of their infrastructure.159
Moreover, to further Google’s reach and connect geographically dispersed markets,
Google is going literally underwater, participating in the building of several submarine
cables – Unity, a Trans-Pacific submarine communication cable between Japan and US,
and Southeast Asia-Japan Cable (SJC) system which connects China, Hong Kong, the
Philippines, Singapore and Brunei with Japan and its link to transpacific fiber that goes
through the US. Recently, Google announced that it is joining FASTER, a new transPacific cable system that will connect Japan to two major West Coast cites in the US,
with initial speeds of up to 60 Tb/s. The consortium building FASTER includes: China
Mobile International, China Telecom Global, Global Transit, KDDI and SingTel with
NEC as the system supplier. Google’s vice president for its technical infrastructure Urs
Hölzle wrote that FASTER would guarantee that Google’s services and products are fast
and reliable.160
By physically owning major fiber routes and not needing to rely on the telecom
industry for Internet service, Google has more control over its services at various points,
delivery of the whole spectrum of its services and products, and has built a giant barrier
to entry for other companies. Dan Caruso, chief executive at Kayo Group – a company



159

Dan Rowinski, “White Spaces & Dark Fiber: Internet Giants Angle For Control Of The Internet's
Pipes,” Readwrite, December 17, 2013, http://readwrite.com/2013/12/17/internet-backbone-googleamazon-facebook-microsoft#awesm=~oI26PAGHkgfsFa.
160
Frederick Lardinois, “Google invests in $300M Submarine Cable to improve Connection Between Japan
and The US,” Tech Crunch, August 11, 2014, http://techcrunch.com/2014/08/11/google-invests-in-300msubmarine-cable-to-improve-connection-between-japan-and-the-us/.

57


that sells fiber lines to companies – explains that “the move by the tech giants to own
Internet infrastructure is really about controlling their own destiny.”161
Internet as life itself
Backed by this massive network infrastructure, Google has taken up its profitmaking business even beyond these familiar Internet sectors. By introducing Internet
connectivity and Internet technologies into existing industries, Google and the other
Internet firms are restructuring and to some extent absorbing them into their profit
domain. The company is setting a trend as it weaves itself into major industrial and
service industries including automobiles, manufacturing, energy, home electronics, health
care, education, wearables and robotics.
Case in point: Google ambitiously delved into the automobile industry – one of the
largest industrial sectors which revived capitalism from the Great Depression – and is
reorganizing the industry to center it around information technologies. At the 2014
Automotive World annual conference in Dearborn, Michigan, the head of Google’s
global automotive unit Meredith Guerriero – not someone from GM or Ford – was the
keynote speaker. She wooed the audience, speaking about fuel economy, eMobility and
connected vehicles. Google is pursuing multiple fronts of the automobile sector to be
extensions of its Internet business.
Since 2009, Google has been working on the self-driving car as part of Google X,
the company’s semisecret R&D lab for long-term initiatives.162 This seemed to be one of
Google’s moon-shot projects even a few years ago, but it is attempting to figure out ways

161

Tim Schiesser, Facebook and Google are buying Internet cables, controlling infrastructure, Techspot,
December 17, 2013, http://www.techspot.com/news/55046-facebook-and-google-are-buying-internetcables-controlling-infrastructure.html.
162
Wikipedia, “Autonomous car,” last modified, November 3, 2014,
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Autonomous_car.

58


to commercialize new technologies. Google is talking to auto manufacturers to bring
down costs and produce for the mass market, but as it did with the Android operating
system, Google is considering whether to license its technologies to automakers and have
the automakers then produce them.163 All of the major carmakers and automotive
suppliers are working on their own driverless technologies as well; so if Google pushes
its own self-driving car, GM product-development chief Mark Reuss asserts that this
would be a “serious competitive threat” to the auto industry.
Moving the self-driving car into the commercial realm does not merely have
technical- and scale issues, but there are also regulatory and legislative obstacles for
Google to overcome. So far there are no concrete legal regulations around self-driving
cars, which are considered neither legal nor illegal in a majority of states. Using this
ambiguous legal space, Google was able to conduct more than 100,000 miles of test
drives of its self-driving car before its official announcement of the project in 2010.164
However, to further pursue the self-driving car business, Google first needed the
government’s help to legalize the self-driving car on the highway, and early on Google
brought the government to its side. Google’s lobbying machine has been taking on one
state at a time to legalize the driverless car. As of the end of 2013, four States – Nevada,
Florida, California, and Michigan – along with the District of Columbia had done so. In
California, despite opposition from the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, the
leading advocacy group for the auto industry, which includes 12 top auto makers such as


163

Eric Blattberg, “Self-driving cars from Ford, GM, & others? Yes, if Google-automaker talks go well,”
Venture Beat, May 14, 2014, http://venturebeat.com/2014/05/14/self-driving-cars-from-ford-gm-othersyes-if-google-automaker-talks-go-well/.
164
Amir Efrati, “Google's Driverless Car Draws Political Power,” Wall Street Journal, October 12, 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10000872396390443493304578034822744854696.

59


GM, BMW and Toyota, Google won by turning an autonomous-vehicle bill into law.165
Google is slowly paving its own way for its future potential source of profit-making.
Besides ambition to build its own car, Google is integrating Android into
automobiles to further the Android market beyond smartphones and tablets. The company
created the Open Automotive Alliance (OAA) – similar to its Open Mobile Alliance – as
a group of automotive manufacturers and technology companies aimed at using Android
in automobiles. It is the same tactic in the automobile industry, as Google has used for its
smartphone, integrating Android software into automobiles manufactured by various
automakers including Toyota, General Motors etc. In this way, Google could grab a large
part of a growing automobile business without manufacturing actual cars in a capitalintensive sector. At the same time, the auto industry is closely watching Google’s
strategies and intensions as it seeks to protect its territory of profit.166
Apple has not been on the sidelines while Google has pursued the Internet car.
Before Google, Apple had introduced CarPlay – an infotainment system for automobiles.
CarPlay can sync a driver’s iPhone with a built-in dashboard featuring Siri voice control.
In 2014, Apple’s CarPlay will deploy in select cars from Ferrari, Mercedes-Benz, Volvo,
BMV, Jaguar, Hyundai etc. and is expected to reach more than 24 million vehicles by
2016.167 Microsoft’s Nokia has also jumped in, developing auto technologies through its


165

Ibid.
Alexei Oreskovic and Ben Klayman, “Google, Detroit diverge on road map for self-driving cars,”
Reuters, http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/06/30/us-google-detroit-insight-idUSKBN0F50C320140630.
167
Sam Oliver, “Apple's CarPlay could be in more than 24 million vehicles by 2019,” appleinsider, July
10, 2014, http://appleinsider.com/articles/14/07/10/apples-carplay-could-be-in-more-than-24-millionvehicles-by-2019-report-says.
166

60


venture capital arm Nokia Growth Partner, which manages $700 million for
development.168
Meanwhile, Google is also swiftly linking its automobile business to the start-up
company Uber to enhance its strategic accumulation options. Uber – one of the most
popular ride-sharing networks – is financed by Google and Goldman Sachs, and relies on
its mobile app to fetch customers. Uber doesn’t own or manage any cars, but simply
deploys its app as the basis of its business. Drivers supply their own cars and pay Uber a
20% commission on each fare in exchange for the use of Uber’s app and technical
infrastructure. Under “flexible” options, Uber deploys a massive network of thousands of
precarious workers who are potentially disposable at any time. Google’s involvement in
Uber’s business seems a random venture to experiment with a new market; but it is part
of Google’s long-term profit-making strategy by linking up with a transportation network
that can deploy Google’s self-driving car. Uber chief Travis Kalanick has already alluded
to that possibility and said, “driverless cars are the future and drivers are not.” When
Google’s self-driving technology is ready, Google will have an infrastructure where
Google simply can replace Ubers’ drivers with Google’s self-driving cars.
Google’s self-driving car is merely a glimpse of its wider deployment of robotics
across a range of sectors. Google acquired eight robotics companies including Boston
Dynamics, an engineering and robotic design company that has fashioned mobile
research robots for the Pentagon, and set up a new robotics team.169 While Google has
remained quiet about its plans, these acquisitions are part of Google’s much larger move

168

Adam Ewing, “Nokia Joins Musk to Google in Investing in Intelligent Cars (2),” Business Week, March
5, 2014, http://www.businessweek.com/news/2014-05-04/nokia-joins-musk-to-google-in-investing-inintelligent-vehicles.
169
Lorraine Luk, “Foxconn Is Quietly Working With Google on Robotics,” Wall Street Journal, February
1, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/02/11/foxconn-working-with-google-on-robotics/.

61


into robotics and artificial intelligence that can be applied in a range of industries. While
Foxconn – the world's largest contract electronics maker – is known as Apple’s supplier,
Google is now working with Foxconn and its robotic team, headed by former Android
executive Andy Rubin, to develop new manufacturing technologies to further automate
the factory floor.170 This at a time when Foxconn is repressing workers who are
demanding better working conditions and resisting against harsh exploitative labor
practices. Google is assisting Foxconn as they face intense international criticism to
replace workers with thousands of robots.171 Google’s partnership with Foxconn is
signaling that the company is looking for expansion of its business in the manufacturing
industry where it can appropriate internet technologies to reorganize labor processes and
further the mechanization and automation processes. The US government is already on
Google’s side as the Obama administration has been pushing aggressively to create
“digital manufacturing cities” and mobilizing the academic industrial complex to focus
on “high-tech” manufacturing design technologies.
Digital capital’s expansionary impulse is also moving into peoples’ homes, realtering them into a new marketplace. Google acquired Nest Labs, a home automation
company and maker of high-tech thermostats and smoke detectors – as well as Nest’s
large amount of private data on home energy use, temperature etc. – to expand its
presence in consumers’ homes as it marches into the so-called “smart home” market over
rivals such as Apple, Microsoft, Samsung, and IBM.172 Nest is part of a broader Google


170

Ibid.
Grant Brunner, “Foxconn is attempting to replace its human workers with thousands of robots,” Extreme
Tech, July 8, 2014, http://www.extremetech.com/electronics/185960-foxconn-is-attempting-to-replace-itshuman-workers-with-thousands-of-robots.
172
Rolfe Winker, “What Google Gains From Nest Labs,” Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2014,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052702303819704579321043556056678.
171

62


play in home entertainment as it expands its Chromecast device for streaming online
content to televisions. Google is seeking end-to-end control from fiber going from the
garage into the house, through the living room and kitchen, with links to Android
powered automated systems with cloud data services.173 To this end, Google has
appropriated Nest’s hardware unit, building hardware/software rather than operating
systems for others to apply.174 Armed with a vast number of patents from its Motorola
Mobility acquisition, Google is building its hardware team to embed Android into homes
and enable devices such as locks, doorbells, baby monitors and humidity monitors.
Google’s Nest Labs unit has already purchased Dropcam Inc., a video-monitoring and
security firm, for $555 million, aiming for Android to become the dominant operating
system for home and wearable devices.175 John Gapper from the Financial Times176
equated Google to General Electric (GE) in the late 19th century when GE promoted
futuristic homes with a range of home appliances and technologies as a way to expand its
marketplace into homes. Today it’s not GE but Internet firms that are reentering into
homes and reorganizing them into an emergent profit domain. Google’s competitor Apple
has already intervened in the home by selling a platform HomeKit, allowing people to
use their iPhones to control their houses. Samsung declared that the “smart” home is a


173

Ibid.
Rory Carroll, “Google buys Nest Labs for $3.2bn in bid for smart home-devices market,” Guardian,
January 14, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jan/13/google-nest-labs-3bn-bid-smarthome-devices-market.
175
Alistaor Barr and Rolfe Winker, “Google's Nest to Buy Dropcam for $555 Million,” Wall Street
Journal, June 20, 2014, http://online.wsj.com/articles/googles-nest-labs-to-buy-video-monitoring-securitystartup-1403308929.
176
John Gapper, “Google is the General Electric of the 21st century,” Financial Times, June 5, 2013,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e57abef0-cd0c-11e2-90e800144feab7de.html?siteedition=intl#axzz35ZY1QLEB.
174

63


“growth engine” by launching its own open source OS Tizen to compete with Android
and iOS.177
From automobile to home to museums and libraries, our everyday lives are no
longer insulated from the market as digital capital is doing in other industries what it has
already done by ravaging the fields of education and health – the most basic social
domains that should be operated outside of commerce. Digital capital is going far beyond
traditional computing devices, and is no longer limiting itself to smartphones and tablets.
The Internet industry describes this as the “internet of things” which means powering and
connecting billions of everyday objects to other objects and those objects to humans –
and collecting all of that data. Google calls it “real life Internet.”178 Digital capital aims to
engulf life itself.
This then is the scope of political economy of information industry within which
search is situated. As demonstrated above, capital has a firm grip on the information
sphere, so it’s hard to imagine search services outside the market. However, the origin of
search technology was rooted in the public institutions where search engines functioned
as more like a public utility. How then did search engine technologies shift to the
marketplace? The next chapter traces the evolution of search function, business models
and its development of technical infrastructure. It documents how the search function has
emerged as one of the most profitable industries from technologies that were mainly
developed in the academic, non-commercial domain, and explicates the evolution of the



177

Edward Baig, “Samsung's BK Yoon talks smart homes, appliances,” USA Today, June 23, 2014,
http://www.usatoday.com/story/tech/columnist/baig/2014/06/20/samsung-bk-yoon-talks-smart-homesappliances/10665777/.
178
Pankaj Mishra, “Google Is Making A Land Grab For The Internet Of Things. Tech Crunch, January 2,
2014, http://techcrunch.com/2014/01/27/google-is-making-a-land-grab-for-the-internet-of-things/.

64


business model and technical infrastructure behind search that are being organized to
monetize user information activities – labor.

65


Chapter 2
Monetizing User Traffic: The Development of Search Advertising Systems
Initially, many search engine technologies were developed within noncommercial
environments. Early pre-Web search engines were created in academic institutions.
Archie, developed at McGill University in 1990, indexed files from FTP servers and is
considered the Internet’s first search engine. Following Archie, Gopher was developed at
the University of Minnesota in 1991. It was both a protocol and application to transport
hierarchically organized text files. Gopher was widely used in universities and libraries.
The rise of Gopher led to new search software Veronica and Jughead. Veronica came
about in 1992 at the University of Nevada, Reno to index information on gopher servers;
Jughead, from the University of Utah in 1993, was an alternative to Archie, and also
searched for files on gopher servers. Whereas Veronica listed all server titles that fit the
search criteria, Jughead searched a single server at a time.
The first Web search engine – WWW Wanderer developed by Matthew Gray at
MIT in 1993 – was also the first Web crawler, actually designed to measure the growth of
the Web. It lasted until 1995. One of the first full-text crawler search engines was
Webcrawler in 1994 – created by Brian Pinkerton at the University of Washington –
which allowed users to search for words on Web pages. Webcrawler was bought by
America Online in 1995 and later sold to Excite. Lycos from Carnegie Mellon, Inktomi
from University of California Berkeley, and Excite, Yahoo! and Google from Stanford –
were all created in academic research institutions, and most often with public funding.
In particular, Google’s algorithm PageRank was part of a Stanford Digital Library Project
(SDLP), one of the first six awards of the multi-agency Digital Library Initiative (DLI)

66


financed by the National Science Foundation (NSF).179 Larry Page and Sergey Brin,
supported by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship, developed the initial PageRank
algorithm as they were working on the SDLP project. At that time, the primary goal of
the SDLP project was described thusly, “to develop the enabling technologies for a
single, integrated and ‘universal’ library, proving uniform access to the large number of
emerging networked information sources and collections.”180 Not accidently, this is quite
similar to Google’s current mission – “to organize the world’s information and make it
universally accessible and useful.”
Table 1. Search Engines/Directories between 1990 - 1995
Year
Search Engines/Directories
1990 (Pre Web)
Archie – McGill University
Gopher – University of Minnesota
Veronica – University of Nevada, Reno
Jughead – University of Utah
1992

World Wide Web Virtual Library – CERN, Geneva,
Switzerland

1993
World Wide Web Wanderer – MIT
W3Catalog – University of Geneva
AiWeb – Nextor
JumpStation – University of Stirling,
World Wide Web Worm – University of Colorado
Yahoo! – Stanford University
1994
Web crawler – University of Washington
Lycos – Carnegie Mellon University
Infoseek – Steve Kirsch, Infoseek Corporation
1995
Open Text – University of Waterloo
Magellan – Isabel & Christine Maxwell
Excite – Stanford University
AltaVista – Digital Equipment Corporation
infoMarket Search – IBM
Source: Michael Zimmer (2007) & Van Couvering (2010)


179

“On the Origins of Google National Science Foundation,” National Science Foundation, August 14,
2004, http://www.nsf.gov/discoveries/disc_summ.jsp?cntn_id=100660.
180
“The Stanford Integrated Digital Library Project,” National Science Foundation,
http://www.nsf.gov/awardsearch/showAward?AWD_ID=9411306.

67


The emergence of a number of new search engines and Web directories that grew
out of academic institutions was in response to the rapid growth of the Web. In 1991,
there was one Website, but by 1995, the Web grew to 23,000 pages and Web users
reached 44,838,900. By January 1997, a year before Google released its PageRank, the
Web grew to 650,000 pages and Web users reached 120,758,310.181 With a rapidly
growing Web, search engine technology became a necessary utility to access information
on the Internet. Given this necessity and growing scale, no longer could a few individuals
build and manage a search engine, it soon required a large information infrastructure and
investment. Combined with this, the function of the search engine as a gateway to
information seemed to fall within the domain of public information provision. Libraries
for instance, as existing public information infrastructure, early adopters of computers
and key participants in early search engine development, could have built, with public
funding, the public utility of search. With this in mind, the first question to ask must be:
considering these initial search engine technology developments, which occurred outside
of commercial transactions, how did search engine technologies shift from a public utility
type of function to become billion dollar ads-based businesses?
Why did search engines not continue to be organized as public services when that
was potentially their initial role? Search engine technologies made for uncertain
businesses and few people predicted that search itself could be a business. Even major
advertisers were skeptical about online ads as a viable market platform. The first Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) of Lycos, Ted Philip recalled, “there was no such thing as
advertising on the Internet at that time...We had no business plan. All we had was a piece


181

Web Growth data from Matthew Gray, the creator of WWW Wanderer, the first Web crawler.
http://www.mit.edu/people/mkgray/net/internet-growth-raw-data.html.
68


of technology.”182 In 2000, Yahoo! cofounder Jerry Yang echoed a similar sentiment in a
Forbes Interview, saying that in 1994, he and his partner were working on the Yahoo!
directory as a hobby. He said, “We were looking for another start-up idea. We really
didn't think Yahoo! could possibly be it. There was no real business model that fit it.” 183
Search engines did not have intrinsic commercial value; rather they had to be enabled and
organized in a particular way.
Searching for a Business Model
Along with the privatization of the Internet, the rise of the search engine industry
intersects with the dot-com bubble between 1995-2000 when large sums of venture
capital fueled a host of Internet-based technology startups and when telecommunication
and networking equipment companies attempted to organize the Internet as a commercial
platform.184 The Internet bubble emerged after the recession in the early 1990s following
the stock market crash of 1987 as capital was seeking a new site of accumulation to
overcome the economic down-turn.185 In searching for a new high growth sector, massive
amounts of financial capital flowed into Internet startups, which nurtured the Dot-com
bubble. Goldfarb, Pfarrer, and Kirsch, in their 2005 study, estimated that from 1998-


182

Elizabeth Van Couvering, “Search engine bias: the structuration of traffic on the World-Wide Web”
(PhD diss., London School of Economics, 2010), 98; Giovanni Gavetti and Jan Rivkin, “On the Origin of
Strategy: Action and Cognition over Time,” Organization Science, 18, no. 3 (2007), 425.
183
Brent Schlender, “The Customer Is The Decision-Maker Jerry Yang talks with FORTUNE's Brent
Schlender about flexibility, hierarchy, and the "religion" of Yahoo,” Fortune, March 6, 2000,
http://archive.fortune.com/magazines/fortune/fortune_archive/2000/03/06/275281/index.htm.
184
Sam Ro, “Venture Capital Funding Is Nowhere Near The Levels We Saw During The Dot-Com
Bubble,” Business Insider, April 10, 2014, http://www.businessinsider.com/historical-venture-capitalfunding-2014-4.
185
Robert McChesney, Digital Disconnect: How Capitalism Is Turning the Internet Against Democracy
(New York: The New Press, 2013); Matt Crain, “The Revolution Will Be Commercialized: Finance, Public
Policy, and the Construction of Internet Advertising” (PhD diss., University of Illinois, 2013); Dan Schiller,
Digital Capitalism.

69


2002, 50,000 new ventures were formed in an effort to commercialize the Internet.186
And these dot-com firms did not subscribe to traditional business models, rather they
pursued intangible “mind share” or “eye balls” to build brand awareness while they were
operating at a sustained loss.187 A host of venture capital funded initial start-ups intended
to leverage the “eyeballs” that had garnered to other advertisers and were trying to
expand their consumer base as fast as possible to build brand in order to increase their
valuation – the idea was to “get big fast.”188
Search engine firms – once called eyeball aggregators – were at the center of this
“get big fast” game.189 In 1998, Robert David, CEO of Lycos, echoed this business
model, “our sole focus is audience size … Any place there are consumers, there are
advertisers.”190 In the 1990s, betting on this eyeballs game, a slew of major venture
capital firms such as Sequoia Capital, Softbank, Kleiner Perkins Caufield & Buyers,
Highland Capital Partners, Institutional Venture Partners (IVP), and Draper Fisher
Juverton invested in search engine start ups like Yahoo!, Infoseek, Lycos, Excite,
AltaVista, Ask Jeeves, Google, etc. Draper Fisher Juverton invested more than 30 million
dollars in search services.191 Timothy Draper, a managing partner with the venture capital
firm, said “Search is going to be hot as long as people continue to be frustrated.”192
Draper Fisher Juverton was also one of the original US investors in Chinese search

186

Brent Goldfarb, Michale Pfarrer, and David Kirsch, “Searching for Ghosts: Business Survival,
Unmeasured Entrepreneurial Activity and Private Equity Investment in the Dot-Com Era,” Working Paper
No. RHS-06-027 (Robert H. Smith School, 2005), 2,
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=825687.
187
Paul Anderson, Web 2.0 and beyond: principles and technologies (Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2012), 35.
188
Crain, “The Revolution Will Be Commercialized,” 113.
189
Christopher Nerney, “The Up and Coming,” Network World, April 20, 1998, 57-58.
190
Ibid.
191
Phil Carpenter, EBrands: Building an Internet business at breakneck speed (Boston: Harvard Business
School Press, 2000), 197.
192
Ibid.

70


engine Baidu which will be discussed in a later chapter. While looking for business
models, search engine firms funded by venture capital spent the majority of their budgets
in attracting lots of users to their sites because, without standard metrics for market share,
Web metrics were centered around “traffic,” “hits,” and “eyeballs.”
To build brand recognition and draw user traffic, search engine firms launched
extensive marketing campaigns on and offline, and poured the majority of venture capital
money into brand building and advertising campaigns. Running up to its IPO, Yahoo!
spent $5 million for the first national-scale ad campaign on television.193 This could be
seen as a small amount of money for TV ads, but it was almost Yahoo!’s entire
advertising budget for 1996.194 PR was not neglected then. Yahoo!’s PR agency
generated 600 articles in 6 months in business and trade journals as well as mainstream
publications.195 Shortly thereafter, Excite responded and launched its own $8 million
nation-wide television campaign.196 From 1995 – 1998, Excite poured more than $65
million into marketing to build its national brand.197 Ironically, search engine firms were
sellers of online ads at the same time being among the largest advertising spenders as
well.
Along with extensive marketing, search engine firms built partnerships with
established Internet businesses to draw more user traffic. After rejecting an offer to be
acquired by Netscape and AOL, Yahoo! began a strategic partnership with Netscape, then
the most valuable property on the Net, which made Yahoo! one of the featured search


193

Ian Chaston, Entrepreneurial management in small firms. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2009), 67.
Ibid.
195
Karen Angel, Inside Yahoo!: Reinvention and the road ahead (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002),
39.
196
Chaston, Entrepreneurial management in Small firms, 67.
197
Carpenter, EBrands, 192.
194

71


engines for Netscape’s browser users. Excite, then the number 2 search engine, made a
strategic deal with Netscape, Microsoft and America Online (AOL), to expand the
distribution of their search engine services.198 Infoseek also made a deal with Netscape in
which it became a featured search provider on Netscape.
Table 2. The Search Engine Market
Product
Entry
Date
Yahoo!
Infoseek/Go Network
Lycos
Excite
AltaVista
Webcrawler
About
LookSmart
Snap
HotBot
GoTo
Ask Jeeves

1994
1995
1994
1995
1995
1995
1996
1996
1997
1996
1998
1997

Total # (in millions)
of unique users
Total # (in millions)
of web users

Unique Users in Millions
August 1997
14.8
7.9
4.9
7.6
4.7
3.2

August 1998
26.0
12.5
12.0
14.6
9.5

August 1999
33.0
18.5
14.9
14.1
9.2

-3.2
4.0
5.5
2.6
0.4

8.6
8.5
8.3
7.2
7.1
4.0

43.1

90.2

133.7

44.7

55.5

63.1

Source: Neil Gandal, “The dynamics of competition in the Internet search engine market,” International
Journal of Industrial Organization, 19, 1103-1117, (2001).

With extensive marketing campaigns, partnerships with other Internet firms and the
increase in Web user population, leading search engines such as Yahoo!, Lycos, Infoseek,
Excite, and AltaVista were able to draw millions of users by the late 1990s. And they all
followed a textbook dot-com route: once big enough, companies pursued one of two
lucrative exit strategies: 1) filed an IPO to raise more funding and to expose its brand; or
2) sold themselves to a bigger company without a solid business model.


198

Rebecca Pirto Heath, “The Marketing 100: Excite: Scott Epstein,” Advertising Age, June 20, 1997,
http://adage.com/article/news/marketing-100-excite-scott-epstein/71587/.

72


The first search engine to go public was a Canadian company OpenText, which
came out of research projects at the University of Waterloo.199 By the end of 1996, the
top four at the time – Yahoo!, Excite, Lycos, and Infoseek – all had IPO’s and raised
$162 million.200 While many search engines went the IPO route and raised millions of
dollars during the dot-com boom, none of them had a working business model. Going for
IPO without a specific revenue source was not uncommon for dot-com start-ups that
relied on the “get big fast” principle in which companies with little revenue sources
raised massive amounts of capital by pursuing a strategy of attracting “eyeballs.” By the
mid 1990s, the major search engine firms had millions of users, but couldn’t figure out
ways to monetize those “eye balls.”
In its IPO preparation, Yahoo!, then the leading search engine, was mulling over
three possible revenue sources – licensing its directory, fee-based services, or advertising.
Unlike other search engines, Yahoo! couldn’t license its search engine software since it
started with a human-edited directory and outsourced its search technology to other
search engine firms. Despite advertising being one of its options as a revenue source,
Yahoo! was not at all sure if the ads business model would be viable given there were no
precedents for online ads sponsored businesses. The company was unsure whether the
Web could ever drive enough advertising revenue, and even if it did, there were hundreds
of dot-com sites that were chasing after the same advertising dollars.201 Also, Yahoo!
knew that users would not pay for its services when there were already plenty of free
services available online. Tim Brady, Yahoo!’s marketing director argued that, “No one


199

William Aspray and Paul Ceruzzi, The Internet and American business (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,
2008), 174.
200
Angel, Inside Yahoo!, 124.
201
Joan Rigdon, “Yahoo! IPO Soars in First Day, But Honeymoon May Not Last.” Wall Street Journal,
April 15, 1998, http://online.wsj.com/article/0,,SB849504268462964500,00.html.

73


pays for picking up the Yellow Pages…. I don't think it's going to happen online.”202 In
the end, Yahoo! nonetheless went with its ads model because there was a surge of online
ads demand from dot.com firms who wanted to build their brand quickly. Along with
Yahoo!, the first generation of search engines like Excite and Lycos initially pursued
advertising.
Search engines initially served banner ads, the main advertising format at that time.
Banner ads were popularized by HotWired, the first commercial digital magazine on the
Web and online version of Wired magazine, which first sold pictorial banners on Cost
Per thousand Impressions (CPM) on a large scale in 1994.203 CPM meant that when an
“impression” or “hit” happened, a banner ad would be displayed. Since there was no
specific pricing model for online ads, Web publishers used the CPM model, borrowing
from the models of traditional print publications and other media. With the CPM pricing
model, whether or not users recognized the ads or interacted with them made no
difference as long as the ads were displayed in front of users’ eyeballs. The CPM model
offered no data on the actual effect of an advertisement. Thus, the major advertisers were
hesitant to shift significant portions of their marketing budgets to a new platform that did
not guarantee a Return On Investment (ROI). They were looking for more accountability
and metrics from Web publishers, but there were no established standards or criteria for
measuring Web audience. Fernando Bermejo, quoting a 1996 Advertising Age article,
captured advertisers and marketers’ uncertainty about these new ads platforms, stating:


202

Ken Yamada, “Yahoo soliciting advertisers for Internet directory service,” Computer Reseller News,
642, Aug 7, 1995, 54.
203
Frank D’Angelo, “Happy Birthday, Digital Advertising,” Advertising Age, October 25, 2009,
http://adage.com/article/digitalnext/happy-birthday-digital-advertising/139964/;
Chip Bayers, “The original Internet adman long before digital advertising was a multibillion-dollar
industry, Jonathan Nelson saw the future,” AdWeek, July 12, 2011,
http://www.adweek.com/news/advertising-branding/original-internet-adman-133283.

74


the lack of Internet standards is currently the single greatest impediment to the
Web’s emergence as a viable long-term advertising medium. The void impacts
everything from definitions to audience measurement to ad sizes and pricing.204
In fact, advertisers pressured Web publishers to provide sophisticated audience
measurements so they could see if ads were working and compare with traditional media
programs.205 At the same time, mainstream advertisers and marketers were hedging their
bets, afraid that they would be left behind, so they were experimenting with the Internet
as a new ads platform.206
In 1996, Proctor & Gamble (P&G) made the first move. Demanding more
accountability from Yahoo!, P&G struck a deal with the search engine to pay for
advertisements on a Cost Per Click (CPC) basis rather than CPM.207 This meant that
P&G paid only when a searcher actually clicked on an ad. Yahoo!, followed by search
engine site LinkStar Communication, offered an option for CPC model. This opened a
debate on how publishers should charge for ads and Web publishers were reluctant to
adopt a CPC model.208 AOL rejected the P&G deal because leveraging its place as the
largest ISP at that time, AOL touted that it would be able to deliver user traffic in the
millions.209 Yet, the real reason for AOL’s refusal to use the CPC model was its basic
business calculation because it reasoned that the CPC model could reduce its revenue
since it was only paid when someone clicked.


204

Scott Donaton, “Standards required to make next leap,” Advertising Age, November 4, 1996,
http://adage.com/article/news/standards-required-make-leap/235/; Fernando Bermejo, The Internet
Audience: Constitution & Measurement (New York: Peter Lang, 2007), 183; Joseph Turow, The Daily
You: How the New Advertising Industry Is Defining Your Identity and Your Worth (New Haven: Yale
University Press, 2011), 61.
205
Ibid.
206
“Ready or not, The Electronic Mall is coming,” Business Week, November 13, 1994,
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/1994-11-13/ready-or-not-the-electronic-mall-is-coming.
207
“Another engine takes ads by the click,” CNET, May 22,1996, http://news.cnet.com/Another-enginetakes-ads-by-the-click/2100-1033_3-212736.html.
208
Ibid.
209
Turow, The Daily You, 51.

75


Along with AOL, other Web publishers denounced CPC, saying “we are not going
to offer them a cost per click because we can’t figure out a way to make it make sense to
us.”210 The tension between marketers and publishers persisted, and major marketers
claiming that they would only invest limited capital for experimentation on the Web if
there were no reliable measurement standard.211 In 1998, a survey conducted by the
Association of National Advertisers revealed that the lack of accurate measurement and
difficulty in tracking ROI were considered the biggest barriers for advertisers reluctant to
buy online ads.212 From advertisers’ point of view, Web advertising did not offer any
palpable advantage over traditional commercial media based on the CPM model.
However, search engine firms had their own unique problems in attracting
advertisers besides the lack of standard measurement. Search engines by their very nature
are meant to move Web users away from the search site as quickly as possible. This was
counter-intuitive for advertising purposes, because from the perspective of traditional
media experience, users needed to stay on the site as long as possible to see and click on
ads. In other words, search engine technology lacked the so-called “stickiness” needed
for an ad-based business model to succeed. In fact, search engines were once even
considered a failed business idea because they were only conduits to other pages. Shortly
after major search engines went for IPOs in 1996, Fortune Magazine ran an article saying
that Internet advertising was not working and search companies were losing money.213 In

210

Debra Williamson, “Early Internet days perilous,” AdAge, March 28, 2005, http://adage.com/article/75years-of-ideas/early-internet-days-perilous/102660/.
211
Bermejo, The Internet Audience, 178.
212
Kim Cleland, “Media buying & planning: marketers want solid data on value of internet ad buys:
demand swells for information that compares media options,” AdAge, August 3, 1998,
http://adage.com/article/news/media-buying-planning-marketers-solid-data-internet-ad-buys-demandswells-information-compares-media-options/64931/.
213
Janice Maloney, “Yahoo: Still searching for profits on the Internet,” Fortune, May 26, 2013,
http://fortune.com/2013/05/26/yahoo-still-searching-for-profits-on-the-internet-fortune-1996/.

76


the article, Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon.com, expressed his doubts about online
advertising and said that while Amazon advertised on all four search sites, he considered
print ads in major publications like the Wall Street Journal to be more effective at
delivering business to Amazon.
In response to this skepticism, search engines shifted to portals and offered various
new services to attract more users and retain users in an effort to create “stickiness.”
Yahoo!, Excite, Infoseek, and other major engines provided a variety of other services
like ISP, news, email, chat rooms, and Web hosting so users did not need to leave the
site. As they pursued the building of portal sites, the search engines also began to build
partnerships with Internet content providers, and ISPs. In 1996, Excite established a
strategic alliance and co-branding services with AOL, which then had the biggest
audience, and WebTV Networks to broaden its audience.214 In 1997, Infoseek, Lycos,
and Excite all joined forces with AT&T’s online service which offered Internet access
through AT&T’s portal. The idea was that by connecting with AT&T, Internet search
companies would try to generate additional advertising revenues and further expand into
one-stop online services.215 They tried to reposition themselves as ultimate digital
destination sites by offering content and other services to incentivize users to stay on the
search site longer – and see the ads.
By the late 1990s, Yahoo!, MSN, Lycos, Excite and other Web portals were
growing rapidly as primary entries to the Internet. They rushed to acquire other
companies to expand their range of services in the hopes of increasing the time a user

214

Rebecca Heath, “The marketing 100: Excite: Scott Esptein,” Advertising Age, June 30, 1997,
http://adage.com/article/news/marketing-100-excite-scott-epstein/71587/.
215
“AT&T to Sell Services on Yahoo's Web Sites,” Los Angeles Times, May 19, 1998,
http://articles.latimes.com/1998/may/19/business/fi-51198.

77


stayed on a portal.216 Yahoo! offered online shopping, email services, free Web hosting
services, online streaming and digital audio while it licensed its search engine technology
from Inktomi. Many portal sites in fact licensed search technology, so search service
became only a minor part of what search engines provided, and search itself was viewed
as more of a traffic conduit to other Internet businesses.217
Yet, even the portal model did not last long. When the dotcom bubble burst in
2000-2001, the 280 Internet stocks lost $1.755 trillion from their 52 week high.218 Within
this 2-year period, $5 trillion in market value was wiped out which meant that people’s
pensions, retirement and mutual funds simply disappeared. Political economist and
historian Robert Brenner describes this as “stock-market Keynesianism” 219 which was
the result of deliberate state regulations to encourage a speculative bubble by permitting
retirement, pension, and mutual funds to invest in risky assets as a form of venture capital
and extremely low interest rate which helped dotcom start ups to easily raise capital to
commercialize the Internet. In response to the dotcom recession, the Federal Reserve cut
interest rates on several occasions, and this set up the next bubble (housing) as capital
was looking for its next site of capital accumulation.220


216

Charles Warner, Media selling: Television, print, Internet, radio (Chichester, West Sussex, U.K: WileyBlackwell, 2009), 437.
217
Jessica Livingston, Founders at Work: Stories of Startups' Early Days (Guildford: Springer London,
2007), 68.
218
David Kleinbard, “The $1.7 trillion dot.com lesson,” CNN Money, November 9, 2000,
http://money.cnn.com/2000/11/09/technology/overview/.
219
Robert Brenner, “New Boom or New Bubble?” New Left Review 24, January 2004,
http://newleftreview.org/II/25/robert-brenner-new-boom-or-new-bubble.
220
David McNally, Global Slump: The Economics and Politics of Crisis and Resistance (Oakland, CA:
PM, 2011), 102.

78


During the 2000 peak in online advertising spending, dot-com firms were spending
77% of advertising on the Web;221 but this dried up, and also brought about the collapse
of the dominant form of ads – banner ads – which made it more difficult for search
engine firms to generate revenues through advertising.222 By mid-2000, most advertisers
had moved away from banner ads and advertisers and pundits further questioned the
brand building capabilities of online advertising. And advertising agencies set aside their
digital subsidiaries and only valued online ads for direct response campaigns demanding
a specific action from consumers.223 This resulted in surplus ads space, which shifted the
market to the advantage of advertisers.
Selling Search
After the Dot-com bubble burst, the Wall Street Journal, reporting on a study by
Harris Interactive Inc and Jupiter Media Metrix Inc. noted that, “the very nature of the
Web may be incompatible with effective advertising. Users simply have too much ability
to ignore or click off what they don't want to see.”224 Advertisers and marketers pulled
their marketing budgets from online ads, and this forced Web publishers to find new
sources of revenue. Major search engines realized that banner ads were not enough to
generate revenue to make them profitable.225 Thus, they tried to reduce their dependence
on online ads and altered their business model to fee-based services. In fact, Yahoo! was


221

Joseph Menn, “77% of Advertising on the Web is bought by dot-com,” Los Angeles Times, September
6, 2000, http://articles.latimes.com/2000/sep/06/business/fi-16112; Eileen Colkin, “Web Ads Upend
Industry Practices,” InformationWeek, Jun 13, 2005, 54-56.
222
Gabriela Taylor, Advertising in a digital age: best practices & tips for paid search and social media
advertising (Global & Digital, 2012), 15.
223
Damian Ryan and Calvin Jones, Understanding digital marketing: marketing strategies for engaging the
digital generation (London: Kogan Page, 2009), 76.
224
Peter Gumbel. “E-Commerce (A Special Report): Selling Strategies --- Advertising -- Ads Click:
According to a Major New Survey, some Types of Online Advertising may Deliver the Goods, After all,”
Wall Street Journal, Oct 29, 2001, http://search.proquest.com/docview/398941244?accountid=14026.
225
Owen Gibson, “Cash from clicking,” Guardian, April 8, 2002,
http://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/apr/08/mondaymediasection9.

79


adding new fee-based services in the late 1990s to see if users would be willing to pay for
content or services.226
In the midst of this depressed ads market, there was some pulse as the search engine
GoTo.com was attracting advertisers.227 GoTo.com was charging advertisers to bid for
placement in search results. This is called “sponsored search” or “paid search,” where
advertisers paid for preferred placement in search results. The concept of paid search is
not new, rather it is similar to the Yellow Pages where advertisers paid to have their ads
listed. However, in the early days, Internet communities vehemently resisted paid search,
and many believed that search engines should display results based on the quality and
relevance of Web content, not advertising dollars.228 And there were several attempts by
search engines to pursue paid listings as a business model, but they were not only actively
rejected by users but also questioned by the search engine industry itself.
While Google is the best-known paid search engine, capital’s attempts to sell search
have a longer history. In 1996, the search engine OpenText first offered “preferred
listing” services selling search results placement. The service allowed publishers to pay
for higher search ranking results without requiring them to buy more expensive banner
advertising.229 Because the company was first in this area, it faced the brunt of scathing
criticism from users, though it was welcomed by advertisers and marketers. Abe


226

Karen Angel, Inside Yahoo!: Reinvention and the Road Ahead (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2002),
195.
227
Saul Hansell, “Clicks for Sale; Paid Placement Is Catching On in Web Searches,” New York Times, June
4, 2001, http://www.nytimes.com/2001/06/04/business/clicks-for-sale-paid-placement-is-catching-on-inweb-searches.html/.
228
Brad Geddes, Advanced Google AdWords (Hoboken, N.J: Wiley, 2010), 69; David Kesmodel, The
domain game: How people get rich from Internet domain names. (Philadelphia, PA: Xlibris Corp, 2008)
67.
229
Karen Díaz, Reference sources on the Internet: Off the shelf and onto the Web (New York: Haworth
Press, 1997), 6; “Engine sells results, draws fire,” CNET, June 21, 1996,http://news.cnet.com/2100-1023215491.html.

80


Kleinfield, a vice president at OpenText, said, “People thought it was immoral.”230 At the
same time, Lilly Buchwitz, marketing manager for OpenText, addressed this issue,
saying that the services were in response to marketers who demanded to be able to pay
for preferred ranks on search results.231 However, the company got so many complaints
that the feature was abandoned in a matter of a few short weeks.232 Yet, 2 years later in
1998, GoTo.com (which became Overture and was incorporated into Yahoo! Search
Marketing in 2002) resurrected the OpenText business model of selling search results
with its own unique features. And the company was putting itself up against ads serving
firms like Engage, 24/7 Media, and MatchLogic, which ran banners and other forms of
advertisements on Web sites.
This time, besides user resistance, search engine firms were even skeptical about
GoTo.com’s paid search since they saw users’ response to OpenText and how OpenText
failed to sell search. Brett Bullington, Executive Vice President of Strategic and Business
Development at Excite expressed it thusly, “My feeling that the consumer wants
something more [sic.] cleaner than commercialism.”233 Likewise, Lycos search manager
Rajive Mathur said, “I'm not sure it’s really providing value to the user, in the long term.
I think they want some independent sorting.”234 Bob Davis, then CEO of Lycos, said,
“With the Yellow Pages, listings are delivered alphabetically. There’s no illusion there….
To me, this damages the integrity of the search service. This is like librarians putting


230

Laurie Flynn, “With Goto.com's Search Engine, the Highest Bidder Shall Be Ranked First,” New York
Times, March 16,1996, http://www.nytimes.com/1998/03/16/business/with-gotocom-s-search-engine-thehighest-bidder-shall-be-ranked-first.html?pagewanted=2&src=pm.
231
“Engine sells results, draws fire,” CNET, June 21, 1996, http://news.cnet.com/2100-1023-215491.html.
232
Bernard Jansen, Understanding Sponsored Search: Core Elements of Keyword Advertising (Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2011), 9.
233
Danny Sullivan, “GoTo Sells Positions,” Search Engine Watch, March 2, 1998,
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2066843/GoTo-Sells-Positions.
234
Ibid.

81


books on the end [of a bookshelf] if you pay her some extra money. We would not do it
with Lycos.”235 Despite much continued skepticism from the public and from search
engine firms themselves, advertisers and marketers were drawn to GoTo.com because it
had several features that appealed to them – and that were later adapted by Google – and
set it apart from the other search engines.236
First, GoTo.com offered Cost Per Click (CPC) in which advertisers were charged
only when a visitor actively clicked on their ad and landed on their site.237 This
performance-based pricing model enticed advertisers and marketers compared to the
CPM model. As noted above, the CPC model had existed for a while, but it had not
become popular among publishers. Second, keywords were sold in an automated auction
where marketers bid for placement and the highest bidder was placed at the top of the
search results. This guaranteed the targeted placement of advertisers’ sites, as opposed to
Yahoo!, which offered paid submission to its directory, but gave no guarantees that a
company’s ads would be included or have a particular placement order in its listing.
Third, after the bid, human editors reviewed each link submitted by Webmasters to
ensure the site and keywords were relevant, so the search engine displayed only relevant
ads to users.238 This increased the possibility of searchers clicking on advertisers’ ads.
This concept of relevance will be discussed later, but it became a core principle of
Google’s system. Fourth, it deployed a self-service advertising platform with no
minimum spending, which removed the barrier between sales people and ads inventories


235

Ibid.
Geddes, Advanced Google AdWords, 2-3.
237
David Kesmodel, The domain game: How people get rich from Internet domain names (Philadelphia,
PA: Xlibris Corp, 2008), 69-70.
238
Adam Eisner, “Small advertisers feel the pinch as GoTO.com defends price increase,” Search Engine
Guide, May 10, 2001, http://www.searchengineguide.com/andrew-goodman/small-advertisers-feel-thepinch-as-goto-defends-price-increase.php.
236

82


and bypassed the paper contract.239 With this potent combination of self-service, ads
relevancy, and CPC pricing model, GoTo.com attracted both small businesses and large
corporations. The search engine began its service with 15 advertisers, but by the end of
1999, the company had thousands of advertisers.240
However, the problem for GoTo.com was how to attract enough user traffic to
monetize it. At the time when GoTo.com entered into the search market, there were
plenty of other search engine options – such as Yahoo!, Lycos, AltaVista, Excite, Hotbot,
and Microsoft MSN– so it was not easy to draw traffic since the company did not have a
sufficiently popular brand.241 Thus, GoTo.com had to turn to sites that already had heavy
user traffic like Yahoo!, MSN, AOL, and Netscape. The company decided to syndicate
its service, so that affiliated sites could embed the GoTo.com search box on their site, or
use the GoTo.com search engine directly and identify the results as partner results. 242 In
those cases, GoTo.com would share the revenue with partnering sites; by 2001, it had
reached revenues of $667.7 million and turned into a profitable business.243 The company
offered non-ads sponsored search results as well as a complement to its ads-driven
search. However, GoTo.com licensed its search technology from Inktomi for its nonsponsored listings.244
Yet, despite its early success, GoTo.com faced a dilemma because it had to rely on
larger search engines or portals to serve the traffic it needed, and this put them in a


239

Geddes, Advanced Google AdWords, 3.
John Battelle, The search: How Google and its rivals rewrote the rules of business and transformed our
culture (New York: Portfolio; 2006), 112.
241
Catherine Seda, Search engine advertising: Buying your way to the top to increase sales. Indianapolis,
Indiana: New Riders, 2004), 7.
242
Charles Hill and Gareth Jones, Strategic management cases: an integrated approach (Mason, OH:
South-Western/Cengage Learning, 2007), 90.
243
Ibid.
244
“GoTo.com Adds Inktomi Search Functions,” ClickZ, June 10, 1998,
http://www.clickz.com/clickz/news/1716907/gotocom-adds-inktomi-search-functions.
240

83


vulnerable position since user traffic is the precondition for the search business.245
GoTo.com founder Bill Gross even talked to Larry Page and Sergey Brin about a
potential partnership; but Google rejected the idea and went their own way.246 The
company changed its name to Overture in 2001 and was eventually acquired by Yahoo!
in 2003. Up until GoTo.com, search engine firms couldn’t figure out a way to monetize
user traffic; but Bill Gross built an advertising system that offered the basis for
transforming search traffic into profit-making.
GoTo.com and Google entered into the search business at a similar time. Unlike
GoTo.com, Google had plenty of traffic when it considered running ads, but it had no
backend advertising system. In addition, Google was advantageously insulated from the
dot-com meltdown in online advertising and had not been exposed to the collapse of
banner ads because it hadn’t moved to the ads-based business model until after the bubble
burst. When Google was looking for revenue sources, the ads-based business model was
not its first choice. In fact, Sergey Brin and Larry Page were opposed to ad-supported
search services because Brin believed, “advertising-funded search engines would be
inherently biased toward the advertisers and away from the needs of consumers.”247 Thus,
initially Google tried to license its PageRank search technology to other search engines
rather than trying to compete in the already extremely competitive search market. By
early 2000, Google was mainly generating the majority of its revenue through licensing
fees. Since a search engine was an expensive and capital-intensive business, most portals

245

Kevin Lee, The truth about pay-per-click search advertising (Upper Saddle River, N.J: FT Press, 2009),
27; Jansen, Understanding sponsored search, 13.
246
Hill and Jones, Strategic management cases: An integrated approach, 110.
247
Sergey Brin and Larry Page, “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web Search Engine,”
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30, no. 1-7 (1998),
http://infolab.stanford.edu/~backrub/google.html.

84


like Netscape, AOL, and even Yahoo! later outsourced search to Google. Google still had
to compete with incumbants like AltaVista and Inktomi, both of whom concentrated on
the development of search technologies rather than moving to a portal model.248 In
particular, AltaVista was one of the most used search engines before Google gained
popularity. However, AltaVista – at that time known for having high-end processors –
was using a centralized index to answer queries from users, which made it difficult to
deal with the large and growing amount of Web content, while Google chose to adopt a
distributed crawling architecture in which the task of url crawling and indexing was
distributed among multiple machines, making it markedly faster and more scalable.249
Despite the fact that Google was drawing user traffic and building a national brand as a
search engine, it was a challenge for Google to position itself as a service provider to
large enterprises. Elizabeth Van Couvering pointed out that there were not enough
enterprises to which to sell search services.250 Also, as Ken Auletta points out, unlike
AOL, Yahoo! and the other portal sites, Google couldn’t count on subscription revenue
and content sites on which to display banner ads,251 bringing it reluctantly back to
advertising.
When Google was trying to figure out ways to run ads on its site, banner ads were
still the dominant format. However, Google was hesitant to run banner ads. Sergey Brin
said, “We are about money and profit … Banners are not working and click-throughs are


248

Douglas Edwards, I'm feeling lucky: The confessions of Google employee number 59 (Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Harcourt, 2011), 60.
249
Shivanshu Rastogi, Zubair Iqbal and Prabal Bhatnagar, “Search Engine Techniques: a Review,” MIT
International Journal of Computer Science & Information Technology 2, no. 2 (2013), 56-57,
http://www.mitpublications.org/yellow_images/1381121411_logo_Search%20Engine%20TechniquesA%20Review.pdf.
250
Van Couvering, “Search Engine Bias,” 99.
251
Auletta, Googled, 63.

85


failing. I think highly focused ads are the answer.”252 Google’s alternative to banner ads
were small and targeted text ads, though they were not even sure if targeted text ads
would be attractive to advertisers and be successful because text ads had never been used
for brand building. Google had a back up which was DoubleClick. Brin and Page said, “if
we start to see that we’re running out of money, well then we’ll just turn on a deal with
DoubleClick and we will be fine because we have a lot of traffic.”253 Given that
DoubleClick was the leading banner ads operator at the time, Google was planning to
outsource its ads business to DoubleClick in case its own ads business failed.254
It’s noteworthy that before Google’s search ads dominated the Internet,
DoubleClick, which is now owned by Google, was the largest online ads network, and
dominated the banner ads market. It pioneered large-scale online advertising by offering
targeted ads using its patented Dynamic Advertising Reporting and Targeting (DART) ad
management system to schedule, track and bill for ad placement among its network of
content providers. By the end of 1998, DoubleClick’s network had grown to more than
1,300 Web sites. However, its revenue was highly concentrated, with 61.2% derived from
four Web publishers – including 44.7% of DoubleClick’s revenue from AltaVista
alone.255 AltaVista, which did not have in-house advertising sales, outsourced its ads
service to DoubleClick. Google was considering going the same route as AltaVista, but
then the bubble burst in Spring 2000, and the online ad banner market crashed, so this
induced Google to build its own ad program. 256

252

David Vise and Mark Malseed, The Google story (New York, N.Y: Delacorte Press, 2005), 87.
Battelle, The Search, 124.
254
Scott Karp, Google AdWords: A brief history of online advertising innovation, May 27, 2008,
http://publishing2.com/2008/05/27/google-adwords-a-brief-history-of-online-advertising-innovation/.
255
Scott Reeves, To DoubleClick Or Not To DoubleClick? Barron’s, February 16,1998,
http://online.barrons.com/news/articles/SB887413994242883500?tesla=y.
256
Ibid.
253

86


In October 2000, Google officially launched its advertising system called AdWords
with 350 customers on a flat CPM pricing model. AdWords was very different from
today’s ads system, but it was self-serve and was restricted to relevant text ads. Google
limited ads titles to 25 characters and one link, and displayed no more than eight small
ads on the results page of any search. The ads results looked like part of the search
results. Google had a few tactical reasons to go with small and targeted texts ads. This
was not only to offer an alternative to banner ads, but also to try and ease some
immediate technical and social obstacles.
Besides their ineffectiveness, banner ads often took too long to load and slowed
down the system. In early 2000, the majority of users were still connected via dial up
Internet connections with 56k modems, so banner ads required more time to display. By
mandating its own 25 character text ads as the standard, Google was able to speed up the
ad serving process, which allowed for users to conduct more searches and the company to
serve more ads in a given time. With its text ads, Google was able to improve efficiency
and speed, which became the major factors in Google’s profit-making search business.
Further, targeted small text ads gave an illusion to users that the ads were part of the
results, and blurred the line between search and ads results, treating them in a similar
way. “If you treat advertisements as a great search result, they will work as a great search
result” said Omid Kordestain, Vice president of business development and sales at
Google.257 This deflected some users’ resistance to paid search.
Yet, Google’s AdWords didn’t immediately take off. The CPM based ads model
still did not appeal to advertisers, and the system in general was still underdeveloped.
According to Jeff Levick who worked on Google’s ads team at that time, “we were cold

257

Mindy Charski, “Google’s Ad Program stresses simplicity,” Inter@ctive Week 7, no. 33 (2000): 14.

87


calling people, trying to get them to buy keywords.”258 Less then 2 years after launching
its first iteration of AdWords, the company overhauled the system and its search business
began to take off.
Making the Secret Sauce
Google’s later versions of AdWords were closer to its current system. Soon after
launching the second iteration of its system, Google changed its pricing model from CPM
to CPC. CPC was a more attractive model to advertisers because it imposed less risk to
advertisers since they did not need to pay for impressions that were not clicked on.259
Yet, the core features of Google’s later ads system were its ads algorithm, which
determines Google’s ads rank, and its keywords auction system used to calculate ads
price. Google designed an ads system that hit the trifecta – it maximized its profit and
concomitantly drew in both users and advertisers, all the while persistently projecting a
public image of “all about users.”
Google distinguished itself from its rival GoTo.com’s generalized first price
auction (GFP) system where first position was given to the highest paid bidder. Rather
than price, Google incorporated a user feedback loop into the system to place more
“relevant” ads by adding Click Through Rate (CTR) to determine ads ranking for each
query in real time. Google called their system AdRank (an ad’s maximum bid times its
CTR = AdRank), which determines the order of ads in response to a user’s query. Despite
being a controversial Web metric standard, CTR was one of the accepted measurements

258

Will Oremus, “Google’s Big Break,” Slate, October 13, 2013,
http://www.slate.com/articles/business/when_big_businesses_were_small/2013/10/google_s_big_break_ho
w_bill_gross_goto_com_inspired_the_adwords_business.html.
259
James Shanahan and Goutham Kurra, “Digital Advertising: an Information Scientist’s Perspectives,” in
Advanced Topics in Information Retrieval, ed. Massimo Melucci et al., (Berlin: Springer, 2011), 212;
Bernard Girard, The Google way: How one company is revolutionizing management as we know it (San
Francisco: No Starch Press, 2009), 31.

88


among both advertisers and publishers, who associated CTR with user interest and intent.
Google’s incorporation of CTR into its ads algorithm was merely the beginning of their
systematic attempts to have user feedback generate more relevant/targeted ads. This
principle of relevance seems an obvious factor for a traditional information retrieval
system; however, for a money-making advertising system, it seemed paradoxical on its
face – one would think that if Google relied on the highest bidder, it would receive more
in return; yet Google’s seeming unselfishness toward users in relying on relevance
proved to be the core driver of its profit-making, and the building of an ads system in
which the House always wins.
Google quickly extended its ads relevance algorithm/ads ranking system to include
more than just CTR. It introduced its so-called Quality Score (QS). In addition to CTR,
QS today includes the relevance of each keyword to its ad group, landing page quality
and relevance, the relevance of ad text, and historical AdWords account performance,
among other undisclosed ingredients of relevancy factors. Google continually tweaks its
ads algorithm QS over time as it updates its search algorithm. Google then factors this QS
into its keywords auction program. If a keyword’s QS is too low, then it is automatically
disqualified from participating in the auction. AdWords recalculates QS with only
qualified keywords and multiplies the second QS and keyword’s CPC bid to calculate an
ad’s rank. In its auction system, unlike GoTo.com’s “generalized first price auction,”
Google has employed a generalized second price (GSP) auction to reduce the volatile
pricing and inefficiency in investment to try to game the system that tend to happen in
generalized first price auctions.260 Second price auctions work such that the price that the

260

Benjamin Edelman, Michael Ostrovsky and Michael Schwarz, “Internet Advertising and the
Generalized Second-Price Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of Keywords,” American Economic

89


advertiser pays is not the advertiser’s maximum bid price – this helps to assuage
advertisers’ feelings of overbidding or overpaying for ads services. Unlike the
generalized first price auction (GFP) in which the winning bid is the highest bid, the GSP
is the minimum amount above the second place bid that an advertiser will pay in order to
win the auction. GSP is a more attractive model to advertisers and prevents volatility of
auction price.261 Higher quality scores lower the overall cost of ads – meaning Google
gets less money per ad – but this spurs advertisers to create and maintain “quality” ads
that meet Google’s requirements – and cause more ad clicks for advertisers and therefore
more ad revenue for Google over time. Eric Schmidt affirmed this, saying, “Improving ad
quality improves Google's revenue … If we target the right ad to the right person at the
right time and they click it, we win.”262
Google emphasizes the idea that its ads algorithm is scientific, objective and purely
data driven, and vows that this complex proprietary ads system is for users and user
experience. However, Google isn’t purely concerned with users’ or advertisers’
experience per se, rather Google has a calculated capital logic to maximize its profit.263
Google organized its ads system to generate more profit by putting its version of
“relevant” ads higher on the list, where they have more chance to be seen and clicked on
by more users.264 In this way, Google prevents itself from having advertisers on the top
that may be generating little traffic and revenue. Google’s emphasis on relevance led it to


Review 97, no. 1 (2005): 246; Bernard Jansen. Understanding Sponsored Search: Core Elements of
Keyword Advertising (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 188.
261
Ibid.
262
Saul Hansell, “Google Wants to Dominate Madison Avenue, Too. New York Times,” October 20, 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/30/business/yourmoney/30google.html?pagewanted=al.
263
Charles Arthur, Digital wars: Apple, Google, Microsoft and the battle for the Internet (London: Kogan
Page, 2012), 42.
264
David Vise and Mark Malseed, The Google Story (London: Macmillan, 2005), 90.

90


pass the other search engines by.265 The most relevant ad has the most profitable auction
price point. In Google’s ads system, the best matched advertising is not merely limited to
the most relevant from the traditional sense of an information retrieval system, but it also
implies best revenue generation of pricing point from an economic perspective.266 Omid
Kordestani, Google’s 12th employee, described Google’s ad system in an interview:
We applied auction theory to maximize value – it was the best way to reach the
right pricing, both for advertisers and for Google. And then we innovated by
introducing the rate at which users actually click on the ads as a factor in placement
on the page, and that was very, very useful in relevance.267
Google also launched its AdSense program to place ads beyond its search site and
other Web properties and embed ads on individual Web sites willing to be part of
Google’s content network in exchange for sharing advertising revenues. Google did not
build AdSense technology but acquired it from Applied Semantics and absorbed their
AdSense content-targeted ads technology including the AdSense name. Self-serve
AdSense enticed online publishers by giving access to Google’s massive network of
advertisers from AdWords to any Web publishers who signed up with its program. With
a few lines of JavaScript code inserted into the Web page itself, AdSense would search
for and embed relevant ads from its ads network using Google’s search algorithm. The
AdSense program is a way to inject capital into the entire Web on a large scale since the


265

Will Oremus, “How Google’s Jeff Dean became the Chuck Norris of the Internet,” Slate, January 23,
2013,
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/doers/2013/01/jeff_dean_facts_how_a_google_programmer_beca
me_the_chuck_norris_of_the_internet.single.html.
266
Shuai Yuan, Ahmad Zainal Abidin, Marc Sloan and Jun Wang, “Internet Advertising: An Interplay
among Advertisers, Online Publishers, Ad Exchanges and Web Users,” (working paper, Department of
Computer Science, University College London, 2012): 3, http://arxiv.org/abs/1206.1754.
267
“Interview with Google’s chief business officer Omid Kordestain,” John Battelle’s search blog, October
26, 2005, http://battellemedia.com/archives/2005/10/titans_column_omid_kordestani.php.

91


company doesn’t need to rely on its own staff to insert ads into each Website or create
Web content in which to place ads.268
As Google was rapidly taking off, Yahoo! began to strengthen its own search
services by acquiring Inktomi, as well as AltaVista and AlltheWeb through its acquisition
of Overture (nee GoTo.com) in 2003.269 Soon after, Yahoo! stopped licensing Google’s
search technology and began to use its own in-house search engine. In 2006, Microsoft
also joined the sponsored search auction business.270 By 2007, Yahoo! had added its own
quality-based bidding to its sponsored auction ad system to combat Google. Despite all
this, Yahoo! was never able to raise its own proprietary technology on par with Google’s
ad system.
Jason Spero, the head of global mobile sales and strategy at Google, calls AdWords
the “nuclear power plant at the core” of the company.271 New York Times columnist
Randall Stross wrote, “the best minds at Yahoo!, Microsoft and Google’s smaller rivals
have spent years trying to replicate Google’s ad placing formula and all have failed to do
so.”272 Often, Google’s success is attributed to its superior search engine algorithm
PageRank over other search engines; but in fact, a large part of its profit-making relies on
the 24/7 marketplace of its ads system that is designed to monetize user search activities.
What then is the role of its search engine?
This 24/7 marketplace cannot run without a search engine. Underneath Google’s
ads system, Google has its “free” search engine that attracts users and generates massive


268

Arthur, Digital wars, 39.
Charles Warner, Media selling: Television, print, Internet, radio (Chichester, West Sussex, U.K: WileyBlackwell, 2009), 439.
270
Jansen, Understanding sponsored search, 179.
271
Kunur Patel, “Google Takes Mobile Ads to 1 Million More Advertisers,” Advertising Age, June 7, 2012,
http://adage.com/article/digital/google-takes-mobile-ads-1-million-advertisers/235211/.
272
Randall Stross, Planet Google: One company's audacious plan to organize everything we know (New
York: Free Press, 2008), 6.
269

92


amounts of user traffic, the precondition of search business. The search engine exposes
users to ads as they conduct everyday searches, and then feeds user search data back into
Google’s ad system to display ads based on users’ past or potential interests. The
extracted, computed, and contextualized user data from users’ everyday search activities
are fueling Google’s ads system to target “the right ad to the right person at the right
time.”273 Google hoards its immense data reservoirs that are constantly being filled and
refilled by searchers’ everyday information activities across Google’s search and other
Web properties. One of Google’s former employees described Google.com as “a living
laboratory processing data that reveals what is effective and what is not.”274 Using data
from users’ search activities, Google is working on perfecting its advertising system. Eric
Schmidt, in a 2007 interview with Wired Magazine, was asked, “how should we think
about Google today?” Schmidt responded:
Think of it first as an advertising system. Then as an end-user system – Google
Apps. A third way to think of Google is as a giant supercomputer. And a fourth
way is to think of it as a social phenomenon involving the company, the people, the
brand, the mission, the values -- all that kind of stuff.275
Tellingly, in his response, Schmidt did not mention search, what many people think of as
Google’s essential function. Did he forget about Google’s search technology or
misrepresent Google? Hardly. It’s a rare moment, but the description of Google in this
interview is in fact an accurate one – Google’s business is built primarily on advertising
systems with side ventures attempting to radically diversify their data streams and
revenue sources.

273

Saul Hansell, “Google Wants to Dominate Madison Avenue, Too,” New York Times, October 30, 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/10/30/business/yourmoney/30google.html?pagewanted=all.
274
Edwards, I'm feeling lucky, 59, 281.
275
Fred Volestein, “As Google Challenges Viacom and Microsoft, Its CEO Feels Lucky,” Weird, April 9,
2007, http://archive.wired.com/techbiz/people/news/2007/04/mag_schmidt_qa?currentPage=all.

93


There is additionally a lesser-known piece of Google’s advertising system that
feeds data back to the mother ship and supports the company’s profit-making project. It is
Google analytics, which generates detailed statistics on Web traffic, traffic sources, what
pages visitors are viewing and how long for marketers. While Google AdWords collects
data on users’ search activities on Google’s site, Google analytics follows users as they
travel through the entire Web.
In 2005, Google acquired San Diego Web analytics’ firm Urchin Software Corp,
rebranded its service as Google Analytics and began to offer free Web analytic services
to Google AdWords customers. Google was the first company to offer Web analytic
services for free. At that time, other firms were charging fees, and Yahoo! and Microsoft
did not have a sufficient analytic tool for their advertisers who were clamoring for more
data.
By giving away its “free” analytics tool, Google was first able to appeal to
advertisers who were hesitant to adopt online advertising. Even if Google was giving its
analytics for “free,” if it were able to attract more advertisers by providing a feedback
loop to measure their advertising, the company calculated that it could be more
profitable.276 Second, Web analytics were still evolving, and over 80% of advertisers on
the Web were not using analytics at that time.277 If Google analytics could be adopted
widely, then it could be the de facto Web analytics standard. By offering quantifiably
measurable ROI, Google provides a tool to justify search spending. Third is data. Google
analytics users have to insert Google-provided JavaScript into every Web page they


276

Brett Crosby, “The Path to Acquisition,” Stanford University Technology Venture Program, February
13, 2008, http://ecorner.stanford.edu/authorMaterialInfo.html?mid=1905.
277
“Analyzing Google’s Analytics Strategy,” Business Week, November 14, 2005,
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2005-11-14/analyzing-googles-analytics-strategy.

94


serve, and all their site statistics end up on Google’s servers.278 This is a way for Google
to acquire massive amounts of 2-way Web traffic data in exchange for its “free” analytics
tool. All of these data are fed into its advertising system.
The role of user data in Google’s profit-making will be discussed further in the next
chapter; however, given the importance of user data in its search business, it should not
come as a surprise then that Google has a voracious appetite for data as the company
devours what it gleans from users’ searches, keystrokes and movements, to their homes
and email, and its wide-ranging political efforts to control user data across the globe.
For Google and other Internet firms, mining, managing and controlling user data
are not options, but business imperatives. Bruce Schneier, a security expert, observed,
“Surveillance is the business model of the internet.”279 Grounded in this surveillance
based business model, search engines have been scaled up to large enterprises by
automating and mechanizing ads selling, buying and serving processes.
Large Scale Enterprise
Steven Levy (2009) describes Google’s AdWords as “the world's biggest, fastest
auction, a never ending, automated, self-service version of Tokyo's boisterous Tsukiji
fish market.”280 The tuna auction in Tsukiji fish market is run by skilled auctioneers, from
5am to 7am, but Google has built an automated system that runs 24/7 with an auctionbased online marketplace on a massive scale.


278

Justin Cuttroni, Google Analytics (Sebastopol, Calif.: O'Reilly, 2010).
Dan Gillmore, “As we sweat government surveillance, companies like Google collect our data,”
Guardian, April 18, 2014,
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/18/corporations-google-should-not-sell-customerdata.
280
Steven Levy, “Secret of Googlenomics: Data-Fueled Recipe Brews Profitability,” Wired, May 22, 2009.
279

95


Traditional advertising production was labor- and time-intensive as it required staff
to customize ads design, campaigns, schedules, and placement that might require
meetings, phone calls, and production schedules. Even in the early Web era, the process
of buying, selling and serving ads depended on manual recording, ad scheduling, and
tracking on number of visits or impressions, assisted by staff, and ads were also bought
and sold through individual contracts which were negotiated on a case-by-case basis;
advertising sales were oriented toward the larger advertisers.281
This rapidly changed in the mid-1990s Dot-com era when a range of new
advertising technologies were developed including online ads networks, data profiling
technologies, Web metrics, ad serving and management technologies. Ads buying, selling
and serving processes were further automated and mechanized. By the mid to late 1990s,
a host of ads serving technology firms like Focal Link, MatchLogic, Flycast,
DoubleClick, NetGravity, AdForce, SoftBank, and CMGI had emerged and developed
technical capabilities for ads sales, targeting, serving and tracking under one integrated
system. For instance, in 1996, Yahoo! used NetGravity's AdServer to schedule, place,
target, track, measure and manage banner ads and further automate and speed up ads
management. In particular, DoubleClick – acquired by Google in 2007 – first deployed
its ads network model in its online and centralized ads serving system, which built a
foundation for large-scale online advertising.282 Mentioned earlier, DoubleClick as the
largest ad broker was considered the Google of its time, and major advertisers and
publishers used them. In 1997, DoubleClick’s network of server computers delivered



281

De Liu, Jianqing Chen and Andrew Whinton, Current issues in Keyword Auction in Business
Computing, edited by Gediminas Adomavicius et al. (Bingley, UK: Emerald, 2009), 73.
282
Crain, “The revolution will be commercialized,” 36.

96


over 500 million ads impressions a month, and by 1999, it was delivering 500 million a
day.283 The company’s services delivered ads from 3,600 different advertisers.284
However, DoubleClick was still limited to large advertisers and publishers
representing sites with at least 1 million page views monthly285 and required a formal
sales contract with those sites.286 The company was known for having one of the largest
and most aggressive sale forces on the Internet, and roughly 500 of its 1,400 employees
were working in its sales unit.287 However, the coming years would see the search engine
industry figure out ways to exponentially scale up their ads businesses.
GoTo.com and Google launched self-service platforms instead of having a sales
representative to pitch ads directly to individual advertisers or publishers. While they
were selling premium ads in person, they automated the majority of the management of
ad buying, selling and serving process. By instituting an automated self-serve model with
no minimum spending, Google and other search engine firms were able to quickly
expand their ads business on a mass scale without hiring thousands of sales people. Using
the Internet as a business platform, the self-serve model shifted labor costs to advertisers,
marketers and publishers by giving them the tools to work on buying, targeting and
tracking ads. At the same time, the search engine firms further automated their ad-serving
systems from ads allocation to payment scale by using algorithms. The result is that, in
2012, Google alone had more than one billion advertisers, and generated 29.8 billion ad

283

Michael Indergaard, Silicon Alley: The Rise and Fall of a New Media District (New York: Routledge,
2004), 52.
284
Sloane Lucas, “DoubleClick Divides: 6 New Unites Emerge,” Brandweek 40, no. 41(1999): 60.
285
Steve Vonder Haar, “DoubleClick Opens Ad Network for Small Sites,” Inter@ctive Week 7, no. 4
(2000): 22.
286
Tim O’Reilly, “What is Web 2.0: Design Patterns and Business Models for the Next Generation of
Software,” Communication Strategies 1, no.1 (2001),
http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1008839.
287
Loren Fox, “DoubleClick Climbs to the top of the ad world,” Upside, February, 2000: 58-60.

97


impressions every single day between ads on its own site and ads on its network.288 Eric
Schmidt describes Google as an operating system for advertising, and now Google
continues to hone its ads OS to speed up and serve as many ads as possible.289
This is a major reason why Google has been spending massive amounts of capital
on building the infrastructure described earlier, to accelerate its ads serving by speeding
up search – more and faster search means more ads. From the beginning, Google tried to
squeeze out better performance from its hardware, wrote a myriad of customized
software to speed its data processing and built its massive industrial sized infrastructure.
Urs Hölzle, Google’s search guru and SVP of Infrastructure, points out that speed has
been Google’s mantra from its early days and “speed is the essence when it comes to
search results.”290 He asserted, “when you speed up service, people become more
engaged – and when people become more engaged, they click and buy more … Speed
isn't just a feature, it's the feature.”291
Today search engines are fighting for every millisecond.292 Google calls this its
“Gospel of Speed” – a rule that it requires all Google engineers and product managers to
follow: “Don’t launch features that slow us down.”293 In 2010, Google introduced a new
search-before-you-type feature called Google Instant to shave 2 to 5 seconds from the
average 25 second search speed. Google’s own data showed that four tenths of a second


288

John Koetsier, “30 billion times a day, Google runs an ad (13 million times, it works),” Venture Beat,
October 25, 2013, http://venturebeat.com/2012/10/25/30-billion-times-a-day-google-runs-an-ad-13-milliontimes-it-works/.
289
John Battele, “The Advertising System,” John Battele’s Search Blog, April 9, 2007,
http://battellemedia.com/archives/2007/04/the_advertising_operating_system.php.
290
Urs Hölzle, “The Google Gospel of Speed,” think with Google, January 2011,
http://www.thinkwithgoogle.com/articles/the-google-gospel-of-speed-urs-hoelzle.html.
291
Ibid.
292
Steve Lohr, “For Impatient Web Users, an Eye Blink Is Just Too Long to Wait,” New York Times,
February 29, 2012, http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/01/technology/impatient-web-users-flee-slowloading-sites.html?pagewanted=all/.
293
Hölzle, “The Google Gospel of Speed.”

98


would translate to 8 million less searches per day, and millions fewer ads.294 Marissa
Mayer, then vice president of search products and user experience said, “It’s search at the
speed of thought.”295 “Two hundred fifty milliseconds, either slower or faster, is close to
the magic number now for competitive advantage on the Web,” said Harry Shum, a
computer scientist and speed specialist at Microsoft.296
So far, Google has succeeded in designing a ubiquitous, lightning-fast, and
powerful system that has allowed the company to monetize users’ information activity on
a massive scale and generate obscene amounts of wealth. Yet, the online advertising
environment is changing at a rapid rate due to the increasing use of a range of Internet
connected devices such as smartphones, tablets, smart TVs and others. Google is under
pressure to respond to this changing environment, and understands that it is not enough to
maintain control over the ads business by merely relying on its current ads system. Thus,
Google is now busy reassembling its back-end ads technologies with new acquisitions as
well as in house developments to assure its profit-making in other forms as ads proliferate
across other hardware devices.
Reassembling the Machine
In 2005, Google vowed that “there will be no banner ads on the Google homepage
or Web search results pages.” However, by 2013, the company had begun to experiment
with banner ads for 30 brands, which appeared at the top of brand search results in the US
only. Google stopped its experimentation after 6 months, but Google’s bold move hints at

294

Kit Eaton, “How One Second Could Cost Amazon $1.6 Billion In Sales,” Fast Company, March 15,
2012, http://www.fastcompany.com/1825005/how-one-second-could-cost-amazon-16-billion-sales.
295
Amir Efrati, “Google's New Features Designed to Speed Web Searches,” Wall Street Journal,
September 8, 2010,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052748703453804575479821579919484.
296
Lohr, “For Impatient Web Users, an Eye Blink Is Just Too Long to Wait.”

99


the company’s ambition to conquer display ads, which are generally used for brand
building. Marketers expect that display ads will outpace search ads by 2016 with $74.4
billion driven increasingly by mobile and video ads.297 Yet, it is worth noting that despite
online display ads being the fastest growing advertising media, display ads market’s
profit margin is still low because there is an oversupply of display ads and they are
known for low click through rates. In the U.S. alone, 1.1 trillion display ads are shown
online each quarter, but the advertising industry has not yet fully solved the so-called
“banner blindness” which means that consumers simply ignore banner ads after a short
period of time. Despite their limitations, display ads have become more important for the
advertising industry, as users shift to mobile where they spend more than 80% of their
time inside mobile apps,298 and the increase of the online video market, which aims to
garner some of the lucrative spending on television ads. Google is retooling its backend
advertising technology to aim at not-fully-tapped markets, and to reduce its reliance on
search ads.
Google’s acquisition of DoubleClick in 2007 was largely to purchase its tool for
selling and serving display ads. Google has been rebuilding this display ads platform and
gradually integrating it into its larger ads infrastructure. Google linked AdWords to
DoubleClick and relaunched it as DoubleClick Ad Exchange (AdX) to directly compete
with other big ad exchanges run by Yahoo!’s right media and Microsoft.299 The Ad
Exchange platform facilitates the bid buying and selling of display, video and mobile ads

297

Ginny Marvin, “Display To Eclipse Paid Search Ad Spend In 2016, Mobile Set To Become 4th-Largest
Ad Medium,” Marketing Land, April 7, 2014, http://marketingland.com/display-eclipse-paid-search-adspend-2016-mobile-set-become-4th-largest-ad-medium-79309.
298
Simon Khalaf, “Flurry Five-Year Report: It’s an App World. The Web Just Lives in It,” Flurry, April 3,
2013, http://www.flurry.com/bid/95723/Flurry-Five-Year-Report-It-s-an-App-World-The-Web-Just-Livesin-It#.VSq1XbqyIns.
299
Michale Learmonth, “Google revamps DoubleClick, puts own names on it,” Advertising Age, February
22, 2010, http://adage.com/article/digital/digital-marketing-google-revamps-doubleclick-ad-server/142237/.

100


from multiple ad networks, individual Websites, and large publishers.300 The emergence
of the Ad Exchange business is the result of the advertising industry’s efforts to
rationalize and further mechanize the online ads market. There are massive marketplaces
consisting of many ad networks, individual Websites, and large publishers and serving
targeted ads is made more complex when a variety of different devices are added to the
mix. The advertising industry is trying to figure out ways to buy and sell ads process in
order to increase ads prices and ads accuracy for display ads. Ad Exchanges have arisen
to make it easier and more efficient to find the audiences and impressions by
programmatically matching ads buyers and sellers at the right time and at the right
price.301
Google’s AdX includes AdSense publishers and AdWords advertisers and
generates a massive demand on both the buying and selling sides.302 Initially, Google’s
AdX was only available to premium publishers, but now it has been expanded to include
small and medium publishers as well. Through its DoubleClick Ad Exchange, Google has
also built Real Time Bidding (RTB) – search-like real time bidding systems for crossplatform display advertising.
There are four components in the RTB environment – advertisers/advertisement
agencies, a Demand Side Platform (DSP), Ad Exchange, and a Publishers/Supply
Platform. Ads Exchanges like DoubleClick consist of two sides; on the one hand is the
Demand Side Platform (DSP) and on the other is the Supply Side Platform (SSP). The

300

Jack Marshall, “WTF is an ad exchange?” Digiday, January 39, 2014,
http://digiday.com/platforms/what-is-an-ad-exchange/.
301
Rich Karpinski, “Ad Networks and Exchanges 101,” Advertising Age, April 19, 2010,
http://adage.com/article/special-report-ad-network-exchange-guide-2010/ad-networks-exchanges101/143310/.
302
Zachary Rodgers, “Google's Ad Exchange Opens for Business,” ClickZ, September 9, 2010,
http://www.clickz.com/clickz/news/1710314/googles-ad-exchange-opens-business.

101


DSP works as the agency of advertisers by bidding and tracking on selected ad networks;
while the SSP works as the agency for publishers by selling impressions and selecting
optimal bids.303 Over the years, Google has built its own DSP and SSP platforms in
concert with a number of acquisitions. The company acquired DSP Invite Media, recoded
it, re-launched DoubleClick Bid Manager as a demand side platform,304 bought the
supply side platform AdMeld in 2011 and integrated it into its DoubleClick Ad
Exchange.305 DoubleClick Ad Exchange interface connects the supply and demand sides
and facilitates the purchase of inventory via RTB.
In RTB, each impression is bid for in real time, as opposed to a static auction where
the impressions are typically sold in bundles of 1000. RTB allows buyers to bid on an
impression-by-impression basis using data about user behavior, intent, semantics,
geography, device, location and demographics. This extremely complex method is hyperdata-driven and promises to deliver the right ad to the right consumer at the right time on
the right device. The model that Google is pursuing is similar to AdWords that is
targeting individuals, but it generates display advertising on large advertising networks.
The RTB market promises accuracy and speed as its selling points. Google
describes that in its RTB, the bidder has to respond to an exchange request within 100
milliseconds and this speed of response has an impact “everywhere along the bidder’s



303

Kevin Reynolds, “Are Ad Exchanges and Real Time Bidding The Next Big Thing?” Advertising
Perspectives, http://www.advertisingperspectives.com/adblog/media-technology/are-ad-exchanges-andreal-time-bidding-the-next-big-thing/.
304
“Getting Real With DoubleClick Bid Manager,” DoubleClick Advertiser Blog, October 24, 2012,
http://doubleclickadvertisers.blogspot.com/2012/10/getting-real-with-doubleclick-bid.html.
305
David Kaplan, “Google Continues AdMeld, Wildfire Integrations, Aiming Higher For Brand Dollars,”
adexchanger, March 21, 2013,
http://www.adexchanger.com/online-advertising/google-continues-admeld-wildfire-integrations-aiminghigher-for-brand-dollars/.

102


technology stack, from the physical infrastructure to the implementation of bid logic.”306
Given technologies that support AdExchanges are complex and capital intensive, it’s not
surprising that Google and Microsoft, with their deep pockets and extensive
infrastructures, are leading the way in building out Ad Exchanges to include RTB ads
systems.307
Yet, Facebook and Twitter are right behind them, joining the RTB market for
mobile display ads and beefing up their backend ads technology infrastructures. Yahoo!
also acquired Flurry, the mobile ad exchange, to bolster its mobile market. Flurry has its
own RTB platform called the Flurry marketplace that facilitates the process of selling ads
across different web properties.308 Even Amazon threw its hat into the RTB market by
building its own proprietary platform that can plug into ad exchanges or supply
platforms.
RTB marketing is growing. International Data Corporation (IDC) predicts RTB
spending worldwide will reach $20.8 billion by 2017, accounting for 28% of all online
display advertising sales,309 while it is still a relatively small segment of ads market and
faces uncertainties – given that the technologies have not been proven yet. However
Google is preemptively trying to occupy the market and is attempting to get a firm grip
on its backend ads technologies as they evolve as it did similarly with search ads.


306

“Real-Time Bidder Solution for Google Cloud Platform,” Google Cloud Platform,
https://cloud.google.com/developers/articles/real-time-bidder-solution-for-google-cloud-platform.
307
Kevin Reynold, “Are Ad Exchanges and Real Time Bidding The Next Big Thing?” Advertising
Perspectives,
http://www.advertisingperspectives.com/adblog/media-activation/are-ad-exchanges-and-real-time-biddingthe-next-big-thing/.
308
“Yahoo Eyes Mobile Ad Dollars With Flurry Acquisition,” Forbes, July 24, 2014,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/greatspeculations/2014/07/24/yahoo-eyes-mobile-ad-dollars-with-flurryacquisition/.
309
IDG, “Real Time Bidding in the US and the World 2011-2016,” October 2012,
http://www.pubmatic.com/reports/7_IDC-Research_Q32012.pdf.

103


Today, the most crucial function of search on the Internet served by the
marketplace seems naturalized and accepted with no alternatives. However, given its
history, this was not an imperative, rather there has been a long march for capital to
monetize search coupled with US government’s efforts to spur the commercialization of
the Internet. Alternatively, publicly funded search technology could have been bolstered
within the public information provision space like libraries and organized as a public
utility. Instead, search has turned into the foundation of a giant advertising system, has
been fully integrated into the very core of capital accumulation processes by monetizing
people’s everyday activities, and has become a large-scale information enterprise.
The question to then explore in the next chapter is: who is laboring behind this
newly emerged large-scale information industry? A highly automated search engine
industry seems to require little human labor; however, it has distinctive labor processes,
which offer us a glimpse of the emerging labor structure and labor control in the Internet
sector. The following two chapters are devoted to the labor behind the search engine to
shed light on characteristics and organization of labor processes in the search engine
industry.

104


Chapter 3
Laboring behind the Search Engine
According to one IT industry expert, the search engine is 21st century
infrastructure – and “building and maintaining a search engine is so expensive and labor
intensive that it requires the same kind of planning and upkeep that, say, the Golden Gate
Bridge does.”310 This statement defies the popular notion of the search engine industry as
the emblem of the “new” information economy, which, unlike the industrial capitalist
economy, needs very little in the way of human labor. Yet, technology as a social process
embodies human labor, and the search engine is no exception – every link on the Web
and each keystroke on a computer, tablet, or smartphone contain human labor. Search
engine technology is so seamlessly embedded in our daily lives, however, that it masks a
whole series of complex labor processes that enable and animate it; these processes,
moreover, provide an unmatched window onto our contemporary social organization.
This chapter uncovers the labor structure of the search engine industry to clarify
both the changing social relations between capital and labor, and the search industry’s
own profitable expansion. What are the distinctive modes and forms of labor organization
that assist in the search engine industry’s profitable accumulation? Who is actually
laboring to deliver information instantaneously in response to our seemingly highly
automated search queries and where are these workers located? By answering these
questions, this chapter illustrates representative patterns of labor in a leading Internet
industry. But before discussing specifics, the chapter begins by setting labor within a
larger context of changes gripping the information and communications workforce.

310

Keren Dagan, “Google’s search engine is the 21st infrastructure,” Webnomea, June 11, 2010,
http://Webnomena.com/2010/06/11/googles-search-engine-is-the-21st-infrastructure/.

105


Surplus Labor
5 years after the great recession, which wiped out 8.4 million jobs between 2008
and 2009, President Obama celebrated US economic progress and declared, “We have
got back off our feet [sic], we have dusted ourselves off… Construction is
up. Manufacturing is back. Our energy, our technology, our auto industries, they’re all
booming.”311 He reminded the public that the unemployment rate was at its lowest point
since September of 2008, and the economy was improving. In fact, in 2014, the
Department of Labor reported the unemployment rate at 6.2%, down from its recession
peak of almost 10% official unemployment rate.312 Indeed, it seems that the US economy
has improved; however, President Obama’s “booming” economy does not translate to the
majority of everyday Americans.
The official unemployment rate is 6.2%; however, this does not give the full
picture of the current labor condition. The official unemployment rate does not account
for missing workers who are neither employed nor actively looking for jobs because they
are discouraged by job prospects and have given up searching for a job. In October of
2014, the Economic Policy Institute (EPI) estimated that if these missing workers were
included in the government’s calculations, real unemployment would be at 9.6%.313
Moreover, there is a massive number of workers who are chronically underemployed – a
situation when workers want to work full-time, but are forced to work part-time
(involuntary part-time) due to economic conditions or work at jobs for which they are


311

The White House Office of the Press Secretary, “Remarks by the President on the Economy -- Kansas,
City, MO,” July 30, 2014, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/07/30/remarks-presidenteconomy-kansas-city-mo.
312
Peter Morici, “Real unemployment rate is at least 18 percent,” Hill, July 31, 2014,
http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/economy-budget/213834-real-unemployment-rate-is-at-least-18percent.
313
Elise Gould, “The Unemployment Rate Fails to Take into Account Missing Workers,” Economic Policy
Institute, October 3, 2014, http://www.epi.org/blog/unemployment-rate-fails-account-missing/.

106


overqualified. For college students over the last decade, the average underemployment
rate has been 44%, and for black college students, the average has been 50%. What’s
worse, during the “recovery” from the 2008 recession, the majority of employment gains
have been concentrated in lower waged occupations, and with millions of Americans still
looking for work and underemployed, capital has no urge to raise wages for those who
are working.314
In this “booming” economy, these vast pools of labor power are evidently not
needed by the search industry or, indeed, by the information sector at large. But they do
play an important ideological function for the Internet industry to serve their interests. In
response to the high unemployment rate, Google Chairman Eric Schmidt stated at the
2012 World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, “…there are plenty of companies in
the US and other countries I've visited that are very short of highly skilled workers.”
Schmidt answered that the problem of unemployment is the result of inadequate skills
among the workforce, which therefore may be solved with better education. Echoing the
industry’s complaints that it suffers from a shortage of “highly skilled” workers,
President Obama launched an engineering initiative to train 10,000 engineers per year in
“collaboration” with the private sector and proposed to reform the education system to
put more emphasis on Science, Technology, Engineering and Math (STEM).
While the Internet industry is crying over the shortage of skilled labor and asking
for government assistance, IBM, Cisco, Hewlett-Packard, AT&T, and Microsoft are
laying off large numbers of workers as they face emerging Internet services and a rapidly

314

Annie Lowery, “Recovery Has Created Far More Low-Wage Jobs Than Better-Paid Ones,” New York
Times, April 17, 2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/04/28/business/economy/recovery-has-created-farmore-low-wage-jobs-than-better-paid-ones.html?_r=0; “The Low-Wage Recovery and Growing
Inequality,” National Employment Law Project, August, 2012, http://www.nelp.org/page//Job_Creation/LowWageRecovery2012.pdf?nocdn=1.

107


changing IT market. In July 2012, Cisco slashed 1,300 workers – 2 percent of its global
workforce315 – and recently announced that it would cut an additional 6000 workers as
part of the company’s restructuring plan. In September 2012, HP announced that the
company would lay off 29,000 workers by 2014 as it eliminated roughly 8 percent of its
workforce – to become a “leaner and more profitable” company.316 Over the last decade,
HP has eliminated 120,000 jobs, almost equivalent to the populations of Mountain View
and Palo Alto combined.317 Google itself, which had not used layoffs beyond eliminating
200 sales personnel and 100 contractors in 2009,318 went on to cut 20 percent of the
workforce of its newly acquired Motorola Mobility,319 and sold off the company within a
year. In 2013, BlackBerry reduced its workforce by 40% – 45,000 workers.320 In July
2014, Microsoft announced that the company was planning to cut 14% of its workforce –
as many as 18,000 employees, 12,000 of whom were from Nokia, its mobile business
acquired in 2014. This is considered the “biggest round of layoffs” in Microsoft’s
history.321 In response, Chinese workers at Microsoft’s Nokia factory at Yizhuang
Industrial Park took to the streets to protest against Microsoft’s mass layoff. In his public
memo to Microsoft employees, CEO Satya Nadella said that this drastic change was


315

Ken Presti, “Cisco Confirms Layoffs; Cuts 2 Percent Of Workforce,” CRN, July 23, 2012,
http://www.crn.com/news/networking/240004198/cisco-confirms-layoffs-cuts-2-percent-of-workforce.htm.
316
Todd Wasserman, “HP Job Cuts to Reach 29,000 in Reorganization,” Mashable, September 10, 2012,
http://mashable.com/2012/09/10/hp-29000-jobs/.
317
Larry Walsh, “Few Worries as HP layoff tally Climbs up to 29,000,” Channelnomics, September 11,
2012, http://channelnomics.com/2012/09/11/worries-hp-layoff-tally-climbs-29000/.
318
Nicholas Carlson, Google’s Layoffs, Explained. Business Insider, March 31, 2009,
http://articles.businessinsider.com/2009-03-31/tech/29962746_1_google-s-europe-sales-force-search-ads.
319
Sayantani Ghosh and Alexei Oreskovic, “Google to cut 4,000 Motorola Mobility jobs, shares rise,”
Reuters, August 13, 2012, http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/08/13/us-motorolamobility-jobsidUSBRE87C07F20120813.
320
Roger Cheng, Layoffs may be over as BlackBerry looks to grow again, CNET, August 5, 2014,
http://www.cnet.com/news/blackberry-layoffs-may-be-done-as-company-looks-to-grow-again/.
321
Alison Griswold, “Microsoft Layoffs Would Be the Fourth-Biggest in Tech’s Modern History,” Slate,
July 18, 2014,
http://www.slate.com/blogs/moneybox/2014/07/18/microsoft_cuts_18_000_jobs_it_s_the_fourth_biggest_t
ech_layoff_ever.html.

108


necessary to become “more agile and move faster.”322 Microsoft’s reorganization of its
labor force was done in order to shift its business toward cloud and mobile. Industry
experts predicted that in 2014, layoffs in IT sectors would reach their highest levels since
2009 at the peak of the recession.323 A Forbes article wrote at the time that, “layoff is a
permanent feature in the tech sector.”324
These massive layoffs seem contradictory given it is the most dynamic business
sector, but it is indicative of an IT sector which is demonstrably undergoing a wideranging reorganization with the rise of new Internet businesses, but also highly uneven
workforce restructuring, and exhibiting disparate and even contradictory trends that are
deeply marked across the length and breadth of the information workforce. The labor
incarnated in the search engine industry needs to be situated and understood within this
vortex. I now turn to examine some trends characteristic of the high-pay, high-status
segment of the occupational structure – in the information industry in general and the
search industry in particular.
Top of the Pyramid
As the Internet sector expands, it generates new kinds of occupations, labor
demands and workplace structures. And one of the characteristics of the labor structure
within emerging Internet industries like search and social media is a concentration at the
top of disproportionately well-paid and highly skilled workers. The workers categorized
as “highly skilled” labor referenced by the flourishing search engine industry are

322

“Starting to evolve our organization and culture,” Microsoft News Center, July 17, 2014,
http://news.microsoft.com/2014/07/17/starting-to-evolve-our-organization-and-culture/.
323
Cadie Thompson, “Tech job cuts to soar in 2014,” CNBC, July 28, 2014,
http://www.cnbc.com/id/101872278.
324
Kay Roger, “Layoffs in Tech Now a Permanent Feature,” Forbes, February 6, 2014,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/rogerkay/2014/02/06/layoffs-in-tech-now-a-permanent-feature/.

109


computer scientists, software engineers (applications), Web developers and computer
systems engineers/architects, as the industry expands its territory to include mobile,
wireless technologies, cloud, app development, VoIP, and medical data. According to a
2011 report released by the Northern Valley Job Training Consortium (NOVA), the most
highly sought-after jobs in Silicon Valley where Google, Facebook, Yahoo!, Apple, eBay
all reside, are computer engineers and project managers who often have engineering
degrees. More specifically, the most-demanded “high skilled” IT occupations considered
by Silicon Valley IT industry are software engineers, field applications engineers, quality
assurance engineers and user interface designers.325
These “highly skilled” IT workers are often said to be akin to those of well-paid
young “Googlers” who have four-year- or advanced degrees in computer engineering and
business and the nature of their work has to do with computer systems design, scientific
research and development and/or management and business. Many of them come from
elite universities. Google recruits many of its employees from Stanford University,
University of California Berkeley, MIT, Carnegie Mellon, and UCLA,326 the historic
hubs of the Academic-Military-Industrial Complex (AMIC). This is not a surprise given
that the origins of the search engine industry are tightly rooted in AMIC, where engineers


325

,“Silicon Valley In Transition,” Silicon Valley Workforce Investment Board, July 2011, 15,
http://bwresearch.com/reports/BW_NovaTechReport_072011.pdf; Abby Lombardi, “Tech Talent Demands
in the Silicon Valley,” Wanted Analytics, April 28, 2014,
https://www.wantedanalytics.com/analysis/posts/tech-talent-demands-in-the-silicon-valley.
326
Henry Blodget, “And Here's The Secret Reason Apple Is Crushing Google,” Business Insider, March
25, 2012, http://www.businessinsider.com/and-heres-the-secret-reason-apple-is-crushing-google-2012-3;
Mary Ann Milbourn, “Who is hiring Google?” Orange County Register, March 31, 2012,
http://economy.blog.ocregister.com/2012/03/31/who-is-google-hiring/106711/; David Orenstein, “Google
grew from Stanford engineering, and the relationship continues to provide answers to tough problems,”
Phys.org, April 29, 2011, http://phys.org/news/2011-04-google-grew-stanford-relationship-tough.html; Ken
Auletta, “Get Rich U. There are no walls between Stanford and Silicon Valley. Should there be?” New
Yorker, April 30, 2012, http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2012/04/30/120430fa_fact_auletta; Max
Nissen, “What Facebook, Twitter, Google, and Apple employees have in common,” Quartz, March 7,
2014, http://qz.com/183958/what-facebook-twitter-google-and-apple-employees-have-in-common/.

110


have historically had access to both technical training and capital. Engineers with venture
capitalists, guided by capital expansion, have been undertaking the transformation of
search technologies into one of the most powerful sectors of the information industry.
Google describes its company as an engineering company and states that its,
“engineers make an impact on billions of users.”327 Ken Auletta states that Google is run
by engineers: “Google’s leaders are not cold businessmen; they are cold engineers.”328
These engineers, under the guidance of corporate goals, design and build search
technologies to be productive and profitable. While search companies typically do not
reveal the number of engineers that they have, LinkedIn lists 18,882 engineers at Google
as of June 2014. To give some perspective, the number of full, associate and assistant
faculty members of the 50 top US Computer Science Programs is 2,200 – Google has
almost 10 times more engineers than all of these academic programs put together.329
LinkedIn estimates that at Google, 55% of its employees have a Bachelor’s degree, 36%
possess a master’s degree and 7% a PhD degree.330 In fact, this engineer-driven search
industry has been absorbing “highly skilled” IT workers for quite a while. During the
worst economic downturn since the Great Depression – when other established IT
companies like IBM, Cisco and HP were shedding workers in a rapidly restructuring IT
market – Google added more than 4,500 workers in 2010 and announced that the

327

Matt McGee, “Yes, Bing Has Human Search Quality Raters & Here’s How They Judge Web Pages,”
Search Engine Land, August 15, 2012, http://searchengineland.com/bing-search-quality-rating-guidelines130592; “Human Search Quality Raters on Bing & What They Look For,” Top Marketing Strategies,
August 15, 2012, http://topmarketingstrategies.com/human-search-quality-raters-on-bing-what-they-lookfor
328
Auletta, Googled, xii.
329
This dataset was collected as a project for a Human Computer Interaction course at Brown University in
Spring of 2014. Detailed data is available at http://cs.brown.edu/people/alexpap/faculty_dataset.html;
Nissen, “What Facebook, Twitter, Google, and Apple employees have in common.”
330
“Google employs way more R&D employees than most other tech companies,” Business Insider,
http://www.businessinsider.com/10-charts-that-explain-the-state-of-googles-employees-today-20123#google-employs-way-more-rd-employees-than-most-other-tech-companies-1.

111


company would aggressively recruit more than 6,200 workers in 2011, primarily in
engineering and sales.331 In 2011, Google’s workforce grew by 33 percent, or more than
8,000 employees, and as of January of 2014, Google had 4000 open positions.332
Struggling Yahoo! even added workers in 2011, but soon after the company had begun
to make cuts as it had lost market share.333
This demand for “highly skilled” IT labor by new Internet companies has been
pushing up wages for this class of young IT workers, with an average age of less than 35
years old – the average age of workers at Google is 29; Facebook 28 and Apple 33.334
Google pays newly graduated computer science majors $90,000 to $105,000.335 Google
software engineers earn an average base salary of $128,336 and their counterparts at
Microsoft and Yahoo! earn over $100,0000. By comparison, the average starting salary
of a U.S. teacher is $39,000; the average ending salary – after 25 years in the profession –
is $67,000.336 And half of all Americans earned less than $27,529 according to the 2014
Social Security report.337
It is telling that new Internet companies indeed create well-paid jobs, but the story
not told to the public is that they tend to nourish and enrich only a small cadre of very
high-skilled workers by generating a relatively narrow array of jobs that require

331

“Help wanted: Google hiring in 2011,” Google Official Blog, January 25, 2011,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2011/01/help-wanted-google-hiring-in-2011.html.
332
“Best Companies 2014,” Fortune, http://fortune.com/best-companies/google-1/.
333
Mike Swift, “Google dominates Web Sector,” San Jose Mercury News, April 21, 2012,
http://www.mercurynews.com/business/ci_20417591/sv150-silicon-valley-150-google-dominates-Websector.
334
Quentin Hardy, “Technology Workers Are Young (Really Young),” New York Times, July 5, 2013,
http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2013/07/05/technology-workers-are-young-really-young/.
335
Clair Miller and Jenna Wortham, “Silicon Valley Hiring Perks: Meals, iPads and a Cubicle for Spot,”
New York Times, March 21, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/03/26/technology/26recruit.html?_r=0.
336
David Eggers and Clement Calegar, “The High Cost of Low Teacher Salaries,” New York Times, April
30, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/01/opinion/01eggers.html.
337
“Wage Statistics for 2012,” Social Security Online, October 12, 2014, http://www.ssa.gov/cgibin/netcomp.cgi?year=2012.

112


considerable education and skills. Given the entirety of STEM occupations in which
many of the highly skilled workers in the Internet sector are categorized, this is less than
5 percent of all jobs in the US economy, and the computer-related workforce within
STEM occupations is less than 2.5 percent.338 This reflects a structural shift occurring in
the IT sectors, which can be seen in changing workforce patterns in Silicon Valley where
many of these new Internet companies reside.
Over the years, the majority of the existing high-tech firms in the field of
computer systems design, telecommunication, semiconductor equipment manufacturing,
and data processing shed jobs as they automated, standardized or outsourced their work
to lower-cost regions in the US and abroad. Now even higher-skilled tech jobs like
engineers and computer programmers are being sent to places like India and China,
where there is an increasingly abundant supply of lower-cost IT workers. A decade ago,
one-quarter of the jobs in Santa Clara County – the heart of Silicon Valley – were at high
tech manufacturing firms. But nearly one-third of those jobs have relocated, as the
valley’s focus has shifted toward software and the Internet.339 Silicon Valley has been the
symbol of new economic growth, but over the past decade between 2002-2012, it has not
added any net new jobs; instead, the employment rate has fallen 2% according to a 2012
report by the community labor organization Working Partnerships in USA.340 In
particular, middle-wage jobs fell to 46 percent of the work force, from 52 percent. All
start-up success stories and the wealth in the Valley – the region that the world wants to

338

Hal Salzman, Daniel Kuehn, and Lindsay Lowell, “Guest workers in the high-skill U.S. labor market:
An analysis of supply, employment, and wage trends,” Economic Policy Institute, April 24, 2013,
http://www.epi.org/publication/bp359-guestworkers-high-skill-labor-market-analysis/.
339
Scott Thurm and Pui-Wing Tam, “California's Boom Masks State's Uneven Recovery,” Wall Street
Journal, August 15, 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303505504577405221289491972.html.
340
“Life in the Valley Economy: Saving the Middle Class: Lessons from Silicon Valley,” Working
Partnerships USA, 2012, http://www.wpusa.org/Publication/LIVE2012.htm.

113


emulate – have not translated into the creation of jobs or been generalized to the rest of
the population. During the recession, the unemployment rate rose as high as 11%. Silicon
Valley is today boasting about its 5.4% unemployment rate; however, what’s left unstated
is that the Valley’s recent job growth is mainly from jobs that pay less than $50,000
annually – an annual income far below what is necessary to afford the median price of a
home in the area.341
Over the past decade, the industry mix in the Valley has shifted away from
middle-wage manufacturing towards the very high-wage information- and services
sectors. The new information economy is polarizing the workforce and deepening wage
inequality in Silicon Valley as well as the US as a whole. From 2000 to 2010, the number
of households in Santa Clara County, the hub of Silicon Valley, who earned less than
$10,000 a year more than doubled – increasing by 128%.342 Almost a third of the
Valley’s workers earn less than $16 an hour, not a sustainable wage given the area’s high
cost of living, and another third of wage earners make less than $36/hour.343 The poverty
rate in Silicon Valley has surged, and tent cities have sprung up around the Valley, which
has the largest homeless encampment in the US, called “the jungle.”344 The bottom is
expanding, defying the common notion that the Valley’s productivity, driven by the new
information economy, will distribute wealth and reduce poverty. It is true that the “new”
economy redistributes wealth, but as David Harvey points out, wealth is redistributed to
the top.

341

Esther Lee and Aviva Shen, “Class Divide Widens Between Low-Wage And High-Wage Workers In
Silicon Valley,” Think Progress, October 16, 2013,
http://thinkprogress.org/immigration/2013/10/16/2779601/wage-immigrants-silicon-valley/.
342
Working Partnerships USA, Life in the Valley Economy, 39.
343
Working Partnerships USA, Life in the Valley Economy, 18.
344
Robert Johnson, “Welcome to ‘The Jungle:’ The Largest Homeless Camp In Mainland USA Is Right In
The Heart Of Silicon Valley,” Business Insider, September 7, 2013, http://www.businessinsider.com/thejungle-largest-homeless-camp-in-us-2013-8?op=1#ixzz3GS6TuvbL.

114


Unlike the popular rhetoric, new Internet companies generate a relatively small
number of “highly skilled” workers whose capabilities can be adapted to meet current
market changes. Compared to traditional IT companies, Google, Yahoo!, Facebook or
Twitter do not require many workers to design their algorithms or service-based
products.345 For instance, Google is larger than software and hardware company Oracle in
terms of revenue, but Google’s highest number of workers was 54,604 in 2013 after
doubling its workforce with its 2012 Motorola Mobility acquisition, while Oracle had
122,458 workers in 2013. Social news site Reddit has only 11 employees servicing a site
that can handle hundreds of thousands of unique visitors per hour; the photo sharing
social network company Instagram, before being acquired by Facebook, had only a team
of 16 to support 30 million users and a $1 billion valuation.346 The Search engine industry
and other internet-based businesses have often been perceived as creating a large number
of highly skilled jobs, but compared to traditional IT industry, it tends to generate a
relatively narrow array of jobs that require considerable education and skills. Contrary to
popular notions, the search engine industry in fact operates with only a small cadre of
very high-skilled workers at the top.
However, this small number of highly skilled workers is not even insulated from
capital’s effort to cut labor costs and increase profits. The industry is rallying together to
further open the skilled labor market. Companies in Silicon Valley, contrary to recent
anti-immigration rhetoric against working class immigrants in the US, have long been the
most outspoken protestors against US caps on visas for “highly skilled” foreign workers.


345

Marcus Wohlsen, “Silicon Valley Creating Jobs, but not for everyone,” Wired,
August 3, 2012, http://www.wired.com/business/2012/08/silicon-valley-creates-jobs-but-not-for-everyone/.
346
Water Chen, “4 Secrets to Silicon Valley’s Productivity,” Business Inside, June 1, 2012,
http://www.businessinsider.com/4-secrets-to-silicon-valleys-productivity-2012-6.

115


While they have been silent on the US government’s deportation of 2 million working
class immigrants, Google, Microsoft, Apple, Facebook and other major IT companies
have been at the forefront of lobbying the US Congress to reform immigration laws to
increase the number of H-1B visa holders to bring more “highly skilled” workers from
other countries, if not completely remove the barriers to bring in an indefinite number of
foreign IT workers. Laszlo Bock, Senior Vice President of People Operations at Google
writes, “… at a time when the U.S. economy needs it most, our immigration policies are
stifling innovation … Our experiences here at Google and in the tech sector show us that
immigrants to the US are a powerful force for entrepreneurship and innovation at every
level, from start-ups to multinational corporations.”347
Since the 1990s, the US Department of Labor has issued between 65,000 and
200,000 H-1B visas per year to allow foreign-born workers with specialized skills to
work in the United States on a temporary basis.348 More than half of these H-1B visas
have been issued to technology related positions. The top H-1B visas holders were not
Google or Facebook, but they were multinational information technology consulting and
outsourcing firms – Cognizant Technology, Wipro Limited, and Cisco Systems topping
the list. In 2013, IBM received 1624 H-1B visas, Microsoft had 1048, and Google had
753.349 Google, Facebook, and other Silicon Valley firms desperately want more access
to the global pool of skilled – cheaper – labor.


347

Suzy Khimm, “Do we need more skilled foreign workers?” Washington Post, March 21, 2013,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/wonkblog/wp/2013/03/21/do-we-need-more-skilled-foreignworkers/.
348
“H-1B Fiscal Year (FY) 2015 Cap Season,” US Citizenship and Immigration Service,
http://www.uscis.gov/working-united-states/temporary-workers/h-1b-specialty-occupations-and-fashionmodels/h-1b-fiscal-year-fy-2015-cap-season.
349
Deepak Chitnis, “50% of H-1B visas in 2013 went to offshore companies, mostly in India,” American
Bazaar, April 2, 2014,

116


As mentioned earlier, Eric Schmidt, at Davos in 2012, attributed the problem of
unemployment during the 2008 recession to a shortage of “highly skilled” labor; and
before that Microsoft founder Bill Gates testified before the US House Committee on
Science and Technology, stating that US companies were facing a severe shortage of
scientists and engineers with the skills needed to cultivate future innovative information
technologies. Gates asked that Congress reform immigration policies to allow indefinite
numbers of “highly skilled” foreign workers to work for US companies. In 2007, Google
VP of People Operations Laszlo Bock testified before the US House Judiciary
Subcommittee on Immigration, urging Congress, “to significantly increase the annual cap
of 65,000 H-1B visas, to a figure more reflective of the growth rate of our technologydriven economy.”350 In 2012, Brad Smith, Microsoft's general counsel and executive vice
president, said that tech companies faced a workforce crisis because of the severe
shortage of qualified applicants.351 He pointed out that Microsoft had 3,400 open
positions for researchers, developers and engineers – an increase of 34 percent from 2011
– and that the skills gap was one of the major impediments for the company.352
Claiming “shortages” of skilled labor, in 2013, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg,
supported by Microsoft’s Bill Gates and Google’s Eric Schmidt, formed a political
lobbying group FWS.us to focus specifically on immigration reform and rallying around
immigration reform bills to serve its business interests. The IT sector also banded
together to back several immigration bills such as Science, Technology, Engineering and

http://www.americanbazaaronline.com/2014/04/02/50-h-1b-visas-2013-went-offshore-companies-mostlyindia/.
350
Pablo Chavez, “What U.S. immigration policies mean to Google,” Google Blog, June 06, 2007,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2007/06/what-us-immigration-policies-mean-to.html.
351
Brendan Sasso, “Microsoft: shortage of tech workers in the US becoming 'genuine crisis,'” Hill,
September 27, 2012, http://thehill.com/blogs/hillicon-valley/technology/258985-microsoft-lack-of-techworkers-approaching-genuine-crisis.
352
Ibid.

117


Mathematics (STEM) Jobs Act, Startup Act 2.0, STEM visa legislation and Brains Act.353
Put succinctly, the industry is demanding that the US government intervene to enlarge its
“highly skilled” labor force, because the barrier to transnational mobility of IT workers
can only be resolved by nation state regulation.
The IT industry’s urgent demand to the state for more “highly skilled” foreign
workers to cope with the “shortage” of labor has not persuaded the majority of IT
workers and many experts on the IT labor force. The definition of “highly skilled” in
industry is not static; rather it varies depending on changing economic base and
technologies.354 Thus, the skill shortages refer to the gap between the estimated demand
for workers with a particular skill and the number of available workers at the very
moment without considering unemployed IT workers who could learn the requisite
skills.355
Technology union Washington Alliance of Technology Workers has voiced the
perspective that tech CEOs’ persistent claims of a shortage of highly skilled tech
engineers is far from true and that there are thousands of domestic tech workers that are
either underemployed or out of work. In fact, there has been no evidence of a shortage of
“highly skilled” labor; the US actually produces three times more STEM degrees than the
economy can use356 and less than 30% of STEM degree holders are working in their



353

Eric Larson, “’BRAINS’ Act: More Green Cards for STEM Workers,” Yahoo News, September 19,
2012,
http://news.yahoo.com/brains-act-more-green-cards-stem-workers-125827247.html.
354
Biao Xiang, Global "body Shopping": An Indian Labor System In the Information Technology Industry
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007), 26.
355
Ibid.
356
Beryl Lieff Benderly, “What Scientist Shortage?” Columbia Journalism Review, January 12, 2012,
http://www.cjr.org/reports/what_scientist_shortage.php; National Science Board, “2008 Science and
Engineering Indicators”, http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind08/.

118


chosen fields.357 The 2014 Science and Engineering Indicators Report showed that
between 2007 and 2010, the unemployment rate for engineers more than doubled – from
2.4 percent to 4.6 percent – even though it remains below the national average.358 In
2011, when Google announced it would hire 6,000 employees, the company received
more than 75,000 job applications.359 Google receives over 1 million resumes each year
and only hires between 1,000 to 4,000 people annually.360 Paul Krugman, the economist
and New York Times columnist, wrote that multiple studies have found no support for the
linkage between inadequate workers’ skill and high unemployment. He railed that the
myth of the US suffering from a “skilled gap” “ … should have been killed by the
evidence, but refuses to die.”361
Yet, indeed, there is a demand for new kinds of skill sets that can be immediately
applied to churn out new products for new businesses; however, the IT industry’s claim
of a shortage of workers has been their way to enlarge the labor supply, allowing them to
have a more flexible labor pool at lower cost, while maintaining expansionary
momentum.362 Harvard economist George Borjas explains that raising the supply of
doctorates by just 10 percent through immigration lowers pay in a given field by 3 to 4
percent.363 The industry’s rhetoric of catastrophic labor shortages is an attempt to
increase the mobility of highly skilled labor and justify the reform of immigration laws in


357

“Science and Engineering Indicators 2014,” National Science Board,
http://www.nsf.gov/statistics/seind14/index.cfm/chapter-3/c3s3.htm#s1.
358
Ibid.
359
Danny Goodwin, “75,000 People Really Want to Work at Google,” Search Engine Watch, February 3,
2011, http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2050072/75000-People-Really-Want-to-Work-at-Google.
360
Claire Gordon, “Google Is Hiring: The Secret To Getting A Job At Google,” AOL Jobs, August 24,
2012, http://jobs.aol.com/articles/2012/08/24/want-to-get-a-job-at-google-heres-how/.
361
Paul Krugman, “Jobs and Skills and Zombies,” New York Times, March 30, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/31/opinion/krugman-jobs-and-skills-and-zombies.html?_r=0.
362
Xiang, Global Body Shopping, 17.
363
George Borjas, “Immigration in high-Skill labor Markets: The Impact of Foreign Students on the
earnings of Doctorates,” National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006,
http://www.nber.org/papers/w12085.

119


order to have access to foreign labor as they expand to global markets and to hire more
temporary, lower-paid foreign workers. Despite the fact that foreign workers are required
to be paid comparably to American workers, in 2006, the US Government Accountability
Office (GAO) found that 54% of foreign workers holding H-1B work visas were paid less
than their American counterparts.364
As the competition between and among global IT companies has intensified, the
industry has made a concerted effort to liberalize and reorganize not only low waged
workers but also increasingly “highly skilled” workers to create a large and more
casualized labor pool for its rapidly changing sector. As Xiang points out, since the high
tech industry was financialized in the 1990s, the value of the IT industry is tightly linked
to fluctuations within the stock market and the industry’s hiring and layoff cycles, as
noted at the beginning of this chapter, a common practice to beef up companies’
valuations.365 Zynga, the social game company, is a recent example. The company laid
off 5% of its workforce soon after its stock price plummeted. Microsoft‘s announcement
of a 14% cut of its workforce in 2014 lifted its stock price 3.7%. The logic of capital here
is not only to have an abundant skilled labor pool, but also a highly mobile workforce
that can be quickly deployed to constantly changing market conditions.366 This signifies
that the labor market is extremely volatile, and there is no job security even if one is
“highly” skilled in the current “new” information based economy.
Russell Hancock, president of Joint Venture Silicon Valley, summing up the
current labor conditions in Silicon Valley – the heart of the “new” economy – said, “You

364

H-1 Visa Program Reforms are needed to Minimize the Risks and Costs of Current Program, United
States Government Accountability Office (GAO), 2011, http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d1126.pdf.
365
Xiang, Global Body Shopping, 6.
366
Ibid.

120


can have companies doing well and you can have all this startup activity, but it no longer
means lots of jobs.”367 Then does this mean that the search engine industry merely
depends on a small number of highly skilled workers? The answer is no. I turn now to
show some characteristic features of the information industry at the other end of the pay
scale as I demonstrate that the search engine industry is able to depend on only a small
number of skilled workers, not just because it is a highly automated industry, but because
the industry has appropriated a large number of invisible low and unwaged workers to
prop them up.
Low-Waged Workers
The myth of the search engine industry is that it is exclusively, even generally,
reliant on highly-paid workers. As we have seen, the industry does rely on a dense array
of highly skilled, young and educated employees. However, it is likewise crucially
dependent on a large and growing number of low-waged contingent workers who serve
the Internet industry and are rendered mostly invisible by this same myth. Beneath the
small segment of senior software engineers, research scientists, product managers, sales
engineers, financial analysts, and the like, are legions of low-waged workers. Huws
describes them as process workers who work under strict direction and tight control and
are isolated from their co-workers.368 This group’s much-needed work is obfuscated by
seemingly magical technology, but there is actually a distinctive hierarchy and division of
labor within this sector of the labor force.
For years, Google has attributed the supremacy of its search results to its
automatically configured algorithm. While Yahoo! began its search business based on its


367

Marcus Wohlsen, “Silicon Valley Creating Jobs, but not for everyone,” Wired, August 3, 2012,
http://www.wired.com/business/2012/08/silicon-valley-creates-jobs-but-not-for-everyone/.
368
Huws, The Making of a Cybertariat.

121


– paid – human indexed directory, Google and others developed automated crawl-based
search technology. There are no longer human indexers per se as search engine
technology has become automated, but their work has not been entirely eliminated; rather
this automation has led to the emergence of a new class of low-waged workers who are
practically invisible.
Google rarely talks about its outsourced, low-waged workers, but it has admitted
to hiring a great number of human evaluators to pretest its algorithms. They are often
referred to as “quality raters,” or “search engine evaluators” whose task is to determine
the relevance of search engine results before the company releases an alteration to its
algorithm. The head of Web spam at Google, Matt Cutt, acknowledged the role of quality
raters in responding to the Search Engine Optimization (SEO) community, which
expressed concern that raters were affecting search results. Cutt defended the objectivity
of Google’s search results and said, “Human raters work under the Search Quality
Evaluation Team and are used in the initial testing phases of proposed changes to the
organic search algorithm.”369
Google started to advertise for quality rater positions in late 2004 and hired them
directly, but today they are no longer recruited by Google. Rather, Google hires them
through contractors like Appen Butler Hill, iSoftStone, Lionbridge, Leapforce and
ZeroChaos (formerly WorkforceLogic), IT outsourcing companies specializing in
supplying global IT workers to large multinational corporations.370



369

Miranda Miller, “How Google Uses Human Raters in Organic Search,” Search Engine Watch,
March 2, 2012, http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2172154/How-Google-Uses-Human-Raters-inOrganic-Search.
370
Matt McGee, “An Interview With A Google Search Quality Rater,” Search Engine Land, January 20,
2012, http://searchengineland.com/interview-google-search-quality-rater-108702;

122


Under terms such as Multimedia Judge, Internet Search Administrator, Speller
Web Content Assessor, Query Understanding Judge, Ad Assessor, Internet Crowd
Worker, Web Content Assessor and Internet Assessor and Social Media Internet
Assessor, these positions are advertised as flexible, telecommuting, temporary work from
10-30 hours per week.371 Ads, direct email, and robo-commenters abound that say, “Can
You Work-at-Home by Surfing the Web All Day? Yes!”372 Since the positions are
advertised as work-at-home jobs, they often target stay-at-home mothers, advertising the
positions on Websites like workathomemom,com, telecommutingmommies.com, and
baycenter.com. These positions make up Google’s search quality evaluation team; but
their salaries and working conditions are far from the idyllic conditions on the Google
campus. These workers are even required to pay their own expenses for high-speed
Internet connections, and to have a smartphone and tablet for their tasks and everchanging computer technologies. The average salary for these permanent temporary
quality raters is between $12-16/hr with no benefits or job security. While their wages are
set, payments are based on completion of agreed upon tasks within specific time
periods.373 The positions require employees to have a BA/BS degree or equivalent or 4
years relevant work experience; however, quality raters do not enjoy the prospect of
moving up to a full time career at Google or other Internet companies. While their work
is tightly connected to the engineers who design Google’s algorithm, quality raters do not

Halina Zakowicz, “Can You Work-at-Home by Surfing the Web All Day? Yes!” I’ve Tried That, February
27, 2013, http://www.ivetriedthat.com/2014/02/27/can-you-work-from-home-by-surfing-the-Web-all-dayyes/.
371
Julianne Pepitone, “Silicon Valley fights to keep its diversity data secret,” CNN, November 9, 2011,
http://money.cnn.com/2011/11/09/technology/diversity_silicon_valley/index.htm?iid=EL.
372
Zakowicz, “Can You Work-at-Home by Surfing the Web All Day? Yes!.”
373
See sample job description for Internet Assessor at Lionbridge.
http://www.thesmartcrowd.com/workers/job-opportunities/job/internet-assessor-united-states-chineselanguage-smartphone-required/.

123


have any direct interaction with engineers or other workers at the company as they are
managed remotely.
The major tasks of quality raters are to evaluate search and/or advertising
“relevancy,” label spam and flag problem pages as engineers constantly tweak the
algorithm. According to Search Engine Watch, while the nature of the job for quality
raters is presented as flexible and self-directed, it is routinized, mechanized and tightly
managed, as the raters perform their tasks based on a 125-page manual of specific
guidelines provided by the company. Their task is not conducting search to evaluate
search results; rather raters are given a URL and query and are instructed to visit the
landing page and score a rating.374 They rate the URL based on categories that are given
such as user intent, location, language, etc.375
According to a Google rater in her interview with Search Engine Land, raters
have to meet their productivity goals in order to stay on the job. She describes the nature
of the work and says that there are a certain number of tasks that they have to complete
every minute. If they fall behind in terms of “productivity,” workers can be put on
probation and cannot work during that period. The quality of work for quality raters is
tracked based on staying within the time period for rating tasks and the number of tasks
that have to be returned.376 If raters’ quality is not up to the company’s standard, they are
terminated. She offers that, “it’s a very controlled work environment.”
Quality raters are not exclusive to Google or to search engine companies; rather
they are a standardized workforce in many Internet companies, which rely on search as a


374

Miranda Miller, “How Google's Human Search Quality Raters Assign a URL Rating,” Search Engine
Watch, October 19, 2011, http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2118334/How-Googles-Human-SearchQuality-Raters-Assign-a-URL-Rating.
375
Ibid.
376
McGee, “An Interview With A Google Search Quality Rater.”

124


basic function in terms of access and revenue generation.377 Bing also has a similar
program and Microsoft refers to evaluators as “judges” who work under its Human
Relevance System (HRS) project, which has been active since 2004 when MSN began
generating its own search results.378 These “judges” perform their tasks based on the 52page HRS Judging Guidelines, but Microsoft is reluctant to discuss their role and very
little has been written about their work.379 Social media company Facebook also directly
recruits so called “Entity Quality Raters” whose tasks are described as assessing the
quality of Facebook’s search results for People, Pages, Games etc.380
So far, there are no official numbers on how many quality raters are employed by
the search engine industry and other Internet sectors. In 2007, former Google executive
and current Yahoo! CEO Marissa Mayer, in a session at the Google scalability
conference, said that Google employs more than 10,000 quality raters;381 however, the
company has so far avoided providing exact data. Google’s Engineering Director Scott
Huffman, who leads the search quality evaluation team, confirmed the existence of the
large number of raters who evaluate search relevance across all of the locales in which
Google operates.382 These low wage quality raters collectively constitute a new category
of workers and an integral part of the search engine industry workforce. This is but one
segment of the massive substrate of low-wage workers. Others include content filterers,


377

“Working at Home for Lionbridge – Non Phone Work,” Earn Money Online, June 13, 2013,
http://realwaystoearnmoneyonline.com/2013/06/working-at-home-for-lionbridge-non-phone-work.html.
378
Matt McGee, “Yes, Bing Has Human Search Quality Raters & Here’s How They Judge Web Pages,”
Search Engine Land, August 15, 2012, http://searchengineland.com/bing-search-quality-rating-guidelines130592.
379
Ibid.
380
See Facebook’s Entity Quality Rater job description, https://www.linkedin.com/jobs2/view/4934626.
381
“Google Scalability Conference Trip Report: Scaling Google for Every User,”
http://www.25hoursaday.com/weblog/2007/06/26/GoogleScalabilityConferenceTripReportScalingGoogleF
orEveryUser.aspx; Stross, Planet Google, 224.
382
John Paczkowski, “Google and the Evolution of Search I: Human Evaluators,” All Things Digital, June
3, 2009, http://allthingsd.com/20090603/google-and-the-evolution-of-search-scott-huffman/.

125


digitization workers, and other outsourced contract workers. So far, the numbers of these
low-waged workers have not been tallied. However, perhaps the most telling hallmark of
the search industry is its massive reliance on an entirely different and still often
overlooked category of labor.
At the Bottom
If quality raters are at the bottom of the hierarchy for wage-labor that supports the
search engine industry, there is an even larger workforce that is unwaged: a great mass of
labor that is incarnated in Internet users themselves. The search engine industry relies on
uncompensated labor – not merely self-service labor that takes over a function that used
to be waged, but labor that generates inputs that are appropriated by Google and other
information companies without compensation.
The labor that is provided by searchers is more complex than may be thought.
Users perform a variety of tasks for search companies as they create content, refine
search engines by providing constant feedback via searching, viewing, creating content,
networking, rating, and commenting. It is profoundly striking that searchers think that
they are receiving “free services,” when their labor – in enormous quantities – provides
much of the basis of this “free service.” As the search engine industry has automated and
industrialized, the need for and use of human labor has not been eliminated;383 on the
contrary, it has intensified and changed form, as large-scale commercial search engines
have predicated their business models on continuing and ubiquitous inputs made up by
searchers. In the process of its expansion, the industry has externalized much of its labor
processes by incorporating a large pool of unpaid users. While user labor is not waged
labor, it has been visible and valued; in this respect it contrasts with the unpaid domestic


383

Ibid.

126


labor which has long been devalued and invisible despite its value to capitalists in
allowing them to set below-subsistence wages.384
Mainstream media and scholars have recognized the important contributions of
users in culture and economy. Time Magazine chose “You” – complete with a mirror on
the cover – as their person of the year for 2006 by recognizing the millions of people who
contribute to YouTube, Wikipedia, Facebook, etc. Many scholars hail user labor as a new
and supposedly emancipatory mode of social and cultural production.385 Yochai Benkler
popularized the concept of peer-to-peer production as an alternative to and an
improvement over industrial capitalism. He describes this new kind of production as a
subset of a commons-based production that “depend on individual action that is selfselected and decentralized, rather than hierarchically assigned.”386 For Benkler, Google’s
PageRank algorithm is a product of peer-to-peer production, which builds its search
ranking through valuing decentralized individual acts of linking to other sites as search
engines count those links as “votes of confidence.”387 Benkler claims that this is a new
mode of production that resides somewhere outside of the imperatives of capitalist
production. Peer production, convergence culture, collective intelligence, and free culture
all describe the increasing role of users as part of the “new economy.” However, what is
striking about these analyses is their common abstraction away from a discussion of labor



384

Jeanne Boydston, Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of labor in the Early Republic
(New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), 137.
385
Henry Jenkins, Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide (New York: New York
University Press, 2006); Lawrence Lessig, Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to
Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity (New York: Penguin Press, 2004); Benkler, The Wealth of
Networks.
386
Benkler, The Wealth of Networks, 62, http://www.benkler.org/Benkler_Wealth_Of_Networks.pdf.
387
Ibid., 76.

127


in relation to capital.388 Dean Colby succinctly points out that online activity constitutes
both means of production and social relations; current debates centered around the “new
economy” are absent any discussion of labor and capital as a constitutive social relation
in order to concentrate solely on changes in the means and techniques of production.389
Those who view this unpaid user labor as a new phenomenon or as unique to our
contemporary information economy have neglected to understand an ongoing, decadeslong effort by capital to systematically appropriate unpaid customers’ labor in order to
augment profits.
For instance, a history of self-service, a common business model, illustrates how
portions of the work processes in diverse industries have been transferred to unpaid
consumers to increase profit and productivity. While self-service is widespread today in
fast food, grocery, banking, post office and other industries, this business model goes
back to the early 20th century in the retail industry. With expansion of mass production of
food manufacturing, the first self-service chain grocery stores – Piggly Wiggly – were
introduced by Clarence Saunders in Memphis, Tennessee in 1916. Saunders modeled this
self-service grocery store on the cafeteria-style restaurant and reconfigured his store to let
his consumers serve themselves.390 He patented his standardized store floor plan, building
fixtures and finishers and franchised Piggly Wigglys across the US.391 The first principle
for Saunders’ Piggly Wiggly was uniformity.392 He insisted that, “every store must do


388

Dean Colby, “New Media as a New Mode of Production?” in Knowledge Workers In the Information
Society, ed. Catherine McKercher et al. (Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007), 197-205.
389
Ibid.,197.
390
Warren James Belasco and Roger Horowitz. Food Chains: From Farmyard to Shopping Cart.
(Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009), 180.
391
Ibid.,185; Nona Glazer, “Servants to capital: Unpaid domestic labor and paid work,” Review of Radical
Political Economics 16 (1984): 68.
392
Warren James Belasco and Philip Scranton. Food Nations: Selling Taste In Consumer Societies (New
York: Routledge, 2002), 166.

128


everything in exactly the same manner … this is one of the greatest advantages of our
system. Clerks, goods, fixtures are interchangeable.”393 Saunders’ self-service system
was built on standardization and routinization of labor processes so that each could be
broken down into a separate task. During WWI, many retailers, facing labor shortages
and rising labor costs associated with the war effort, increasingly shifted to selfservice.394 This adoption of a self-service model by industry was not exclusive to the food
retail industry. Bell Telephone Company for example started to automate its local phone
service after WWI. By 1930, after a long labor struggle, nearly one-third of all telephones
in the United States were rotary dial phones which automatically connected local calls,
replacing many telephone operators395 – though the full brunt of the evil combination of
automation and self-service in US telephony was felt only beginning in the 1950s and
1960s.396 Today, self-service principles have been diffused throughout many other retail
and service industries, such as home improvement, DIY furniture, ATMs and online
banking, pharmacies, airports, online travel ticketing, automated phone systems, print-ondemand publishing, post offices, etc.
The capital logic of self-service is to transfer work from paid workers to the
unpaid time of the consumer, which allows firms to cut labor costs by eliminating service
workers. Thus, many service industries where consumers and firms interact at the stage
of production continue to make an all-out effort to incorporate unpaid consumer labor as


393

Ibid.
Glazer, “Servants to capital,” 69.
395
Michael William Palm, “Phoning it in: Self-service, telecommunications and new consumer labor” (PhD
diss., University of North Carolina, 2010), 23.
396
Venus Green, Race On the Line: Gender, Labor, and Technology In the Bell System, 1880-1980
(Durham: Duke University Press, 2001).
394

129


a means to improving productivity and lowering labor costs.397 In the 1970s, service
sectors of the economy were on the rise, service businesses were increasingly rationalized
and standardized, mirroring the model of mechanized manufacturing industry. The
concept of the “production line approach to service” or “industrialization of service,”
theorized by Harvard economist Theodore Levitt, applied manufacturing logic to
consumer service to move consumers to take part in a “production line” as a given
automated, standardized and routinized service. In business management literature, the
consumer was discovered as a productive resource for corporations.398 By the early
1980s, business literature had pointed out that productivity would be enhanced when
consumers were treated as partial employees and as emerging sources of labor.399 As
consumer participation has become a standard part of the process of service production,
customers as employees and employees as customers have become interchangeable
slogans in business discourse.400
While the methods and levels of utilization of unpaid time of consumers in
capital’s profit making venture today vary depending on the business – from laboring by
simply contributing comments about a service or a product in order to improve quality
and quantity for production to completing tasks on behalf of and replacing employees, the


397

Christopher Lovelock and Robert Young, “Look to Consumers to Increase Productivity," Harvard
Business Review 57 (May-June 1979), http://hbr.org/1979/05/look-to-consumers-to-increaseproductivity/ar/1.
398
Theodore Levitt, “Production-line Approach to Service” Harvard Business Review, 50 (September
1972): 41–52; Frank Kleemann, G. Günter Voß, Kerstin Rieder, “Underpaid Innovators: The Commercial
Utilization of Consumer Work through Crowdsourcing,” Science, Technology & Innovation Studies, 4, no.
1 (2008): 5-26.
399
Peter Mills, Richard Chase, and Newton Margulies, “Motivating the client/employee system as a service
production strategy,” Academy of Management Review 8 no. 2 (1983): 301-10; David Bowen, "Managing
Customers as Human Resources in Service Organizations," Human Resource Management 25, no. 3
(1986): 371.
400
Michael Bowers, Charles Martin, and Alan Luker, "Trading Places: Employees as customers, customers
as employees," The Journal of Services Marketing 4, no. 2 (1990): 55.

130


use of unpaid consumer labor is radically increasing with the introduction of new
information technologies which offer newly direct and comprehensive interactive links
between consumers and producers. Capital continues to search for new mechanisms and
territories where consumers can be part of the labor process. Capitalism is dynamic and
constantly reinventing and reconfiguring labor processes through new technologies,
management skills and business models. For decades, the question for capital had been
how much value could be extracted from unpaid consumer labor, taking into
consideration the cost of incorporating and managing their labor. Yet, the distinctions of
today’s unpaid consumer labor that is integrated into search is that it involves the
appropriation of involuntary as well as freely donated behavior – the capture of users’
content, keystrokes, click-throughs and data trails.
Given this increasing role of unpaid workers in the Internet industry, it is
insufficient to understand the labor process of search engine industry only through
analyzing paid labor. The analysis needs to be extended by relating the search engine
industry’s incorporation of unpaid labor within the longer historical process by which
capital has continually sought to reorganize labor and cheapen its labor costs, among
other ways by making greater use of unpaid consumer labor.
User labor as a business imperative
The role of unpaid labor in capital’s profit-making has been reignited as Internet
technologies have provided a ubiquitous platform to easily aggregate and manage the
entire process for a dispersed unpaid user labor pool. From the early stages of the search
engine industry, unpaid labor was viewed as a valuable resource and competitive
advantage by the industry. Unwaged labor has been not only an integral part of

131


development of the search engine industry; more importantly it constitutes a new urgent
and strategic labor force for the industry.
In the 1990s, when Yahoo! was the leading search engine in the market – with its
paid human indexed Web directory – NewHoo was launched to compete with Yahoo!
under the premise that enlisting a large body of volunteers to compile a Web directory
would be more comprehensive than the Yahoo! directory.401 NewHoo’s founders, four
Sun Microsystem engineers, noticed that Yahoo! was not able to keep up with the growth
of the Web and was struggling to maintain fresh content, and recognized that building a
directory was extremely labor intensive and expansive. They discovered their business
model in open source software that was being used with little capital investment across
the IT industry, and posited that they could apply the open source idea to building a Web
directory by recruiting volunteer workers as their main source of labor.402 As capitalists
provided tools for their waged workers, NewHoo provided tools for editing, deleting and
updating links to their unpaid voluntary workers who selected, described and organized
Websites and added to the directory. By the time NewHoo was acquired by Netscape in
1998, the search engine had compiled 100,000 Websites with over 4500 volunteer editors
compared to Yahoo!’s 70 paid editors.403 NewHoo sold its unpaid worker-built directory
to Netscape for $1 million, which promptly renamed it the Open Directory Project (ODP).
At that time, ODP already had 1.6 million entries – surpassing Yahoo! – to become the


401

Danny Sullivan, “NewHoo Becomes Netscape Open Directory,” Search Engine Watch, December 2,
1998, http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2068092/NewHoo-Becomes-Netscape-Open-Directory; Chris
Oakes, “The Distributed Yahoo: 'NewHoo,'” Wired, July 8, 1998, from
http://archive.wired.com/science/discoveries/news/1998/07/13625.
402
Angel, Inside Yahoo!, 142.
403
Chris Sherman, “Humans do it better inside the open directory project,” Online, June 2000,
http://www.infotoday.com/online/OL2000/sherman7.html; Angel, Inside Yahoo!, 143.

132


largest, most comprehensive human-edited directory on the Web.404 All major search
engine companies – Lycos, HotBot, Ask Jeeves, Google, AT&T etc. – incorporated ODP
to augment their search databases and to get fresh content which allowed them to level
the content playing field. When Netscape was acquired by AOL in 1999, the ODP was
considered one of the assets included in the acquisition.
Ironically, ODP is often held up by popular media and scholars as one of the best
examples of this “new” mode of production occurring outside of the capitalist market. In
fact, ODP was initially built with unpaid voluntary labor specifically in order to
contribute to a profitmaking investment rather than to challenge capitalist social relations.
ODP was firmly rooted in a capitalist market in which unpaid voluntary labor was
integrated into and subordinated to a capitalist accumulation project. NewHoo was not
the first or only Internet company to deploy unpaid voluntary labor to leverage paid
workers. In 1994, a start-up called Geocities was built with a business model based on
“community.” Geocities provided free Web hosting, suites of utilities and other
“Geotools” to its members – called “homesteaders.” In exchange, unpaid laborers created
content by building Websites focusing on their interests and organizing collections of
member Web pages by themes and subjects for Geocities – who then used members’
Websites for advertising to generate revenue. Geocities’ founders David Bohnett and
John Rezner wanted to create a massive amount of content and traffic but on very limited
capital. Instead of hiring paid workers, Bohnett and Rezner utilized a “community” based
business model as a way to extract labor power from users. Contributing to Geocities’
success was its cost-efficient editorial structure, because the most labor-intensive part of

404

William Aspray and Paul E. Ceruzzi, The Internet and American Business (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT
Press, 2008), 167.

133


the work was performed by voluntary unpaid workers who created and maintained their
own pages.405 Bohnett touted that GeoCities “has 75 employees and 900,000 editors,”406
which meant 75 paid workers along with 900,000 unpaid volunteer workers. The
company leveraged the content by unpaid users to generate more market share and more
traffic. In 1999, GeoCities was purchased by Yahoo! for $3.57 billion.407
The extensive use of unwaged user labor by Internet companies went
unchallenged until a group of volunteers at AOL’s “Community Leader Program” asked
the Department of Labor to investigate whether the company had violated the Federal
Fair Labor Standards Act. They pointed out that they were treated like any other paid
employees – filing time cards, working specific shifts etc. – and therefore should be
compensated.408 AOL, then the largest ISP and a major market actor across the length and
breadth of cyberspace, recruited a large number of volunteers as “community leaders” to
perform routine tasks – answering subscribers’ questions, maintaining chat rooms and
offering technical support in exchange for waived or heavily discounted monthly AOL
connection fees. At its peak, AOL had up to 16,000 volunteers, including ones as young
as 12 years old,409 outpacing AOL’s 12,000 employees.410 One former executive once
estimated that the worth of work performed by volunteers was as much as 30% of the
company's annual revenue,411 and Forbes reported that AOL saved almost $1 billion in

405

Eric Mueller, “Mr. Bohnett builds his dream house,” Upside, December, 1997: 44-48.
Ibid., 48.
407
“Yahoo! buys GeoCities,” CNN, 1999, January 28,1999,
http://money.cnn.com/1999/01/28/technology/yahoo_a/.
408
Elliot Zaret, “Volunteer rebels rock Web community,” ZDnet, April 14, 1999,
http://www.zdnet.com/news/volunteer-rebels-rock-Web-community/102083.
409
Michael Malone, “The Little People VS. America Online,” Forbes, February 19. 2011,
http://www.forbes.com/asap/2001/0219/060_print.html.
410
Eliot Zaret, “AOL drops hundreds of teen volunteers,” ZDnet, July 26, 1999,
http://www.zdnet.com/news/aol-drops-hundreds-of-teen-volunteers/102876.
411
Malone, “The Little People VS. America Online.”
406

134


expenses from 1992 – 2000.412 In 2001, the US Department of Labor declined to take any
legal action against AOL, reasoning both that the agency lacked resources and that
government intervention was “inappropriate” in the dispute between AOL against its
volunteers.413 Later, the group of volunteers filed a class action lawsuit against AOL, and
they settled for $15 million.
This brief moment of questioning the use of unpaid volunteer labor within social
relationships between labor and capital quickly disappeared, as the Internet sector
increasingly became a site of economic growth. The deployment of consumer labor under
the “new” economy has been theorized in business literature with neologisms like “cocreation,” “co-innovation,” and “democratization of innovation.”414 The definition of cocreation or co-innovation here is the creation of value jointly with consumers at the
behest of capital. Leading business scholars have started to point out that the future of
competition depends on this “new” approach to value creation based on a supposed
individual centered co-creation of value between consumers and companies rather than a
company-centric value creation.415 This “new” approach goes beyond earlier forms of
self-service such as pumping one’s own gas or making a withdrawal from an ATM
because unpaid consumers are now actively drawn into capital’s profit-making pursuit
and participate directly and indirectly in the creation of value.



412

David Raymond, “True Value,” Forbes, February 19, 2001,
http://www.forbes.com/asap/2001/0219/060s02.html.
413
Labor Department won’t puruse AOL complaints, USA today, October 29, 2001,
http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/tech/news/2001/10/29/aol-labor-department.htm.
414
C.K. Prahalad and Venkatram Ramaswamy, “Co-opting Consumer Competence,” Harvard Business
Review, January 2000; Stefan Thomke and Eric von Hippel, Customers as Innovators: A New Way to
Create Value, Harvard Business Review, April 2002, https://hbr.org/2002/04/customers-as-innovators-anew-way-to-create-value/ar/1.
415
C. K. Prahalad, and Venkatram Ramaswamy. The Future of Competition: Co-Creating Unique Value
with Customers (Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004), 26.

135


The concept of “co-creation” has become a business mantra: “users must be
treated as co-developers” which today lies at the very heart of many Web 2.0 projects.416
The ubiquitous exploitation of unpaid user labor by internet companies is typically no
longer even visible; while its status as labor is effaced, user labor is hailed as typifying a
supposed internet-based culture of participation, democracy and so-called “open
innovation.” Moreover, the incorporation of unpaid voluntary user labor in profit-making
has become an increasingly standardized labor process for many Internet companies
today. The value of unpaid user labor in improving its competitive advantage has long
been recognized by capital whether or not users are aware of it.
Users as Covert Strategic Workforce
Unpaid workers toil side by side paid workers as they perform various tasks. In
the case of the search engine industry, companies depend on unpaid user workers for the
most capital- and labor-intensive part of their work – providing feedback on algorithms,
creation of content, and constant testing of new products. One of the most apparent tasks
performed by unpaid workers is providing feedback on search engine algorithms. Users
as “co-developers” with engineers assist in the refining of a search engine company’s
core algorithm technology as they go about their everyday search activities.
Google changes its search ranking algorithm 500 – 600 times annually.417 While
these changes are based on numerous factors, one of the factors is user activity, which
signals Google to tune the search algorithm in order to match user queries with contextappropriate advertisements. Currently, Google has devoted roughly one-third of its
workforce to research and development. This segment of the workforce has the


416
417

O’Reilly, “What is Web 2.0.”
“Google Algorithm Change History,” Moz, http://moz.com/google-algorithm-change.

136


responsibility for working on the design of information systems including algorithm and
new service products. Along with them, Google might have 10,000 paid quality raters,
more or less, and an unknown number of paid usability testers, but the largest number of
workers who provide constant feedback to improving the algorithm are unwaged users
who perform searches everyday. Google’s personalized search feature is a good example
whereby all Google searches are connected to users’ browser cookie records, so that the
results are not merely based on the relevance of a Web page to a user’s search term, but
also on the user’s previous search activities. This ratio between paid- and unpaid labor at
Google provides a stark contrast as to the enormity of the pool of unpaid labor.
As of January 2013, Google had 170 million unique US visitors per month, with
an average of 125 minutes per visitor per month in unpaid labor.418 This equates to an
additional 2,213,542 full time workers for Google (based on the 40-hour work week).
These 2,213,542 “people” are not categorized as a productive force in classical economic
terms or included in the generation of GDP, but their activities are as vital as the 47,756
full time Google employees (2013 statistics) – if not more so – as their activities
contribute directly to Google’s revenue generation. Here the ratio between equivalent
unpaid users and paid full-time workers is around 46:1. Even if each of these unpaid
workers received a salary of $12/hr (the average pay for a quality rater) – or $23,000 per
year – it would cost Google an additional $51,000,007,680 in salary each year. This is
almost the equivalent of Google’s 2013 global revenue of $59.83 billion. In other words,
Google would not be the grossly profitable company it is without these unpaid users.



418

“January 2013: top U.S. entertainment sites and web brands,” Nielsen Newswire, March 22, 2013,
http://www.nielsen.com/us/en/insights/news/2013/january-2013--top-u-s--entertainment-sites-and-webbrands.html.

137


Google’s astronomical success and profit generation have been predicated on its
wholesale incorporation of unpaid user labor into its business model. The role of unpaid
labor in profit-making for the search engine industry is not a secret. In 2005, Microsoft
Chairman Bill Gates somewhat ironically pointed out that Google doesn't share ad
revenues with end users who help them get the revenue, saying, “Google keeps all of the
money with [sic] itself.”419
While algorithms are central to search engine businesses, they cannot be effective
without a large quantity of fresh content to index and deliver to users and advertisers;
thus generating original content has long been a major capital- and labor-intensive task
for search engine businesses. For this, companies again rely heavily on user labor in
creating, uploading, and commenting supplemented with acquiring proprietary content
and partnering with content providers like NBC Universal, Sony Pictures, and Disney.
Take Google’s YouTube site for instance. In 2013, YouTube handled more than 1
billion unique users each month – the third most-visited site on the Web after Google
search and Facebook and the world’s largest video sharing platform.420 As of 2014,
according to Google’s own statistics, 100 hours of video are uploaded to YouTube every
minute, over 6 billion hours of video are watched each month, almost an hour for every
person on Earth.421 Google has discontinued provision of data on users’ social actions
(likes, shares, comments) on YouTube, but its last statistics in February of 2013 showed
that 100 million people took some sort of social action on YouTube (likes, shares,
comments, etc.) every week, and more than 50% of videos on YouTube have been rated

419

John Ribeiro, “Microsoft to show search engine users the money,” InfoWorld, December 8, 2005,
http://www.infoworld.com/t/platforms/microsoft-show-search-engine-users-money-619.
420
Nathan Olivarez-Giles, “YouTube hits 1billions monthly users,” Wired, March 21, 2013,
http://www.wired.com/2013/03/youtube-1-billion-monthly-users/.
421
“YouTube Statistics,” http://www.youtube.com/yt/press/statistics.html.

138


or include comments from the user community. Google’s YouTube unit has only 700-900
full-time workers despite the enormous scale of the site and the massive workload to
improve functionality and interface, upload new content, and increase its revenue.422 The
reason Google is able to assign a relatively small number of workers considering this
amount of work is because of the more than 1 billion monthly unique visitors assisting
them.
Google is one of the industry trendsetters for its creative deployment and
exploitation of user labor. The company has introduced its so-called beta business model
– which mirrors the open-source community’s bug fixing approach – in which its
products are released incomplete and during development. At Google, their motto is:
“launch early and iterate,”423 which means that the iterations process relies on work by
users to assist Google in perfecting its products. A product would normally be tested by
paid workers or internally by Googlers, but Google has decided to release its products to
large numbers of users perpetually in beta versions. According to Jeff Jarvis, this is
Google’s way of saying, “there are sure to be mistakes here and so please help us find
and fix them and improve the product” as the company monitors user activities to see
how new “free” products and services are used and which features are rejected and
adopted.424 As Tim O’Reilly points out, “it’s no accident that services such as Gmail,
Google Maps, Flickr, del.icio.us, and the like may be expected to bear a ‘Beta’ logo for
years at a time.”425 The logic behind releasing “perpetual beta” products is not as a

422

Andrew Morse and Ian Sherr, “YouTube to Boost Staff by 30% This Year,” Wall Street Journal, March
10, 2011, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052748704399804576193044126399836.html.
423
“A fresh take on the browser,” Google Official Blog, September 1, 2008,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2008/09/fresh-take-on-browser.html.
424
Jeff, Jarvis, What Would Google Do? (New York, NY: Collins Business, 2009), 93.
425
O’Reilly, “What is Web 2.0.”

139


technical experiment; rather it is a business strategy to transfer part of the work to unpaid
user labor. This business approach carries on the 20th century’s corporate welfare
capitalism in which exploitation is cloaked in typically paternalistic corporate initiatives
aimed at showing “we care.” The deployment of welfare capitalism in Internet industry
will be discussed in more detail in the following chapter.
It is vital to add that the search engine industry built over the Internet is able to
tap into user labor across national boundaries. Many Google products (Google.com,
Blogger, Google Earth, and others) are currently available in more than 170 languages,
from Abkhazian to Zulu. Most of these translations are done by volunteers from around
the world, as the company encourages them to participate by creating and using
translation programs and providing tools to perform this task. Google maps also uses
volunteers from various countries who post updates on their neighborhoods or travel to
remote places to map the area before uploading their findings to Google Map Maker. In
particular, in the countries where there is little Web content to index and monetize,
Google has launched volunteer programs to create and translate content. Imagine how
many paid translators and cartographers Google would need to perform all of these
myriad tasks. Instead of waged-workers, Google is taking the old but familiar
“community” based business model in which work can be transferred to unpaid voluntary
labor. This “community” as covert strategic labor has been a vital workforce for the
industry’s survival, development and transformation of search engine technologies into
one of the most dynamic information industries.
There are several remaining questions to be answered: why are people willing to
perform voluntary work for Google and the other Internet firms? Users are not merely

140


performing work on behalf of Google’s business. Their everyday information activities
are also rewarding in and of themselves for entertainment, communication, work,
education, building social reputation, and meeting information needs. Given that users get
benefits from commercial Internet services, some might argue that users are willing to
trade their labor in exchange for “free” services. The question then needs to be shifted
from “why?” to “what price?” The price to pay for users to use those services is to live in
a constant state of surveillance in which their moves are being gathered, monitored,
extracted, and analyzed for corporate gain and beyond. Is this a fair trade for users? The
absence or lack of public information provision offers few choices for the public. This
then leads to the next question. Since not all Internet activities can be deemed labor to
assist capital, what percentage of Internet users’ activities are directly put into profitmaking? Given the complexity of the labor processes, is it possible to even calculate?
The search engine industry is built on the work of a mass of people whose labor is
the basis of its business. Unpaid labor is not new; rather, it has always been part of the
capitalist system – women's labor, slave labor, prison labor, child labor, and today's
increasingly unpaid interns. Yet, what is new in the search engine industry is that the
sheer scale of voluntary and non-voluntary unwaged labor appropriated by capital and the
directness of its incorporation into profit-making projects and its strategic urgency for
capital are historically unprecedented. The profitability for the search engine industry
rests on the appropriation of unpaid user labor. Today, the deployment of user labor in
search engine companies and other Internet companies is no longer a choice; rather it has
become a business imperative. Concomitantly, there is no longer even a choice for users

141


to bypass laboring for the Internet firms as Internet activities are fabricated into our
everyday lives.
The search engine industry is perceived as charting a path forward for the “new”
information economy, which generates a large quantity of highly skilled workers where
workers are not exploited but rather are empowered, highly-paid and engaged in creative
work. The information-based economy is viewed as the driving force behind the
prosperity of workers and the building of a more egalitarian society. Yet, as
demonstrated, the actual emerging labor structure and organization of the search engine
industry offers us quite a different picture. The next question that I will examine is how
the search engine industry controls its workers? In the following chapter, I explicate how
both paid and unpaid workers are being managed in the search engine industry.

142


Chapter 4
Digital Welfare Capitalism
In the era of the industrial economy, the distinct characteristic of labor
management is the “scientific” management approach – or “Taylorism” after the works of
Frederick Taylor – where workers are tightly controlled and tasks are highly automated
and mechanized. Along with Taylorism, industrial capitalists have also experimented
with other paternalistic methods of labor control by providing some private welfare
programs and improving working conditions as a way to curtail the tension between labor
and capital and kill labor unions. Yet, since the 1970s, post-industrial theorists have
suggested that the new information-based economy that has brought about the structural
transformation of capitalism bears different forms of labor control and management
practices.426 Rather, in the “new” economy, they argue that capitalists will move away
from old forms of labor control techniques as workers become more empowered, have
more control over their work processes and working conditions, and become more
involved in the production process. Ultimately, they predict that there will be
fundamental shifts in the amount of control workers have.
Yet, the search engine industry that represents the information-based economy
illustrates that seemingly participatory and democratic approaches to labor management
are firmly ingrained in the historical tradition of capitalist labor control. This chapter
discusses the specific modes of management employed by the search engine industry to
both paid and unpaid labor – modes that facilitate the expansion of capital. It focuses on
the organization of labor within the search engine industry – in particular within and

426

Daniel Bell, The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture In Social Forecasting (New York: Basic
Books, 1973); Alvin Toffler, The Third Wave (New York: Morrow, 1980).

143


around Google – and sheds light on how work and workers are structured within the
longer history of labor management.
Workers’ newly found Paradise?
Organic gardens, cafes, swimming pools, onsite doctors, day care, free haircuts,
24/7 fitness centers, yoga and meditation classes, Wi-Fi enabled commuter shuttles with
private guards, are all part and parcel of the Googleplex. Googleplex – its 4 million
square feet or the equivalent of about 40 Home Depot stores427 – occupies a suburban
landscape within sunny Silicon Valley. This hardly looks like any workplace that one
could imagine. Google made a name for its search business but is also known for its
“unconventional” working environment and management style. For several consecutive
years running, Fortune Magazine has named Google the best place to work in the US,
and for many young professionals, the company has been perceived as an icon of the
idealized workplace.
With “Passion not Perks” as its corporate motivational tagline, Google is famous
for its 20% time program, where its engineers are allowed to spend one day a week
working on projects they are passionate about but which are not in their job
description.428 This is one of the known aspects of the company’s “innovative” policy.
Apple followed Google’s footsteps and launched its own version of Google 20% time,429
allowing its employees to take two weeks to work on projects outside their normal

427

Mike Swift, “Google's growth online reflected by expansion in Mountain View,” San Jose Mercury
News, November 11, 2010, http://www.mercurynews.com/breakingnews/ci_16586782?nclick_check=1&forced=true.
428
“Google's "20 percent time" in action,” Google Official Blog,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2006/05/googles-20-percent-time-in-action.html.
429
Matthew Panzrino, “Apple fires up its version of Google’s ‘20% time’, giving some employees 2 weeks
for special projects,” TNW, November 12, 2012, http://thenextWeb.com/apple/2012/11/12/apple-fires-upits-version-of-googles-20-time-giving-some-employees-2-weeks-for-special-projects/; Jay Yarow, “Tim
Cook Is Giving Apple Employees Two-Week Breaks To Work On Special Projects,” Business Insider,
November 12, 2012, http://www.businessinsider.com/apple-tries-20-time-2012-11#ixzz2GUS5dwtU.

144


responsibilities. Yahoo!’s CEO Marissa Mayer, is attempting to emulate Google by
offering free food and an iPhone to Yahoo! workers and changing the layout of the
workspace to revitalize the company.
At Google, employees seem to have their own autonomy, and are able to pursue
their curiosity and inspiration. Google management has embedded the Maker/DIY ethos
that encourages experimentation and technology play for their own sake – and is
presented as if it were an alternative to capitalist pursuits – into the Googleplex. The
company has often been portrayed by media as an intellectual playground, a relaxed and
informal workplace that fosters creativity and innovation. Instead of a bureaucratic,
hierarchically controlled structure, the company has become known for its flat, open
organization and its bottom-up approach to its management as it promotes employee
participation and democratic decision-making. Mission, transparency and voice are
ostensibly the main components of Google’s corporate culture. Google’s success has
often been attributed to its “unique” management style that distinguishes Google from its
more traditional and bureaucratic counterparts.430
Google’s seemingly idyllic culture and exciting and fun working environment are
unthinkable for the majority of workers today who are barely clinging to their jobs and
facing radical reductions in pensions, and health benefits.431 Google’s showering of its



430

Stefanie Olsen, Google vs. Yahoo: Clash of culture, CNET, June 20, 2005,
http://news.cnet.com/Google-vs.-Yahoo-Clash-of-cultures/2100-1024_3-5752928.html; Karl Moore and
Kyle Hill, “The Decline but Not Fall of Hierarchy -- What Young People Really Want,” Forbes, June 14,
2011, http://www.forbes.com/sites/karlmoore/2011/06/14/the-decline-but-not-fall-of-hierarchy-whatyoung-people-really-want/; Reena Jana, “Case Study: Yahoo!'s Hot Innovation Incubator,” Bloomberg
Business Week, November 15, 2007,
http://www.businessweek.com/stories/2007-11-15/case-study-yahoo-s-hot-innovationincubatorbusinessweek-business-news-stock-market-and-financial-advice.
431
Daniel Gross, “Goodbye, Pension. Goodbye, Health Insurance. Goodbye, Vacations,” Slate, September
23, 2004,

145


workers with a whole host of benefits, services and amenities seems unfamiliarly new to
many ordinary workers, and even anti-capitalistic. Yet, not that long ago, there was a
time in American history when corporations forged the paternalistic labor management
style of so-called welfare capitalism in response to the rise of workers’ unions and labor
unrest in the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Around the turn of the 20th century, National Cash Register (NCR), located in
Dayton, Ohio – considered the Silicon Valley of its day432 – was known for its lavish
welfare programs for workers. NCR, which produced the first mechanical cash registers,
was a symbol of the era of commercial automation at that time.433 The company started
the first sales training school and offered unprecedented internal private welfare
programs providing lunchrooms, lending libraries, free child care, paid education, onsite
medical services, sponsored retreats, musical concerts, and neighborhood programs for its
employees.
NCR’s new style of management was seen to be a transformative moment of
capitalism, strikingly distinguished from Taylorist techniques in which workers were
treated as part of the factory’s machines, watched by foremen and tightly controlled.
However, NCR’s seemingly generous employee benefits then were not based on altruistic
motives and did not indicate a change in fundamental social relations between capital and
labor. Rather this new-at-the-time management technique was motivated by capital’s
serving of its own long-standing interests. John Patterson, the President of NCR, bluntly


http://www.slate.com/articles/business/moneybox/2004/09/goodbye_pension_goodbye_health_insurance_g
oodbye_vacations.html.
432
Philip Dray, There is power in a union: The epic story of labor in America (New York: Doubleday,
2010), 230.
433
Ibid.

146


admitted that improving workers’ lives would boost the company’s business interests.434
He was known for posting signs throughout NCR shops saying, “It Pays” 435 and
claiming to his employees that, “While it is the duty of the company to show to its people
that it is not a corporation without a soul, it is fair for the people to show … that they too
have a soul, a spirit which responds to considerate treatment.”436
Labor historians refer to this more “humane” labor management that emerged in
the late 19th century as welfare capitalism, or industrial paternalism, which gave workers
a variety of employment benefits including pensions and stock shares as part of a larger
strategic business management. The objective of industrial paternalism was to gain
competitive advantage by fostering loyalty and dedication among workers.437
For instance, Ford Motor Company developed a sophisticated experimental
industrial welfare program. Henry Ford found that productivity did not increase as much
as he had expected after he mechanized and transformed production processes by
employing assembly production lines.438 The company was still suffering from instability
and a high workforce turnover rate. In 1913, Ford’s plant in Detroit had a turnover rate of
370%.439 Ford discovered that productivity and efficiency on the factory floor were
affected by “human elements” as much as machinery. Thus, along with the introduction
of mechanized assembly lines and new technical machinery, the company experimented


434

Cindy Aron, Working at play: A history of vacations in the United States (New York: Oxford University
Press, 1999), 194.
435
Roland Marchand, Creating the corporate soul: The rise of public relations and corporate imagery in
American big business (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998), 17.
436
Ibid.
437
Phanindra Wunnava, The changing role of unions: New forms of representation (Armonk, New York:
M.E. Sharpe, 2004), 69.
438
Evelyn Cobley, Modernism and the culture of efficiency: ideology and fiction (Toronto [Ont.]:
University of Toronto Press, 2009), 54.
439
Robert Zieger, Timothy Minchin, and Gilbert Gall, American workers, American unions: the twentieth
and early twenty-first centuries (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2014), 11.

147


with internal welfare programs in an effort to solve the human elements, the so-called
“labor problem.” They extended control of labor processes beyond the factory floor by
instituting various welfare programs such as savings options, health care, and profit
sharing.
One of Ford’s famous programs rooted in welfare capitalism was the five-dollara-day plan with a reduction of the working day from nine hours to eight, which shocked
the world because it was double the average wage at that time, making Ford workers
better paid than in any other industry.440 Ford’s five-dollar-a-day program had two
functions, both aimed at solving capital’s immediate problems. Since mass production
requires mass consumption, this was a way to generate higher consumption of
automobiles by raising worker’s wages. The other function was using the program to
control workers’ social behaviors beyond the factory floor.
The five-dollar-a-day wage was not just given to workers as fair wages; rather it
was used as a reward system to intervene in workers’ private lifestyles to fit into the
mechanized factory work environment for mass production. In order for workers to earn
five dollars per day, workers had to qualify by meeting particular behavior criteria
established by the company. To tackle these tasks, Ford established a Sociology
Department at Ford’s Highland Park facility in Detroit where the company conducted
investigations on workers by detailed monitoring of private lives to administer the fivedollar-a-day program. By 1919, the department had hired hundreds of investigators who
visited workers’ homes, talked to workers and documented their spending habits,



440

Beth Tompkins Bates, The Making of Black Detroit In the Age of Henry Ford (Chapel Hill: University
of North Carolina Press, 2012), 23.

148


cleanliness, sobriety, etc.441 After gathering data on workers’ private lives, the sociology
department used those data to monitor behavior of workers and determine eligibility for
the five-dollar-a-day program. In fact, Ford extended its management “beyond the purely
technical realm to the broader social and cultural ones of values and forms of
behavior.”442 As capital extended its control to workers’ social and private lives and
recognized a “human element,” there was an increasing interest in social and behavioral
science by corporate America in order to understand the conditions under which workers
were most efficient and productive.
The industrial research at Western Electric Company, a subsidiary of American
Telephone & Telegraph (AT&T) at the Hawthorne Works, in Cicero, Illinois was one of
the landmark attempts in social and behavior science experiment introduced to the factory
floor on a large scale in order to investigate the relationship between productivity and
working conditions and to solve once and for all the “labor problem.” Western Electric
was one of the leading companies to endorse welfare capitalism from early on, and
refined its approach over time. By the mid-1920s, the company offered a pension system,
stock options, and a benefits package, opened a hospital and medical department, and
established a Hawthorne Club as the center of workers’ social activities – concerts,
classes, sports competitions, club store, and beauty contests.443 In order to administer and
manage their various welfare programs, Western Electric established a centralized
personnel management department. By implementing formal systems of personnel
management practices in terms of recruitment, discharge, promotion, and benefit

441

Greg Grandin, Fordlandia: The Rise and Fall of Henry Fords’ Forgotten Jungle City (New York:
Picador, 2010), 38.
442
Stephen Meyer, The Five Dollar Day: Labor, Management, and Social Control In the Ford Motor
Company, 1908-1921 (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1981), 96.
443
Gillespie, Manufacturing Knowledge, 19.

149


programs, the company innovated bureaucratic techniques and asserted power over a
large workforce for mass production. This emergence of personnel management – an
essential feature of welfare capitalism – drew social and behavioral science on to the
factory floor.
The plant brought in Harvard professor Elton Mayo and his research team –
including Fritz Roethlisberger from the Harvard Business School and Clair Turner from
the Biology and Public Health Department at MIT – to conduct research on a team of six
women relay assemblers under various working conditions. They ran numerous
experiments with different variables such as rest periods, shift hours, and length of
working day and week to measure their relationship to workers’ efficiency and
productivity.444 Mayo’s research team conducted more than 20,000 interviews with
workers and collected data not only on workers’ attitudes toward the organization and
personnel policies but also individual personalities of workers and individual adjustments
to working and social conditions as the researchers applied their backgrounds in
psychology, sociology, and anthropology.445
According to Mayo’s research team, workers’ productivity increased with the
improvement of the working environment; but also productivity continued to increase
even if special improved working conditions were removed. Their research claimed that
workers’ attitudes and motivation toward work, and their morale could be more important
than their physical working conditions in increasing efficiency and productivity. The socalled “Hawthorn Effect” posits that productivity and performance are improved when
workers feel like they are receiving attention and that their employers care about them.


444

Gillespie, Manufacturing Knowledge.
Stephen Adams, and Orville R. Butler, Manufacturing the Future: A History of Western Electric
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1998), 127.
445

150


This research, which has been seen as “objective” science and canonical in management
literature, ignored the political nature of the Hawthorne Works experiments themselves
and the very interconnection between science and corporate interest.446
Resting on Mayo’s research, corporations began to design diverse new means of
control as many companies attempted to change workers’ attitudes by experimenting with
participatory decision-making, group dynamics, and “worker centered” approaches. They
pursued the control of labor through consent rather than coercion, more standardized
benefit programs and professional management practices to engineer workers’
subjectivity and deter them from joining national unions.447 The legacy of the Hawthorne
experiments shows that science is deployed to justify and mask capital’s interests in a
system of paternalistic welfare capitalism.448
These industrial forms of labor management based on welfare capitalism seemed
to disappear during the great Depression; however, historian Sanford Jacoby shows that
while welfare capitalism was indeed curtailed by the Depression, it was never eliminated.
Rather, he argues that welfare capitalism had to be reshaped and modernized between
1930 and 1960 to grapple with both industrial unionism and ascending state welfare
programs. This new phase of welfare capitalism was supplemented by government
programs, and distinguished from earlier versions as capital sought to establish a “kinder,
gentler sort of paternalism” which emphasized consent rather control.449
Current labor management practices of Internet firms like Google – with
corporate slogans like job enrichment, quality of work life, and participatory management

446

Gillespie, Manufacturing Knowledge, 95.
Jacoby, Modern Manors, 32.
448
Gillespie, Manufacturing Knowledge.
449
Jacoby, Modern Manors, 5.
447

151


– seem innovative but they are deeply rooted and need to be situated within the
continuing history of welfare capitalism as a form of labor control by management.
Welfare Capitalism 2.0
With growing competition and rapidly changing markets and technologies in the
search engine industry, a steady stream of engineers and other professional workers who
may be tasked with immediate and strategically imperative work objectives is considered
vital. Borrowing Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello’s term, this class of workers can be
described as “cadres” – young, educated, technical experts of high social status, “whose
support for capitalism is particularly indispensable for running firms and creating
profit.”450 Boltanski and Chiapello found that “they aspire to share decision making
power to be more autonomous, to understand managerial policies, to be informed of the
progress of business.”451 In the search engine industry, the cadres are the small segment
of software engineers, financial analysts, project managers and other related professionals
described in the previous chapter – many of them belonging to the managerial class
and/or possessing the mobility to climb the social ladder.
Given this, capital instills a management technique that rests on an ethos of
premium corporate paternalism, autonomy, flexibility, non-hierarchy, and participation.
Cadres are not constrained or disciplined by traditional hierarchical structures and strict
behavior rules; but they are expected to take initiative, to be self-starters, and to engage in
a rigorous and creative form of discussion where decisions emerge among employees.452


450

Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello, The New Spirit of Capitalism (London: Verso, 2005), 14.
Ibid., 64.
452
Gideon Kunda, Engineering culture: control and commitment in a high-tech corporation (Philadelphia:
Temple University Press, 1992), 90.
451

152


Capital encourages these abstract behaviors to provoke creative, innovative, and selfmotivated, entrepreneurial risk-taking.453
Boltanski and Chiapello call these new qualities of labor management the new
spirit of capitalism, “the ideology that justifies people’s commitment to capitalism, and
which renders this commitment attractive.”454 The notion of these non-hierarchical,
autonomous, and participatory capitalist firms may seem antithetical to capitalist
management; however, the majority of cadres are socialized into its capitalist business
values, and their participation remains circumscribed by capital’s profit goals. Thus, it is
far from truly being autonomous or participatory in the sense of being fully independent
or worker control of the ownership structure.
Under the moral tone of “Do no evil” and “organizing the world’s information,”
Google triumphantly presents its endeavor as a worthwhile alternative opportunity. Its
slick leaders – Larry Page, Sergey Brin and Eric Schmidt – are far from tyrannical in
their public images. They are portrayed more as freedom fighters who challenge and
revolt against oppressive regimes – such as China and Cuba – as defined by the US
government. For young cadres, working for such a search engine firm, whose main
business is information access, this seems to offer an uncompromised opportunity where
working for capital and pursuing the public good are completely compatible. With the
rhetorical façade of democracy, freedom of information and human rights, Google
develops global common values that not only motivate and drive its employees, but
extend out to attract intellectuals, activists, and the public to sympathize with its


453

Ibid.
Luc Boltanski and Eve Chiapello, “The New Spirit of Capitalism” (paper presented at the Conference of
Europeanists, Chicago, IL, March, 14-16, 2002),
http://www.frontdeskapparatus.com/files/boltanskiNewSprit.pdf.

454

153


enterprise. As its employees internalize these values – share them – Google has no need
to use rigidly strict control management techniques. As Richard Edwards points out, “the
most sophisticated level of control grows out of incentives to workers to identify
themselves with the enterprise, to be loyal, committed and thus self-directed and selfcontrolled.” 455
Unlike industrial factory firms that exploit every ounce of a worker’s labor to
increase profits, Google is often praised as an exceptional company having the utmost
care for its employees in mind. The company has long been known for taking care of its
workplace and everything within its employees’ lives – from meals to laundry to death
benefits that include paying the spouse or domestic partner of the deceased 50% of their
salary for 10 years. The question raised at this point is: if the 19th century’s corporate
welfare program was created to control labor, curtail labor unions and government
intervention, then what is the motivation behind Google renewing and expanding
employee benefits when there are few labor unions and scarce threats of government
intervention? Why do companies like Google spend so much money on employee
benefits? Some might think that the exploitative nature of capitalist systems has given
way and that the “new economy and benign capitalism is truly possible;” yet, Google’s
management techniques illustrate that the “new economy” carries characteristics of a
supposedly bygone era of welfare capitalism. Why – in response to what threat or
compulsion?
100 years ago, NCR’s president John Patterson said about his company’s welfare
program that “it pays,” and similar practices have been paying off for Google as well.

455

Richard Edwards, Contested terrain: the transformation of the workplace in the twentieth century (New
York: Basic Books, 1979), 150.

154


The company generates $931,657 in revenue per worker, 170% higher than Yahoo!’s
$344,758 in revenue generated per employee.456 Laszlo Bock, Google’s VP of People
Operations, described it thusly “The important thing to note is that you don’t need a lot of
money to do what Google has done. If you give people freedom, they will amaze you.”457
Thus, seemingly over-the-top lavish perks and freedom – to be sure, only for Google’s
most elite employees – are not contradictory to capital logic; rather, they closely align
with capital accumulation by bringing cadres into the Google enterprise and are a
successful way of hiring and managing a highly skilled workforce. Google’s welfare
capitalism is a strategy based on economic self-interest aiming to secure the enthusiastic
and intensive labor of the most highly talented engineers, programmers, and managers in
the world – a scare commodity, easily lured away by competition.
Google’s different mode of management is commonly exemplified by the
company’s provision of free gourmet food for its employees receiving positive press
coverage. While corporate free food programs are not new, Google seems to have
brought them to a different level by offering to executives as well as all employees local,
fresh and organic meals – 3 times a day – cooked by top chefs and catering to the
international regional tastes of its employees. This kind of free food program has often
been portrayed as Google’s genuine exceptionalism; yet, this is part and parcel of the
company’s management strategy. In fact, the real objective has stemmed from the service
of corporate interest. A Google executive once stated that the company’s free meals

456

Daniel Honan, “Marissa Mayer's Guide to Being Productive: It's About Data, Not Politics,” big smarter
think fast, February 28, 2013, http://bigthink.com/think-tank/marissa-mayer-work-from-home.
457
“Interview with Laszlo Bock, VP, People Operations at Google,” Spice Mentor, May 19, 2008,
http://spicementor.blogspot.com/2008/05/if-you-give-people-freedom-they-will.html;
Susan Gargoyle, “How employee freedom delivers better business,” CNN, September 21, 2011,
http://edition.cnn.com/2011/09/19/business/gargiulo-google-workplace-empowerment/.

155


program is a way to increase productivity; workers do not leave their workplace for
meals, which means extending working hours.458 Joe Labombarda, the executive chef at
Google’s Manhattan office admitted, “the unlimited free food supply was originally
designed to maximize productivity and loyalty.”459 At the turn of the last century, free
lunch, with the idea that well-fed workers were more productive, embodied corporate
paternalism.460 Google’s free food is not a “perk” – it is part of a productivity
maintenance strategy.
And free food is not the only management strategy that Google uses to increase
productivity. Eric Schmidt blatantly put forward his control technique in order to increase
productivity in the Google workforce:
The goal is to strip away everything that gets in our employees’ way… We provide a
standard package of fringe benefits, but on top of that are first-class dining facilities,
gyms, laundry rooms, massage rooms, haircuts, car washes, dry cleaning, commuting
buses – just about anything a hardworking employee might want. Let’s face it:
programmers want to program, they don't want to do their laundry. So we make it
easy for them to do both.461
He presents this idea as if the purpose of these generous benefits is truly to look after
workers’ personal growth and their interests, but by “stripping away everything,” Google
extends employees’ working hours by reducing any work interruption and stoppage. In
his interview with McKinsey & Company, Inc., a management consulting firm, Schmidt
also revealed how the company manages productivity and intensity of work, stating:

458

Sara Kehaulani Goo, “At Google, Hours Are Long, But the Consommé Is Free,” Washington Post,
January 24, 2007, , http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2007/01/23/AR2007012300334.html.
459
Juju Chan and Mary Marsh, “The Google diet; Search Giant Overhauled its Eating Options to ‘Nudge’
Healthy Choice,” ABC News, http://abcnews.go.com/Health/google-diet-search-giant-overhauled-eatingoptions-nudge/story?id=18241908#.UUwJkRn1dyU.
460
Nikki Mandell, The Corporation As Family: The Gendering of Corporate Welfare, 1890-1930 (Chapel
Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 2002), 23.
461
Joe Mont, “Here's The Real Reason Your Employer Loves Giving Perks,” Business Insider, August 31,
2011, http://articles.businessinsider.com/2011-08-31/strategy/30092971_1_employees-perks-executivecompensation.

156


You need two things. You have to have somebody who enforces a deadline. In a
corporation the role of a leader is often not to force the outcome, but to force
execution. Literally, by having a deadline. Either by having a real crisis or
creating a crisis. And a good managerial strategy is “let’s create a crisis this week
to get everybody through this knot hole.”462
Under industrial capitalism, the speed and intensity of work were coded into new
machineries that set the pace of work for working class labor. While Google does not use
machinery in a 19th century sense, it does resort to psychological manipulation –
techniques of labor control stemming from the early 20th century.
Moreover, Google is trying to extend its control over employees’ lives beyond the
Google “campus” just as Ford Motor Company had pioneered in the early 20th century. In
2003, Google proposed and pressured the Mountain View city council to build employee
housing and a hotel and conference complex within proximity to the Google campus.463
Pursuing the project, Google real estate chief David Radcliffe wrote in a letter to city
officials that the company’s goals were to build a headquarters that would be “nurturing
and regenerative to the environment, provide a vibrant community and work/life balance
for all.”464 Google envisions constructing a company town – a modern day company town
following in the footsteps of Pullman, IL or McDonald, OH – and corporate culture
where there are no boundaries between work and private lives and employees will have
no reason to leave the Google “campus.” By blurring the lines between work and private
lives under the name of providing a “vibrant” community, the company does not need to
deploy a traditional tightly controlled management mechanism to extend workers’
working hours; rather, Google intends to reshape workers’ lifestyles and physical


462

James Manyika, “Google’s view on the future of business: An interview with CEO Eric Schmidt,” The
McKinsey Quarterly, November 2008, 5.
463
Mike Swift, “Google envisions its own town,” Seattle Times, November 21, 2010,
http://seattletimes.com/html/businesstechnology/2013485338_googlerealestate22.html.
464
Swift, “Google's growth online reflected by expansion in Mountain View.”

157


environment in order to motivate workers to voluntarily put in longer hours at work and
stay loyal to the company.
While Google’s housing proposal was opposed by the Mountain View City
Council and the company had to drop its plan for the time being, Google has been
expanding its physical footprint since 2011, spending 600 million dollars to acquire
buildings in suburban Silicon Valley. Google is also constructing its ambitious new
corporate campus by adding a 42-acre section of NASA’s Moffett Field – a former US
Naval air station – through a long-term lease contract with the federal government. While
detailed information is hard to come by, the new mega campus is supposed to have nine
buildings surrounded by a quad, piazza, garden and contemplative space.465 This time,
Google is embracing nature into its corporate strategy. Google’s new corporate structure
is close enough to a wetland that Google has promised to use only 5 percent of the land
for new office space, reserving 15 percent to wetland restoration areas. The company
confidently said that Google will provide employees access to the wetlands, which it sees
as a “potential source of inspiration and education.”466
Google’s “unorthodox,” “worker-centered” and “democratic” management
strategies are typically equated with its overall approach; yet, this is not the entire picture.
On one level, Google embraces a “care-free” or “hands-off” approach to managing its
elite employees, seemingly with little direct control over labor processes and moving
away from industrial forms of labor control; but on another level, it has adapted a form
innovated by Western Electric – a method built on data for managing its workforce.


465

Nathan Donato-Weinstein, “More details on Google's new ultra-green, bike-friendly Bay View
campus,” Inside Silicon Valley Business Journal, May 30, 2013,
http://www.bizjournals.com/sanjose/news/2013/05/30/more-details-on-googles-new.html?page=all.
466
Ibid.

158


Google by Design
Few will question that the search engine business is driven by data, but it is less
well-understood that this extends to the management of its workplace as well. Data is an
integral part of Google’s organizational culture. Google calls its human resources
department “People Operations (POPs),” and manages all aspects of its employees’ lives.
POPs operates under the principle that “All people decisions at Google are based on data
and analytics.”467 POPs distinguishes itself from the traditional HR department, asserting
that “everything has been researched and is backed up by data.” If Ford had its sociology
department and Western Electric had Mayo’s research team, Google has POPs where
scientists collect detailed data on workers’ behaviors and activities. On Google’s own
blog, they state, “we apply science to organizational issues as well.”468 Google’s POPs –
a team of scientists and researchers working on the development of management – is the
place where science and HR meet.469 Google claims that the company wants its HR to
emulate a science lab where everything is observed, tested and measured – even down to
employees’ emotions.
A Google spokesperson, Jordan Newman, once proudly alluded to Google’s
overarching management principle in a New York Times interview, “to create the
happiest, most productive workplace in the world.”470 While we have seen how it links
workers’ happiness to productivity – and this has been broadly embraced by business

467

Ciara Bryne, “People analytics: How Google does HR by the numbers,” Venture Beat, September 20,
2011, http://venturebeat.com/2011/09/20/people-analytics-google-hr/.
468
Jennifer Kurkoski, “Hello science – meet HR,” Google Research Blog,
http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2012/06/hello-sciencemeet-hr.html.
469
“Inside Google’s Culture of Success and Employee Happiness,” http://blog.kissmetrics.com/googlesculture-of-success/.
470
James Stewart, “Looking for a Lesson in Google’s Perks,” New York Times, March 15, 2013,
http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/16/business/at-google-a-place-to-work-andplay.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0.

159


practices and business literature471 – Google also resorts to intensive data to ensure
workers’ happiness. Google scientists are experimenting on employees to determine how
to maximize their happiness. The company has established the People Analytic team
within POPs to observe and measure the emotional states of employees and thoroughly
analyzes employees’ satisfaction to benefits, perks, salary, talent management, hiring and
various aspects of employees’ lives in order to tune their management.
Slate Technology columnist Manjoo Farhad corroborates this by showing how
Google uses its employee data tracking system to empirically quantify aspects of
workers’ lives such as optimal lunch lines, the shape of furniture, and diet. Farhad reveals
that POPs measured the lunch-line for their employees and found that 3-4 minutes is
optimal in terms of workers having time to meet new people but at the same time not
“waste time.”472 Google even specifies the shape and length of the so the company can
put their employees in physical proximity to spur conversations and share information.473
As “people walk down between the chairs, they bump into each other — it’s actually
called a ‘Google bump’” according to John Sullivan, a management professor at San
Francisco State University and workplace consultant.474 This is no mere accident, but
designed – and it is driven by data.475



471

Teresa Amabile and Steven Kramer, “Employee Happiness Matters More Than You Think,” Bloomberg
Business News, February 22, 2012,
http://www.businessweek.com/debateroom/archives/2012/02/employee_happiness_matters_more_than_yo
u_think.html.
472
Farhad Manjoo, “The Happiness Machine,” Slate, January 21, 2013,
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/technology/2013/01/google_people_operations_the_secrets_of_th
e_world_s_most_scientific_human.single.html.
473
Ibid.
474
Steven Henn, “Serendipitous Interaction' Key To Tech Firms' Workplace Design,” all tech considered,
March 13, 2013, http://www.npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered/2013/03/13/174195695/serendipitousinteraction-key-to-tech-firms-workplace-design.
475
Henn, “Serendipitous Interaction' Key To Tech Firms' Workplace Design.”

160


Google’s management of its employees has even gone down to the level of
individual diets. Jennifer Kurkoski, who has a PhD in organizational behavior and is part
of the People Analytic team, has experimented with changing workers’ diets. Kurkoski
explains, “When employees are healthy, they’re happy. When they’re happy, they’re
innovative.”476 Kurkoski conducted experiments to help Google employees make better
food choices as she rearranged the location of food, resized plates, and replaced food
containers in order to reengineer employees’ eating habits. The objective behind this
experiment was to understand ways to control food intake and the food choices of
employees. The irony of Google’s attempts to have their employees make healthy food
choices is a balancing act; on the one hand, Google provides unlimited access to free food
to increase productivity; on the other hand, it has found that the company needs to deal
with the side effects of unlimited access to food and the concomitant risks to workers’
health. This seems a benign experimentation, and even could be considered an act of true
care; however, poor health will directly affect workers’ capacity to perform their tasks
and productivity and ultimately affects Google’s bottom line.
From the minutia of diet to the entirety of the environment, Google is even
designing its new campus based on data – data to bolster its workers’ productivity and
efficiency. The new Googleplex – set to be the largest office in the US – takes its datadriven approach to labor management to a whole new level. The company has measured
everything from environmental factors like sun and wind to working and living habits of
its thousands of employees. In a Vanity Fair interview, David Radcliffe, vice president of
Google’s Real Estate & Workplace Services, proudly stated that no worker would be


476

Cliff Kuang, “In The Cafeteria, Google Gets Healthy,” Fast Company, March 19, 2012,
http://www.fastcompany.com/1822516/cafeteria-google-gets-healthy.

161


more than a two-and-a-half minute walk from any other co-worker in the 1.1-millionsquare-foot complex.477 He explains that the new campus layout is designed to generate
“casual collisions of the work force” and said, “You can’t schedule innovation… We
want to create opportunities for people to have ideas and be able to turn to others right
there.”478 Eric Schmidt and Former Google Senior VP of Products (and current advisor to
Google CEO Larry Page) Jonathan Rosenberg call it “foster[ing] serendipitous
connection.”479 It seems “casual” or “serendipitous,” but if I can paraphrase David
Noble’s book America By Design, it’s productivity by design.
Laszlo Bock, Vice President of People Operations, states, “We try to bring as
much analytics and data and science to what we do on the people side as our engineers do
on the product side.” Bock proudly declared that Google even has data on productivity
based on the relationships between new employees and their managers’ greeting on the
first day. He states that “when an employee starts on their first day, we have data that
says, if the manager shows up and says, ‘Hi nice to meet you, you're on my team, we’re
gonna be working together,’ and does a few other things, those people end up 15 percent
more productive in nine months.”480 Measuring the correlation between the greeting by
the managers and productivity is actually only a minor part of Google’s data-driven
management. Concerned about employee turnover that could have a negative effect on its
ability to compete, Google even built an algorithm to identify those employees most


477

Paul Goldberg, Exclusive Preview: Google’s New Built-from-Scratch Googleplex, Vanity Fair,
February 22, 2013, http://www.vanityfair.com/online/daily/2013/02/exclusive-preview-googleplex.
478
Ibid.
479
Eric Schmidt’s and Jonathan Rosenberg, “How Google Works,”
http://www.slideshare.net/pitgottschalk/eric-schmid-how-google-works.
480
John Blackstone, “Inside Google workplaces, from perks to nap pods,” CBS News, January 22, 2013,
http://www.cbsnews.com/8301-505266_162-57565097/inside-google-workplaces-from-perks-to-nap-pods/.

162


likely to leave based on employee reviews, promotions and pay histories.481 Google’s
characteristic of labor management is epitomized by Laszlo Bock’s statement: Google
built an algorithm to “get inside people's heads even before they know they might
leave.”482
While Google wants to get inside its employees’ heads, it also mines data to
change employees’ behavior, questing to identify the metrics for “good” managers. In
2009, Google launched a premier project called Project Oxygen to identify such traits. A
team of researchers gathered more than 10,000 observations about managers and
performance reviews, employee feedback surveys, and nominations for top manager
awards.483 The researchers then extracted general patterns in the data, built hypotheses
and continued to collect more data by interviewing managers.484 The results of this
analysis are the “Eight Good Manager’s Behaviors and Three Pitfalls” rules, which have
been systematically implemented into Google’s management training program.
This set of eight “good” behaviors is incorporated into its own workforce training
program called GoogleEDU. GoogleEDU is a vehicle to socialize employees and their
managers into the Google culture and its corporate values. In 2012, Google renewed
GoogleEDU programs to boost employee performance. Karen May, Google’s vice
president of GoogleEDU, who has led the redesign of GoogleEDU, sums up the core of
Google’s “new” management philosophy: “what’s important is that it aligns with our
overall business strategy.”485


481

Scott Morrison, “Google Searches for Staffing Answers,” Wall Street Journal, May 19, 2009,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB124269038041932531.html.
482
Ibid.
483
Adam Bryant, “Google’s Quest to Build a Better Boss,” New York Time, March 12, 2011.
484
Manjoo, “The Happiness Machine.”
485
Joseph Walker, “School's in Session at Google,” Wall Street Journal, July 5, 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052702303410404577466852658514144.html.

163


Google dances between paternalistic, participatory and data-driven scientific labor
management in order to get inside of its paid workers’ heads to increase productivity and
maintain stability in its workforce; however, these techniques are not exclusively applied
to cadres and other paid workers. They are also employed in Google’s approach to its
massive unwaged user labor force. The search engine firm is scientifically monitoring
and managing users as well as giving them “free” services as a form of welfare program
on capital’s behalf. By espousing welfare programs along with scientific management,
the industry wants to get inside of all users’ heads – and Google has been doing so to
unpaid labor long before it got inside its own workers’ heads. This is the actual essence
of Google’s tenet – “focus on the user and all else will follow.”
Scientific Management of User Labor
As described in an earlier chapter, since unpaid users’ labor plays a vital role in
Google’s profitability, studying data about and managing user labor have become as
important – if not more so – as managing paid labor. While the search engine industry
does not use the term “user labor,” as it does to its paid labor force, Google user activities
are studied, observed and measured in variant forms of user studies as their labor is
incorporated into production processes. From the early stages of their business, search
engine firms have been conducting substantial research on users and tapping deeply into
academic institutions as they shape and expand the field of user studies and develop
expertise in this new field.
Initially, when search engine firms were using traditional information retrieval
(IR) techniques, documents were the main unit of analysis and search results were based

164


on the keyword similarity between the query and the documents.486 However, as the
Internet provides an interactive platform where users interact between documents and the
system,487 users have become an important unit of analysis in IR systems; their activities
as users provide a vital feedback loop in determining improvements of IR systems. In
particular, as search business model has become based on advertising, users have become
the most important unit of analysis and user feedback is directly linked to advertising
revenue.
By the end of the 1990s, large-scale user studies on commercial search engines
had begun to be visible within the academic industrial complex. One of the earliest user
behavior studies was the Excite Research project by Jansen and Spink in 1998.488 This
research initially analyzed 51,000 queries and later expanded the data set to 2.5 million
queries from Excite’s transaction logs to look at searchers’ online activities, including the
number of queries per user, number of terms per query, number of documents viewed,
query modification and distribution and occurrence of terms. In 1999, Craig Silverstein
from Stanford University teamed up with Michael Moricz from AltaVista to conduct an
analysis of one billion entries for search requests from AltaVista query logs.489 This
research was considered to be significant because of the longitudinal nature of the largescale commercial search data collected to understand individual patterns of search use.490


486

Ashok Veilumuthu and Parthasarathy Ramachandran, “Discovering Implicit Feedbacks from Search
Engine Log Files” in Discovery Science, ed. Vincent Corruble et al. (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007):
197-208.
487
Danny Sullivan, “Search 4.0: Social Search Engines & Putting Humans Back In Search,” Search Engine
Land, May 28, 2008, http://searchengineland.com/search-40-putting-humans-back-in-search-14086.
488
Bernard Jansen and Amanda Spink, “The Excite Research Project: A Study Of Searching By Web
Users,” http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.26.1410.
489
Craig Silverstein, Hannes Marais, Monika Henzinger and Michael Moricz, “Analysis of a very large
web search engine query,” ACM SIGIR Forum 33, no. 1 (1999); 6-12,
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=331405.
490
Ibid.

165


Silverstein et al. found that users tended to type short queries and that the majority looked
at the first 10 results.491 The search engine business continues to exploit this general user
behavior pattern as it sells search results.
In particular, large-scale user research is considered a necessary method to learn
general and individual patterns of what, how and why users are searching as the industry
engages the mass population. Search engine firms began to conduct their own research
using their own data – frequently but not always in conjunction with academics.
User studies are encompassed in a range of different research areas including user
experience, user engagement, human computer interaction, user data mining etc. Over the
last 10 years, under these diverse rubrics, search engine firms have been deploying
various research methods to understand users through log analysis, ethnographic studies
click metrics, questionnaire surveys and lab and field studies on searchers’ activities
across the spectrum. It is notable that search engine firms began to publish some of their
research output at academic and industry conferences beginning in the early 1990s. Since
1993, Google – which lists 715 researchers – has published 2,899 research articles as of
July 2014; Yahoo! lists 2043 publications.492 The research area of user studies overlaps
with a range of other fields; thus, it is difficult to identify the exact numbers of
publications specifically targeting user activities. However, much research related to user
activities commonly falls into the areas of algorithms, machine learning, artificial
intelligence, data mining, human-computer interaction (HCI), and information retrieval
(IR). Microsoft has more than 2000 publications falling under the IR heading while for
Google, almost 50% of its research output belongs to those areas.


491

Silverman, Marais, Henzinger and Morciz, “Analysis of a very large web search engine query.”
“Research at Google,” http://research.google.com/researchers.html; “Yahoo Lab,”
http://labs.yahoo.com/publication/.
492

166


Not accidently, these research areas have become popular within the wider field
of computer science in universities. According to a dataset of 2200 faculty in the top 50
US Computer Science Graduate Programs from Brown University, the largest field of
research in computer science is Algorithms & Theory which is at the nexus of machine
driven user data mining and analysis.493 As a business strategy, the search engine industry
has been supporting robust programs for universities around the world, aiming for them
to serve corporate interests through the establishment of funding, visiting faculty
programs, post doc programs, and internships.
Before 2010, Google funded many smaller research grants,494 but since 2010, it
has begun to substantially fund research focused on Google’s business, launching its
Google Focused Research program – “areas of study that are of key interest to Google as
well as the research community.”495 In the first year of the program, a large grant of
$1.35M went to a University of Washington researcher, a former Intel research director,
whose work is on mobile data collection in science. In 2014, Google received 691
proposals and funded 115 projects in 46 countries;496 the company gave the most funding
in the fields of human-computer interaction, systems, and machine learning which are the
areas where users are most involved. Academic institutions are eager to seek Google’s
funding and work with the “most innovative” company in the world as they ally their


493

This dataset was collected as a project for a Human Computer Interaction course at Brown University in
Spring of 2014. Detailed data is available at http://cs.brown.edu/people/alexpap/faculty_dataset.html.
494
Nick, Eaton, “Google grants UW researcher $1.35M for data collection,” Seattlepi, February 4, 2010,
http://blog.seattlepi.com/microsoft/2010/02/04/google-grants-uw-researcher-1-35m-for-data-collection/;
Steve Lohr, “Google puts New Focus on Outside Research,” New York Times, February 1, 2010,
http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2010/02/01/google-extends-outside-research-funding-to-newfields/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.
495
“Announcing Google's Focused Research Awards,” Google Official Blog, February 2, 2010,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/02/announcing-googles-focused-research.html.
496
“Google Research Awards: Winter 2014,” Google Research Blog, February 18, 2014,
http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2014/02/google-research-awards-winter-2014.html.

167


research with corporate commercial interests. Of course, this shouldn’t come as a surprise
as spending cuts from public funding has led universities to seek corporate funding more
intensively and policies like the US government’s 2013 “lab to market” initiative to spur
commercialization of Federal government’s taxpayer funded academic research. By
bringing universities and corporate researchers together with government support, the
industry has been able to bolster the field of user studies, and bring experts under its
sway.
Delving into Users
The Internet industry is pushing the scope of user research beyond merely
tracking general patterns of user behavior through traditional analysis of query logs.
Basically, every minute movement of users is becoming of interest to the industry.
Google research is working on prediction of users’ behavior based on historical
performance of user search patterns,497 tracking individual user behavior over various
search services and platforms such as images, maps, voice, mobile and tablets,498
examining the conditions that convert users into consumers, and even detecting an
individual searcher’s frustration in real time,499 users’ response times to speed of search
services,500 and building a user’s personal interest profile based on click behavior and


497

Yair Shimshoni, Niv Efron, and Yossi Matias, “On the Predictability of Search Trends,” Google Israel
Labs, August 17, 2009,
http://static.googleusercontent.com/external_content/untrusted_dlcp/research.google.com/en/us/archive/goo
gle_trends_predictability.pdf.
498
Maryam Kamvar and Shumeet Baluja, “A Large Scale Study of Wireless Search Behavior: Google
Mobile Search” (paper presented at CHI, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, April 22-27, 2006),
http://www1.cs.columbia.edu/~mkamvar/publications/CHI_06.pdf.
499
Anne Aula, Rehan Khan, and Zhiwei Guan, “Frowns, Sighs, and Advanced Queries -- How does search
behavior change as search becomes more difficult?” Google Research Blog, September 17, 2010,
http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2010/09/frowns-sighs-and-advanced-queries-how.html.
500
Jake Brutlag, “Speed Matters,” Google Research Blog, June 23, 2009,
http://googleresearch.blogspot.com/2009/06/speed-matters.html.

168


personalized recommendation system.501 Along with Google, Microsoft and Yahoo! have
also expanded their research in behavior biometrics and cognitive behavior. This type of
research seems merely to be purely academic scientific experimentation, and far from
current search engine business, but they are the basis of future profit-making projects.
Eye-tracking technology built on visual behavior data is an illustrative example.
In 2005, Google researchers published an article entitled “Incorporating eye tracking into
User Studies at Google” which revealed that the company collected eye-tracking data to
supplement their understanding of user behavior as well as to measure users’ feelings
towards Google’s services and products.502 Yahoo! and Microsoft have both endeavored
to keep up with Google in this area. Microsoft has published several research studies on
eye-tracking of users’ visual attention as they surf the Web. These studies examined gaze
duration and differences in individual gaze patterns to understand user attention and the
relationships between visual attention of where and why users look on the screen and
decide to click.503 This eye-tracking technology is now commonly being used by search
engine industry to see how users navigate homepages, identify “hot zones.”
While the search engine industry, allied with academic institutions, is able to
guide the general research agenda for user studies on behalf of the industry, search engine
firms are also pursuing their own secret projects to help them preempt and monopolize
the market. Google has its semi-secret lab called Google X where engineers and scientists

501

Jiahul Liu, Elin Pedersen, and Peter Dolan, “Personalized News Recommendation Based on Click
Behavior” (paper presented at the International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces, New Orleans,
Louisiana, January 9-12, 2010),
http://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/us/pubs/archive/35599.pdf.
502
Laura Granka and Kerry Rodden, “Incorporating Eye tracking into User Studies at Google,” in ACM
CHI 2006 workshop on Getting a Measure of Satisfaction from Eye tracking in Practice,
http://static.googleusercontent.com/media/research.google.com/en/us/pubs/archive/34377.pdf.
503
Susan Dumais, Georg Buscher, and Edward Cutrell, “Individual Differences in Gaze Patterns for Web
Search,” Proceeding of the third symposium on Information interaction in context, 2010,
http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/default.aspx?id=156118.

169


are experimenting with self-driving cars, drone technologies, robotics, and Google glass.
In the lab, Google has also quietly developed eye-tracking as a hands-free way of
unlocking, manipulating and navigating mobile and wearable devices,504 and “pay-pergaze” eye-tracking technology that could measure user engagement based on how long a
user looks at an ad and their emotional response as indicated by pupil dilation so that
advertisers could price based on actually seeing their ads.505 Wired magazine reports that
Google’s pay per gaze technology is clearing a path for an advertising business model for
wearables.506 Google has already filed patents for these technologies.
User Labor as Big Data
The search engine industry’s consistent investment in user research has been
critical to figure out ways to understand and normalize inherently irregular,
heterogeneous and complex user information activities so that they can be predicted and
incorporated into search engine mechanisms, products and profit. However, the
precondition of this process is the collection of user activity data; in other words,
surveillance is the prerequisite for search business. Thus, from the beginning of its
business, the industry has aggressively deployed and experimented with a wide range of
data mining techniques to collect and control user data.


504

Scott Nicols, “Google patents eye-tracking for Google Glass,” Techradar, August 7, 2012,
http://www.techradar.com/us/news/portable-devices/google-patents-eye-tracking-for-google-glass1091428.
505
Richard Chirgwin, “Google proposes eye-tracking ad-tracking Adds more 'creepy' to Glass,” Register,
August 19, 2013, http://www.theregister.co.uk/2013/08/19/google_proposes_eyetracking_adtracking/;
Adrianne Jeffries, “Google patents 'pay-per-gaze' eye-tracking that could measure emotional response to
real-world ads,” Verge, August 18, 2013, http://www.theverge.com/2013/8/18/4633558/google-patentspay-per-gaze-eye-tracking-ads.
506
Richard Tso, Google Pay Per Gaze’ patent pave way for Wearables Ad Tech,” Wired, September 27,
2013, http://www.wired.com/2013/09/how-googles-pay-per-gaze-patent-paves-the-way-for-wearable-adtech/.

170


There are two common methods implemented by the industry to observe and
manage searchers’ activities – server logs and client logs. One of the original methods
used to observe the characteristics and patterns of searchers’ activities is the transaction
log. The transaction log (which refers to a search log) in a search engine is the record of
interactions between the search engine and users’ searches.507 Search logs are considered
server-side logs since Web servers record and store the interaction between searcher’s
browser and the search engine.508 This server-side log basically allows the tracking of the
interaction between the user, her query, and the search engine.509 The data included in the
logs are the user’s IP address, time spent on a page, click path (aka “click stream”), the
url of the requested item, search term used, search content, number of unique visitors,
browser type, and browser language.510 Search engine firms record a “server log” every
time a user makes a query with their search engine. One of the reasons that using server
logs to monitor user activities has been common is because a large set of data can be
collected in a fairly easy and low-cost way. Since users are not aware of the process
whereby their activities are being observed, this is a technique “to obtain a large quantity
of data on unaltered user behavior in the complex Web environment.”511 The industry has
been fighting to retain control of these data.
This mass quantity of routinely collected search logs could be held by search
engine companies for an indefinite period up until 2007, when the European Union’s
advisory body of member states’ telecommunications ministers, called the Article 29


507

Bernard Jensen, “Search log analysis: What it is, what's been done, how to do it,” Library and
Information Science Research 27 (2006): 408.
508
Ibid.
509
Ying Zhang, Bernard Jensen, and Amanda Spink, “Time series analysis of a Web search engine
transaction log, Information Processing and Management 25 (2009): 230-245.
510
Bernard Jensen, “Search log analysis,” 424.
511
Amanda Spink and Bernard Jansen, Web search: Public searching of the Web (Dordrecht, Netherlands:
Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004), 38.

171


Working Party (WP29), asked that major search engines doing business in the region
anonymize the personally identifiable data in search logs after 6 months to protect
consumer privacy. Google’s rival Microsoft, which had less than 2 percent market share
in Europe at that time,512 first agreed to comply with the European Union’s demand that
data retention be cut to six months while the company reminded the Working Party that a
single company – which meant Google – was controlling the majority of the market and
its data practice had turned into an industry standard. Shortly thereafter, Yahoo! said the
company would limit its search logs to 90 days before anonymization and pressured its
competitors to shorten their data retention period.513 Yet, the importance of user data for
search engines showed when the company reversed its decision in 2011 and extended its
data retention back to 18 months. Yahoo!’s reason for its reversal was “to meet the needs
of consumers” yet, the company admitted that shortening its data retention policy had
“set them apart from the rest of the industry.”514 It suggests also that the longer duration
possesses importance.
Google initially resisted the EU’s demands, but compromised to make search log
data anonymous after 18-24 months, and later cut it down to 9 months’ retention. In the
process of negotiations with the EU, Google’s security/privacy engineer Alma Whitten,
who was involved in Google’s decision on data retention, was quoted in Ars Technica
describing Google’s data retention;
Wonderful things can be done with an abundance of data… When Google’s teams
began looking at the data retention issue a few years back, they “started with


512

“Search engine market share by country,” http://www.them.pro/Search-engine-market-share-country
Miguel Helft, “Yahoo Limits Retention of Search Data,” New York Times, December 17, 2008,
http://www.nytimes.com/2008/12/18/technology/internet/18yahoo.html.
514
“Updating our Log File Data Retention Policy to Put Data to Work for Consumers,” Yahoo Policy Blog,
April 15, 2011, http://www.ypolicyblog.com/policyblog/2011/04/15/updating-our-log-file-data-retentionpolicy-to-put-data-to-work-for-consumers/.
513

172


zero” and tried to see if they could make it work. They could not; Google would
lose the ability to do too many useful things.515
In other words, without harnessing search logs – records of users’ labor – Google would
limit the profit delivered from its products. However, Google and other Internet firms
persistently present the reason for data collection and retention as one of “care” for its
users. Like Yahoo!, Google’s first privacy principle is “use information to provide our
users with valuable products and services.”
While collecting and analyzing search logs are popular techniques and
indispensable for profit-making, Internet firms have found that the server side search logs
are limited in terms of harvesting user activities in their entirety – because server logs
only capture the clicked link or the information submitted through the browser.516
However, the industry is interested in learning user activities before the actual click to
understand users’ search intentions through users’ mouse hovering and scrolling etc.
Bernard Jansen, Amanda Spink, and Tefko Saracevic noted that search log data reflects
real artifactual search behavior, but do not provide the context of search activities.517
To overcome the limitations of server-side logging, the industry has also been
deploying client-side techniques – referring to a user’s computer or an application that
makes requests to servers – to capture more comprehensive individual activities,
including information such as what a user might consider but does not actually click,



515

Nate Anderson, “Why Google keeps your data forever, tracks you with ads,” Ars Technica, March 8,
2010, http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2010/03/google-keeps-your-data-to-learn-from-good-guys-fightoff-bad-guys/.
516
Xin Fu, “Evaluating sources of implicit feedback for Web search” (PhD diss., University of North
Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2007), 61.
517
Bernard Jansen, Amanda Spink and Tefko Saracevic, “Real life, real users and real needs: A study and
analysis of users' queries on the Web,” Information Processing and Management 36, no. 2 (2000): 207227.

173


printing, bookmarking, use of the back button, etc.518 Client-side logs are collected by
installing Web applications on a user’s computer.519 The browser is one of the most
common Web applications that are utilized by search engine firms to collect individual
searchers’ activities. Compared to search logs, client-side logs reveal literally every move
a user makes – including keystrokes, mouse clicks, submission of the form, backtracking,
user login and profile information, and page requests – and have the most robust types of
logging information. Lara Catledge and James Pitkow examined client-side user
interactions on NCSA’s XMosaic and pointed out that “actual user behavior, as
determined from client-side log file analysis … can supplement the understanding of
Web users with more concrete data.”520 Given this, there is a reason that search engine
firms have introduced their own browsers and designed numerous other client side apps
to work with their specific browsers because they are not only a way to increase Web
traffic but also can be used as platforms to collect enormous amounts of information on
user activities.
This log data from both the server and client sides provides a large breadth and
quantity of information surrounding user activities on the Web. However, the problem of
these data for Internet businesses was initially in the difficulty in tracking an individual
user’s activity, because the HTTP protocol in which a search engine and a browser
communicate is a “stateless” protocol. This means that each query is a new connection
and appears independent of any requests the user (browser) made previously, while most


518

Fu, “Evaluating sources of implicit feedback for Web search,” 61.
Diane Kelly, “Methods for Evaluating Interactive information retrieval systems with users,”
Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 3, no. 1-2 (2009): 90, http://ils.unc.edu/~dianek/FnTIRPress-Kelly.pdf.
520
Lara Catledge and James Pitkow, “Characterizing browsing strategies in the World-Wide Web,”
Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 27, no. 4 (1995):1065.
519

174


Web applications require multiple requests to finish a particular task. The HTTP protocol
was initially designed to support stateless applications. This preserves some degree of
privacy for users; yet, the stateless protocol was problematic for Internet firms for their
online business, because applications have to maintain “state” information in order to
remember login permission, transaction stages, items added to a shopping cart etc., but
HTTP protocol does not support those necessary business functions.
This is where “cookies” come in. Cookies were introduced by Netscape in 1994.
They are small text files that reside on the searchers’ hard drive and pass between the
Web browser and Web server. Cookies help to maintain “state” and contain a unique
identifier, which allows a Website to recognize and distinguish the user whenever s/he
visits a site. Thus, they are used to identify a specific session ID when a Web browser
interacts with a Web application. Moreover, cookies contain state related data such as a
user ID, passwords, purchase history, and consumer preferences, which can be
extrapolated to a single visitor. These data are the vital assets for the Internet
marketplace. Cookies are a more accurate method for identifying individual users than
simply depending on IP address. The IP address of the client machine also represents an
individual user, but it is difficult to associate the IP address with the particular user since
more than one person could use one computer and/or ISPs often assign dynamic IP
addresses.521 Since identifying and reaching out to each individual user rather than
merely targeting demographics is critical to the Internet industry, cookies have become
an essential and necessary tool for the user analysis process, and expansion of online
advertising. Thus, search engine firms are fighting tooth and nail to control cookie data.

521

Spink and Jansen, Web search: public searching on the Web, 38-39.
175


In 2007, Google’s cookie data were set to expire in 2038. Google was the first
search engine firm to specify a data retention policy of 30 years and this became the norm
among Internet firms. Google’s draconian data control was heavily criticized by privacy
advocates, and when the EU asked US internet firms to reduce their data retention
periods in 2007, as mentioned earlier, Google changed their retention of cookies
information to 18 months while keeping its server logs for 9 months before anonymizing
part of its IP data. This means that Google truncates/ anonymizes the last octet of the IP
address to prevent itself from being able to trace any particular query back to a particular
computer. This doesn’t completely anonymize the data, it just makes it more difficult to
computationally zero in on specific users’ activity.
Since their inception, cookies have been at the center of privacy debates. When
Netscape implemented cookies in 1994, cookies were accepted by default, and users were
unaware of their existence. However, there was soon a growing concern over cookies in
terms of privacy. In 1995, the Internet Engineering Taskforce (IETF), an Internet
standards body, led the development of cookie specifications; at that time it was not clear
that Netscape’s cookie specification would become the basis for the IETF’s standard.522
Initially, IETF proposed prohibiting a browser from accepting third party cookies or
permitting a browser to accept them by default provided the user could control the option
and the default was to opt out.523 There was also a proposal to limit state information with
cookies being destroyed at the end of each browser session. Online advertisers
vehemently objected to this proposed standard because they had already recognized that


522

David Kristol, “HTTP Cookies: Standards, privacy, and politics,” Journal of ACM Transaction on
Internet Technology 1, no.2 (2001); 151-198, http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=502153.
523
Ibid., 160.

176


limiting cookie usage was a threat to their business model. In the end, Netscape’s cookie
specifications were used as a baseline, which favored corporate- over users’ interests.
Interestingly, Netscape’s default cookie specification being altered not by public
demands but by the information industry itself has had far-reaching implications. Internet
firms began to block third party cookies to prevent the collection of their data by rival
firms. Apple’s Safari browser has been configured since 2003 to block third party cookies
by default, Microsoft’s Internet Explorer (IE) and Opera browsers enabled “Do Not
Track” as a default and Mozilla’s Firefox browser has blocked third party cookies since
Firefox version 26 in late 2013. Google’s Chrome browser is the only one to allow all
cookies as the default setting. The significance of the industry’s move could be merely
seen as a victory for users and privacy advocates, but underneath this shift there are inter
capitalist rivalries trying to set the terms on behalf of their own interests. In particular,
Microsoft’s change of cookies settings directly attacks Google’s ads business, given IE’s
large market share of over 58%.524 Blocking third party cookies in IE prevents Google
from using behavioral ads targeting based on users’ previous browsing activity in its
AdWords. On the other hand, Microsoft is positioning IE 10 as a “pro-consumer” product
and an alternative to Google’s Chrome browser. In the case of Apple’s Safari browser, it
has only 5% of market share on the desktop, but it is the most widely used browser on
mobile devices and designed to block third party cookies. This is a major problem for
Google whose business is advertising. So what’s Google’s solution? Google along with
other advertising companies, were willing to break into Apple’s Safari security settings to
collect user data. Google used a code in its advertisements to trick Safari browser into

524

Anthony Leather, “Google Chrome Browser Market Share Tops 20%: Leaves Firefox In Its Dust,”
Forbe, August 4, 2014, http://www.forbes.com/sites/antonyleather/2014/08/04/google-chrome-browsermarket-share-tops-20-leaves-firefox-in-its-dust/.

177


collecting user data on both desktop computers and iPhones. For hacking Safari browser
and tracking users’ history, Google was fined $22.5 million by the Federal Trade
Commission (FTC).525 The fact that Google was willing to take this risk knowing full
well the legal consequences shows the critical nature of the data. Google and its 800strong legal team clearly understands that its voracious data collection activities are
potentially illegal, yet the company is intentionally – and sometimes covertly – pushing
the boundaries of data collection and privacy laws to shape the legal environment in favor
of its business.
Cookies are still the most widely used technique for data collection of users’
online activities, but this is also changing. According to a study by the UC Berkeley
Center for Law and Technology, nearly 85 percent of the top 1,000 sites have cookies set
by a third party.526 However, Internet firms have been looking for alternative
technologies for cookies because third-party cookies are inconsistent and limited in reach
because they are now blocked by default on major browsers, some users remove cookies
on a regular basis, and cookies do not translate well to the mobile environment because
they don’t provide cross device user tracking capabilities.527
In the rapidly growing mobile space, Internet firms have already begun to use new
forms of tracking technologies. Google introduced its Advertising ID (AID), which
allows advertisers to track user behavior across all Android apps using the AID to target



525

“Google Will Pay $22.5 Million to Settle FTC Charges it Misrepresented Privacy Assurances to Users
of Apple's Safari Internet Browser,” Federal Trade Commission, August 9, 2012, http://www.ftc.gov/newsevents/press-releases/2012/08/google-will-pay-225-million-settle-ftc-charges-it-misrepresented.
526
Nima Wedlake, “As advertisers phase out cookies, what’s the alternative?” Gigaom, March 29, 2014,
http://gigaom.com/2014/03/29/as-advertisers-phase-out-cookies-whats-the-alternative/.
527
Ibid.

178


ads to specific users at specific times.528 Google’s AID is similar to Apple’s Identifier For
Advertisers (IDFA) introduced in 2012 (and now required for all iOS apps). Google has
not yet abandoned cookies on mobile devices; however, as the Internet business is
shifting to the mobile sphere, the industry is in search of better user tracking techniques.
One of the most controversial data collection methods employed by Google was
the packet sniffer, a piece of software (sometimes a hardware device) which was able to
monitor the network traffic coming in to a Web server and to extract usage data directly
from TCP/IP data packets. The use of a packet sniffer is not illegal per se because it was
originally designed to assist network administrators in troubleshooting their network. Yet,
between 2007 and 2010, Google used it to capture vast quantities of private Web traffic
data from open Wi-Fi routers.529 In fact, Google was building a database of Wi-Fi
location information to correlate cell towers and Wi-Fi routers with coordinates to use in
its mobile business. Google admitted that it sniffed open wireless networks “to map those
networks, which would then be used by mobile devices such as smartphones to pinpoint
their locations in Google's mapping services.”530 According to court documents, Google
used its new patent-pending Wi-Fi sniffing technology to collect data.531 The patent
application illustrates that Google is interested in more than just basic Wi-Fi location
information. Rather, the company states that, “collection, decoding, and analysis of a
user’s payload data would, therefore, serve to increase the accuracy, value, usability, and

528

“Google’s New Advertising ID: Is it Good News for Mobile App Developers?” airpush, May 5, 2014,
http://www.airpush.com/googles-new-advertising-id-is-it-good-news-for-mobile-app-developers/.
529
Gareth Halfacree, “Google admits Street View WiFi sniffing,” bit-tech, May 17, 2010, http://www.bittech.net/news/bits/2010/05/17/google-admits-street-view-wifi-sniffing/1.
530
Gregg Keizer, “Google wants to patent technology used to 'snoop' Wi-Fi networks,” Compute World,
June 3, 2010,
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9177634/Google_wants_to_patent_technology_used_to_snoop_
Wi_Fi_networks.
531
Keizer, “Google wants to patent technology used to ‘snoop’ Wi-Fi networks.”

179


marketability of Google's new method.” 532 Though Google claims that collection of
payload data – including all traffic on unsecured Wi-Fi networks like email, text
message, passwords, and other personal information submitted by Web forms, browsing
histories etc. – was inadvertent, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) Report
shows that Google wanted more than mere Wi-Fi network location data.533 The FCC
concluded that Google did not violate any law; FCC closed the case with a mere $25,000
fine for failing to cooperate in the FCC’s investigation.534 Along with the FCC, the
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) ended its investigation without a fine and concluded
that Google had given the FTC assurances that the company would not use data that they
collected. These verdicts are indicative of the US government allying itself with Google
and legitimatizing these kinds of data collection practices. Google even took this case to
the US Supreme Court in an attempt to legalize collecting private data through open WiFi networks after a federal appeals court ruled that the practice violated user privacy.535
The Supreme Court declined to hear Google’s case.
After much publicity, Google declared that the company had stopped the data
collection program by its Street View Cars. Yet, this did not mean that Google has given
up mapping Wi-Fi hotspots, given that all of Google’s mobile products hinge on a
database of locations vital for mobile services – including mobile applications to function
and to serve highly tailored ads based on users’ specific locations. A Google product

532

Ibid.
David Kravets, “An Intentional Mistake: The Anatomy of Google’s Wi-Fi Sniffing Debacle,” Wired,
May 2, 2012, http://www.wired.com/2012/05/google-wifi-fcc-investigation/; “Enforcement Bureau issues
$25,000 NAL to Google Inc,” Federal Communication Commission,
https://apps.fcc.gov/edocs_public/attachmatch/DA-12-592A1.pdf.
534
In 2013, Google reached a $7 million settlement with 30 states’ attorneys general over its Street View
data collection practices, and the company still faces street view investigations abroad.
535
Lauren Williams, “Google Wants The Supreme Court To Legalize Collecting Private Data Through
Open Wi-Fi Networks,” Think Progress, April 3, 2014,
http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2014/04/03/3422086/google-wiretapping/.
533

180


manager revealed in the Wall Street Journal that “the collection of location information
from millions of mobile devices and personal computers is ‘extremely valuable’ to the
company's future business.”536
Now Google is leveraging users with mobile devices to collect its data as Android
phones regularly check on users’ location using GPS, Cell ID and Wi-Fi to locate the
device and send back data to Google’s location servers. The location service identifies a
phone’s location by comparing the names and strengths of nearby Wi-Fi hotspots against
its database of Wi-Fi hotspots.537 With this method, users do not even need to turn on
Google Maps or actually be connected to a Wi-Fi hotspot because their phone will detect
Wi-Fi- and users’ location regardless.538
This technique was originally developed by Skyhook Wireless, which competes
with Google’s location service. Apple chose Skyhook over Google when Apple’s first
generation iPhone did not have a location database, while leaving data collection to
Skyhook and Google. As mentioned in an earlier chapter, Google was irked by Apple’s
use of Skyhook over Google’s service, and when Samsung and Motorola chose to use
Skyhook’s service, the company forced them to drop the contract under the clause of
incompatibility with Android OS and to replace it with Google’s own system. In fact,
Skyhook filed a lawsuit against Google for business interference and patent infringement.
The suit documents revealed that Google’s main reason for fervently trying to handle
location services for mobile phones was because Google “could collect the users’ Wi-Fi

536

Amir Efrati, “Google Calls Location Data 'Valuable,'” Washington Post, May 1, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052748703703304576297450030517830.
537
Nick Bilton, “Tracking File Found in iPhones,” New York Times, April 20, 2011,
http://www.nytimes.com/2011/04/21/business/21data.html.
538
Steven Vaughan-Nichols, “How Google--and everyone else--gets Wi-Fi location data,” ZDNet,
November 16, 2011, http://www.zdnet.com/blog/networking/how-google-and-everyone-else-gets-wi-filocation-data/1664.

181


information.”539 In a New York Times article, Michael Shean, the co-founder and senior
vice president of business development at Skyhook said user location could be more
accurately pinpointed through Wi-Fi hotspots than via GPS because GPS accuracy is
limited in urban environments and inside buildings so Internet firms would use Wi-Fi and
GPS in tandem. He also pointed out that they use data from users’ phones to constantly
update their database of Wi-Fi hotspots.540 Why then is Google even using coercion to
collect data through mobile phones? Google is racing after location-based services (LBS)
market set to be worth $39.87 billion by 2019. Since Google had to drop collecting Wi-Fi
data through its maps car, collecting location information through Android has become
more essential than ever.
Apple and Microsoft are using the same technique to collect location data. Since
2010, Apple also began to provide its location-based service through its own database of
Wi-Fi hotspots. The company was even recording users’ geo-location data in an
unprotected file on iPhones. This led to a Congressional investigation in 2011, and
Apple’s response to Congress was “by using any location-based service on your iPhone,
you agree and consent to Apple’s and its partners and licensees’ transmission, collection,
maintenance, processing and use of the location data to provide such products and
services.”541 Yet, it turned out that even if location services were turned off, Apple was


539

Neil Huges, “Skyhook accuses Google of disparaging its technology to Apple,” apple insider, July 3,
2013, http://appleinsider.com/articles/13/07/03/skyhook-accuses-google-of-disparaging-its-technology-toapple.
540
Miguel Helft, “Google Says It Collects Location Data on Phones for Location Services,” New York
Times, April 22, 2011, http://bits.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/04/22/google-says-it-collects-location-data-onphones-for-location-services/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.
541
Letter to US Representatives Edward J. Markey and Joe Barton from Bruce Sewell, General Counsel
and Senior Vice President of Legal and Government Affairs, Apple Inc.,
http://www.wired.com/images_blogs/gadgetlab/2011/04/applemarkeybarton7-12-10.pdf.

182


still collecting and storing the data.542 In order to please European regulators, Google
offered users an opt-out option from Google’s location service.543
Besides these controversial data collection methods, there are lesser-known but
long-standing techniques that are also employed. For example, a Web beacon, often
referred to as a Web bug, is another technique to collect user activity data. The Web
beacon – sometimes used in tandem with or to deliver a cookie – is a transparent 1 pixel
by 1 pixel graphic that is embedded in a Web page or email. When implemented using
JavaScript instead of a graphic, they may be called JavaScript tags. Web beacons help
advertisers track users. Described in an earlier chapter, Google’s Analytics service and
advertising networks such as DoubleClick use Web beacons to count how many have
access to particular Websites and to provide a survey of targeted market information.
Mining these data, they create user profiles indicating the types of ads to be shown to
particular users. Web beacons are also embedded in email like Gmail, Hotmail, etc. to
track details about when a message is read and to whom the message might be sent.
This is not even close to a comprehensive list of user tracking and data control
strategies, but illustrated above are the major techniques and efforts that are employed by
the search engine industry to collect and manage user activity data. Backed by the use of
enormous technical capacity, labor and capital, the amount of user data collected,
managed and analyzed by search engine firms is astronomical. Bing is currently storing
nearly 300 petabytes of data and creating nearly 1 terabyte of data each day.544 Google

542

Jennifer Valentino-DeVries, “IPhone Stored Location in Test Even if Disabled,” Wall Street Journal,
April 25, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/news/articles/SB10001424052748704123204576283580249161342.
543
Don Reisinger, Google to let users opt out of location data collection,” CNET, September 14, 2011,
http://www.cnet.com/news/google-to-let-users-opt-out-of-location-data-collection/.
544
Brad Sams, “Bing is comprised of ~300 petabytes of data,” Newowin, June 11, 2012,
http://www.neowin.net/news/bing-is-comprised-of-300-petabytes-of-data.

183


processes 25 petabytes (a petabyte is about 1,000 terabytes) each day. The search engine
industry is the major data collection machine in the data business – the epitome of so
called “Big Data.” This big data, collected primarily through the labor of unpaid users, is
the basis of the search business.
The “big data” of search has been growing exponentially, predicated upon
effective techniques of labor control. As Jacoby has pointed out, welfare capitalism has
endured after the Great Depression. There is a resurgence of welfare capitalism – a mark
of the industrial economy; however, while earlier welfare capitalism was designed to
control the working class in order to quell the power of labor unions, today’s welfare
capitalism is being deployed to manage the elite class in non-union tech firms. Backed by
data, “science” and the interactive nature of Internet technologies, the current welfare
capitalism is redressed with a façade of democracy but conceals the exploitative
relationship between capital and labor as if capitalism could be built on democratic and
participatory ideals. While Taylorism has been criticized for its dehumanization of
workers, a new stage in the historical arc of Taylorism is reemerging that is celebrated
today and has been adopted by Google and other Internet firms. And this time, it’s being
applied not only to low level factory workers but to elite cadres and the unwaged labor as
well. This lucrative search business built on the backs of massive amounts of unpaid
labor is transnationalizing as it searches for new markets and new labor by expanding its
geographical territories. The following chapter scrutinizes the different economic zones
of China and the EU, where US digital capital is facing the most resistance.

184


Chapter 5
Market Dynamics and Geopolitics: A Search for Stability
The search engine industry operates across territorial boundaries as the gateway to
the newly established marketplace of the Internet, and has become a key part of the
world’s information infrastructure. Search is being organized as a social, political and
economic control structure, and plays an instrumental role in deepening information
markets on a transnational scale. This fundamental function of search is dominated not by
Japan, Germany or France or China, but by the US-based search engine industry – mainly
Google. US dominance in search seems to reaffirm the existing global political economic
power structure, however, it has opened up a new geopolitical flash point as it recounts
the unequal structure of information control. As Schiller posits, the construction of
extraterritorial networks is a complex and contradictory process, one which not merely
depends on technical experts but involves interests of states, various corporate users, and
political constituencies.545
By situating search within current geopolitical contexts, this chapter elucidates
tensions and conflicts to control over the new strategic information domain, a vital sector
in organizing global transnational political economy. In particular, it focuses on the most
globally contested zones where US-based transnational capital is facing opposition – the
People’s Republic of China (PRC), a relatively new and expansionary force within the
global economy and the world's second biggest economy, and the European Union (EU)
– US’s longtime ally as well as its global competitor and political counterweight.



545

Dan Schiller, Geopolitical-economic conflict and network infrastructures, Chinese Journal of
Communication 1, no.1 (2011), 90-107.

185


Examining the geopolitical aspects of search, this chapter situates the dynamics of the
political economy of contemporary transnational capitalism.
Unfinished Battle
Historians have documented that information and communication networks have
long been of strategic importance to the global political and economic interests of the
great powers.546 In the 19th century, European powers – Britain, Germany, France, Russia
– and their capital extended their political influence and commercial interests by building
global information networks. Great Britain exerted its political, economic and military
power, led manufacturing, commerce, finance and industrial technologies as it
monopolized global information. Between 1864 and 1880, British firms laid submarine
cables to Gibraltar, Malta, Egypt, India, Hong Kong and Australia as the amount of
global submarine cable increased eighty six times.547 By 1887, Britain controlled 70
percent of the world’s cables; and twenty-five years later, it still retained a 63 percent
share and dominated global information flow and networks.548 The majority of countries,
including the United States, depended on British-controlled information networks for
military and strategic purposes and finance and commodity markets.549 This put its rivals
Germany, France, and Russia in vulnerable positions, which manifested during World
War I (WWI). When Great Britain declared war against German imperial ambition, it
first destroyed two German submarine cables that connected Europe and America, and
began to censor all communication that went through British-controlled cables in order to


546

H. Schiller, Information and the Crisis Economy; Daniel Headrick, The Invisible Weapon:
Telecommunications and International Politics, 1851-1945 (New York: Oxford University Press, 1991):
Jill Hills, Telecommunications and Empire. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007; Smith, The
Geopolitics of Information.
547
Aashish Velkar, Markets and Measurements In Nineteenth-Century Britain (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2012), 64.
548
Headrick, The Invisible Weapon, 28.
549
Ibid.

186


isolate Germany.550 This affected the US political economy due to the lack of sufficient
independent network infrastructure. Britain’s control of information infrastructure indeed
hindered the growth of US economic power. This WWI experience spurred the US state
and US capital to build independent information networks in order to fuel its own
political and economic influence and geographical expansion. Unscathed from WWI, the
US elevated its position into a rivalry with the other world powers, as Germany was
defeated and Great Britain and France were weakened by the war.551
After WWI, the US attempted several times to build its own network, but this did
not occur until World War II (WWII) and after. But over the course of WWII, the US had
risen as it gained economic and military power, moved away from relying on Britain’s
colonial information system control, and began to build its own information
infrastructure.552 The expansion and dominance of the information industry played a
central role in the US ascent. US information power has not gone unrecognized by its
global rivalries, and its formidable position in the information sphere has been repeatedly
assailed over the course of time as geopolitics and economics have changed.
In the 1970s, the French government was alarmed by US corporate dominance in
computer and information technologies. The response to US dominance in the
information sphere was articulated in the 1978 report, Computerization of Society – aka
the Nora and Minc Report.553 The report, commissioned by the French government,
warned of American domination in “telematics” as a threat to French sovereignty and
economic competitiveness and warned of IBM’s dominance in the European information

550

Ibid.
Schiller, “Geopolitical-economic conflict and network infrastructures,” 93.
552
Ibid.
553
Simon Nora and Alain Minc. The Computerization of Society: A Report to the President of France
(Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980).
551

187


market. The report urgently called on France to counter IBM, develop its own
information-based industry as well as a comprehensive national strategic policy and
investment in national information technology systems.
From a different direction in the 1970s, the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM),
mobilized by Third World countries aspiring to self-determination, challenged the US
and the western dominated information sphere as they recognized the importance of
control over information for their economies, cultural independence and national
sovereignty and demanded a New International Information Order (NIIO). Led by NAM,
NIIO called out the imbalance of global information flows and sought out a more
equitable, balanced information exchange among sovereign nations. The US, which had
deployed the Free Flow of Information doctrine to support its global expansion, was
criticized and questioned.554 This conflict over NIIO led the US to leave UNESCO,
which had made room for NIIO. More recently, the US has reasserted the doctrine at the
forefront of its foreign and economic policy on the global stage to control over the
Internet. The battles over the information sphere have never ended, but the actors and
their motives have altered as have the technologies in contention with the emergence of
the Internet and its related industries within a changing geopolitical and economic base.
The business of search is one of the new information domains where this global
battle over the information sphere has arisen. The search engine industry operates across
territorial boundaries as the gateway to the newly established marketplace of the Internet
and has become a key part of the world’s information infrastructure. It is also a


554

Herbert Schiller, Communication and Cultural Domination. (White Plains, N.Y.: International Arts and
Sciences Press, 1976); Sean MacBride. Many Voices, One World: Communication and Society Today and
Tomorrow (Paris: UNESCO, 1980).

188


component of the most dynamic and prized pole of economic growth: The Internet
industry.
The US recognizes the importance of this in the maintenance and extension of USled global capitalism. President Obama, addressing American innovation in his 2011
State of the Union address, claimed that:
What America does better than anyone else is spark the creativity and imagination
of our people. We’re the nation that put cars in driveways and computers in offices.
The nation of Edison and the Wright brothers; of Google and Facebook.555
The search engine industry is one of the top new US strategic information industries and
has opened up an entirely new global market. Led by Google, US search engine firms
dominate in the sphere of information search, as they expand the domestic US
information market, churn out many new products and aggressively build an
extraterritorial information network. This requires them to remove barriers between
nation states. However, Google’s global dominance is not a permanent condition; rather,
its continued growth and expansion actually depends heavily on volatile and politically
organized international markets.
Contested Zones
There are a few places in the world where US capital is struggling for a foothold.
China, Russia and South Korea are those rarest of places where there is a viable
alternative to Google, and domestic capital has so far been able to capture and maintain
those search markets. In particular, one of the most contested markets has been China –
the world's largest economic growth zone and Internet market by population – where
Google and other US-based Internet firms have made little headway. In China, according

555

The White House Office of the Press Secretary, “2011 Remarks by the President in State of Union
Address,” January 25, 2011, http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2011/01/25/remarks-presidentstate-union-address.

189


to the survey by China Internet Network Information Center, 632 million people are
logged on and spend an average of 25.9 hours a week online.556 As of 2013, the country
had only 42% Internet penetration rate and still has much fertile ground where digital
capital can dig. By comparison, the US has about 247 million Internet users and has 85%
Internet penetration.557
In the world’s largest Internet market, the Chinese search engine Baidu – not
Google – has organized and is mobilizing the labor of millions of unpaid voluntary users.
As of 2013, the company had 21,800 paid workers, handling 5 billion daily search
queries from unpaid voluntary users – more than any other search engine in any other
single national market.558 To put this in perspective, the search giant Google processes
3.3 billion queries on a daily basis.559 While Baidu only has half the paid employees that
Google does, it has an immense reservoir of unpaid labor power. Baidu holds almost 80
percent of China’s search-engine market by revenue and combined, China’s top three
search engines Baidu, Qihoo, and Sohu command almost 90% of the market.560 Globally,
Baidu is a distant second behind Google with 18.03% global market share – but this
exceeds the combined market share of Bing and Yahoo!.561


556

Dexter Roberts, “Chinese Social Media Lose 7 Percent of Visitors During Crackdown,” Bloomberg
Business Week, July 22, 2014, http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2014-07-22/chinas-social-medialose-7-percent-of-visitors-during-crackdown.
557
“Pew Research Internet Project’s Health Fact Sheet,” Pew Research Center's Internet and American Life
Project, http://www.pewinternet.org/Commentary/2011/November/Pew-Internet-Health.aspx.
558
Kevin Chen, “5 Billion Reasons to Buy Baidu,” Daily Finance, March 3, 2013,
http://www.dailyfinance.com/2013/03/02/5-billion-reasons-to-buy-baidu/.
559
Ibid.
560
Paul Mozur and Nathalie Tadena, “Baidu’s profit Rises, but Concerns Remain.” Wall Street Journal,
February 4, 2013, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324445904578284923371824716.html.
561
Konrad Krawczyk, “Google is easily the most popular search engine, but have you heard who’s in
second?” Digital Trends, July 3, 2014, http://www.digitaltrends.com/web/google-baidu-are-the-worldsmost-popular-search-engines/.

190


The rise of the Chinese search engine industry has been commonly presented in the
mainstream media in terms of the Chinese state’s favoritism toward Chinese companies
and/or the result of Google’s partial withdrawal from China in 2010, and an attempt by
new “emerging” global power China to challenge the current hegemon – the US. Yet,
given China’s deep reintegration into global capitalist markets, this perceived view of
Google representing the US, the bearer of liberal democracy vs. Baidu representing the
authoritative regime China, is incomplete and misleading and needs to be explicated in
order to understand how the global search engine industry might actually have evolved.
Haughty and self-serving declarations of moral principles set aside, US search companies
need to participate in China’s high growth Internet market. And, unlike most other
regions of the world, and even allowing for very extensive financial involvement by US
and other foreign Internet firms, US search companies face real and intensifying
competition from units of Internet capital based in China.
Meanwhile, on the other side of the world, the search engine industry landscape is
quite different. In major European countries such as France, Britain, and Germany,
Google is the search engine. Unlike in China, there are no competitors in Western Europe
– once the center of global information power – who are able to challenge Google’s
expansion. Given this absence of rivals, Google should be able to extend its economic
activities without obstacles. Yet, the reality shows otherwise. Google is facing severe
opposition, is on the receiving end of numerous antitrust lawsuits from a number of
European countries and is dealing with a series of ongoing legal problems across Europe,
from anti-monopoly to copyright to privacy. Google has been dealing with a major
antitrust investigation in the 27-member state bloc of the European Union. As of 2013,

191


six European countries, including France, Britain, Netherlands, Germany, Spain and Italy
had agreed on joint legal action against Google over its privacy policy. And Google’s
legal problems in Europe are far from over. With that in mind, what is the nature and root
of opposition against Google in Europe? Who are the actors behind these conflicts?
New Challenge: China
The information industry has long been considered of strategic importance for
China within the wider context of its reintegration into the global capitalist economy.562
In the 1970s, the post-Mao Chinese Community party – just coming out of its Cultural
Revolution – launched a national campaign on four areas of “modernization” – including
agriculture, industry, national defense, and science and technology. According to Yuezhi
Zhao, this nationalist development agenda by Chinese political elites was a way to
reclaim China from historical defeat and “catch up with the West” – including in
information technologies.563 Thus, in the process of shifting from a socialist economy to a
more state-capital oriented economy, Chinese policy has prioritized its information
technology sectors and reorganized them as a new zone of economic growth. The former
Chinese President Jiang Zemin once stated, “None of the four modernizations would be
possible without information.”564 The information industry has been treated by the
Chinese State as a pillar industry,565 and it is important to consider China’s ICT
development to set the stage for the geopolitics of search in that region.


562

Yuezhi Zhao, Communication In China: Political Economy, Power, and Conflict. Lanham, Md.:
Rowman & Littlefield, 2008; Yu Hong, Labor, Class Formation, and China's Informationized Policy of
Economic Development (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2011).
563
Yuezhi Zhao, “After mobile phones, what? Re-embedding the social in China’s Digital Revolution,”
International Journal of Communication 1 (2007): 97.
564
“Promotion of Information Infrastructure Urged,” People's Daily, July 27, 2002,
http://china.org.cn/english/government/37832.htm.
565
Hong, Labor, Class Formation, 31.

192


By the 1980s, China had implemented extensive industrial policies to develop
domestic information sectors, including the building of special economic zones and statefunded technology parks, supporting homegrown software and hardware IT firms,
investing in state-led nationwide large-scale IT infrastructure projects, and offering tax
breaks for Chinese Internet startups.566 At the same time, China has built out its
information infrastructure and made a concerted effort to promote the commercial use of
information technologies at every level of industry, government and people’s everyday
lives. As part of the reorganization of its information sectors, the Chinese state has
attracted substantial foreign capital as a vital economic strategy in shifting its economy
move toward information-driven development. China’s accession into the World Trade
Organization (WTO) in 2000 was seen as an official juncture of China’s opening up to
foreign capital. However, as Yu Hong shows, long before that, the Chinese government
had facilitated foreign investment in development of Internet sectors via joint ventures,
contractual arrangements, equity investments, and foreign R&D investments.567 By the
early 2000s, IBM, Microsoft, Intel, Alcatel, GE, Bell Labs, and GM had all already
established R&D centers in China. The development of Internet networks and its
commercialization were political and economic arrangements at the center of the Chinese
Party State’s industrial policy, which made it possible for transnational capital to reach
China’s growing and lucrative information sectors. In particular was China’s industrial
policy regarding Internet services running over telecommunication networks.



566

Xiudian Dai, “ICTs in China’s development strategy,” in China and the Internet: Politics of the Digital
Leap Forward, ed. Christopher Hughes et al. (London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003), 8-29.
567
Yu Hong (2008), "Distinctive Characteristics of China’s Path of ICT Development—A Critical Analysis
of Chinese Developmental Strategies in Light of the Eastern Asian Model,” International Journal of
Communication 2 (2008): 456-471.

193


In 2000, the Chinese government standardized the regulatory framework for its
Telecom Sector as it prepared for accession into the WTO. It clearly defined the
categorization between basic telecom service operators and value-added information
services operating over the network such as email, Internet services, online data
processing etc.568 The PRC purposefully relaxed the restriction on foreign investment in
value-added services – allowing foreign investors to own up to 50% – and the process of
obtaining service licenses as compared to basic telecommunication businesses.569 The
policy explicitly encouraged Chinese private capital as well as foreign capital
participation in the development of Internet service sectors. By intentionally relaxing
state involvement, the Chinese party state planned to cultivate market opportunities for
domestic companies by using foreign capital and speeding up the commercialization of
the Internet and its related industries.
With this effort by the Chinese State to accelerate market logic, foreign capital
flooded into the Internet market in China. While direct foreign investment and whole
foreign ownership of Internet services was prohibited in the Internet industry, many
domestic and foreign firms pursued joint ventures, joint research and development, and
complex contractual arrangements of mutually beneficial interest to allow foreign firms
access to the Chinese market and give Chinese firms access to foreign capital. In the case
of US internet firms like Yahoo!, Ebay, Amazon, Microsoft MSN, they all entered into
the Chinese market through joint ventures with a local company. In addition to joint
ventures, another common route that Chinese Internet firms used is a system called

568

Richard, Hanley, Moving people, goods, and information in the 21st century: the cutting-edge
infrastructures of networked cities (London: Routledg, 2004), 166.
569
Scott Yunxiang Guan, China's Telecommunications Reforms: From Monopoly Towards Competition
(Hauppauge, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers, 2003), 78.

194


Variable Interest Entities (VIEs), a workaround in which foreign investment can be
utilized to participate in restricted industries such as the Internet and telecommunication,
but may not directly control the enterprise. The VIE structure is often referred to as the
Sina-model because it was first deployed in 2000 by Chinese Internet company Sina.
Under the VIE structure, two entities are created: one is offshore and the other is
in China. PRC individuals and foreign investors first establish an offshore entity in the
Cayman or other British Islands so that foreign investors are able to inject capital into
that entity; in turn they can acquire ownership in offshore assets. The first entity then sets
up a wholly foreign-owned enterprise (WFOE) in China as a direct subsidiary. This
subsidiary in China sets up one or more domestically licensed companies as its operating
companies, and these domestically licensed companies are called VIEs.570 The China
subsidiary sits between the off-shore firms and the VIEs. Via a series of contractual
agreements with the Chinese subsidiary, the VIEs enable the overseas-listed company to
effectively run its operations inside China.
Besides Sina, other major Chinese Internet companies like Baidu, Tencent,
Tudou, Sohu.com, and Alibaba’s rival JD.com have been listed on the stock markets in
the US, Hong Kong, and Shanghai using the VIE structure.571 Chinese e-commerce giant
Alibaba, which recently became the world’s biggest IPO, is operating under the VIE
structure as well. In 2011, the law firm Cadwallader reported in the Financial Times that


570

Zeng Xianwu, “Variable Interest Entity Structure in China,” China Law Insight, February 9, 2012,
http://www.chinalawinsight.com/2012/02/articles/corporate/foreign-investment/variable-interest-entitystructure-in-china/; Complex Structure for Investing in China, Matthews Asia Insight, September 2012,
http://matthewsasia.com/perspectives-on-asia/asia-insight/article-560/default.fs.
571
Joy Shaw and Lisa Chow, “China VIE structure may hold hidden risk,” Financial Times, November 11,
2011, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/0a1e4d78-0bf6-11e1-9310-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2Pv2dezjE.

195


42 percent of Chinese companies listed on the US stock exchange are using the VIE
structure, with thousands of unlisted companies operating in the same way.572
The Chinese party state is well aware that many of its Internet firms use VIEs to
draw in foreign capital, and that foreign capital uses VIEs to invest in the restricted
Chinese Internet industry. Periodically, there have been rumors that the state would
perhaps regulate the VIE structure. In 2006, the Ministry of Information, which regulates
Internet firms, said it was taking a look at the VIE practice. In 2009, three other
ministries announced that VIEs were banned for companies involved in Internet
gaming.573 More recently, in 2011, Reuters reported that the China Securities Regulatory
Commission (CSRC) had asked the government to regulate VIE corporate structures.
Yet, so far, the Chinese Party State has maintained its ambiguous policy stance and has
never declared VIEs to be illegal or actually attempted to clamp down on the system and
practice. What then is the reason for the Chinese Party state not taking action against
VIEs to restrict foreign capital into Chinese strategic industries? On the flip side,
according to a report by the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission, US
shareholders in Chinese Internet firms face “major risk” because Chinese courts might
not hold that those contractual agreements are legal. Why then do US investors continue
to invest in Chinese Internet firms in this manner?
There is a mutual understanding among transnational capitalists that the Chinese
state would be unlikely to take any measures that affect major Internet firms anytime
soon because “there are so many of them in existence and due to the fact that the


572

Kathrin Hille, “Foreign internet presence in China to face scrutiny,”
Financial Times, September 1, 2011, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/7f8645e2-d493-11e0-a42b00144feab49a.html.
573
“China's murky ownership rules who owns what?” Economist, July 7, 2011,
http://www.economist.com/node/18928526.

196


financial interests involved are already massive.”574 Alibaba’s CEO Jack Ma, in his talk
at China 2.0 conference in 2011 at the Stanford University Graduate School of Business,
assured the audience that the PRC would not regulate the VIE structure given that so
many Chinese Internet firms commonly operate as VIEs.575 In other words, transnational
capital is so deeply interwoven into the development of Chinese Internet industry that it is
hard to untangle without harming domestic capital and party-state elites own financial
interests as well. This is not an accident; rather, it is the direct result of Chinese party
state policy in the process of shifting its economy to being more market-oriented,
absorbing transnational capital in order to reintegrate into the global capitalist economy.
Thus, the rise of Chinese Internet firms like Baidu is tightly intertwined with the interests
of transnational and domestic capital, and domestic and transnational capital classes. As
Zhao posits, the defining feature of the information industry in China is that it developed
during a period of market liberalization, globalization, and transnational integration.576
The ascendance of Baidu and other Internet firms needs to be situated within this context.
The Rise of Baidu
Baidu was co-founded in 2000 by Robin Li and Eric Xu, Chinese nationals
educated in the United States. Current CEO Li studied computer science at the State
University of New York (SUNY) at Buffalo and worked at Dow Jones & Co. in
Princeton, New Jersey, and Infoseek, an early search engine firm partly owned by
Disney, as a search engine engineer. Xu, a former Xerox employee, has a Ph.D. in

574

Richard Pearson, “Looking at Chinese VIE’s,” Forbes, October 18, 2012,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/richardpearson/2012/10/18/looking-at-chinese-vies/.
575
China 2.0: Transforming Media and Commerce,” Stanford Program on Regions of Innovation and
Entrepreneurship, September 20, 2011,
http://sprie.gsb.stanford.edu/events/china_20_transforming_media_and_commerce/.
576
Zhao, Communication In China, 154.

197


biochemistry and is well-connected in Silicon Valley. In 1999, the two raised $1.2
million in seed money from Silicon Valley venture capital firms Integrity Partners and
Peninsula Capital and returned to China.577 On January 18, 2000, with that seed money
and using the VIE structure, they co-founded Baidu, which was incorporated in the
Cayman Islands as Baidu.com. In 2005, Goldman Sachs and Piper Jaffray (PJC), along
with Credit Suisse First Boston (CS), underwrote Baidu's IPO and listed it on the
NASDAQ stock exchange. Baidu’s IPO was considered the biggest opening on
NASDAQ since the dot.com peak of 2000. Soon after its IPO, Baidu secured another $10
million from two other US venture capital firms, Draper Fisher Jurvetson and IDG
Technology Venture.578 The 2010 Report to Congress of the US-China Economic and
Security Review Commission stated that Baidu’s initial majority investors were
Americans and American firms.579 Ironically, Google – Baidu’s competitor in China –
even bought a 2.6 percent share of Baidu in 2005, and sold the shares with 1100% return
as the company started its own operations in China. As of 2013, 63% of Baidu’s shares
are held by 471 financial institutions,580 including Baillie Gifford & Co, Price (T.Rowe)
Associates Inc., Oppenheimer Funds Inc. etc.581 – Baillie Gifford & Co, Price (T.Rowe)
Associates and others are also top shareholders of Google.582



577

David Barboza, “The Rise of Baidu,” New York Times, September 17, 2006,
http://www.nytimes.com/2006/09/17/business/yourmoney/17baidu.html?pagewanted=all.
578
Ibid.
579
Report to Congress of the U.S. China Economic and Security Review Commission, 100 th Cong., 2nd sess
(Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 2010), 231,
http://origin.www.uscc.gov/sites/default/files/annual_reports/2010-Report-to-Congress.pdf.
580
“Baidu Inc.,” Yahoo Finance, http://finance.yahoo.com/q/mh?s=BIDU.
581
“Baidu Inc.,” Financial Times, http://markets.ft.com/research/Markets/Tearsheets/Businessprofile?s=BIDU:NSQ.
582
Google Inc. Financial Times, http://markets.ft.com/research/Markets/Tearsheets/Businessprofile?s=GOOG:NSQ.

198


Baidu is a typical Chinese Internet startup nurtured by the Chinese state and by
transnational capital during the late 1990s, even while the investment of Chinese venture
capital in Chinese Internet startups slowly rose to today’s levels. Like other search firms,
the majority of Baidu’s revenues still come from search advertising, but it has attempted
to diversify its revenue stream. While Baidu relies on Chinese advertisers to reach
China’s burgeoning consumer population, it also depends on many US advertisers that
utilize Baidu to tap into the domestic and growing overseas Chinese market. Baidu has
not revealed how many of its advertisers are US-based or from other foreign countries,
but the number is expected to grow according to Scott Kessler, an analyst for Standard &
Poor’s equity research services.583 As part of its strategy, Baidu is also aggressively
building partnerships with foreign- as well as booming domestic IT companies. For
foreign companies, partnership with Baidu is a way to break into the Chinese information
market.
In 2006, Baidu struck a deal with MTV to provide television and music content to
Baidu. The company teamed up with Providence Equity Partners – one of Hulu’s
investors – to inject $50 million into the creation of licensed online video platform
qiyi.com,584 established a joint venture with Japan-based Rakuten to operate a Businessto-Consumer (B2C) online shopping service in the Chinese market, entered into a
cooperative agreement with Nokia, and worked with Intel to develop search services for
home PCs, laptops and mobile phones. Baidu partnered with Dell, Inc. to develop tablet

583

Pete Barlas, “More US Companies Trying Baidu Ads China Market A Strong Lure Advertisers ramping
up efforts with largest nation's dominant search engine,” Investor's Business Daily, February 16, 2011:
A04.
584
Robin Wauters, “Baidu acquires dominant stake in online video firm iQiyi, buys out ex-Hulu investor
Providence,” TNW, November 2, 2012,
http://thenextWeb.com/asia/2012/11/02/baidu-acquires-majority-stake-in-online-video-firm-iqiyi-buys-outex-hulu-investor-providence/.

199


computers and mobile phones to target the Chinese market dominated by Apple and the
Chinese company Lenovo – itself the buyers of IBM’s PC business. Recently, Baidu
reached an agreement with BMW to bring self-driving cars to China under the project
name called “Vision Zero” showing its ambition beyond traditional Internet sector. In the
deal, Baidu will provide the map and content services while BMW supplies the vehicles.
By partnering in these ways, Baidu has strategically integrated deeply into the global
information sphere and expanded its business across the market.
The rise of Baidu in China has often been attributed by the Western media as the
result of Google’s partial withdrawal from China in 2010 and Chinese government
policies favoring Chinese-owned companies. After Google moved its operations to Hong
Kong, Business Week reported that “Baidu will now enjoy near-monopoly status” in the
Chinese search market. This prediction is only partially correct. Indeed, after Google’s
partial departure, Baidu was at once able to raise its market control to 80%, but that was
only a brief aberration. As of 2014, Baidu controls 58.76%, while its domestic rival 360
Search shares 25.41%, Sogou 12.58%, and Google has 1.34%.585 By no means has the
search engine market in China stabilized with Baidu seemingly reigning over the
domestic search market. Baidu is facing fierce competition among fast-growing Chinese
homegrown Internet firms, so its continuing dominance is not assured in the rapidly
changing information landscape in China despite Google’s partial departure.


585

Bruce Einhorn “Qihoo takes on Baidu in China’s Search Engine Wars,” Bloomberg Business Week,
January 31, 2013, http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-01-31/qihoo-takes-on-baidu-in-chinassearch-engine-wars; Steven Millward, “Baidu down, Qihoo up, Google dead: 2013 was a year of drama for
China’s search engines,” Tech In Asia, January 7, 2014, http://www.techinasia.com/how-baidu-qihoogoogle-performed-in-china-in-2013/; Top Chinese Search Engines, Chinese SEO Shifu, April 10, 2014,
http://chineseseoshifu.com/blog/top-5-chinese-search-engines.html.

200


Fierce Competition
The search engine market in China is highly dynamic, unstable and competitive.
One of Baidu’s newly emerged contenders is Qihoo, founded by a former Yahoo!
Executive586 and initially backed by the venture capital firm Sequoia Capita,587 which
was also a major backer of Google. In addition to Sequoia, Qihoo is supported by both
Chinese and foreign venture capital firms such as IDG Ventures, Highland Capital
Partners, Trustbridge partners, and Chinese private equity firm CDH. The company is
best known for being China’s largest antivirus software vendor, but it launched a search
engine called so.360.cn, then used it in place of Google as the search engine on its portal.
As of 2014, Qihoo runs the second largest search engine and browser in China.588 During
its initial public offering in 2011, Qihoo 360 Technology raised $175 million in the
biggest IPO by a Chinese company in the US that year.589 Citigroup and UBS investment
bank underwrote the IPO, which meant that the banks had committed to purchase a
certain amount of Qihoo shares at an agreed-upon price, and listed it on the NASDAQ in
2011.590
Shortly after launching its new search engine, Qihoo introduced its own Web portal
site hao.360.cn and its own browser the 360 Browser. So far Qihoo is chipping away at

586

Paul Mozur, “Qihoo 360's Zhou Hongyi: Taking Aim at China's Internet,” Wall Street Journal,
November 30, 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204707104578094460340552442.html.
587
Matt Marshall, “Yahoo China to file aggressive suit against Qihoo nemesis,” Venture Beat, November 2,
2006, http://venturebeat.com/2006/11/03/yahoo-china-hits-back-at-qihoo-nemesis/.
588
Benjamin Pimentel, “Qihoo shares more than double in IPO,” Market Watch, March 30, 2011,
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/qihoo-shares-more-than-double-in-ipo-2011-03-30-1122190.
589
Nisha Gopalan and Joan Solsman, “Qihoo Tops Chinese IPOs in U.S. This Year,” Wall Street Journal,
March 20, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703712504576232084175020582; Matt Marshall,
“Sequoia Capital's romp around the world: Qihoo, Jajah, Sipera & AdBrite,” Venture Beat, March 20,
2006, http://venturebeat.com/2006/03/20/sequoia-capitals-romp-around-the-world-qihoo-jajah-siperaadbrite/.
590
Gopalan, and Solsman, “Qihoo Tops Chinese IPOs in U.S. This Year.”

201


Baidu’s search market share, and Baidu has responded by blocking Qihoo from access to
its products and services. Baidu also took legal action against Qihoo 360, claiming that
Qihoo 360 violated its robot exclusion protocol by indexing its Web content without
permission.591 In response to the lawsuit, Qihoo argued that Baidu’s actions violated
China’s anti-monopoly laws.592 To ease the tension between these competitors, the
Internet Society of China, a government-backed trade group, stepped in and got search
companies and other Internet firms including Baidu, Qihoo 360, Tencent, Sina etc. to
agree to sign a self-regulation pact including a code of conduct to maintain fair
competition.593 This “self regulation” can be seen as weakening the role of the Chinese
state in the new market-oriented economy. However, as Yuezh Zhao succinctly posits,
“self regulation” is a way for the Chinese state to couch the market as a benevolent, nonpolitical entity.594 It is part of the Chinese state’s neoliberal strategies where the party
state distances itself from the market yet maintains its influence and strategically
facilitates the commercialization processes.
In the midst of its battle against Baidu, Qihoo teamed up with China’s e-commerce
giant Alibaba to launch 360.etao.com, an online shopping search engine. This move is an
aggressive strategy by Qihoo and Alibaba meant to grab market share from Baidu's
dominance in the Chinese search engine market. Besides search, Qihoo offers competing
services like vertical search engines specializing in music, software, and mapping


591

Ellyne Phneah, “Baidu takes Qihoo 360 to court over search dispute,” ZDNet, February 22, 2013,
http://www.zdnet.com/cn/baidu-takes-qihoo-360-to-court-over-search-dispute-7000011649/.
592
Ibid.
593
Michael Kan, “China's Baidu and Qihoo 360 sign pact meant to resolve dispute,” PC World, November
2, 2012,
http://www.pcworld.idg.com.au/article/440847/china_baidu_qihoo_360_sign_pact_meant_resolve_dispute.
594
Yuezhi Zhao, Communication In China, 33.

202


services.595 Qihoo 360 had a hiring spree for its search unit, specifically targeting and
recruiting employees from Baidu, as well as search teams from Tencent and Sohu.596
Trailing Qihoo is Soguo, a subsidiary of Web portal Sohu and a long-time player
in the Chinese search market. Sohu was the first Chinese language search engine/portal in
China. The company was founded by ChaoYang Zhang, who received his PhD in
experimental physics from MIT in 1993. Zhang left his position as MIT’s liaison officer
for China and returned to China in order to start his own company, Internet Technologies
China (ITC), with help from MIT media lab director Nicholas Negroponte – the One
Laptop per Child (OLPC) evangelist – and Edward Roberts of MIT’s Sloan School of
Management. ITC later changed its name to Sohu.597 In 2004, Sohu launched an updated
search engine called Sogou. As the search engine market heated up in 2012, Sohu
announced that the company would join the search engine battle between Baidu and
latecomer Qihoo. However, since then, Sogou has sought buyers, spurring interest from
domestic Internet giants Baidu, Tencent and Qihoo 360.598 The company had been
holding a solid 10% share of the search market, but has not been able to sustain growth,
facing competition from Baidu and Qihoo. From its competitors’ point of view, Sogou’s
10% was vital enough to shift the balance of the search engine market. For Baidu,
keeping Sogou out of Qihoo’s hands was necessary in order to maintain its dominance


595

Catherine Shu, “Qihoo 360 Partners With Alibaba To Grab Market Share Away From Chinese Search
Giant Baidu,” Tech Crunch, May 21, 2013, http://techcrunch.com/2013/05/21/qihoo-alibaba/.
596
Doug Tsuruoka, “Qihoo 360 Search Unit Reportedly Hiring More Staff,” Investor’s Business Daily,
November 13, 2013, http://news.investors.com/technology/111312-633269-qihu-said-ramping-up-searchhiring.htm.
597
Wenxian, Zhang, Huiyao Wang, and Ilan Alon. Entrepreneurial and Business Elites of China: The
Chinese Returnees Who Have Shaped Modern China (Bingley: Emerald Group Pub., 2011), 219.
598
“Sogou attracts interest from Baidu, Tencent, Qihoo 360,” Want China Times, Mary 23, 2013,
http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20130523000057&cid=1202.

203


and protect its share of the market it now enjoys.599 However, in 2013, Sogou made a
deal with Tencent, which invested US$ 448 million for a 36.5 percent stake in the
company and merged with Tencent’s search engine SoSo, which had a smaller market
share. After the deal, Sogou’s market share rose to 12%, and Tencent-backed Sogue is
now planning for its own IPO.
Tencent – founded by Pony Ma, the third-richest man in China – is another major
player in the Chinese Internet market and often ranked as the third largest Internet
company in the world behind Google and Amazon, with market capitalization of $132
billion. Tencent is more known for its core Instant Message (IM) product QQ and for
gaming, but it jumped into the search market, and developed its own search engine called
SoSo (meaning “search search”) and e-commerce portal. Initially Tencent partnered with
Google’s search ad platform, but in 2009 it decided to replace Google with its own ad
platform.600 While Tencent is a small player in desktop search with slightly over 3.5%
market share, it is a bigger player in mobile search and online games. After acquiring the
36.5% stake of Sogou owned by Chinese search engine Sohu, the two joined forces to
challenge Baidu. About half of Tencent’s revenue was from online gaming, with another
fifth coming from products like the mobile chat service WeChat/Weixin – which has over
300 million registered users – instant messaging service QQ, etc. 601 The company is



599

“China’s Browser Wars: Sogou on Sale?” Barron’s,
http://blogs.barrons.com/emergingmarketsdaily/2013/05/23/chinas-browser-wars-sogou-onsale/?Mod=WSJ_blogs_mostpop_read.
600
Sarah Lacy, “What Valley Companies Should Know about Tencent,” Tech Crunch, June 20, 2010,
http://techcrunch.com/2010/06/20/what-valley-companies-should-know-about-tencent/.
601
“Tencent Chief Ma Passes Baidu’s Li in Wealth: Chart of the Day,” Bloomberg News, May 17, 2013,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-03-17/tencent-chief-ma-passes-baidu-s-li-in-wealth-chartof-the-day; Michael Kan, “China's Tencent expands search engine presence with Sogou deal,” PC World,
September 16, 2013, http://www.pcworld.com/article/2048843/chinas-tencent-expands-search-enginepresence-with-sogou-deal.html.

204


more than 30 percent owned by South African media group Naspers Ltd, who also owns
shares of Facebook and Mail.ru (MAIL), the largest Russian-language Internet firm.
Meanwhile, e-commerce giant Alibaba rolled out its own general search engine
called Aliyun or Alibaba Cloud Search – the same brand as its mobile operating system.
Under its cloud computing division, Aliyun offers the basic features of search: Internet,
news, images and maps, and competes directly with Baidu.602 This is not the first time
that Alibaba has entered into the search market. In 2010, it partnered with Microsoft and
launched the shopping search engine Etao.com.603 And to tackle China’s mobile search
market, in 2014, Alibaba formed a joint venture with Chinese browser developer UCWeb
called Shenma. Alibaba CEO Jack Ma voiced his domestic ambition, saying at the time
“What Alibaba is going to do is to challenge the flagship of the industry and trigger
benign competition”604 while it also aims to take its e-commerce business to emerging
markets.
If Alibaba is ambitiously moving into Baidu’s territory, Baidu is looking to carve
out its own space in Alibaba’s lucrative e-commerce market. In an attempt to directly
challenge Alibaba’s Taobao (TMall) dominance in e-commerce with over 80% market
share, Baidu set up an e-commerce department in October 2007, and its C2C platform
Youa, backed by venture capital like IDG-ACCEL and Qiming Venture Partners, opened
in October 2008, but failed less than 3 years later. Since then, Baidu has attempted


602

Gregg Sterling, “Alibaba Creates Aliyun Search Engine To Challenge Baidu, Google In China,” Search
Engine Land, February 19, 2013,
http://searchengineland.com/alibaba-creates-aliyun-search-engine-to-challenge-baidu-google-in-china148992.
603
Josh Ong, “Alibaba’s new Aliyun search engine raises the stakes in its feud with Google and Android,”
TNW, February 19, 2013.
http://thenextWeb.com/asia/2013/02/19/alibabas-new-aliyun-search-engine-raises-the-stakes-in-its-feudwith-google-and-android/.
604
Dan Zhang, “Alibaba vs. Baidu: Can e-commerce trump search?” ZDnet. September 26, 2011,
http://www.zdnet.com/blog/china/alibaba-vs-baidu-can-e-commerce-trump-search/128.

205


several other e-commerce ventures without success.605 Will Baidu completely relinquish
China’s e-commerce market estimated to be worth between $420-$650 billion by
2020?606 The answer is no. In 2014, Baidu has joined forces with Tencent and the Dalian
Wanda Group, the Chinese real estate, cinema and retail conglomerate, and once again
entered into the e-commerce business against Alibaba. The three companies are set to
launch Wanda E-Commerce, in which Baidu and Tencent would each hold a 15 percent
stake. They plan to invest about $811 million in so-called online-to-offline business
ventures where Wanda’s nationwide offline chain of 107 malls and department stores are
integrated with the utility and popularity of Baidu’s and Tencent’s online search, social
networking and payment services.607 To defend itself, Alibaba has embarked on a similar
initiative into online-to-offline ventures, investing nearly $700 million to acquire a
minority stake in the Intime Retail Group, which operates 36 department stores and
shopping centers around the country. 608 And recently Tencent built a partnership with
China's number 2 online retailer JD.com, preying on Alibaba’s weakness in mobile
business.
Similar to the US market, as Chinese Internet firms diversify their accumulation
strategies, they move into each other’s territories of search, social media, browsers,
mobile phones, music, games, video, e-commerce, and “Internet of things” all predicated


605

Kevin Huang, “Baidu’s New Ecommerce Journey: may Fail Again,” Internet Change China, July 12,
2012, http://www.ichangechina.com/baidus-new-ecommerce-journey-may-fail-again/; Doug Young,
“Baidu Diversification Sputters With E-Commerce Flop,” Forbes, April 25, 2012,
http://www.forbes.com/sites/techonomy/2012/04/25/baidu-diversification-sputters-with-e-commerce-flop/.
606
Robert O’Brien, “China’s E-Commerce Market: Growing in Size, Importance, and Dynamism,” Context
Chin, April 26, 2013, http://contextchina.com/2013/04/chinas-e-commerce-market-growing-in-sizeimportance-and-dynamism/.
607
Neil Gough, “To Compete Against Alibaba, Wanda Joins Forces With Baidu and Tencent,” New York
Times, August 29, 2014,
http://dealbook.nytimes.com/2014/08/29/to-compete-with-alibaba-a-chinese-e-commerce-company-isborn/?_php=true&_type=blogs&_r=0.
608
Ibid.

206


on continuing commodification of the Internet. For defensive and offensive purposes,
Baidu is also pursuing a strategy of vertical integration by acquiring e-book sellers
(Fanshu.com), a travel-booking service (Qunar.com), e-commerce sites (Yougou.com,
360buy.com, tg.com.cn, yaodian100.com), an online community (jingtime.com) and a
housing information portal (anjuke.com).609 In 2013, Baidu acquired online video
provider PPS for $379 million and merged it with its own video platform, iQiyi, to
compete with the top Chinese video business Youku Tudou – which had received a $1.22
billion investment led by Alibaba. iQiyi also launched an in-house film studio – similar to
Google’s YouTube tactic for original content creation – to produce domestic and
Hollywood films while it has been working with movie studios to produce TV shows.
Baidu’s main business and the majority of its revenue is still desktop search, but, as the
company diversifies, it faces fierce competition from social media, e-commerce, video
companies such as Alibaba’s e-commerce, Tencent's QQ SMS, Sina’s Weibo twitter-like
microblogging service, and Renren, China's Facebook clone.
While Chinese Internet firms are competing with each other over these new
markets, there are other contenders to Baidu that are barely on the western media radar –
Chinese party state information service outlets. China Central Television (CCTV),
People’s Daily and Xinhua are all flexing their muscles to expand their businesses into
the increasingly lucrative Internet market and compete with privately owned Internet
firms. In the process of “opening up,” the state-run media firms People’s Daily, Xinhua
and CCTV have restructured and integrated into the market by incorporating private
capital. The Chinese Communist party elites have vested interests in the market and have


609

Normandy Madden, “With Google Gone, Baidu Moves Beyond Search in China But Faces Local
Rivals,” Ad Age, December 8, 2011,
http://adage.com/article/global-news/baidu-moves-search-china-faces-local-rivals/231444/.

207


become major players across the information sectors as the state assets have corporatized,
commercialized and capitalized.610 This process is far from over. The state run companies
are in the midst of undergoing additional restructuring processes in order to take part in
the profit of the Internet – a new site of capital accumulation – as they compete and
collaborate with private Internet firms.
People’s Daily started to build its online operation in 1997 when it launched
People’s Daily Online (People.cn Co.), an online portal for People’s Daily. The
newspaper’s Internet venture was primarily viewed as the Chinese party State's effort to
propagate its party agenda through new media, but it is equally a business imperative as a
commercialized press in order to cope with the shifting information industry. In 2010, as
part of an effort to expand its private capital, People’s Daily also built its own news
search engine called Jike, hoping to tap into the burgeoning search engine market. Not
surprisingly, Jike was not able to make even a dent against domestic competitors Baidu,
Qihoo and Sogou and failed, but the state media has not given up on the search business
and relaunched a new search engine called ChinaSo in 2014 by merging Jike and
Xinhua’s search engine Panguso.611 This might not be the last attempt for People’s Daily.
Considering the changing information market environment, state capital has been
pressured to expand its own operations to the Internet as it attempts to increase revenues
by injecting more private capital into its business.612 People.cn Co. has not shied away
from its market-oriented business model. The company described its business as a
“market-oriented” commercial news portal which has benefited from transnational


610

Zhao, Communication In China, 75-135.
Phill Muncaster, “Chinese government buids its own ‘ChinaSo’ search engine,” Register, March 4,
http://www.theregister.co.uk/2014/03/04/chinaso_search_engine_beijing_new/.
612
Zhang Ye, “Xinhua online portal files for IPO,” Global Times, June 29, 2014,
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/868059.shtml.
611

208


capital613 and expressed that “it needs to accelerate its restructuring drive and ‘take active
measures’ to compete with those commercial rivals.”614
One of People.cn Co.’s defensive and offensive measures was moving toward an
IPO in order to raise more private capital on the global financial market. In 2012,
People’s Daily Online Co. launched its IPO on the Shanghai Stock Exchange and raised
$222 million, three times what it initially expected.615 People.cn Co. is the first Chinese
state-owned information outlet that has gone public. As the Financial Times reported,
“this is the first time a Chinese state media company’s listing includes not just
commercial but also editorial assets.”616 People.cn received investments from many large
state-owned enterprises including People’s Daily, China Mobile Ltd, China Unicom and
China Telecom Corp Ltd.617
While People’s Daily and many other Chinese state information outlets have been
building online operations from early on, compared to privately held Internet firms like
Baidu, Tencent, Sina, Sohu, they are still relatively small scale. Through its IPO,
People’s Daily Online intended to inject more private capital into its coffers and expand
its business as it continues to integrate into the global capitalist information market. The
company is ready to use new capital to upgrade its technology including mobile delivery
and content,618 as it shifts into the mobile market and expands to include video services,

613

Lingling Wei, “Website of China Communist Party Mouthpiece Plans IPO,” Wall Street Journal,
January 10, 2012, http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204124204577150563664941658.html.
614
Ibid.
615
“People's Daily website raises $222m via share sale,” BBC News, April 20, 2012,
http://www.bbc.com/news/business-17781024.
616
Hille, “People’s Daily Online plans Shanghai listing.”
617
Samel Shen and Melanie, “China's party mouthpiece Xinhuanet applies for Shanghai IPO,” Reuters,
2013, http://ru.reuters.com/article/idUKBRE90604420130107.
618
Zijing Wu, “People’s Daily Site Raises $222 Million in Enlarged IPO,” Bloomberg, April 19, 2012,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-04-18/china-s-party-Website-people-cn-seeks-18-ipopremium.html; Dexter Roberts, “China’s Hot New Tech Stock Offering: The People’s Daily,” Bloomberg

209


online news services, gaming platforms etc.619 After People.cn Co.’s IPO, Xinhua and
CCTV have followed suit and are preparing for IPOs on the Shanghai Stock Exchange.
CCTV has already moved a large portion of its content – ranging from news,
drama and variety shows – online to CCTV.com. It is planning to team up with China
Mobile to launch an Internet TV station as CCTV’s online video platform.620 This
initiative is motivated by private online video companies like Youku Toudu Inc. and
Baidu’s iQiyi.com, which started to compete with CCTV for advertising revenues.621 In
fact, CCTV has dominated the advertising business for the last 20 years, but the
emergence of privately-owned Internet firms has changed the dynamic of the industry
and chipped away at its advertising market share. In 2012, while CCTV had an ad income
of US$4.3 billion,622 Baidu's ad income reached US$3.6 billion.623 If Baidu is able to
continue to grow at its current rate, it will easily pass the broadcaster’s ad revenue soon.
Baidu’s new video platform iQiyi.com is directly threatening CCTV. In The Wall Street
Journal, a CCTV spokesman bemoaned the difficulties for state-owned, less marketized
information firms to compete with newly emerged private Internet firms in a fully open
and competitive Internet market.624 There is a growing pressure on Chinese state capital
like CCTV.

Business Week, April 20, 2012, http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2012-04-20/chinas-hot-new-techstock-offering-the-peoples-daily.
619
“People's Daily Online Kicks Off IPO Roadshow,” Marbridge Daily, April 11, 2012,
http://www.marbridgeconsulting.com/marbridgedaily/2012-0411/article/55134/peoples_daily_online_kicks_off_ipo_roadshow.
620
Raymond Li, “CCTV and China Mobile to launch Internet TV station,” South Morning China, February
20, 2009, http://www.scmp.com/article/670554/cctv-and-china-mobile-launch-internet-tv-station.
621
“China's CCTV advertising sales hit 19-year high at $2.5 bln,” Reuters, November 18. 2012,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2012/11/19/china-cctv-adsales-idUSL4N08Z10Z20121119.
622
“Baidu: putting TV ads down for the count?” Want China Times, March 13, 2013,
http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20130314000051&cid=1502.
623
Ibid.
624
Loletta Chao, “China Media Push into the Web,” Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/articles/SB10001424052748703386704576186402009111630.

210


The tension between CCTV and Baidu is illustrated in CCTV’s hostile coverage
of Baidu. In 2011, CCTV ran a series of critical stories about Baidu’s ad sales practices
by revealing false ads on Baidu. This led the Baidu vice-president for sales to apologize
on CCTV to viewers affected by fraudulent information, and promising stricter
censorship and policies in its sales procedures.625 The scrutiny of Baidu could be seen as
CCTV’s outstanding journalistic standard, but CCTV’s critical report on Baidu also
needs to be set next to the fact that Baidu and CCTV are fighting for the same online ad
revenues.626 One of the reasons for CCTV to launch its own search engine is reciprocally
to better compete with Baidu and other internet firms on that important turf.
Chinese state run news agency Xinhua also joined the race for Internet business
by building its online unit Xinhuanet.com in 1997. In 2011, Xinhua released its own
search engine, Panguso.com, in partnership with state-owned telecommunications carrier
China Mobile, which came on the heals of the People’s Daily starting its own search
engine, Goso.cn.627 The news agency is also venturing out to social media, offering its
own Twitter-like messaging service. State run information outlets have long been
commercializing their businesses, but they are renewing their ambition to do so in the
Internet market.628 In January of 2011, Xinhua unveiled its first research center – called
Xinhuanet Industrial Park – built to develop new media products in China’s New Media
Development Zone in southern Beijing. Li Congjun characterized the construction of
Xinhuanet Industrial Park as a strategic move to expand Xinhua’s media businesses and

625

Kathrin Hille, “Baidu’s shares fall after attacks by CCTV,” Financial Times, August 19, 2011,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/6b065c2e-ca43-11e0-a0dc-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2UNFELVUd.
626
Melanie Lee, “CCTV Criticism of China's Baidu May Mask Competition Issues,” Hollywood Reporter,
August 18, 2011, http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/news/cctv-criticism-chinas-baidu-may-225153.
627
Loretta Chao, “China’s state media push deeper into the Web,” Wall Street Journal, March 8, 2011,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB30001424052748703386704576186402009111630.html.
628
Ibid.

211


enhance its online competitiveness. According to the Global Times, Xinhuanet has
decreased its reliance on the government’s service purchases and fees, and the Chinese
government has spurred state-backed media to seek IPOs to raise private capital in order
to compete with private Internet companies.629 While a majority of the company’s
revenue – 63.67% – now comes from online advertising, Xinhuanet’s mobile accounts
still only account for 8.37%. 630 The company understands the significance of competing
in and expanding its mobile Internet business, so it plans to invest in mobile Internet
infrastructure with new capital from its IPO. Xinhua has hired China International Capital
Corp. as an underwriter and filed for an IPO in Shanghai in 2014.
Re-convergence
These private and commercialized state run Internet firms are all now reconverging in the rapidly growing mobile market which will be a major revenue source in
the future. In 2014, China became the largest mobile market in the world by revenue631
and there are about 632 million people accessing the Internet in China, with
approximately 75% of this number through mobile technologies.632 Given the importance
of the mobile market, Baidu has been injecting a large amount of capital into the mobile
market as well as cloud computing through which run mobile apps, software, data and
services. Utilizing its dominance in desktop search and its brand name, Baidu has become
the frontrunner in the mobile search engine market.


629

Zhang Ye, “Xinhua online portal files for IPO.” Global Times, June 29, 2014,
http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/868059.shtml.
630
Ibid.
631
Simon Zekaria, “China is Projected to Overtake the US in Mobile Revenue,” Wall Street Journal, May
28, 2014, http://blogs.wsj.com/digits/2014/05/28/china-projected-to-overtake-the-us-in-mobile-revenue/.
632
John Mylant, “China's Mobile Advertising Market Is Still Young - Watch Baidu As It Matures,” Seeking
Alpha, March 27, 2013, http://seekingalpha.com/article/1303061-china-s-mobile-advertising-market-isstill-young-watch-baidu-as-it-matures; Nick Zhou, “China Mobile Search Engine Market Update,” China
Internet Watch, May 29, 2013, http://www.chinainternetwatch.com/2218/mobile-search-engine-market-q12013/#more-2218.

212


Baidu entered the mobile market relatively late. Its first move for mobile business
was in 2011 with the launching of Baidu Yi, its own mobile operating system, to
integrate its range of services into mobile devices. Baidu Yi is based on Google’s
Android operating system, but as Amazon did for its Kindle Fire, Baidu forked
(modified) Android OS, replaced Google services and directly integrated Baidu services
including mapping services, an ereader, music services etc.633 Baidu began to build
strategic partnerships with domestic and transnational telecom and mobile device
companies in China to carry its Internet services. In 2011, Baidu started its own smart
phone with US hardware vendor Dell running on its cloud-based Baidu Yi. This major
attempt failed as Dell’s phone did not sell well; rather, low-end Baidu Cloud phones from
China’s Changhong and TCL Corp generated more sales than the high-end Dell model.634
This hasn’t deterred Baidu as the influx of mobile technologies is radically reorganizing
the information industry as a whole.
Rather, Baidu has shifted its investments more toward mobile applications,
including its mobile browser, mobile search, and Baidu Application Center. The key part
of Baidu’s strategic plan lies in the mobile cloud. The idea is that once Baidu has user
information stored in its cloud services, it will discourage users from moving to other
services or platforms. Google is already effectively using this strategy.635 Baidu has
invested $1.6 billion in a cloud computing center to further its mobile strategies. Baidu


633

Geoff Duncan, “China’s Baidu to launch Android –Based Mobile OS,” Digital Trends, September 11,
2011, http://www.digitaltrends.com/international/chinas-baidu-to-launch-android-based-mobile-os/.
634
Steven Milward, “Baidu Losing Dell as Smartphone Partner,” Tech In Asia, December 17. 2012,
http://www.techinasia.com/dell-baidu-partnership-android/.
635
Kang Zhou, “Baidu in 2013, Needs Entry-Level Product to Access Mobile Internet Market,” TechNode,
February 10, 2013, http://technode.com/2013/02/10/baidu-in-2013-needs-entry-level-product-to-accessmobile-internet-market/.

213


had less than 10% of its total revenue coming from mobile ads a few years ago, but as of
2014, it had reached 30% of its total revenue coming from mobile.636
In the meantime, Easou Technology is trailing closely behind Baidu in the mobile
search market. Easou, with headquarters in Shenzhen, started its business in 2005 as the
first mobile search engine in China. Its revenue hit 300 million yuan in 2011.637 While
the company does not have a PC platform, it targets the small and medium business
mobile market where users do not generally use PCs on a regular basis. Unlike Baidu,
whose mobile advertisers are mostly larger companies shifting their advertising budgets
from PC to mobile, Easou relies on small and medium advertisers.638 Mobile search
advertisements make up over 70 percent of Easou’s revenues, due to increasing numbers
of cheap smartphones and 4G network access; the rest comes from paid music, games
and software downloads.639 Since 2005, according to China Daily, Easou.com has
received $50 million in four rounds of funding and is looking to go public on the
NASDAQ.640 In the last round of funding, SB China Venture Capital, the Hsinchu,
Taiwan-based company, United Microelectronics Corporation and French venture capital
company Ventech joined in the venture.641
Trailing behind Easou is Tencent, which was reorganized in 2012 in anticipation
of growing profits from its mobile platform and heavy investment in the app and e
636

“Mobile Advertising Fuels Boom for China's Search Engines,” Yahoo Finance, August 5, 2014,
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/mobile-advertising-fuels-boom-chinas-150000624.html.
637
“Easou Wap Search Business Exceeds Baidu,” Green Technology World, May 17, 2012,
http://green.tmcnet.com/news/2012/05/17/6307952.htm; Danny Sullivan, “WML and WAP Search
Engines,” Search Engine Watch, February 19, 2002,
http://searchenginewatch.com/article/2067285/WML-and-WAP-Search-Engines.
638
“Mobile Advertising Fuels from Boom for China’s Search Engine,” Market Watch, August 5, 2014,
http://www.marketwatch.com/story/mobile-advertising-fuels-boom-for-chinas-search-engines-2014-08-05.
639
Shen Jingting, “Easou gets new round of funding,” China Daily, April 5, 2011,
http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2011-04/15/content_12333971.htm.
640
Ibid.
641
Ibid.

214


commerce space. Tencent is competing with Baidu and Alibaba over the mobile search
market642 and its mobile messaging app WebChat/Weixin grew to roughly 355 million
monthly active users as of the end of 2013.643 The company has diversified revenue
sources, moving to games, subscription fees, and advertising, whereas Baidu concentrates
on online advertising.644 Tencent is trying to leverage its large user base against Baidu,
and is also broadening its business spectrum on a global level by joining into partnerships
with foreign companies. For example, Tencent teamed up with American Express to
create Tenpay in order to provide a cross-border online payment platform to enable
Chinese users to shop online on foreign Websites.645 This move is a threat to China’s top
online payment system, Alibaba group’s Alipay, which, since 2007, has provided a
payment service enabling users to shop on more than 600 overseas Websites.646 In
response, Alibaba went on the offensive by acquiring stakes in Sina Corp’s socialnetworking Website Weibo – a competitor of Tencent and navigation and maps firm
AutoNavi.
Transnationalization
Given the ever-intense domestic capitalist rivalries within China as illustrated
above, Baidu’s dominant position in the Internet market continues to be challenged.
Moreover, unlike its dominant position in the desktop market, Baidu has not been able to

642

Michele Chandler “Alibaba, Tencent Battle for Search Dominance,” Investor’s Business Daily, January
22, 2015, http://news.investors.com/technology/012215-735793-baidu-competes-with-alibaba-tencent-inmobile-search.htm.
643
Kaylene Hong, “WhatsApp rival WeChat is narrowing the gap as it passes 355 million monthly active
users,” TNW, March 10, 2014, http://thenextWeb.com/apps/2014/03/19/whatsapp-rival-wechat-isnarrowing-the-gap-as-it-passes-355-million-monthly-active-users/.
644
“Tencent Chief Ma Passes Baidu’s Li in Wealth,” Bloomberg News, March 17, 2013,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2013-03-17/tencent-chief-ma-passes-baidu-s-li-in-wealth-chart-of-theday.html.
645
Owen Fletcher, “Tencent, AmEx partner on online payment services,” Market Watch, September 28,
2011, http://www.marketwatch.com/story/tencent-amex-partner-on-online-payment-services-2011-09-28.
646
Chen Limin, “Tencent, American Express create online payment service for overseas websites,” China
Daily, September 11, 2012, http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2012-11/19/content_15943580.htm.

215


fully exploit the domestic mobile market yet. These factors are pressuring Baidu to look
for overseas expansion of its business. Baidu’s CEO Robin Li expressed that
international expansion is an “important way” for the company to spur future growth; the
company is investing 2 billion RMB in Shenzhen to build a new 220,000-square-meter
complex for international operations. The Center is scheduled to open by 2015647 and will
focus on R&D for strategic projects including Internet operating system. The company
also has a presence in the US with the opening of the Institute of Deep Learning in
Silicon Valley dedicated to Artificial Intelligence (AI).648 Baidu recently hired the
leading AI researcher Andrew Ng to head Baidu’s research. Ng was a professor at
Stanford University and previously worked on deep learning at Google. And the
company is in the process of establishing an R&D center in Brazil, working with two
local universities.
Baidu’s transnational ambitions go back to 2007 when the company first launched
its Japanese services, partnering with Japanese e-commerce giant Rakuten; yet its global
expansion has not been a smooth road. In Japan, Yahoo! dominates the market with over
50 percent market share – although Yahoo! search in Japan is powered by the Google
search algorithm and Google also holds over 36% of the Japanese market.649 Microsoft
had attempted to convince Yahoo! Japan to use Bing’s search algorithm, but this effort
failed because SoftBank, the Japanese cellphone and Web giant and Yahoo! Japan’s
major stakeholder, refused their overture because of the larger benefit of using Google


647

“Baidu to Build Southern China Office in International Push,” Bloomberg, January 16, 2012,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-01-16/baidu-to-build-southern-china-office-in-internationalpush.html; Jamie Yap, “Baidu preps for global expansion with new office,” ZDnet, January 17, 2012,
http://www.zdnet.com/baidu-preps-for-global-expansion-with-new-office-2062303526.
648
Daniela Hernandez, “Chinese Google Opens Artificial –Intelligence Lab in Silicon Valley,” Wired,
April 12, 2013, http://www.wired.com/wiredenterprise/2013/04/baidu-research-lab/.
649
Kenj Schaulzer, “Japan Search Engine Market Share 2013,” Search Blog Asia, February 15, 2012,
http://www.searchblog.asia/topics/seo/japan-search-engine-market-share-2012/.

216


search technology strength in Japanese language queries.650 As a newcomer, Baidu was
dealing with incumbents Yahoo! and Google, and was not able to make a dent in the
Japanese search market. Yet, this has not deterred Baidu’s global expansion efforts.
Despite its unsuccessful venture in Japan, Baidu regrouped its global strategies and in
2011-2012 launched services in Vietnam, Thailand, Egypt, and Brazil followed by
Indonesia to test those markets. These targeted countries may seem to be randomly
selected, but Baidu’s global strategy is calculated by targeting emerging markets and
non-English territories.651
After Japan, Baidu launched a local-language version of its Web directory
Hao123 in Thailand, which has 25 million Web users. The company slowly introduced
new services, including anti-virus apps now being used by 3 million users.652 The
Chinese firm aims to make its site a business gateway for Thai companies exporting to
China. Starting in 2011, Baidu offered the Vietnamese portal vn.hao123.com and Q&A
service zhidao.baidu.com.vn followed by PostBar (“Baidu Tieba”) and social network
“Tra Da Quan” – which means “coffee shop” in Vietnamese. Yet, Baidu is not the only
Chinese company that is transnationalizing its business. Baidu’s domestic competitors
have already entered Thailand, Vietnam and Indonesia where they compete with each
other and alongside Google, Yahoo!, and Microsoft. In particular, Tencent WeChat
mobile messaging app ranks 19th in popularity on Google Play and Apple Store in
Vietnam, and has embarked on a joint-venture in Indonesia, the region’s largest

650

Hiroko Tabuchi, “Yahoo Japan Teams With Google on Search,” New York Times, July 27, 2010,
http://www.nytimes.com/2010/07/28/technology/28yahoo.html?_r=0.
651
“How Baidu takes on Egypt and the world,” Chinese Speakers Bureau, March 12, 2013,
http://www.chinaspeakersbureau.info/2013/03/how-baidu-takes-on-the-egypt-and-the-world-kaiser-kuo/.
652
“China's Weibo seeks Thai gateway,” Bangkok Post, November 4, 2013,
http://www.bangkokpost.com/print/344912/.

217


country.653 In 2013, Sina Weibo also expanded its presence in Thailand via a partnership
with Jiaranai Entertainment based in Bangkok.654
To assist its global expansion, Baidu has been increasing its R&D abroad and
opened its overseas joint lab with the Institute for Infocomm Research (I2R) in Singapore
to focus on research on natural language processing technology for Thai and Vietnamese
as well as Arabic and Portuguese. While Baidu’s move into Vietnam and Thailand seems
a logical move considering their geographical proximity, what rationale could be behind
targeting Egypt and Brazil? Historian Vijay Prashad, in his book The Poorer Nations,
gives historical insight to understand Baidu’s geographical expansion. He characterizes
emerging countries like Brazil, China, Egypt etc. as “locomotives of the Global South” –
countries having both high economic growth rates and which are demographically large –
to promote South-South corporations. They were initially organized as an alternative to
Western neoliberalism; however, with defeat of the non-Aligned Movement in the 1980s,
they are integrated into global capitalist system and committed to “neoliberalism with
southern characteristics.”655
In fact, Brazil has led the way in South America. It has the largest Internet
population in South America and is fifth in the world with nearly 107 million Internet
users as of 2014. Additionally, Brazil has a lot of potential growth in this area – only 53
percent of its population currently has access to the Internet.656 Baidu’s strategy is not to

653

Jon Russell, “Tencent focuses on Indonesia with local joint venture to promote its WeChat mobile app,”
TNW, February 28, 2013, http://thenextWeb.com/asia/2013/02/28/tencent-focuses-on-indonesia-with-localjoint-venture-to-promote-its-wechat-mobile-app/.
654
Jamie Yap, “Sina Weibo expands to Thailand,” ZDnet, April 12, 2013, http://www.zdnet.com/th/sinaweibo-expands-to-thailand-7000013913/.
655
Vijay Prashad, The Poorer Nations: A Possible History of the Global South (London: Verso, 2012), 7 11.
656
See detailed statistics on Internet use in Brazil at http://www.statista.com/topics/2045/internet-usage-inbrazil.

218


convert Google users, but to attract new Internet users. Jonathan Dillon, head of Baidu’s
international business, considers Brazil its most important market outside China, saying,
“Brazil is a growing economy with a flourishing internet industry.”657 Brazil is one of the
most densely populated countries in the world, but US companies still have relatively less
presence. To tackle this not-yet-fully-tapped potential growth market, Baidu and the
world’s second largest consumer electronics vendor Lenovo have banded together and
released the Baidu cloud powered smartphone.658 Baidu also recently obtained a
controlling stake in Brazilian online-discount company Peixe Urbano to further its push
into Brazil as it anticipates that the country’s e-commerce market will grow 18%
annually by 2016.659
The Middle East is another region with a burgeoning number of Internet users;
yet, digital capital has also not yet fully exploited this region. In particular, Egypt is
considered a strategic market by Internet firms because it is the most populous country in
the Middle East and the third most populated in Africa. In 2011, Baidu introduced Arabic
Baidu Zhidao, which allows users to post questions and privileges users for good
answers. The object of Baidu Zhidao is a common way for search engine companies to
develop much-needed Web content via free user labor in a market where there is little
Web content available. With this content, Baidu is developing proficient search
technology that works in Arabic – a widely spoken language.660 Kaiser Kuo, Baidu’s

657

“Lenovo and Baidu target Brazil as high-growth market,” Want China Times, January 17, 2013,
http://www.wantchinatimes.com/news-subclass-cnt.aspx?id=20130117000071&cid=1102.
658
“Lenovo and Baidu target Brazil as high-growth market.”
659
“China's Baidu buys control of Brazil's Peixe Urbano in expansion push,” Reuters, October 9, 2013,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/10/09/us-peixe-urbano-m-a-baidu-idUSKCN0HY1EN20141009.
660
Neelima Mahajan-Bansal, “Why Baidu Likes Egypt and Other Such Matters,” Forbes, April 3, 2013,
http://forbesindia.com/blog/chinese-checkers/why-baidu-likes-egypt-and-other-such-matters/; Loretta
Chao, “Baidu Brushes Up On its Arabic, Thai,” Wall Street Journal, September 15, 2011,
http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2011/09/15/baidu-brushes-up-on-its-arabic-thai/.

219


director of international communications, did not hide Baidu’s ambitions in targeting
Egypt. She told the press that Baidu was not only interested in standard fusha Arabic
script because it is commonly used from the Maghreb to Mashriq, but also that Egypt is
considered a culturally dominant country in the Middle East, with a large amount of
cultural production and a large number of trained engineers.661 The idea is that mastery
over this language will help Baidu generate more products and also expand into the wider
Arabic world662 Kuo said, “in these markets, we’re dipping our toes in the water and just
learning the lay of the land … We’re not in a huge hurry. We can be patient.” 663 Not that
patient. Early in 2014, Baidu was testing its search site in Thailand, Brazil, and Egypt. In
July of 2014, Baidu search went live in Brazil as the Brazilian and Chinese governments
made a series of agreements including the creation of a “digital city” funded by the
Chinese Development Bank.664
Meanwhile, Baidu’s counterparts are not sitting on the sidelines watching while
Baidu gobbles up new markets. In Egypt, the most popular search engine is Google with
close to 95% of the search market share; Google also has over 98% market share in
Thailand, Brazil and Indonesia. Attempting to expand its market share and counter
Baidu’s move into Brazil, Google increased its Brazilian workforce by 50% from 350
employees in 2011.665 This move comes as the Brazilian government is heavily investing


661

Neelima Mahajan-Bansal, “Growth Engine: China’s Search Giant Baidu,” CKGSB Knowledge, March
12, 2013, http://knowledge.ckgsb.edu.cn/2013/03/12/technology/growth-engine-baidus-global-expansion/
662
Mahajan-Bansal, “Why Baidu Likes Egypt and Other Such Matters.”
663
Loretta Chao, “Baidu Brushes Up On its Arabic, Thai,” Wall Street Journal, September 15, 2011,
http://blogs.wsj.com/chinarealtime/2011/09/15/baidu-brushes-up-on-its-arabic-thai/.
664
Angelica Mari, “Chinese search engine Baidu goes live in Brazil,” ZDnet, July 18, 2014,
http://www.zdnet.com/chinese-search-engine-baidu-goes-live-in-brazil-7000031771/.
665
Samantha Pearson, “Google’s plan to tap Brazil’s fertile market,” Financial Times, April 22, 2011,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/6fa9386c-6d02-11e0-83fe-00144feab49a.html#axzz2Z9RJdWZz;
http://www.chandlernguyen.com/2013/03/search-engine-market-share-mar-2013.html.

220


in its information sectors to accelerate the country’s social and economic development.666
Yet, despite Google’s dominance in these countries, what makes these countries
attractive markets for Baidu is that Internet penetration of these countries is still pretty
low. Thus, Baidu is targeting populations and markets where US-based digital capital has
not yet fully saturated. So far, compared to Baidu’s market power in China, Baidu’s
overseas operations are relatively small and limited which has led it to seek strategic
partnerships to leverage its market power. As a start, Baidu is forging a relationship with
a French multinational telecommunications company – Orange S.A., formerly France
Telecom S.A. – to provide a mobile browser for its Android customers in Africa and the
Middle East.667 Baidu is accelerating its global expansion, aiming to have its products
and services used by half of the world’s population by 2019.668
US-based transnational capital
While Baidu is making an aggressive push inside and outside of China, what
about US-based search firms inside China? In 2010, Google announced it was exiting
China and moving its servers to Hong Kong over a claimed Chinese cyber attack of over
30 different companies including Google’s own servers. And Microsoft and Yahoo! have
never had a strong foothold in China and its roughly 632 million Internet users as of 2014
– which accounts for less than half of the country’s entire population.669 Can US-based
transnational capital give up the world’s largest and fastest growing Internet market? The
answer is absolutely not.


666

Pearson, “Google’s plan to tap Brazil’s fertile market.”
Daniel Thomas, “Baidu nets France Telecom browser deal,” Financial Times, January 14, 2013,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/07812948-5d92-11e2-ba99-00144feab49a.html#axzz2aeX9kOP3.
668
“China's Baidu buys control of Brazil's Peixe Urbano in expansion push,” Reuters, October 9, 2014,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/10/09/us-peixe-urbano-m-a-baidu-idUSKCN0HY1EN20141009.
669
Andrea Peterson, “China has almost twice as many Internet users as the U.S. has people,” Washington
Post, January 31, 2014, http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/the-switch/wp/2014/01/31/china-hasalmost-twice-as-many-internet-users-as-the-u-s-has-people/.
667

221


After Google’s announcement, a Microsoft spokesman stated that the company
had no plans to move out or redirect its operations in China. Microsoft CEO Steve
Ballmer wrote in a blog post about the importance of China for its company and stated its
position thusly, “we have done business in China for more than 20 years and we intend to
stay engaged, which means our business must respect the laws of China.”670 Microsoft
remained silent about censorship and the whole hacking incident, not wanting to damage
its long-term relationship with China. From Microsoft’s perspective, this is a business
opportunity with one fewer competitor.
One year after Google relocated its servers to Hong Kong, Microsoft seized the
opportunity by teaming up with Baidu. Microsoft’s partnership with Baidu was intended
to capture English search, which has a 5 percent market share in China, while abandoning
the Chinese language search market. To pursue this partnership, Microsoft confirmed that
the company would comply with Chinese law and said, “as part of this partnership, Bing
will incorporate certain filtering technologies and processes to ensure that we are in
compliance with local laws.”671
So far this strategy has not paid off for Microsoft. The company holds less than
one percent of the Chinese search market. Microsoft VP Shen Xiangyang lamented about
Bing’s lack of market share improvement, saying, “If you can’t see users’ search
questions and choices, if you don't have enough data to work with, then there is no way to
make improvements [to the search engine].”672 Since search engine algorithms rely on


670

Sharon Gaudin, “Microsoft to maintain China operations, report says,” Computer World, March 5, 2010,
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9166738/Microsoft_to_maintain_China_operations_report_says.
671
David Pierson and David Sarno, “Bing gets foothold in China market,” Los Angeles Times, July 6, 2011,
http://articles.latimes.com/2011/jul/06/business/la-fi-microsoft-baidu-20110706.
672
“With Market Share Shrinking, Bing’s China Dream is in Serious Danger,” Tech In Asia, March 6,
2013, http://www.techinasia.com/market-share-shrinking-bings-china-dream-danger/.

222


user feedback, Bing needs unpaid user labor to improve and refine its search technology.
Bing’s lack of user traffic has stymied the improvement of its search. In an effort to find
unpaid user labor to provide feedback and create content, Microsoft Bing teamed up with
Hudong, which is known as China’s Wikipedia – with Bing providing search to Hudong
and in exchange being given access to a large amount of content to assist it in enhancing
and refining Microsoft’s search engine technologies.673 Whether this will give Microsoft
a competitive edge is questionable; however, Microsoft is still expanding and looking for
alternative routes into the Chinese market.
As former Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer said, the company has been operating
for years and search is only one of many pieces of its business. As of 2013, Microsoft had
a workforce of 4,000 in China, but the company was preparing to radically expand its
operations, with plans to hire 1,000 additional employees in China and increase its R&D
by 15 percent.674 One of the reasons for Microsoft to significantly invest in China in
terms of resources, workforce, technology and partnerships is because it is betting on its
cloud computing platform Azure to help it expand in China, Japan, and Australia.
Microsoft is partnering with 21Vianet, one of the largest Internet service providers in
China, which operates and sells the Windows Azure service in China.675 Microsoft’s
move to the cloud isn’t without Chinese and US government involvement. China’s party
state has encouraged the development of cloud computing as a strategic industry and is


673

Jamillah Knowles, “China’s Wikipedia, Hudong teams up with Bing to boost search technologies,”
TNW, June 5, 2012, http://thenextweb.com/asia/2012/06/05/chinas-wikipedia-hudong-teams-up-with-bingto-boost-search-technologies/.
674
John Foley, “Microsoft stages nebulous Chinese comeback,” Fortune, May 29, 2013,
http://tech.fortune.cnn.com/2013/05/29/microsoft-china-piracy;
Michael Kan, “Microsoft plans large expansion in China to push cloud services,” PC World, September 5,
2012,
http://www.pcworld.com/article/261947/microsoft_plans_large_expansion_in_china_to_push_cloud_servic
es.html.
675
Foley, “Microsoft stages nebulous Chinese comeback.”

223


formulating a national economic policy. In 2010, to push cloud computing, the National
Development and Reform Commission (NDRC) and Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology (MIIT) designated five pilot cities for cloud computing
development.676 In 2011, during the 22nd US-China Joint Commission on Commerce and
Trade, cloud computing was on the agenda for bilateral exchanges.677 With Chinese- and
US governments’ blessings, the Shanghai Municipal Government became the first in the
region to deploy Microsoft’s cloud services.678
Microsoft has also launched its Chinese Microsoft store online, partnering with
Alibaba Group’s TMall, a shopping site that handles goods for more than 50,000
merchants, including major brands like Dell, Gap, Lenovo, and Samsung. Microsoft’s
game console Xbox One also began to sell in the Chinese market, where earlier game
consoles had been banned by the Chinese government for 14 years. Despite Microsoft’s
search engine setback, there is little sign that the company will retreat from the
potentially lucrative and expansive Chinese information market.
Yahoo! on the other hand has been downsizing its Chinese operations as its
business in general has seriously suffered in the US. Yet, Yahoo! still has some presence
in China through partial ownership of Alibaba rather than its own services. Yahoo! first
entered into the Chinese market in the late 1990s under the domain name of
cn.yahoo.com with a joint venture with Chinese computer-maker Founder. In 2005, as a
way to gain access into the Chinese Internet market, Yahoo! acquired a 40 percent stake

676

Wen Liu, “Cloud computing will help expand US-China Ties,” Context China, July 13, 2013,
http://contextchina.com/2013/06/cloud-computing-will-help-expand-u-s-china-ties-gary-locke/.
677
“22nd U.S.-China joint commission on commerce and trade fact sheet,” Embassy of the United States
Beijing, November 21, 2011, http://beijing.usembassy-china.org.cn/112111jcct.html.
678
Jonathan Brandon, “Microsoft Azure aims for June launch in China,” Business Cloud News, May 23,
2013, http://www.businesscloudnews.com/2013/05/23/microsoft-azure-aims-for-june-launch-in-china/.

224


in Chinese e-commerce firm Alibaba.com and merged its China-based subsidiaries into
Alibaba – including the Yahoo! Chinese search engine. This gave Yahoo! 35 percent
voting rights in Alibaba.com and in return, Alibaba obtained the exclusive right to use
and grow the Yahoo! brand in China.679 However, today, as Yahoo!’s business is
dwindling in both China and the US, the company’s earnings have relied heavily on
Alibaba’s soaring revenues.
In 2011, Alibaba bought back half of Yahoo!’s 40 percent stake for US$7.6
billion, in a move widely seen as preparation for an initial public offering. After selling
back the stocks to Alibaba, Yahoo!’s stake dropped to 20% ownership of Alibaba. Since
then, Yahoo! China has closed both its email and music search service as the company is
trying to revive its sagging business with serious acquisition sprees using the cash gained
from selling its Alibaba stock and from Alibaba’s IPO. Yahoo!, who was one of the
earliest email providers in China, ended its email service in 2013 and asked users to
transfer their accounts to AliCloud, a core business of Alibaba.680 By closing its Yahoo!
Mail and Music services, the company leaves only its Yahoo! Web portal in China.
Yahoo!’s deal with Alibaba stated that the company had the right to buy back half of that
stake from Yahoo! when Alibaba had its IPO. After Alibaba’s IPO, Yahoo!’s stock price
actually went down as investors who had acquired a stake in Alibaba via the Yahoo!
proxy, are now moving to purchase Alibaba stock directly.681 Given its declining search


679

“Yahoo to invest US$1 billion in Chinese e-commerce site,” New York Times, August 11, 2005,
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/08/11/business/worldbusiness/11iht-web.0811yahoo.html?_r=0.
680
Xie Yu, “No joy for Yahoo China as e-mail service to close,” China Daily, April 4, 2013,
http://europe.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2013-04/19/content_16421474.htm.
681
Brian Womack, “Yahoo Valued at Less Than Asian Assets After Alibaba IPO,” Bloomberg, September
19, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2014-09-19/yahoo-valued-at-less-than-asian-assets-afteralibaba-ipo.html.

225


and display businesses and shrinking revenue, at this point, Yahoo! has little capacity for
long-term survival let alone expansion in China.
How about search giant Google? Google also entered the Chinese market in 2005
and was able to gain over 35% market share of search service by number of users by the
time it moved operations to Hong Kong. Now it only has a little over 1% of search
market share in China. Google’s flagging business in China has often been explained by
mainstream analysts within the context of Google’s withdrawal from the Mainland
Chinese market in 2010, attributing the move purely to the company’s extraordinary
moral high ground in refusing to compromise with the Chinese government’s censorship.
Microsoft and Yahoo! did not abandon the Chinese market. Did Google really give up the
world’s largest growth market on behalf of its self-claimed business principle “do no
evil”? The answer is no.
In fact, Google never actually left China. Google itself dismisses the popular
claim that the company departed from China; in 2012, Daniel Alegre, Google’s president
of the company's Asia-Pacific operations, stated:
We never left China, and we continue to believe in the market … It’s a very
vibrant Internet market. We have some of the best employees at Google and we
continue to grow not only our revenue but also our headcount in the country.682
Google was praised for its “idealistic” act of leaving China to protest and evade Chinese
government censorship, and presented itself as the corporate moral vanguard; however,
as Alegre confirmed, the company has continued its operations in China. It is true that
Google started to deliver its main search service through servers in Hong Kong instead of
from Mainland China, which has contributed to Google’s radically shrinking search


682

Susan Li and Brian Womack, “Google China Business Grows, ‘Continues to Thrive,’ Alegre Says,”
Bloomberg, January 23, 2014, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-01-24/google-china-business-growscontinues-to-thrive-alegre-says.html.

226


engine business in China.683 However, it is a well-known fact that Google has kept its
R&D operations, Google offices and its ads business in Beijing and Shanghai; in
addition, it has never ceased its other business ventures – like music, maps, online
shopping and mobile ads platform AdMob services. In 2011, John Liu, Google’s vicepresident in China also refuted the popular claim, and restated, “it [Google] has continued
to provide music and translation services all through the past year… Our related business
has also had significant progress.”684 This statement is corroborated by the Wall Street
Journal, which reported that Google still had more than 500 employees in China as of
January, 2013, including more than 300 engineers.685 This represented only a decrease,
not a full-fledged flight from China, as Google had about 700 employees in 2009,
according to a former Google executive in China.686
As a matter of fact, after “leaving” China in March 2010, Reuters reported that
Google simply shifted its business in China, targeting display advertising, particularly
centered around China’s growing export firms who need to access global consumers and
mobile business.687 Given China’s heavy reliance on exports, as much as Google needs
the growing Chinese markets, Chinese firms also need Google – which reaches 90% of
Internet users worldwide via its ads network. Considering these mutual interests, it is no
surprise that Google re-focused on rapidly-growing Chinese exporters who were eager to



683

“A new approach to China: an update,” Google Blog, March 22, 2010,
http://googleblog.blogspot.com/2010/03/new-approach-to-china-update.html.
684
Yang Yang, “Google in China 2.0:New Strategy Avoids Censorship Showdown,” World Crunch,
September 30, 2011, http://worldcrunch.com/google-china-20-new-strategy-avoids-censorshipshowdown/tech-science/google-in-china-2.0-new-strategy-avoids-censorship-showdown/c4s3859/.
685
Amir Efrati and Loretta Chao, “Google Softens Tone on China,” Wall Street Journal, January 12, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203436904577155003097277514.html.
686
Ibid.
687
Melanie Lee, “Analysis: A year after China retreat, Google plots new growth,” Reuters, January 13,
2011, http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/01/13/us-google-china-idUSTRE70C1X820110113.

227


reach out to overseas customers through global search sites like Google.688 In China
Daily, Analysis International, a market research firm, noted that Google’s Chinese
revenues center around exports as it remains a a primary avenue for Chinese domestic
advertisers doing overseas marketing.689
By early 2012, Google started to hire more engineers, salespeople and product
managers in China to gear up its mobile business.690 And the company also rolled out its
advertising platform DoubleClick Ad Exchange service in China to attract local Chinese
businesses. Google’s DoubleClick has existed in China before, but added a real time Ad
exchange marketplace – part of Google’s broader Ads Display Network.691 On the
advertiser side of the equation, Google obtained Hylink Advertising, Taobao.com, Yoyi,
and Aegis Group, while on the publisher side, Sina.com, Sohu.com, CNTV, and
Ifeng.com have also joined the service.692
As of 2013, in China’s growing mobile market, Google's Android OS is on
approximately 84% percent of Chinese smartphones, while iOS has 12.8% percent of the
market.693 China had over 270 million Android users by the end of 2013 – 30% of the
total global mobile market.694 By running Android OS on many different mobile phones,
Google plans to control the smartphone market by driving mobile traffic to Google
services. While Android is an open source platform, it is built around Google services

688

Matt McGee, “Google’s New China Plan: Target Display Advertisers, Report Says,” Search Engine
Land, January 13, 2012, http://searchengineland.com/googles-new-china-plan-target-display-advertisersreport-says-61219.
689
Chen Limin, “Google aims to boost ad business,” China Daily, April 18, 2013,
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/cndy/2013-04/18/content_16417189.htm.
690
Efrati and Chao, “Google Softens Tone on China.”
691
“Google Launches Advertising Trading Platform In China,” China Tech News, April 13, 2012,
http://www.chinatechnews.com/2012/04/13/16220-google-launches-advertising-trading-platform-in-china
692
“Google Launches Advertising Trading Platform In China.”
693
Apple and Nokia China Challenge, March 31, 2013, Seeking Alpha,
http://seekingalpha.com/article/1310221-apple-and-nokias-china-challenges
694
Asha Jhina, “China Has Largest Number of Android Users,” International Business Times, December 4,
2013, http://www.ibtimes.co.in/china-has-largest-number-of-android-users-527280.

228


like Gmail, Chrome Internet browser and Android’s App Store – now called Google Play.
All new Android code has to go through Google’s code review process, and Google also
tightly controls the Android trademark so that the Android name is only used with
Google’s approval. 695
Given that the majority of cellphones run on Android OS, Google possesses a
competitive advantage in mobile in-app display advertising in China. AdMob’s mobile
display ads are embedded in more than 300,000 phone apps,696 and have more than
10,000 registered developers in China.697 App developers and corporations alike –
including BMW and Shanghai General Motors – are marketing to Chinese smartphone
users utilizing Google’s AdMob, which reaches across smartphone platforms.698
According to China-based market research firm iResearch, Google generated 45 percent
of all mobile display ads, compared to just 9 percent for Domob, its closest Chinese
competitor.699 In comparison, in the US market, more revenue is generated in mobile
search advertising than mobile display, both of which are dominated by Google today.700
Gartner predicts that mobile display ad spending will grow and take over mobile search
in China.701
Google has never given up its efforts to gain market share in the world’s largest
Internet market. The company also quietly turned off its much-publicized Chinese anti

695

Fraser Sherman, “What Is the Purpose of Google Android's Open Market Strategy?” Chron,
http://smallbusiness.chron.com/purpose-google-androids-open-market-strategy-39280.html.
696
Kunur Patel, “Google Takes Mobile Ads to 1 Million More Advertisers,” Advertising Age, June 7, 2011,
http://adage.com/article/digital/google-takes-mobile-ads-1-million-advertisers/235211/.
697
Mark Lee, “Google Finally Leads in China -- in App Ad Sales,” Bloomberg, August 21, 2012,
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/2012-08-22/google-finally-leads-in-china-in-app-ad-sales.html.
698
Ibid.
699
Greg Sterling, “Google Leads Chinese In-App Mobile Display Ad Market,” Marketing Land, August 22,
2012, http://marketingland.com/google-leads-chinese-in-app-mobile-display-ad-market-19434.
700
Ibid.
701
“Gartner Says Worldwide Mobile Advertising Revenue to Reach $11.4 Billion in 2013,” Gartner,
January 17, 2013, http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/2306215.

229


censorship service in China after only six months. The service’s key feature was the
notification of users when they typed a censored word, and giving them a choice to
rewrite the keywords or redirect them to a help page explaining how not to be cut off
from the Internet by Chinese authorities.702 Yet, Google continues to criticize the Chinese
government’s censorship in public as if the company had left China.
However, Google’s persistent presence does not mean that Google is having a
smooth ride. US digital capital is struggling and has bumpy roads ahead. Unlike in the
rest of the world, Google has not thus far established a dominant position in China. Not
only has Google’s general search market share in China been shrinking, Google shut
down its shopping and music services as it was not able to compete with Alibaba’s retail
search service Etao and Baidu music – which has a licensing agreement with One-Stop
China, a joint venture with Universal, Warner and Sony BMG.703 While Google has
boasted that the company has more than 1 billion devices with Android OS worldwide (as
of late 2013), tens of millions of those smartphones in China use only Android Open
Source Platform, which does not connect to Google services.704 The major Chinese
Internet firms like Baidu, Alibaba and Tencent have all forked (modified) Android OS
and replaced Google services with their own search and other services.
The 2010 dispute between Google and Alibaba offers a glimpse of Google’s need
to control every inch of the Android market space in China. Google aggressively blocked
Acer, a Taiwanese electronics company, from working with Alibaba to build a
smartphone running Alibaba’s mobile OS by enforcing the Open Handset Alliance


702

Liat Clark, “Google backtracks on Chinese anti-censorship feature,” Wired, January 4, 2013,
http://www.wired.co.uk/news/archive/2013-01/04/google-china-anti-censorship-fail.
703
Jon Russell, “Radio silence: Google unplugs its China-only music service,” TNW, September 12, 2012,
http://thenextWeb.com/google/2012/09/21/googles-china-based-music-service-closing-october-19/.
704
Jhina, “China Has Largest Number of Android Users.”

230


agreement that Acer had signed. Under the Open Handset Alliance (OHA) – funded since
2007 by Google – Acer was required to run versions of Android compatible with the
Android ecosystem, and Google insisted that Alibaba’s Alyun Android-forked mobile OS
was not. In the end, under Google’s threat, Acer retracted its agreement with Alibaba –
which instead launched the K-Touch handset manufactured by handset maker Tianyu
(not a member of the OHA) running Alyun OS with its own email, app store, etc.705 In
2013, Alibaba made another mobile push to expand the reach of its OS by rebranding
Alyun as Alibaba Mobile Operating System and subsidizing mobile handsets running
Alibaba's mobile OS 1 yuan per month, and sharing revenues from a fund of $161.49
million with mobile app developers to spur them to build apps for its OS.706 Despite
Google’s offensive tactics, Alibaba, whose revenues exceeded 2 percent of China’s gross
domestic product in 2012,707 did not flinch; rather it went on to bolster its mobile OS
AMOS by making deals with five lower-end Chinese smartphone makers, including
G’Five and Zopo, to sell AMOS-installed devices.708 The fastest growing Chinese smart
phone maker Xiaomi, who hired Google’s former executive Hugo Barra as vice-president
of international operations, is also running a forked Android OS but without Google Apps
and services using it own services. Xiaomi is solidifying its hold as the third largest
mobile maker, breathing down Samsung’s and Apple’s necks.
Google is facing stiff competition in China; however, the company will not or
cannot afford to give up on the world’s largest Internet market. The company will

705

“Google Trying To Impede Alibaba’s Progress on Mobile,” China Internet Watch, September 17, 2012,
http://www.chinainternetwatch.com/1612/google-aliyun/.
706
“Alibaba makes major mobile push with 1 billion yuan fund,” Reuters, April 15, 2013,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2013/04/15/us-alibaba-mobile-idUSBRE93E0EA20130415.
707
Bruce Einhorn, “China's Alibaba Makes Its Move Against Google's Android,” Bloomberg Business
Week, May 16, 2013, http://www.businessweek.com/articles/2013-05-16/chinas-alibaba-makes-its-moveagainst-googles-android.
708
Ibid.

231


continue to deploy diverse tactics to tackle the Chinese market, and is not above eliciting
help from the US government. Daniel Alegre, Google’s top executive in Asia, in an
interview with the Wall Street Journal in 2012, alluded to Google’s affirmed new
strategy by saying “Google is aiming to capitalize on its fast-growing Android operating
system for mobile devices, online-advertising and product-search services to grow in
China.” One goal, he said, was to introduce Android Market (now known as Google
Play), which wasn’t available in China as of January, 2012, in order to offer mobile
applications to users of Android-powered smartphones and tablets.709 How far will this
strategy work and be able to change market dynamics in Google’s favor?
There are hundreds of local providers that already offer paid and free apps in
China.710 Unlike in the US apps market, where Apple and Android dominate, the Chinese
app market is more fragmented. There are about 20 major players, with Baidu, Qihoo
360, and Tencent leading the way – distributing about 86% of mobile apps.711 In addition,
Google’s domestic competitor Apple is showing the importance of the expanding
Chinese market by being willing to work within Chinese legal requirement concerning
privacy in launching a localized Chinese app store, and storing personal data in China
Telecom servers. In May of 2013, Amazon jumped ahead of Google and began its mobile
app business in China, and launched its Android App store, which offers both free and
paid apps – which is different from Google Play, which currently offers only free apps in
China. Given this, whether Google can carve out market share in China remains open.


709

Amir Efrati, and Loretta Chao, “Google Softens Tone on China,” Wall Street Journal, January 12, 2012,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970203436904577155003097277514.html
710
Masanari Arai, “Explaining China’s mobile app ecosystem: the potential, players, and pain points,”
Venture Beat, November 9, 2013, http://venturebeat.com/2013/11/09/how-to-understand-chinas-mobileapp-ecosystem-the-potential-the-players-and-pain-points/.
711
Rocky Fu, “China Mobile App Distribution Channels Market Share,” China Internet Watch, July 3,
2014, http://www.chinainternetwatch.com/7815/china-mobile-app-distribution/#ixzz3ESopCfBr.

232


This uncertainty possibly helped to motivate Eric Schmidt to visit China. In 2013,
he made a public appearance in China on his way from a trip to North Korea as a mystery
speaker at “Geek Park” – the Chinese version of TED talks – to target product managers,
developers and investors. At the gathering of 3000 “geeks,” he spoke about Google’s
Android operating system, and attempted to persuade local developers to write
applications for the platform,712 enticing them by talking about ways to monetize apps.
Schmidt told the crowd, “don’t just settle for the China market. Go after the world
market.” He sounded more like a cheerleader than a moralist.
Giving up on China is not an option for Google. Because not only is China the
largest Internet market and growing economic zone, but also Chinese Internet firms are
attempting to establish their market positions in other emerging markets across Asia,
Africa, and Latin America, where Google is trying to maintain and expand its dominance.
This is a serious threat to Google’s future growth, so Google has to figure out ways to
interact with them. Despite China’s Internet market being fueled by transnational capital,
the PRC’s policies enable and provide maneuverability for domestic digital capital to
compete.
Europe: Old Challenge
Countering Google Search Engine
US-based transnational capital is confronting serious obstacles in China’s search
engine market. Google in particular also faces vicissitudes in Europe despite its
overwhelming domination of Europe’s search engine market. Since World War II,
Europe has had a long history of struggle to challenge US dominance in the information

712

Michael Del Castillo, “Google’s Eric Schmidt tells Chinese innovators to win the world,” UpStart
Business Journal, February 21, 2013, http://upstart.bizjournals.com/news/technology/2013/02/21/ericschmidt-at-geek-park-china.html?page=all.

233


sphere, but it has not been able to build a globally competitive information economy or
even autonomous information systems. In fact, Europe’s dependence on US information
systems has benefited both the US and US capital. Google’s global dominance has again
provoked Europe’s anxiety over losing control over strategic emerging information
sectors to the US.
The full story of European countries’ failed attempts both individually and within
the framework of the EU, to establish a thriving, multifaceted information industry
independent of and competitive with the US, has never been told. It started in the
immediate postwar period and extended from digital computer to satellite to data
communication network to today’s Internet system and application; competitive tensions
pertaining to search service must be placed in this larger context.
In 2005, during the French-German ministerial conference, then-French President
Jacques Chirac warned about the danger of losing the “power of tomorrow,” and stated
that, “We must take the offensive and muster a massive effort.”713 Chirac was responding
specifically to US dominance in the information industry, and in particular to Google. At
the conference, Chirac, alongside then German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder, endorsed a
proposal to build a Franco-German Internet search engine called Quaero (Latin for “I
Seek”). Later that month, following the conference, Mr. Chirac self-servingly declared,
“culture is not merchandise and cannot be left to blind market forces. We must staunchly
defend the world’s cultural diversity against the looming threat of uniformity. Our power
is at stake.”714


713
714

“Attack of the Eurogoogle,” Economist, 2006, March 9, http://www.economist.com/node/5571496.
Ibid.

234


With urgency, France and Germany initially agreed to commit around $1.3 billion
to $2.6 billion toward the project over five years in order to build an alternative search
engine.715 European-based technology companies like Thomson, France Télécom,
Siemens and Deutsche Telekom also contributed to the Franco-German project.716 Yet,
this effort was far from successful in mobilizing European countries to counterbalance
Google; rather, it ended rather ignobly when Germany dropped out of the project in 2007.
The media reported that the main reason for Germany opting out of the FrancoGerman project was due to a disagreement regarding the format of the search engine –
with German engineers pursuing a text-based search engine and French engineers
favoring a multimedia search engine. Yet, this offers merely part of the story. The
German government under Chancellor Angela Merkel – from the Christian Democratic
Union, which had defeated Gerhard Schröder’s party – shifted Germany’s position,
considering Quaero to be not worth the $1.3 – $2.6 billion investment. Angela Merkel
had never committed to the project in public.717 According to the New York Times,
Germany’s retreat from the project was because many German participants in the project
did not want to be associated with an anti-Google project as they considered Google’s
technology to be beneficial.718 Rooted in historical legacy, France was overtly anxious
over US dominance of new information spheres and the enrichment of US digital capital
at the expense of French, while the German government still aspired to ally itself with the
US to be part of global digital capitalism.


715

Kevin O’Brien and Thomas Crampton, “Germany quits search engine project - Business - International
Herald Tribune,” New York Times, January 2, 2007,
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/02/business/worldbusiness/02iht-search.4081237.html?_r=1&.
716
Ibid.
717
Ibid.
718
Ibid.

235


Soon after Germany pulled out of the Franco-German project in 2007, the German
Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology (BMWi) launched the search research
project Theseus which was first presented at the German Chancellor’s IT summit
established by BMWi in December 2006.719 Theseus focuses in developing new
technologies for Internet services based on semantic Web technologies, which links
information together via metadata through partnerships with 60 academic institutions and
private industry. Hendrik Luchtmeier, a spokesman for BMWi, distinguished Theseus
from Quaero, stating that Theseus would not develop a search engine per se, but would
support companies and organizations working in areas including search-technologies and
advanced communication networks.720 By aiding private IT companies and the public
institutions that support them, the German government intended to build its own
information sector that would have capacity to compete in and be an integral part of the
global information market. The Theseus program, one of Germany’s biggest research
projects, is a way to produce marketable products and services.721 Economics Minister
Michael Glos openly posited Theseus’s economic agenda, stating that, “… New forms of
acquiring, searching for and evaluating Internet-based information are of strategic
importance for the German government … With Theseus we want to improve Germany
and Europe’s ability to compete and reach a top position in IT and communications
technology.”722 The program received a 100 million euro subsidy from BMWi – with
approval from the European Union –with another 100 million euro planned contribution

719

“THESEUS Joint Research,” German Institutes of Technology, 2011,
http://www.tu9.de/research/2168.php.
720
Mathis Winker, “Germany Pulls Away From Quaero Search-Engine Project.” DW, December 21, 2006,
http://www.dw.de/germany-pulls-away-from-quaero-search-engine-project/a-2287489.
721
“THESEUS Joint Research,” 2011, http://www.joint-research.org/en/begleitforschung/tagebuch/.
722
“Germany to Fund Rival to Google Search Engine,” Deutsche Welle (DW), July 20,
2007, http://www.dw.de/germany-to-fund-rival-to-google-search-engine/a-2698176.

236


by participating partners from both industry and research institutions.723 In the first phase,
the German government funded major German multinational IT companies – Siemens,
SAP, Empolis and Deutsche Thomson – and planned to also aid medium- and small sized
companies.724
Mainstream media reported that the reason for the split between France and
Germany was because of differences in technical approaches to search technology –
Germany wanted to build Theseus based on the semantic Web, while France was focused
on multimedia search technologies. However, the real agenda for the German
government all along seems to have been to build a German centered IT sector – rather
than a European – to insert power into and help shape a global digital capitalism in which
Germany would have a growing stake.
Quaero and Theseus are not the only European projects. Pharos (Platform for
searcHing of Audiovisual Resources across Online Spaces) is another EU search engine
project similar to French search engine Quaero. Pharos also focuses on multimedia and
audiovisual search technology. A smaller project was led by the Norwegian search
company Fast Search & Transfer ASA (FAST) and financed by both private and public
funds. The European Union’s Information Society Technologies Programme – with
thirteen partners from 9 countries (Austria, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Norway,
Spain, Switzerland and the UK) and including France Telecom, L3S Research Centre at
the University of Hannover, Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology – funded


723

Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, “The THESEUS research program: new technology for
the Internet of Services,” http://www.bmwi.de/English/Redaktion/Pdf/theseus-researchprogram,property=pdf,bereich=bmwi2012,sprache=en,rwb=true.pdf.
724
Dunca Riley, “EU Google Competitor Gets $165 million Kick Start,” Tech Crunch, July 20m 2007,
http://techcrunch.com/2007/07/20/eu-google-competitor-gets-165million-cash-injection/.

237


FAST with 8.5 million Euro.725 The private company running the Pharos project shut
down in 2009, shortly after Microsoft’s 2008 acquisition of FAST – now known as
FAST, a Microsoft Subsidiary.
Countering Google Book Search in Europe
Along with the announcement of building European search engine Quaero in
April 2005, then-President Chirac and the Premiers of Germany, Spain, Italy, Poland and
Hungary, also sent a letter to the President of the European Commission and
recommended that the EU create a digital European library to make Europe’s cultural
heritage accessible for all. This was a state-centered response to Google book search,
which had embarked on a project to digitize books, maps, newspapers, paintings,
photographs and other cultural artifacts from around the world. Jean-Noël Jeanneney,
who was the head of Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) from 2002 – 2007, called
out Google’s book project as a bid for supremacy based on privileging American culture
and privatizing public resources. Europeana was the answer to this supposed attack on
French culture.
Europeana – a European Commission initiative – aggregates resources from 48
European national libraries, museums and archives. At the same time, the BnF was also
part of a larger initiative of the European Commission’s five-year economic strategy
called European Information Society 2010 (i2010)726 meant to build a European-based


725

Estelle Dumut, “Germany bows out of Euro ‘Google killer,” ZDnet, January 8, 2008. Thirteen partners
include Engineering Ingegneria Informatica, France Telecom, L3S Research Centre at the University of
Hannover, Fraunhofer Institute for Digital Media Technology, Ecole Polytechnique Federale de Lausanne,
Knowledge Media Institute of The Open University, Fundacio Barcelona Media Universitat Pompeu Fabra,
Technical Research Centre of Finland, Circom Regional, Metaware, Web Model, Sail Labs Technology
and Fast.
726
European Commission, “Commission launches five-year strategy to boost the digital economy,”
European Union Press Release, June 1, 2005, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-05643_en.htm?locale=en.

238


digital economy. The EU launched this initiative in 2005 in order to foster economic
growth by prioritizing information sectors within a single European information market,
and to provide EU investment in research on information-related business.727 Given this
context, the digital library Europeana is not only on EU’s cultural agenda but also on its
political and economic agendas. The chosen vehicle was public-private partnerships
(PPP) in digitizing cultural materials as a step toward the building of an EU-based
information economy. Following in the footsteps of US digital capital, the EU moved
into the cultural realm, which had not been fully captured by capital and made into a
marketplace. Digitization was the first step in this process.
The EU has made a concerted effort to build its regional information economy by
recruiting cultural institutions – though it has been done unevenly across European states;
yet, Google has also already seized upon some of Europe’s eagerness to generate its own
cultural materials, as well as to build its own information-based cultural industry.
Digitization and organizing digitized information are expensive, onerous processes that
require enormous financing, extensive technical expertise and a developed infrastructure.
However, so far, few institutions in Europe can afford the cost and/or have the technical
capacity to compete and outpace Google – especially amid the current economic crisis
and widespread austerity policies. The EU has promoted digitization of cultural materials
and contributed them to Europeana; but it made clear it would not pay for the actual
digitization work, which was left to individual member nations and institutions. Given
this, many European cultural institutions such as national and university libraries in Italy,
Austria, Spain, Ireland and Britain have allied instead with Google, which is willing to
digitize their collections in order to speed up the digitization process. Google’s offer is

727

Ibid.

239


enticing for many European institutions because it entails the company digitizing
institutions’ materials free of charge in exchange for adding the digitized materials into
Google book search as well as Europeana.
France was the exception among European countries in defying any alliance with
Google and challenging US dominance of European information sectors. In 2009,
conservative then-President Nicolas Sarkozy vowed to spend $1.08 billion as part of an
economic stimulus package toward digitization of the content of museums, libraries and
cinematographic heritage organizations. 728 He warned that he would not allow Google
“to carry out a massive literary land grab on French and other European literature.”729
Sarkozy stated, “we won’t let ourselves be stripped of our heritage to the benefit of a big
company, no matter how friendly, big or American it is”730… “We are not going to be
deprived of what generations and generations have produced in the French language just
because we weren’t capable of funding our own digitization project.”731
The plan for France was to use existing digital collections within the Gallica project
in order to challenge Google. How would France pursue this? Sarkozy emphasized the
importance of public-private partnerships in digitizing his nation’s cultural works. France
aimed to build up Gallica’s collections by partnering with French publishers and private



728

Roland Parry, “France accepts Google role in book scanning,” AFP, January 20, 2010,
https://web.archive.org/web/20130426074722/http://www.google.com/hostednews/afp/article/ALeqM5gZP
e-DbjkDNnuBOdOLWMQIt5vHSw.
729
Henry Samuel, “Nicolas Sarkozy fights Google over classic books,” Telegraph, December 14, 2009,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/6811462/Sarkozy-fights-Google-over-classic-books.html .
730
Sophie Hardach, “France's Sarkozy takes on Google in books dispute,”
Globe & Mail, 2012, August 23, 2012, http://www.theglobeandmail.com/technology/frances-sarkozytakes-on-google-in-books-dispute/article4295693/?service=mobile.
731
Henry Samuel, “Nicolas Sarkozy fights Google over classic books,” Telegraph, December 14, 2009,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/6811462/Sarkozy-fights-Google-over-classic-books.html.

240


companies.732 This public-private partnership was a way to open up public resources to
private companies – a step toward exploitative privatization of public resources. France’s
overarching concern was eroding US dominance in the information market and protecting
France’s cultural heritage for French commercial interests – not to attack capitalist
development of information
In December 2009, after France had said no to Google and decided to pursue its
own digitization project, French Minister of Culture Frédéric Mitterrand and Google
executive David Drummond met in Paris to discuss France’s concerns. In a New York
Times interview, Bruno Racine, President of the Bibliothèque Nationale de France (BnF)
(2007 - present), emphasized the “necessity of a partnership with the private sector in
order to secure the capital needed for vast digitization projects.”733 Racine’s position
shifted from that of his predecessor, Jean-Noël Jeanneney, who had been a fierce
opponent of the Google Book search project to digitize the world’s books. France now
left the door open for Google to be part of the public and private partnership. According
to a cable made public by WikiLeaks, the reason Mitterrand altered his position was
because it would take $1.5 billion and technical expertise to digitize 14 million works in
the BnF, and Google agreed to create jobs in France and open a scanning facility in Lyon
as part of its digitization agreement with the University of Lyon.734
By January 2010, France had agreed to work with Google on the digitization of
books at the BnF; but they insisted that they would not allow Google to have legal control

732

Lance Whiteny, “France planning Google Books rival,” CNET, January 13, 2010,
http://www.cnet.com/news/france-planning-google-books-rival/.
733
Scott Sayare, “France to Digitize Its Own Literary Works,” New York Times, December 14, 2009,
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/15/world/europe/15france.html.
734
“Googlisation of France,” Unclassified US Cable, US Embassy, Paris, France, December 18, 2009,
WikiLeaks Public Library of US Diplomacy, http://www.wikileaks.org/plusd/cables/09PARIS1729_a.html.

241


over digitized materials. Google was demanding exclusive control over the works for a
period of 20 – 25 years. Mitterrand was quoted in an interview in Le Monde as saying,
Google came to Europe with the attitude of a conqueror, and many opened the door
to it by signing deals which I find unacceptable, (that) are based on excessive
confidentiality, impossible exclusivity, and a casual, even one-sided approach to
copyright … We will propose to them ... to exchange files without confidentiality
or exclusivity, in total transparency and with total respect for copyright.735
France aspired to control its own information and insisted that Google drop its exclusivity
clauses in the agreement.736 Yet, before the French government’s official partnership
announcement with Google, the Bibliothèque Municipale in Lyon had forged a deal with
Google to digitize its entire book collection and to give Google the rights to the works for
25 years. This became the first library in France to partner with Google to digitize books.
France had led Europe in voicing its opposition to US control over information, but
there are signs that France is gradually having its information sphere taken over by USbased transnational capital and marching toward privatization of their own cultural
materials. In 2013, the French Ministry of Culture announced a public-private partnership
between the Bibliothèque nationale de France (BnF) and US-based ProQuest to digitize
over 70,000 books, 200,000 sound recordings and other documents in the public domain.
Within this partnership, ProQuest will retain 10-year exclusive agreements allowing the
company to host and commercialize the digitized collections.737 In fact, this ProQuest
move is alarming to Google which has been eyeing rich European culture to absorb into
Google’s profit-making realm. Toward this goal, Google launched its Cultural Institute

735

Jenny Barchfield, “France plans its own rival to Google Books,” Boston.com, January 12, 2010,
http://www.boston.com/business/technology/articles/2010/01/12/france_plans_its_own_rival_to_google_b
ooks/.
736
Ben Hall, “Paris threatens Google over book-scanning,” Financial Times, January 13, 2010,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/f01e209a-ffe2-11de-ad8c-00144feabdc0.html#axzz2a03oRyga.
737
“Dirty Deeds: French National Library Privatizes Public Domain,” Tech Dirt, February 19, 2013,
http://www.techdirt.com/articles/20130212/17065121955/dirty-deeds-french-national-library-privatizespublic-domain-part-2.shtml.

242


under the guise of digitization of world culture for global access; yet it aims to digitize
cultural materials from museums and archives around the world and gobble them up into
its business of information.738 The Google Cultural Institute has already opened up
headquarters in Paris to preemptively occupy the untapped cultural information sphere.
Can France continue to resist US-led digital capital in Europe and build its own
information-based economy as a counterweight to the US? Will France be able to push
back against Google’s massive global scale of corporate takeovers of culture that have
become such lucrative resources? At the same time, can US capital pass on such a
massive reservoir of culture that could be a new source of profit making?
Battlefield
Google’s relentless advances into Europe’s cultural and information spheres have
been stirring Europe’s deep-seated anxiety over US information dominance. But
ironically, the battle is less between European- and US-based capital, then between rivals,
much of US based Internet capital looking for competitive advantage extraterritorially by
making use of European legal authority in the jurisdiction of the EU. As a result, Europe
has turned into a major battlefield for US inter-capitalist rivalries.
In 2010, the European Commission (EC) – the EU’s executive body and the 27nation bloc’s antitrust authority – officially opened its antitrust case against Google on
whether the company was penalizing its competitors in search ranking. This antitrust case
was initiated by four companies based in Europe – French legal search engine Ejustice.fr,
1PlusV, the parent company of eJustice.fr, UK-based Foundem and Microsoft-owned
Ciao! based in Germany. These four companies filed official complaints with the EU,


738

Dan Schiller and ShinJoung Yeo, “Powered by Google: Widening Access and Tightening Corporate
Control,” Leonardo Electronic Almanac 20, no. 1(2014), http://www.leoalmanac.org/vol-20-no-1-red-art/.

243


stating that Google’s search algorithm had had significant negative consequences for
their Web site traffic. On the surface, it seemed that these cases had been brought by
European companies protesting against Google’s European market dominance. In point
of fact though, as Nicolas Petit, a professor of competition law at the University of Liege
in Belgium pointed out, “Everyone understands here in Brussels that it’s Microsoft versus
Google.”739 Microsoft is behind numerous antitrust complaints to the EU against Google,
in order to challenge Google for giving preference to its own services and advertisers in
search rankings. Microsoft has been using several lobbying groups to urge the
Commission to probe Google’s business practices. The Financial Times uncovered the
fact that Foundem was supported by the Initiative for a Competitive Online Marketplace
(ICOM), a Microsoft-backed lobbying group, to turn their charge against Google into a
formal anti-trust complaint.740 ICOM is largely funded by Microsoft, its sole trustee. In
2007, the Wall Street Journal and the Observer both revealed stories about Microsoft’s
cozy relationship with ICOM.741
In addition, Ciao!, once a long-time Google AdSense partner, now is owned by
Microsoft. Initially Ciao! took its case to the German competition authority, but moved
its case to the EC to have legal standing throughout Europe rather than limiting its case
to Germany. In March 2011, Microsoft itself filed a formal complaint with the EC,
stating that Google had engaged in an unfair, anti-competitive “pattern of actions.”742


739

Gregg Keizer, “Microsoft not fooling anyone by using FairSearch front in antitrust complaint against
Google,” Computer World, April 9, 2013, http://www.computerworld.com/article/2496436/technologylaw-regulation/microsoft-not-fooling-anyone-by-using-fairsearch-front-in-antitrust-compla.html.
740
Richard Waters and Nikki Tait, “Microsoft in spotlight over Google case,” Financial Times, March 4,
2010, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/ad1c2094-27bf-11df-863d-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3GcufcYWl.
741
Milo Yiannopoulos, “Dark forces gunning for Google,” Telegraph, December 6, 2010,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/8184065/Dark-forces-gunning-for-Google.html.
742
Bill Rigby and Foo Yun Chee, “Microsoft files EU competition complaint vs. Google,” Reuters, March
31, 2011, http://www.reuters.com/article/2011/03/31/us-microsoft-google-idUSTRE72U1IN20110331.

244


TripAdvisor, a travel review Website, also joined the EU competition complaints against
Google. TripAdvisor, along with Microsoft, is one of the founding members of
FairSearch. The 17-member group was created after Google had acquired flight-booking
software ITA in 2010. Members of FairSearch also include other major US-based Google
competitors – Foundem, Expedia, Hotwire, Kayak, Nokia (now own by Microsoft),
Oracle etc.
Joaquín Almunia, the EU competition Commissioner, had already hinted in the
summer of 2012 that Google and the Commission had “substantially reduced” their
differences.743 Mr. Almunia had been suggesting that he would like to negotiate with
Google rather than deal with them in court.744 In April 2013, the Commission concluded
that Google may have breached antitrust rules and the Commission could fine the
company as much as 10 percent of its annual worldwide revenue;745 yet, the commission
accepted Google’s concession as Google submitted a proposal to address the concerns
voiced by the European Commission. The Commission invited comments from interested
parties on Google’s offer in relation to online search and search advertising.746 Microsoft
led Google's rivals in pressuring the commission to reject Google’s proposal, which
promised to label Google’s own services and show links to rival services in its search
results. “It would be better to do nothing than to accept Google’s proposals,” said


743

Matt Warman, “EU: Google antitrust case not affected by US FTC ruling,” Telegraph, January 4, 2013,
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/google/9780957/EU-Google-antitrust-case-not-affected-by-USFTC-ruling.html.
744
Charles Arthur, “Google offers concessions to European commission,”
Guardian, April 11, 2013, http://www.guardian.co.uk/technology/2013/apr/12/google-offers-concessionseuropean-commission.
745
John Ribeiro, “EU tells Google to make more concessions or face charges in antitrust dispute,”
PCWorld, September 23, 2014, http://www.pcworld.com/article/2687212/eu-tells-google-to-make-moreconcessions-or-face-charges-in-antitrust-dispute.html.
746
“Antitrust: Commission seeks feedback on commitments offered by Google to address competition
concerns,” April 25, 2013, http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-13-371_en.htm.

245


Thomas Vinje of FairSearch. He further stated, “The proposals would make things worse
rather than better.”747 Under pressure from Microsoft's lobbying groups, the EU made
Google agree to further concessions to settle the case. In February of 2014, Google
agreed to alter the way its search results display competitors’ links, seemingly putting to
an end the three-year antitrust probe and avoiding a heavy fine for Google.
Yet, the agreement was highly criticized initially from Microsoft-backed lobbying
groups, which are asking for an actual test of Google’s latest proposal before
implementation.748 This time, European digital capital backed by firms like Lagardère
Active in France and Axel Springer in Germany are also heavily voicing their opposition
to Google’s proposed settlement with the EU. After many complaints and pressure from
Google’s rivals in both US and Europe, in June of 2014, Commissioner Almunia alluded
that investigation on Google could be reopened and finally the EU Commission rejected
Google’s third proposed draft. Moreover, before the EC even settled Google’s antitrust
cases, FairSearch members including Microsoft, Nokia – a Microsoft partner in the
mobile market – and Oracle, filed another separate antitrust complaint with the EC,
claiming that Google had abused Android’s market dominance in the smartphone
platform to promote its own smartphone applications.749
Yet, by no means is Google merely on the defensive in its European antitrust
cases. Google has the most extensive lobbying operations in Brussels and major

747

“Google rivals seek tough EU antitrust action,” Newsday, June 25, 2013,
http://www.newsday.com/business/google-rivals-seek-tough-eu-antitrust-action-1.5568236.
748
Gregg Keizer, “Microsoft-backed lobbying groups blast talk of Google-EU deal,” Computer World,
January 29, 2014,
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9245858/Microsoft_backed_lobbying_groups_blast_talk_of_Goo
gle_EU_deal.
749
Gregg Keizer, “Microsoft not fooling anyone by using FairSearch front in antitrust complaint against
Google,” Computer World, April 9, 2013,
http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/9238267/Microsoft_not_fooling_anyone_by_using_FairSearch_fr
ont_in_antitrust_complaint_against_Google.

246


European capitals and its business operations in Europe have massively expanded over
the years. According to Der Spiegel, Google has been building its lobbying network of
PR professionals, activists, and academics.750 Google hired Antoine Aubert, who had
previously worked for the EC for three years, as the head of Google’s Brussels policy
team.751 In 2012, the company opened a Berlin office in Unter den Linden, the mecca for
lobbyists. According to Der Spiegel, Google has 7 lobbyists in its Berlin office, and
supports research institutes, interest groups and relevant conferences to influence Internet
policy.752 The newspaper noted that a former Google lobbyist now works for the German
Foreign Ministry where he co-organized a conference along with Aarhus University,
Human Rights Watch, and Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society under the theme of
“Internet and Human Rights.”753 This is one of Google’s more artful tactics as the
company attempts to mobilize activists, academics, and government officials under the
twin virtues of “human rights” and “Internet freedom” to which few would object; yet,
this is an attempt to shield its corporate interests. Moreover, Google is not lobbying and
intervening merely in its antitrust investigation cases, it has been attempting to influence
policy in a range of areas including Intellectual property, privacy, ‘net neutrality,
censorship, trade, data security, and cybersecurity.
Along with its massive lobbying activities, Google is wooing European countries
with the promise of creating IT jobs during a time of huge European-wide economic


750

Sven Becker, “Google’s Lobby Offensive: Internet Giant Builds Web of Influence in Berlin,” Spiegel
Online International, September 25, 2013, http://www.spiegel.de/international/business/how-googlelobbies-german-government-over-internet-regulation-a-857654.html.
751
Bobble Johnson, “A brief guide to tech lobbyists in Europe,” Gigaom, January 13, 2013,
http://gigaom.com/2013/01/28/a-brief-guide-to-tech-lobbyists-in-europe/.
752
Becker, “Google's Lobby Offensive.”
753
Ibid

247


downturn. In 2011, Eric Schmidt held out a carrot of 1000 new Google jobs in Europe754
and boasted about supporting 20,000 European entrepreneurs in 2013.755 Google, along
with Microsoft, HP, SAP, Telefonia, and CISCO all joined the Grand Coalition for
Digital Jobs launched by the EC to reorganize the European workforce centered around
IT through a range of initiatives as European countries are restructuring their economies
based on information technologies.756 Eric Schmidt is also one of 16 members of the UK
Minister’s Business Advisory Group, which consists of a small group of people from
strategic industries that offer business and economic advice to the Prime Minister.757 By
asserting its place within the European economic agenda, Google is weaving itself into
Europe’s economic development and trying to make itself indispensable. David C.
Drummond, Google’s chief legal officer, once said, “We’re really trying to work with
folks in Europe to establish ourselves as more of a local player.”758 Again an attempt to
woo elite classes and ease antagonistic feeling against Google, in July of 2014, Google
launched a new $100 million venture fund in Europe and noted “Our goal is simple: we
want to invest in the best ideas from the best European entrepreneurs, and help them
bring those ideas to life.” Eric Schmidt also more recently went on a “grand tour of
Europe” with Google’s Advisory Council on the Right to be Forgotten – which consists



754

John Kennedy, “Google plans 1,000 new jobs for Europe,” Silicon Republic, January 25, 2011,
http://www.siliconrepublic.com/careers/item/20096-google-plans-1-000-new-jobs.
755
“Out commitment to growth and jobs in Europe,” Google Europe Blog, June 13, 2013,
http://googlepolicyeurope.blogspot.ro/2013/06/our-commitment-to-growth-and-jobs-in.html.
756
“EU acts to fill 900,000 ICT vacancies predicted for 2015 – Minister Bruton,” Tech Central, March 4,
2013, http://www.techcentral.ie/eu-acts-to-fill-900000-ict-vacancies-predicted-for-2015/.
757
“Business Advisory Group,” https://www.gov.uk/government/news/business-advisory-group.
758
Ben Rooney, “Google Searches for Niche Role in Europe,” Wall Street Journal, January 23, 2013,
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424052970204301404577172673564180532.html.

248


largely of European politicians, academics, lawyers, and other elites who had previously
worked on privacy policy in the EU – in order to influence EU’s data policies.759
The inter-capitalist battles over the European market are far from settled, as the
information market continues to be disrupted and reorganized around the Internet; this
will no doubt intensify as lobbying efforts remain in high gear. Along with its continuing
antitrust case, Google has already been hit with a fresh EU antitrust complaint. This time,
at issue is its Android OS licensing. According to the Financial Times, Google is being
investigated by European regulators about allegations including licensing Android below
cost to mobile device makers and requesting that they install Google mobile services.760
For Google, this will surely not be the last complaint.
The question is then what role will the European states play? States are not neutral
entities. Up until recently, the EU had remained relatively favorable in its dealings
toward Google; Google was able to escape from major legal action. However, Edward
Snowden’s exposure of the US National Security Agency (NSA) and its secret global
surveillance programs has complicated the relationship between European capitals, the
US and other States, and political constituencies given the scale of US surveillance
activities and the fact that the NSA directly collected data from servers of major Internet
firms like Microsoft, Google, Apple, Yahoo!, and others. Despite Google’s vehement
denial of its collaboration with the NSA, there have been several reports on Google’s
collaboration with and close ties to the NSA. According to the UK Guardian, the US
government even threatened to fine Yahoo! $250,000 a day for not complying with NSA


759

Julia Powles, “Google’s grand European tour aims to map out the future of data ethics,” Guardian,
September 10, 2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/sep/10/google-europe-explain-rightforgotten-eric-schmidt-article-29; “Google Advisory Council,” https://www.google.com/advisorycouncil/.
760
Daniel Thomas, “Google faces Brussels probe over Android licensing,” Financial Times, June 13, 2013,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/b3da6604-d42b-11e2-8639-00144feab7de.html#axzz2WB6ddJ4y.

249


demands for PRISM data.761 While Google and other Internet firms immediately
condemned the NSA’s actions, they are facing serious challenges in their overseas
markets.
After the NSA news broke, Google quickly began to turn up its PR machine as
Google and other US Internet firms recognized that NSA’s Prism program would cost
their businesses that heavily rely on international markets – announcing that the company
encrypts email against NSA snooping. Yahoo! also teamed up with Google to work on
email encryption. IBM is spending a billion dollars to build a data center outside the US
to assure its international clients that their data are safe from US government
surveillance.762 Microsoft is now offering foreign customers the option of storing their
data on servers outside US.763 In a New York Times interview, Daniel Castro, a senior
analyst at the Information Technology and Innovation Foundation, estimated that US
cloud computing industry has a potential to lose $35 billion by 2016, and Forrester
Research, a technology research firm, anticipated the losses could be as high as $180
billion or 25 percent of industry revenue.764
There are strong signs that European- and other states are stepping up attempts to
control information flows and network infrastructures. In February of 2014, the European
Union and Brazil announced that they were building their own undersea cable to bypass

761

Dominic Rushe, “Yahoo $250,000 daily fine over NSA data refusal was set to double every week,”
Guardian, http://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/yahoo-nsa-lawsuit-documents-fine-user-datarefusal.
762
Claire Miller, “Revelations of N.S.A. Spying Cost U.S. Tech Companies,” New York Times, March 21,
2014, http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/22/business/fallout-from-snowden-hurting-bottom-line-of-techcompanies.html?_r=0.
763
James Fontanella-Khan, “Microsoft to shield foreign users’ data,” Financial Times, January 22, 2014,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/e14ddf70-8390-11e3-aa6500144feab7de.html?siteedition=intl#ixzz2r9yJN1Qz.
764
Miller, “Revelation of N.S.A, spying Cost U.S. Tech companies”; James Staten, “The Cost of PRISM
Will Be Larger Than ITIF Projects, Forrester, August 14, 2013, http://blogs.forrester.com/james_staten/1308-14-the_cost_of_prism_will_be_larger_than_itif_projects.

250


US undersea cables, which are used by Brazil to communicate with Europe. The project
will be executed by Brazilian telecom provider Telebras and Spain’s IslaLink Submarine
Cables. And German Chancellor Angela Merkel, backed by French President Hollande,
also called for the creation of a European centered Internet network to avoid US Internet
infrastructure. Chancellor Merkel said,
We’ll talk about European providers that offer security for our citizens, so that
one shouldn’t have to send emails and other information across the Atlantic.
Rather, one could build up a communication network inside Europe.
In response to the German and French proposal on an EU-centric communication system,
the US Trade Representative (USTR) immediately struck back and criticized the plan as a
violation of trade laws, stating “to create national-only electronic networks could
potentially lead to effective exclusion or discrimination against foreign service suppliers
that are directly offering network services, or dependent on them.”765 The USTR also
denounced the Canadian government’s building of a unified email system requiring data
to be stored in Canada and preventing US companies from bidding. Bell Canada was
awarded the contract.
As European states challenge the US to control their own information systems in
the wake of the Snowden revelations, this opens momentum for European capital to push
their business interests. Mathias Döpfner, chief executive of Axel Springer, Europe’s
biggest newspaper publisher, wrote a scathing open letter titled “We are afraid of
Google” to Eric Schmidt in the Springer-owned Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung
newspaper. In the letter, he depicted the power of Google as a digital super state:
Google is to the Internet what the Deutsche Post was to mail delivery or Deutsche
Telekom to telephone calls. In those days there were national state monopolies.


765

“Merkel and Hollande to discuss European communication network avoiding US,” Reuters, February
15, 2014, http://af.reuters.com/article/worldNews/idAFBREA1E0IE20140215.

251


Today there is a global network monopoly. This is why it is of paramount
importance that there be transparent and fair criteria for Google’s search
results.766
European capital is being mobilized and is pressuring EU regulators to restrain Google’s
market power. Deutsche Telekom has proposed a law against European data being routed
through Asia or the US, and disbanding the Safe Harbor agreement, which allows access
to European data to US companies with European-level privacy standards.767 A Group
called the “Open Internet Project” – backed by Axel Springer, the leading French mobile
media group Internet Lagardère Active, and 400 European digital companies – lobbied
the European Commission to revisit its decision on the Google settlement.768 Thirty
European publishers from the European Association of Newspapers also urged the EU to
reject Google’s latest proposal to settle an antitrust case.769 This time European capital
has political clout, and European politicians are starting to shift their positions on Google.
Arnaud Montebourg, France’s Economy Minister, compared Google to “a new East India
Company” seeking to ravage European wealth.770 German Economy Minister Sigmar
Gabriel even called for breaking up Google’s monopoly, and to “re-establish the
sovereignty of law by ruling that Google can no longer simply bypass European


766

Mathias Döpfner, “An open letter to Eric Schmidt from Mathias Döpfner,” April 17, 2014,
https://www.axelspringer.de/dl/433625/LetterMathiasDoepfnerEricSchmidt.pdf.
767
“U.S. knocks plans for European communication network,” Reuters, April 4, 2014,
http://www.reuters.com/article/2014/04/04/us-usa-trade-telecomunications-idUSBREA331W820140404.
768
Jeevan Vasagar, “The news baron battling Google,” Financial Times, June 9, 2014,
http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/beb7aeae-eb3d-11e3-bab6-00144feabdc0.html#axzz3BLT1fsMn.
769
Loek Essers, “Publishers urge European Commission to reject Google antitrust deal,” PC World,
September 4, 2014, http://www.pcworld.com/article/2602600/publishers-urge-european-commission-toreject-google-antitrust-deal.html.
770
Alex Barker, James Fontanella-Khan and Jeevan Vasagar, “Google feels political wind shift against it in
Europe,” Financial Times, March 21, 2014, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/7848572e-e0c1-11e3-a93400144feabdc0.html#axzz3Aic8kphy.

252


standards.”771 The EU’s incoming digital policy chief Gunther Oettinger signaled that
Google market power could be constrained, and that the EU needs to boost European
information industry and prioritize the industry.772
In January 2014, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, the Lisbon Council, a
Brussels-based think tank, and Nesta (formerly NESTA, National Endowment for
Science, Technology and the Arts) the UK’s innovation foundation, partnered with the
European Digital Forum funded by European Investment Fund, Telefónica, Banco Bilbao
Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA), Orange, and the European Commission to promote
European capital centered digital economy. Neelie Kroes, vice-president of the European
Commission, said as she introduced the Digital Forum at Davos, “Europe needs thriving
startups and global internet companies to become a global growth centre again.” There
remain open questions: would it be possible for Europe to build and sustain its regional
information-led economy that could insert Europe into US-centered information systems
that are deeply saturated within transnationalized digital capitalism? Can European nation
states and capital build a unifying political force and set aside their conflicting interests?
And how does Europe negotiate between European interests and the overarching interests
of transnational capitalism?
The Chinese and European cases of search engine industry illustrate the instability
of current US-centered global Internet economy and information systems as US digital
capital is far from ruling the global search market outright. There has been increasing


771

Jeevan Vasagar, Richard Waters and James Fontanella-Khan, “Europe Strikes back,” Financial Times,
September 15, 2014, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/37e363c2-3cc9-11e4-871d00144feabdc0.html#axzz3GFQYly7h.
772
Alex Barker, Duncan Robinson, and Murad Ahmed, “New EU digital chief puts Google on notice,”
Financial Times, September 10, 2013, http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/0/a97527e2-3903-11e4-9cce00144feabdc0.html?siteedition=intl#axzz3FoxvVNnb.

253


resistance against Google’s dominance on the Internet; however, the nature of this strong
oppositional movement against US Internet firms and the US state is not a revival of the
New Information and Communication Order (NICO) aiming to reestablish selfdetermination and to create a just world. Rather, these conflict zones reveal the
intensification of inter-capitalist competitions over a new site of capital accumulation –
the global information domain, and states have not been standing on the sidelines. As
Schiller posits, “the force field of transnational capitalism was not constituted as a neutral
political space.”773 It is certain that the new geopolitical landscape and political economy
dynamics will further disrupt US-led transnational digital capitalism.



773

Dan Schiller Digital depression: information technology and economic crisis (Urbana, Chicago:
University of Illinois Press, 2014), 238.

254



Conclusion
Whether in libraries, educational and other cultural institutions or in corporate
boardrooms, the conventional view is that the new technical capability to access
information has intrinsically good and democratic value. It’s as if access to and
distribution of information in and of themselves will deliver a more democratic and
egalitarian global society.
However, by looking at the political economy of search, this study challenges that
conventional notion. It uncovers capital’s process of organizing the search industry in
response to the commercialization of the Internet and in order to cultivate new territories
of profit. The study demonstrates how the technical capability of search on the Internet is
hard-wired into the center of global economic activity and how digital capital has
established search businesses to reshape the information economy at large.
Annexation and reconfiguration
Searching is a basic human activity, ubiquitous in everyday people’s social lives.
This domain of information searching used to be either informal or contained within the
public sphere, where it was managed by non-market entities like libraries and other
cultural and educational institutions. Capital has consistently tried to pry open and
reorganize those institutions into commercial zones. However, entrenched practices such
as public information provision by libraries and cultural institutions, fair use and mostly
free access to government information774 remain bulwarks against commercial forces.


774

For issues surrounding access to government information and libraries, see the blog Free Government
Information. http://freegovinfo.info.

255


At the outset of the early 1990s, search activities were taking place through a
mixture of non-market- and market information outlets. The development of the search
function with Internet connectivity seemed even to open up new possibilities to access
and organize information, and to bring back the pieces of the information domain that
had moved to the market back into the public sphere. New technical capability for access
and distribution of information and the lack of a market-based model over the Internet
offered opportunities for cultural institutions to expand their influence in shaping
information provision in general for the public good.
However, despite its democratic potential and wondrous technical affordances,
the search function has instead been reorganized by digital capital, and turned into a new
industry. The search engine industry is ravaging through the public information
commons, opening up new profit sites and engulfing the remaining non-market
information domains, and has become the leading edge of the information economy. Over
the last 10 years, everyday people’s information activities have massively migrated away
from a patchwork of libraries, yellow pages, newspapers, magazines, community, friends,
family, acquaintances to the transnational Internet based information retrieval system.
This shift has spurred new practices of social and cultural life expressed in terms of
efficiency, democracy and technological breakthroughs; yet it is far removed from
democratic information provision.
As demonstrated earlier, search technologies did not have inherent economic
value nor did digital capital have any preconceived long-term business plan to monetize
search function. As Robert Brenner agues, capitalist production is unplanned and

256


uncoordinated but has an inherently competitive nature.775 Under state policies that
encourage capital to carefully structure the Internet into new economic growth zones,
capital’s persistent attempts to further commodify and commercialize information over
the Internet have engendered the development of search as a profit-making information
service. Today search expands its markets across the Internet economy as it weaves into
every information sector and beyond. By annexing public information provision, and
reconfiguring existing information- and industrial sectors into its profit domain and
controlling information infrastructure, digital capital has a stranglehold on the
information space and has turned search into a large-scale global industry based on
untold quantities of uncompensated labor.
Labor and Class Relations
The large-scale industrial size of search business under competitive market
pressure impels efforts to establish distinctive labor processes to maximize
profitability. On the surface, the search engine industry seems to offer a promise of
capitalism that can be built on a new mode of production and new social relations that are
not based on capitalist exploitation of labor. And if the dominant public rhetoric turns out
to be true, then the industry is supposed to be a new economic engine that produces a
large pool of highly skilled wage earners, eliminates low-waged jobs and leads to
prosperity for all. Yet, instead, the structural change occurring now is engendering a new
growth of inequality.
The labor structure of the search engine industry is extremely polarized, with a
hierarchical division of labor – a small number of skilled and highly paid cadre of

775

Robert Brenner, The Economics of Global Turbulence: The Advanced Capitalist Economies From Long
Boom to Long Downturn, 1945-2005 (London: Verso, 2006), 7.

257


workers at the top with a mass of low- and unwaged labor at the bottom. This indicates
that the highly automated search industry’s generation of profit and wealth does not hinge
on a high percentage of skilled workers, rather it leans heavily on the exploitation of
invisible low-waged processing labor, and on appropriation of a massive amount of
unwaged labor. Throughout this historical process, digital capital has enlarged and
reorganized a low-waged global working class, and related to an unprecedented extent on
unwaged labor to integrate it into its profit-making project.
Interestingly, this exploitative labor structure is mostly concealed from the public,
and worse, search giant Google has been portrayed as defying its capital logic by
empowering workers and seemingly relinquishing capital’s control over labor. In the era
of austerity when many workers are willing to accept wage cuts to hang on to their jobs
and are struggling for their survival, Google has been perceived as going against the grain
in offering a system in which capitalism is compatible with democratic ideals. However,
Google’s relation between labor and capital firmly allies with its corporate accumulation
strategies by artfully applying the welfare capitalism management techniques of the
industrial era and combining it with a façade of “objective” science and data to bring both
waged and unwaged labor under Google’s corporate control. Google’s worker-centered
corporate management strategies are not signs of altering capitalist social relations, but
alliances within an elite class, and its “user-centered” approach has become both the basis
of Google’s global surveillance-based search business, and the global infrastructure of
information control.

258


Geopolitics
This newly emerged search engine industry plays a pivotal role in transnational
capitalist economy as it builds extraterritorial information networks to circulate an array
of new information commodities, services and culture over an extraterritorial network –
the Internet. US-based firms, and in particular Google, are impressively exploiting and
capturing the global Internet space. However, their superiority over the Internet recasts
the strategic political and economic importance of information flows and information
networks, which reignite political conflict among major global powers maneuvering
between domestic interests, capitals and rival social forces. The case of the search engine
industry illustrates the volatility of US-dominated global information systems and the
challenges against a historically long standing US information regime that are mounting,
with structural changes to the political economy and both new and old geopolitical
rivalries – including China’s reentry into the global capitalist system, and Europe’s
renewed efforts to control its information infrastructure which are rapidly altering the
dynamics of the geopolitics of information.
The study shows that foreign transnational capital, and in particular US capital,
heavily fuels the building process of Internet sectors in China, and China’s Internet sector
is at the center of a reconstituting global digital capitalism. As part of Chinese State
policy – if not benign neglect by the Chinese state – foreign capital has been drawn into
building domestic Internet sectors that are linked into the global transnationalized
capitalist system. Given the significant role of foreign capital in Chinese Internet sectors,
PRC has no intention to cut off foreign capital for fear that it will jeopardize both
domestic as well as foreign capital. Its silence on foreign capital in China’s strategic

259


sectors like the Internet is an intentional act on behalf of transnational political economy.
On the US side, the US state and US capital will not abandon China’s high growth
Internet market. And the contention between China and US is neither US’s effort to
mobilize the democratic movement in China by offering new information technologies
nor China’s attempt to challenge the US model of capitalism. Rather, the conflicts
between China and the US are not over whether capitalist development should structure
and guide the information sector – or any other sector – but about the terms on which this
development will proceed. Which companies and which states will dominate and
appropriate the greatest share of the profits that result?
There is no doubt that these battles in the fastest growing markets will continue
between US- and China-based transnational capital, but this might reach a point of
rearrangement between the two countries. It has already begun to move in that direction.
At the US-China Internet Industry Forum hosted by Chinese and US Internet firms, the
US has been asking China for cooperation in the areas of Internet governance, Internet
freedom and intellectual property. Robert D. Hormats, Under Secretary for Economic
Growth, Energy, and the Environment, speaking at the 2013 Forum stated:
I want to stress that collaboration with the private sector – both in China and the
United States – will be critical to progress in each of these areas … We desire
cooperation, not confrontation, because we believe that business and scientific
collaboration between our two countries and among all countries can be mutually
beneficial.776
On the European side, the battle between Google and the EU over cyberspace unveils the
intensification of inter-capitalist rivalries among US capital over the European
information market as well as the changing political climate in Europe that once again is


776

U.S. Department of State, “Remark by Robert D. Hormats at U.S.- China Internet Industry Forum,”
April 6, 2013, http://www.state.gov/e/rls/rmk/207490.htm.

260


challenging US-centered transnational information economy. Google’s domestic rivals
aligned with European digital capital are fighting against Google’s monopoly of the most
lucrative information sectors, attempting to carve out their own market share. Meanwhile,
Western European states and capital have been searching for European alternatives to
Google, led mostly by France, but up until recently they had no political or economic
front from which to challenge US digital capital. Yet, the political pressure in Europe is
shifting to control over its information economy and information networks, facing
sluggish economic outlook and Edward Snowden’s revelations of the far-reaching US
surveillance program that transgresses national sovereignty. Especially after the
revelations on NSA surveillance programs which struck a chord, public opinion across
Europe and other parts of the world has shifted against US digital capital, and US’s
closest ally Germany is even calling for European-centered information infrastructure to
bypass US-controlled information flows. European governments are pushing to reform
EU data protection regulations. European Court of Justice (ECJ) already required for
Google and other search engines to comply with the EU’s “right to be forgotten” rule in
which EU citizens have the right to request information online be removed from search
results when the information is inaccurate. Spain passed a new copyright law that
imposes fees for online content aggregators like Google to protect its domestic media
industry – the so-called “Google Tax.”777 Germany’s Günther Oettinger, incoming
European Commissioner for the Digital Economy, is strongly signaling the possibility of
imposing an EU-wide “Google-tax.”778 And, European capital is taking advantage of this


777

Alex Hern, “Spain moves to protect domestic media with new 'Google tax',” Guardian, October 31,
2014, http://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/31/spain-newspaper-google-tax.
778
“Oettinger floats proposal for EU-wide 'Google-tax,'” EurActiv, October 29, 2014,

261


political momentum to pursue its corporate interests and trying to occupy a better
position within global digital capital.
Of course, the US State and US digital capital are not going to take Europe’s
pushback sitting down. The US State is asserting political economic power to fight
oppositional forces in order to maintain US position, but dealing with enormous political
challenges. Google is also working on several fronts to align with European capital. It is
participating in building a submarine cable between the US, Brazil, and Africa with
Brazilian ISP Algar Telecom, Uruguayan incumbent telco Antel, and a consortium of
Angolan ISPs.779 More recently, Google showed its importance to the European
information market. After it had been forced to remove German media company Axel
Springer’s content from displaying in Google search, Springer changed their stance,
finding that search engine traffic to the Springer sites had dropped 40%.
The battle over the control of global information systems is far from over. The
questions remain: will the US be able to deflect its challenges once again and retain its
control over the information system? How and in what ways may states collaborate to
privilege transnational as opposed to domestic capital and navigate domestic political and
social interests? And how may states yet deal as the ground continues to shift under their
feet?
Then the question for us is where is the hope for true democratic and
emancipatory information provision when even the most basic functions of information
access through search are being controlled and appropriated by capital? What are the

http://www.euractiv.com/sections/innovation-enterprise/oettinger-floats-proposal-eu-wide-google-tax309568.
779
“Google building US-Brazil submarine cable with three partners,” Telegeography, October 13, 2014,
http://www.telegeography.com/products/commsupdate/articles/2014/10/13/google-building-us-brazilsubmarine-cable-with-three-partners/.

262


possibilities to organize around a democratic information undertaking? The answer is not
about using Google alternatives that are funded by other venture capital firms. It’s not
about choosing between Google vs. DuckDuckGo or merely implementing various
privacy tools developed by the US State Department or corporations or negotiating with
corporate power and capitalist states to tweak capitalism to be “gentler.” Then where do
we go from here?
There are signs of political hope in local, national and international arenas where
collective actions are rejecting transnational corporate powers and capitalist development
that dispossess, displace, and brutalize everyday people, and strip away public goods.
There is little media coverage on this front, but in Mainland China, workers are resisting
against China’s market-oriented reforms that have led to violence against the poor, and
demanding social and economic justice.780 In Europe, anti-austerity movements are still
alive across many countries from Spain and France to Ireland and Greece. Recently, tens
of thousands of people in Spain, where unemployment has reached 29%, have rallied in
the streets to oppose austerity measures imposed by capitalist states and transnational
financial Institutions like the IMF. Workers at Amazon.com sites in Germany have been
fighting against unfair wages, and have walked out on their jobs. Uber drivers are
protesting against unjust working environment and increasing exploitation by the
company, which profits from the supposed “sharing economy.” Google’s sub-contracted
security guards are protesting against Google, Apple and other Internet firms in Silicon

780

Yuezhi Zhao explains the recent Hong Kong protest and points out that western media focuses its
protest coverage around liberal democratic framework while they are silent on workers’ protests demanding
social and economic justice. See “How Socialist China Became the Workshop of the World,” Real News,
October 13, 2014,
http://therealnews.com/t2/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=31&Itemid=74&jumival=12515

263


Valley for unjust labor practices. Facebook bus drivers are fighting to organize a labor
union. In San Francisco, where thousands of people have been displaced as digital capital
has swept into the city and enriched a small class segment, people are building solidarity
under the banner of housing justice to fight for the right to stay, live and build their own
city.
Now we’re at the point of dismantling the myth of information and informationbased capitalist systems that persistently promise democracy and equality, but not only
fail to deliver it but insidiously generate further inequality and injustice. We’re at the
point of collectively imagining and building information provision autonomous from
capital.

264


Bibliography [Books and Peer-Reviewed Journals]
Adams, Stephen B., and Orville R. Butler. Manufacturing the future: a history of Western
Electric. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
Anderson, Paul. Web 2.0 and Beyond: Principles and Technologies. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, 2012.
Angel, Karen. Inside Yahoo!: Reinvention and the road ahead. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 2002.
Aron, Cindy Sondik. Working At Play: A History of Vacations In the United States. New
York: Oxford University Press, 1999.
Arthur, Charles. Digital Wars: Apple, Google, Microsoft and the Battle for the Internet.
London: Kogan Page, 2012.
Aspray, William, and Paul E Ceruzzi. The Internet and American Business. Cambridge,
Mass.: MIT Press, 2008.
Auletta, Ken. Googled: The End of the World As We Know it. New York: Penguin Press,
2009.
Bates, Beth Tompkins. The Making of Black Detroit In the Age of Henry Ford. Chapel
Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2012.
Battelle, John. The Search: How Google and Its Rivals Rewrote the Rules of Business and
Transformed Our Culture. New York: Portfolio, 2005.
Belasco, Warren James., and Roger Horowitz. Food Chains: From Farmyard to
Shopping Cart. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2009.
Belasco, Warren James., and Philip Scranton. Food Nations: Selling Taste In Consumer
Societies. New York: Routledge, 2002.
Bell, Daniel. The Coming of Post-Industrial Society: A Venture In Social Forecasting,
New York: Basic Books, 1973.

Benkler, Yochai. The Wealth of Networks: How Social Production Transforms Markets
and Freedom. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2006
Bermejo, Fernando. The Internet Audience: Constitution & Measurement. New York:
Peter Lang, 2007.

265


Bidgoli, Hossein. Handbook of Information Security. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley, 2006.
Boltanski, Luc, and Eve Chiapello. The New Spirit of Capitalism. London: Verso, 2005.
Borjas, George J. “Immigration in High-Skill Labor Markets: The Impact of Foreign
Students on the Earnings of Doctorates” (Working Paper No. 12085). National
Bureau of Economic Research, March 2006. http://www.nber.org/papers/w12085.
Bowen, David E. "Managing Customers as Human Resources in Service
Organizations." Human Resource Management 25, no. 3 (1986): 371-383.
Bowers, Michael R., Charles L. Martin, and Alan Luker. "Trading Places:
Employees as customers, customers as employees." The Journal of Services
Marketing 4, no. 2 (1990): 55-69.
Boydston, Jeanne. Home and Work: Housework, Wages, and the Ideology of Labor In
the Early Republic. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990.
Braverman, Harry. Labor and Monopoly Capital: The Degradation of Work in the
Twentieth Century. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1974.
Brenner, Robert. “New Boom or New Bubble?” New Left Review 24, January – February,
2004.
Brenner, Robert. The Economics of Global Turbulence: The Advanced Capitalist
Economies From Long Boom to Long Downturn, 1945-2005. London: Verso,
2006.
Brin, Sergey, and Larry Pages, “The Anatomy of a Large-Scale Hypertextual Web
Search Engine.” Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 30, no. 1-7 (1998): 107117.
Carpenter, Phil. EBrands: Building an Internet business at breakneck speed. Boston:
Harvard Business School Press, 2000.
Catledge Lara, and James Pitkow. “Characterizing browsing strategies in the
World-Wide Web.” Computer Networks and ISDN Systems 27, no. 4
(1995):1065-1073
Chaston, Ian. Entrepreneurial Management in Small Firms. Los Angeles: SAGE, 2009.
Cobley, Evelyn. 2009. Modernism and the culture of efficiency ideology and fiction.
Toronto [Ont.]: University of Toronto Press, 2009.

266


Colby, Dean. “New Media as a New Mode of Production?” In Knowledge Workers In
the Information Society, edited by Catherine McKercher, and Vincent Mosco.
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007.
Crain, Matt. “The Revolution Will Be Commercialized: Finance, Public Policy, and the
Construction of Internet Advertising.” PhD diss., University of Illinois Urbana
Champaign, 2013.
Cuttroni, Justin. Google Analytics. Sebastopol, Calif.: O'Reilly, 2010
Dai, Xiudian. “ICTs in China’s development strategy.” In China and the Internet:
Politics of the Digital Leap Forward, edited by Christopher R. Hughes, and
Gudrun Wacker, 8-29. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.
Díaz, Karen. Reference sources on the Internet: Off the shelf and onto the Web. New
York: Haworth Press, 1997.
Douglas, Sarah, and Thomas Guback. “Production and Technology in the
communication/information revolution.” Media, Culture & Society 6 (1984): 233245.
Dray, Philip. There is Power in a Union: the epic story of labor in America. New York:
Doubleday, 2010.
Dumais, Susan, Georg Buscher, and Edward Cutrell. “Individual Differences in Gaze
Patterns for Web Search.” In the Proceeding of 2010 Information interaction in
context symposium, 185-194. New Brunswick, NJ, USA — August 18 - 21, 2010. 
Dyer-Witheford, Nick. “Empire, Immaterial Labor, the New Combinations.” Rethinking
Marxism: A Journal of Economics, Culture & Society 13, no. 3-4 (2001): 70-80
Edelman, Benjamin, Michael Ostrovsky and Michael Schwarz, “Internet Advertising and
the Generalized Second-Price Auction: Selling Billions of Dollars Worth of
Keywords.” American Economic Review 97, no. 1 (2005): 242-259.
Edwards, Douglas. I'm Feeling Lucky: The Confessions of Google Employee Number 59.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2011.
Edwards, Richard. Contested Terrain: the transformation of the workplace in the
twentieth century. New York: Basic Books, 1979.
Fields, Gary, Territories of Profit: Communications, Capitalist Development, and the
Innovation of G.F. Swift and Dell Computer. Stanford, Calif.: Stanford University
Press, 2004.



267


Fu, Xin. “Evaluating sources of implicit feedback for Web search.” PhD diss., University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 2007.
Gandal, Neil. “The dynamics of competition in the Internet search engine market.”
International Journal of Industrial Organization 19, no. 7 (2001): 1103-1117.
Gartner, Alan., and Frank Riessman. The Service Society and the Consumer Vanguard.
[1st ed.] New York: Harper & Row, 1974.
Gavetti, Giovanni, and Jan Rivkin. “On the Origin of Strategy: Action and Cognition
over Time.” Organization Science 18, no. 3 (2007): 420-439.
Geddes, Brad. Advanced Google Adwords. Hoboken, N.J.: Wiley, 2010.
Gillespie, Richard, Manufacturing Knowledge: A History of the Hawthorne Experiments.
Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Girard, Bernard. The Google Way: How One Company Is Revolutionizing Management
As We Know it. San Francisco: No Starch Press, 2009.
Glazer, Nona. “Servants to capital: Unpaid domestic labor and paid work.” Review of
Radical Political Economics 16 (1984): 61-87.
Grandin, Greg. Fordlandia. The Rise and Fall of Henry Ford’s Forgotten Jungle City.
New York: Picador. 2010.
Green, Venus. Race On the Line: Gender, Labor, and Technology In the Bell System,
1880-1980. Durham: Duke University Press, 2001.
Guan, Scott Yunxiang. China's Telecommunications Reforms: From Monopoly Towards
Competition. Hauppauge, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers, 2003.
Halavais, Alexander M. Campbell. Search Engine Society. Cambridge: Polity, 2009.
Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri, Empire. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press, 2001.
Hargittai, Eszter. “ Do You 'Google'? Understanding Search Engine Use Beyond the
Hype.” First Monday 9, no. 3 (2003).
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1127/104.
Headrick, Daniel. The Invisible Weapon: Telecommunications and International Politics,
1851-1945. New York: Oxford University Press, 1991.
Hill, Charles W. L., and Gareth R. Jones. Strategic management cases: an integrated
Approach. Mason, OH: South-Western/Cengage Learning, 2007.

268


Hills, Jill. Telecommunications and Empire. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007.
Hindman, Matthew. The Myth of Digital Democracy. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 2009.
Holdren, Anastasia. Google AdWords Managing Your Advertising Program. Sebastopol:
O'Reilly Media, 2011.
Hollis, Nigel. Ten Years of Learning on How Online Advertising Builds Brands. Journal
of Advertising Research 45, no. 2 (2005): 255-268.
Hong, Yu. “Distinctive Characteristics of China’s Path of ICT Development—A
Critical Analysis of Chinese Developmental Strategies in Light of the Eastern
Asian Model.” International Journal of Communication 2 (2008): 456-471.
Hong, Yu. Labor, Class Formation, and China’s Informationized Policy of Economic
Development. Lanham, Md.: Lexington Book, 2011.
Hughes, Christopher R., and Gudrun Wacker. China and the Internet: Politics of the
Digital Leap Forward. London: RoutledgeCurzon, 2003.
Huws, Ursula. The Making of a Cybertariat: Virtual Work in a Real World. London:
Merlin, 2003.
Huws, Ursula. “The Underpinnings of Class in the Digital Age; Living, Labour and
Value.” Socialist Register 50 (2014).
Indergaard, Michael, Silicon Alley: The Rise and Fall of a New Media District. New
York: Routledge, 2004.
Introna, Lucas, and Helen Nissenbaum. “Shaping the web: Why the politics of search
engines matter.” The Information Society 16, no. 3 (2000): 169–185.
Jacoby, Sanford M. Modern Manors: Welfare Capitalism Since the New Deal. Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997
Jarvis, Jeff. What Would Google Do? New York: Collins Business, 2009.
Jenkins, Henry. Convergence Culture: Where Old and New Media Collide. New York:
New York University Press, 2006.
Jansen, Bernard. “Search log analysis: What it is, what's been done, how to do it.”
Library and Information Science Research 27 (2006): 407-432.
Jansen, Bernard. Understanding Sponsored Search: Core Elements of Keyword
Advertising. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2011.

269


Jansen, Bernard, Spink, Amanda, and Tefko Saracevic, “Real life, real users and real
needs: A study and analysis of users' queries on the Web.” Information
Processing and Management 36, no. 2 (2000): 207-227.
Kamvar, Maryam, and Shumeet Baluja. “A Large Scale Study of Wireless Search
Behavior: Google Mobile Search.” Paper presented at CHI, Montreal, Quebec,
Canada, April 22-27, 2006.
Kelly, Diane. “Methods for Evaluating Interactive information retrieval systems with
users.” Foundations and Trends in Information Retrieval 3, no. 1-2 (2009): 1-224.
Kesmodel, David. The domain game: how people get rich from Internet domain names.
[Philadelphia, PA]: Xlibris Corp, 2008.
Kleemann, Frank, and Günter Voß, Kerstin Rieder. “Underpaid Innovators: The
Commercial Utilization of Consumer Work through Crowdsourcing.” Science,
Technology & Innovation Studies 4, no. 1 (2008): 5-26.
Kristol, David. “HTTP Cookies: Standards, privacy, and politics.” Journal of ACM
Transaction on Internet Technology 1, no.2 (2001); 151-198.
Kumar, Krishan. From post-industrial to post-modern society: new theories of the
contemporary world. Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell Publishers, 1995.
Kunda, Gideon. Engineering culture: control and commitment in a high-tech
corporation. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1992.
Lazzarato, Maurizio. “Immaterial Labor.” In Radical Thought In Italy: A Potential
Politics, edited by Paolo Virno, and Michael Hardt, 133-149. Minneapolis, MN:
University of Minnesota Press, 1996.
Lee, Kevin. The truth about pay-per-click search advertising. Upper Saddle River, N.J.:
FT Press, 2009.
Lee, Kevin, and Catherine Seda. Search Engine Advertising: Buying
Your Way to the Top to Increase Sales. 2nd ed. Berkeley, Calif.: New Riders,
2009.
Lessig, Lawrence. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and the Law to Lock
Down Culture and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin Press, 2004.
Levitt, Theodore. “Production-line Approach to Service.” Harvard Business Review,
50 (September 1972): 41–52.
Livingston, Jessica. Founders at Work: Stories of Startups' Early Days. Guildford:
Springer London, 2007.

270


Liu, Jiahul, Elin Pedersen, and Peter Dolan. “Personalized News Recommendation Based
on Click Behavior.” Paper presented at the International Conference on Intelligent
User Interfaces, New Orleans, Louisiana, January 9-12, 2010
Lovelock, Christopher, and Robert Young. “Look to Consumers to Increase
Productivity.” Harvard Business Review 57 (May-June 1979):168-178.
MacBride, Sean. Many Voices, One World: Communication and Society Today and
Tomorrow, Paris: UNESCO, 1980.
Mandell, Nikki. The Corporation As Family: The Gendering of Corporate Welfare, 18901930. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of North Carolina Press, 2002.
Marchand, Roland. Creating the corporate soul the rise of public relations and corporate
imagery in American big business. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998.
McChesney, Robert Waterman. Digital disconnect: how capitalism is turning the Internet
against democracy. New York : The New Press, 2013.
McKercher, Catherine and Vincent Mosco, eds. Knowledge Workers In the Information
Society. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 2007.
McNally, David. Global Slump: The Economics and Politics of Crisis and Resistance.
Oakland, CA: PM, 2011.
Meiksins, Peter, Chris Smith, and Boel Berner. Engineering Labour: technical workers in
comparative perspective. London: Verso, 1996.
Melucci, Massimo, and R. Baeza-Yates. Advanced topics in information retrieval. Berlin:
Springer, 2011.
Meyer, Stephen, The Five Dollar Day: Labor, Management, and Social Control In the
Ford Motor Company, 1908-1921. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York
Press, 1981.
Mills, Peter, Richard Chase, and Newton Margulies. “Motivating the client/employee
system as a service production strategy.” Academy of Management Review 8 no. 2
(1983): 301-10.
Mosco, Vincent. The Digital Sublime: Myth, Power, and Cyberspace. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press, 2004.
Mosco, Vincent. “Information in the Pay-per view Society,” in The Political Economy of
Information, edited by Vincent Mosco and Janet Wasko, 3. University of
Wisconsin Press, 1988.

271


Mosco, Vincent. The Political Economy of Communication. 2nd ed. Los Angeles: SAGE,
2009.
Mosco, Vincent. To the Cloud: Big Data In a Turbulent World. Boulder, Colorado:
Paradigm Publishers, 2014.
Noble, David. America by Design: Science, Technology, and the Rise of Corporate
Capitalism. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press, 1979.
Nora, Simon and Alain Minc. The Computerization of Society: A Report to the President
of France. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1980.
Palm, Michael. “Phoning it in: Self-service, telecommunications and new consumer
Labor.” PhD diss., University of North Carolina, 2010.
Prahalad, C. K., and Venkatram Ramaswamy. “Co-opting Customer Competence.”
Harvard Business Review, January 2000.
Prahalad, C. K., and Venkatram Ramaswamy. The Future of Competition: Co-Creating
Unique Value with Customers. Boston: Harvard Business School Press, 2004.
Prashad, Vijay. The Poorer Nations: A Possible History of the Global South. London:
Verso, 2012.
Reid, Robert. Architects of the Web: 1,000 Days That Built the Future of Business. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
Rowland, Diane, and Elizabeth MacDonald. Information Technology Law. London:
Cavendish Publishing, 1997.
Ryan, Damian, and Calvin Jones. Understanding digital marketing marketing strategies
for engaging the digital generation. London: Kogan Page, 2009.
Schiller, Dan. Digital Capitalism: Networking the Global Market System.
Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 1999.
Schiller, Dan. Digital Depression: Information Technology and Economic Crisis.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2014.
Schiller, Dan. “Geopolitical-economic conflict and network infrastructures.” Chinese
Journal of Communication 1, no.1 (2011): 90-107.
Schiller, Dan. How to think about information. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 2007.
Schiller, Herbert I. Communication and Cultural Domination. White Plains, N.Y.:
International Arts and Sciences Press, 1976.

272


Schiller, Herbert I. Information and the Crisis Economy. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex
Pub. Corp., 1984.
Schiller, Herbert I. Who Knows: Information In the Age of the Fortune 500.
Norwood, N.J.: ABLEX Pub. Corp., 1981.
Shanahan James, and Goutham Kurra. “Digital Advertising: an Information Scientist’s
Perspectives.” In Advanced Topics in Information Retrieval, edited by Massimo
Melucci, and Ricardo Baeza-Yates, 209 – 237. Berlin: Springer, 2011.
Smith, Anthony. The Geopolitics of Information: How Western Culture Dominates the
World. London: Faber & Faber, 1980.
Spink, Amanda, and Bernard J. Jansen. Web Search: Public Searching of the Web.
Dordrech, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004.
Stone, Katherine Van Wezel. From Widgets to Digits: employment regulation for the
changing workplace. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2004.
Stross, Randall. Planet Google: One company’s audacious plan to organize everything
we know. New York: Free Press, 2008.
Tai, Zixue. The Internet In China: Cyberspace and Civil Society (New York:
Routledge, 2006); Christopher Hughes and Gudrun Wacker. China and the
Internet.
Taylor, Gabriela. Advertising in a digital age: best practices & tips for paid search
and social media advertising. Global & Digital, 2012.
Terranova, Tiziana. “Free Labor: Producing Culture for the Digital Economy.” Social
Text 63 18, no. 2 (2000): 33-58.
Thomke, Stefan, and Eric von Hippel. Customers as Innovators: A New Way to Create
Value. Harvard Business Review, April 2002.
Tipton, Harold F., and Micki Krause. Information Security Management Handbook.
6th ed. Boca Raton, Fla.: Auerbach Publications, 2007.
Toffler, Alvin. The Third Wave, New York: Morrow, 1980.
Turow, Joseph. The Daily You: How the New Advertising Industry Is Defining Your
Identity and Your Worth. New Haven: Yale University Press, 2011
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. The Googlization of Everything: (and Why We Should Worry).
Updated ed. Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 2011.

273


Van Couvering, Elizabeth. “Navigational Media: The Political Economy of Online
Traffic.” In The Political Economy of Media edited by Dwayne Winseck & Dal
Yong Jin, 183-200. London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2011.
Van Couvering, Elizabeth. “Search engine bias: the structuration of traffic on the WorldWide Web” PhD diss., The London School of Economics and Political Science,
2010.
Veilumuthu, Ashok, and Ramachandran, Parthasarathy. “Discovering Implicit Feedbacks
from Search Engine Log Files” in Discovery Science, ed. Vincent Corruble et al.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
Velkar, Aashish. Markets and Measurements In Nineteenth-Century Britain. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 2012.
Vise, David A., and Mark Malseed. The Google Story. New York: Delacorte Press,
2005.
Warner, Charles. Media selling: television, print, Internet, radio. Chichester, West
Sussex, U.K.: Wiley-Blackwell, 2009.
Wasko, Janet. “Studying the Political Economy of Media and Information.”
Comunicação e Sociedade 7 (2005): 25-48.
Wu, Tim. The Master Switch: The Rise and Fall of Information Empires. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 2010.
Wunnava, Phanindra V. The Changing Role of Unions: new forms of representation.
Armonk, New York: M.E. Sharp, 2004.
Xiang, Biao. Global "body Shopping": An Indian Labor System In the Information
Technology Industry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2007.
Zhang, Wenxian, Huiyao Wang, and Ilan Alon. Entrepreneurial and Business Elites of
China: The Chinese Returnees Who Have Shaped Modern China. Bingley:
Emerald Group Pub., 2011.
Zhang, Ying. Bernard Jensen, and Amanda Spink. “Time series analysis of a Web search
engine transaction log. Information Processing and Management 25 (2009): 230245.
Zhao, Yuezhi. “After mobile phones, what? Re-embedding the social in China’s “Digital
Revolution.” International Journal of Communication 1 (2007): 92-120.
Zhao, Yuezhi. Communication In China: Political Economy, Power, and Conflict.
Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield, 2008.

274


Zieger, Robert H., Timothy J. Minchin, and Gilbert J. Gall. American workers, American
unions: the twentieth and early twenty-first centuries, Baltimore : Johns Hopkins
University Press, 2014.
Zimmer, Michael T. 2007. “The quest for the perfect search engine: values, technical
design, and the flow of personal information in spheres of mobility.” PhD diss.,
New York University, School of Education, 2007.

275

