THE ACADEMIC LIBRARIAN AS BLENDED PROFESSIONAL: REASSESSING
THE POSITION
by
Michael R. Perini
A Dissertation
Submitted to the
Graduate Faculty
of
George Mason University
in Partial Fulfillment of
The Requirements for the Degree
of
Doctor of Arts
Community College Education
Committee:
Director

Program Director
Dean, College of Humanities and Social
Sciences
Date:

Spring Semester 2015
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA

The Academic Librarian as Blended Professional: Reassessing the Position
A Dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Arts at George Mason University

by

Michael R. Perini
Master of Arts
University at Buffalo, 2006

Director: Jaime R. Lester, Associate Professor
Higher Education Department

Spring Semester 2015
George Mason University
Fairfax, VA

UMI Number: 3706660

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3706660
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

This work is licensed under a creative commons
attribution-noderivs 3.0 unported license.

ii

DEDICATION

Ave Maria, gratia plena, Dominus tecum. Benedicta tu in mulieribus, et benedictus
fructus ventristui, Iesus. Sancta Maria, Mater Dei, ora pro nobis peccatoribus, nunc, et in
hora mortis nostrae. Amen.

Gloria Patri, et Filio, et Spiritui Sancto. Sicuterat in principio, et nunc, et semper, et in
saecula saeculorum. Amen.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

Firstly I would like to thank my dissertation committee for the time and effort that they
spent during this project.
My committee chair, Dr. Jaime Lester, officially joined the Higher Education Program
the same semester as I did (Spring 2008). Enrolling in her Research Writing class that
semester was one of the best academic decisions that I have ever made. Thank you for
challenging me to take the more difficult route throughout both the MAIS and DA
programs. It is likely that I would not even have considered the doctoral path without
your support and encouragement. I hope that my future accomplishments in the academy
reflect well on you as a scholar and a mentor.
Dr. Jan Arminio- In addition to the valued methodological and compositional feedback,
thank you for your support with all matters advising and interactions with the College. I
am grateful that you supported my cause with the College. I hope that my academic
productivity whilst in the program has represented you and the Higher Education
Program well.
Dr. Todd Rose- I thoroughly enjoyed your classes and the work we did during
independent studies. It allowed me to approach problems from the unique analytical
position that I tend to occupy in both the academic and professional realms. I will always
appreciate the alternative academic perspectives that you provide and generate in your
students.
There also has been much supplemental support throughout this journey. Thank you to
my supervisors, Mr. LeRoy LaFleur, Ms. Jamie Coniglio, and Ms. Theresa Calcagno.
Your flexibility has allowed me to complete this degree. Dr. Mark Kidd, Dr. John
O’Connor, and Dr. Anne Kuhta all served as academic advisors and provided much
needed academic and professional guidance during my time in both degree programs.
Master Jun An and the rest of my fight team offered me a physical outlet that facilitated
the navigation of the most trying of mental days.
My mom, Dr. Marie Perini, set the academic bar very high but she supported my chase in
every way imaginable. The discipline instilled by my dad, Mr. Richard Perini,
allowed me to realize my potential. Since I was a little kid on the soccer fields in Holland
I have been trying to score as many actual and metaphorical goals as possible to impress

iv

you and make you proud. Above all, I now hope that who I am now as a person brings
you the most fulfillment.
Finally, and most importantly, I want to thank my wife, Lauren. We are finally finished
(though perhaps a D.Litt. would round out my CV and I think I could get my body back
together for just one more run at another world championship). This is just as much your
achievement as it is mine.
You have been with me from the start, as I chased championships and degrees and
endured all the challenges that emerged along the way. You have given me peace and
balance amidst all of my chaotic ambitions. It has been the greatest honor and privilege of
my life to be your husband.
I am anxious about the massive and rapidly forthcoming change in our lives but I am
excited for what awaits us as a family. We have traveled far on many journeys; the
adventures that lie ahead will be the greatest of them all. On to the next mountain…

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
List of Figures ................................................................................................................... vii
Abstract .............................................................................................................................. ix
Chapter One ........................................................................................................................ 1
Chapter Two...................................................................................................................... 19
Chapter Three…………………………………………………………………………….53
Chapter Four……………………………………………………………………………..69
Chapter Five...…………………………………………………………………………..172
Appendices ...................................................................................................................... 210
References……………………………………………………………………………....214

vi

LIST OF TABLES

Table
Page
Table 1 Journal Comparison……………………………………………………………..36
Table 2 Campus Libraries………………………………………………………………..58
Table 3 Tenure-track vs. Academic Librarian…………………………………………...83
Table 4 Influencing Categories on Blended Professional Librarians…………………....85
Table 5 Librarian Schedules...………………………………………………………….138

vii

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure
Page
Figure 1 Obstacles to Professional Success and Development ....................................... 129

viii

ABSTRACT

THE ACADEMIC LIBRARIAN AS BLENDED PROFESSIONAL: REASSESSING
THE POSITION
Michael R. Perini, D.A.
George Mason University, 2015
Dissertation Director: Dr. Jaime R. Lester

This qualitative case study extends Whitchurch’s (2009) blended professional model,
designed to consider the merging of academicians’ roles across several spheres of
professional and academic influence in a higher education setting, to academic librarians.
Following the application of the blended professional model, this work contends that the
academic librarians working at St. Jerome University have similar roles concerning
research, instruction, and service when compared to the institution’s tenure-track faculty.
The scope of professional productivity and the expectation of the librarians, though, are
much less regimented. Consequently, the academic librarians find themselves in a
tenuous working third space where their blended role is inhibited by real and perceived
barriers. These obstacles- a lack of time and money, perceptions of gender, and
organizational complexity- in turn result in hurdles that affect the professional
development of the academic librarians and impact the attitudes about their professional

ix

roles. Librarians and their impact on the academic community often are overlooked and
unrecognized as professionals by higher education theorists. This study consequently
achieves significance due to its use of higher education theory for an examination of the
professional identity of academic librarians and the issues impacting librarian
professional development. The work here also offers a constructive, replicable research
design appropriate for the analysis of librarians in other academic settings, providing
additional insight into how these professionals might perceive their roles within the larger
context of a higher education environment.

x

CHAPTER ONE

Introduction
There is a compelling dynamic in academic libraries between the librarians and
the support staff. Historically, there have been distinct divisions regarding the roles and
duties of the librarians and the staff, with the latter tending to handle the simpler tasks
(Oberg, 1995). Classified circulation staff will check books in and out for patrons, but the
academic librarians will aid the patrons in identification of proper sources. The librarian
duties are more complex and generally require more experience and training. The
demarcation of duties has long been justified by the requirement that unlike the support
staff, academic librarians must hold a masters degree in library science (Rubin, 2004).
Therefore, an academic librarian’s education validated and rationalized their position and
rank in the library community.
However, the roles within the academic library, especially with the influx and
escalation of the usage of technology, have hastily begun to blur actual roles and create
tension amongst the tiers of employees. “The rapidly changing library workplace has
created tension, even resentment, among support staff. Paraprofessionals see themselves
performing the tasks they have watched librarians perform for years, as well as the
challenging new tasks created by automation, but for less money and lower status”
(Oberg, 1995). Classified staff personnel now often perform similar duties, yet they do

1

not regularly enjoy the same level of compensation or esteem within the libraries
(Simpson, 2013). At the same time, this changing activity role of all individuals in the
libraries has resulted in librarians examining their own function within the academy
(Simpson, 2013). This assessment has fueled debate as to whether academic librarians are
in fact faculty based upon their professional activities (Coker, van Duinkerken, & Bales,
2010).
Interestingly outside of the libraries, academic librarians themselves experience
similar difficulties gaining acknowledgement for their roles and activities, particularly
amongst the faculty (Coker, van Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010). Traditional faculty in the
academy value the service offerings of librarians that aid in faculty research, such as
collection development and document acquisition (Yousef, 2010); however, faculty do
not view librarians as collaborative equals due to long-standing historical roles that place
the librarian as auxiliary to in-class instruction (Rubin, 2004; Hardesty, 1995). Similar to
the strain placed upon relationships and roles in the library proper, external tension
between faculty and academic librarians has developed over the role and status of the
latter, especially with the expanding demands of the position (Hardesty, 1995).
Reconciling and defining the role of academic librarians will be a key component of this
study.
Furthermore, there exists a dichotomy in the concept of role and identity for
professionals. Role is the mechanics of a position. It is what an individual performs in
their profession on a daily basis. The professional identity is a construction of the
attitudes, understanding, and beliefs associated with that role (Clarke, Hyde, & Drennan,

2

2013); it is the mental configuration of the physical responsibilities. Herein the difference
between professional role and professional identity is illustrated. Role is the function,
whereas identity is the personal perception.
Academic librarians have a complex set of responsibilities, working within the
library, interacting with other academic departments and units around campus, and in
various communities in and around the campus (Crawford, 2012). These activities create
a unique position amongst the academic community, as their roles create opportunities to
interact and communicate on several different planes of influence with a variety of the
population. The librarians interrelate with faculty, graduate students, undergraduate
students, and members of the community in tasks as simple as locating a book within the
library to collaborating on high-level research projects and the intricacy of the
responsibilities varies often without notice. The librarians’ exchanges occur in a similarly
complex set of locations such as the physical libraries, academic departments, and
through virtual communication. Understanding the impact of the role and its subsequent
status on the professional identity of academic librarians is an important topic that bares
examination and will be a key component of this work.

Background of the Study
Lovitts (2007) produced a study whose chief aim was “for departments,
disciplines, and universities to develop objective standards for the outcomes of doctoral
training- the dissertation” (p. 19). However, what about activities and student preparation
during the program? If the goal of an academic department is the adequate preparation of
a future graduate and extends beyond the culmination of the dissertation to the entirety of

3

the doctoral program, then the program offerings required assessment. A project
subsequently was developed that looked beyond the scope of just the dissertation.
Perini & Calcagno (2013) examined the curriculum in history and computer
science programs and the successive academic professionalism 1 of doctoral students at
the five largest public institutions in the country. Many department websites and their
marketing suggest that their particular program would prepare prospective students for
professional careers of their choosing. However, not all programs offer curricular courses
on publication, or alternatively, either student or faculty led workshops or groups that
focus on that aspect of academic professionalism. The study suggested that there is
indeed a sizable gap between the number of students in the programs and the number of
students who produce scholarship in their fields.
These findings were troubling. First, it demonstrated that potentially a significant
portion of doctoral students are not engaging in published scholarly productivity
concurrent with their studies. This becomes problematic because many of these students
will seek employment in academe and be at a disadvantage when compared to their peers
who do publish. Second, it is difficult to evoke changes to a doctoral program without a
doctoral-level terminal degree in hand. In addition to the difficulty associated with the

1

Academic professionalism in the context of that paper referred to the professional role of
the doctoral student once they had graduated and entered their place in the academy.
Aspects of this process no doubt occurred within the doctoral program itself, such as
what the new graduate might expect in the acculturation process of their future
department. However, since that study concerned the librarian’s role in the process, the
focus was on the aspects of this training that the academic librarian realistically could
alter, such as exposure to a publication process. As a result, professionalism related to the
preparation for anticipated academic output- publications, presentations, and so on.

4

introduction of courses through a university curriculum committee, it seems unlikely that
program populated by doctorate-holding faculty with years or decades of instruction
experience would be receptive to curricular critiques fielded by a doctoral student and a
librarian.
Academic librarians though often engage in professional activities that might aid
doctoral students in their development of academic professionalism. In fact, a subsequent
study found that 78% of academic librarians had formal publishing experience (Barruzzi
and Calcagno, 2015), which is a skill easily passed along to receptive doctoral students.
Thus, the librarians were found to have engaged in at least a portion of the activities that
traditional faculty are noted for, specifically research.
This revelation led to a series questions involving the actual role of academic
librarians throughout the university system. For instance, what type and quality of
research do academic librarians perform? How often do they instruct? What type of
service activities are they involved in? Essentially, in academe who are librarians and
what do they do?
In addition to the issues regarding librarian function, questions emerge when
considering the individuals who often the position. This study will be gender specific in
studying the identity of female academic librarians. This is significant as since its
inception- in contrast to traditional faculty- the role of academic librarian historically has
been a female profession. In fact, of the 20 original students in 1887 at the first library
school at Columbia, 17 were female (Rubin, 2004). Of the 15 schools in existence in
1919, 10 were established by women (Maack, 1986). Yet there are consistent inequities

5

by gender. In 1999, the American Library Association reported that 67.99% of academic
librarians and 57% of academic library directors were female. Yet the average salary for
a male director was $62,961 whereas the female directors averaged $58,202- a difference
of nearly $5,000 (American Library Association, 1999).
Similar inequities persist between men and women in the traditional professoriate.
Thus the role of librarian has historically been occupied by women and their experiences
of bias in the academy merge with those of their full-time tenure-track female faculty
counterparts (Schuster & Finkelstein, 2006). Even though their historical pathways
evolved in different manners, the perception of roles of female academic librarians and
female faculty occupy a similar experiential space within their respective fields. While
the female faculty role inherently may be different from that of the female academic
librarian, the biased treatment of the individuals in relation to their gender is comparable.
By additionally introducing the consideration of gender, the discussion may deliberate on
the effect that the role as a female academic librarian has on professional identity.
When considering the individual’s place in the academy, there emerges the split
between role and identity. In the context of this work the role of faculty is defined by the
actual responsibilities of the individual as characterized by their job description. Some
theorists add additional responsibilities to the faculty position such as governance
(Bowen & Schuster, 1986) and the actual level of faculty scholarship and goals differ by
institution (Boyer, 1990). Contemporary academics most often distill the function of
faculty in some fashion into three categories: research, instruction, and service (Lucas,
2006). For librarians these activities often carry an ambiguous tone. As faculty, academic

6

librarians are expected to publish. Since the librarians are not tenure-track faculty though,
the projected complexity of this research and publication is vague. Which research role
has supremacy- librarian as faculty or non-tenure-track librarian? In this work the
functional role will be measured by job description and subsequent activity and the
attempt will be made to tease out some of the ambiguities in the academic librarian role.
In contrast, identity may be a more subjective and malleable term than role
dependent upon the individual perception. “Identity encompasses how individuals
understand themselves, how they interpret experiences, how they present themselves and
wish to be perceived by others and how they are recognized by the broader community”
(Lieff, et al., 2012, p. 208). A faculty member may spend the majority of their time
involved in classroom instruction yet identify themselves as an academic researcher. Role
and identity differ in this way. While there may be some overlap to the entities, the role
and the identity of faculty remain distinct.
Levin and Shaker (2011) also state that “articulation of identity brings together
personal experiences and expectations with the social-cultural environment, specifically,
the university, including its structures, norms, and practices” (p. 1465). Therefore, the
environment in which the faculty operates shapes identity, and as intimated, the
workplace atmosphere tends to be more difficult for female faculty and academic
librarians and this is a suggested premise in this work. How a faculty member- to include
all classifications of faculty, such as academic librarians- perceives any professional
experience, regardless of the interface, has a direct positive or negative effect on the
individual’s identity (Whitchurch, 2009).

7

Thus, what began as a study on doctoral student academic professionalism
emerged into an examination of the roles and functionality of academic librarians, to
include considerations of their roles and professional identities. The full evolution of the
process and the subsequent consideration of the literature led to more complex
questioning. For instance, if librarians engage in activities akin to formal faculty
(research, instruction, and service) what is their role and position in the professoriate?
Should academic librarians be considered faculty? These are the questions that required
investigation on a larger scale, and therefore led to this current study.

Purpose of the Study
When speaking of “faculty,” the general implication is of the tenure-track variety;
that is, a professor who splits their time teaching classes and performing research for their
next book or article, all the while attending conferences for their particular discipline.
Even at that connotative and simplified level though, the actual role of faculty in the
established tenure-track line is at times itself murky. For example, a 2007 COACHE
study found that while the tenure expectations regarding scholarship and instruction
remained clear, the role of faculty in community and service was vague. Still, the
priorities of the role retained consistency: research, instruction, and service (COACHE,
2007).
Yet there are wrinkles in the actual roles of faculty themselves as “economic,
political, and cultural forces have contributed to the ways in which the nature of faculty
work has changed over time” (Robbins, 2013, 191). These pressures are pervasive,

8

regardless of the institution, as revised role requirements created new positions and
expectations of duty (Robbins, 2013). In addition, across the academy assumptions about
the activities and role of the faculty vary by level and classification, as there are other
members of the university community who have faculty status but perform nontraditional and/or non-tenured roles. Department chairs, for example, are full-time faculty
but occupy a position that involves more administrative duties than average tenure-track
faculty (Riley & Russell, 2013). Student affairs professionals are one example of
personnel who often hold faculty titles but have different expected competencies and may
not even teach or research at all (Dickerson, et al., 2011; Ahren, 2008). There are many
complex hybrids of faculty across campuses that do not fit the traditional tenure-track
notion and as a result struggle to gain recognition as either defined or accepted faculty.
The segment of that under-recognized population that will be examined in this
discussion is the academic librarian. The historical image of a librarian sitting at a desk
dispensing information is prevalent, but it has evolved into a position that includes
instruction (both in person and virtual), service and society memberships, academic
scholarship, collection development, and other substantial tasks. Also, similar to student
affairs professionals and other factions of the faculty, academic librarians exist in a
malleable spot at the university due to these mixed roles as scholar, educator, and
administrator (Coker, van Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010).They are a balance between the
academic faculty and other departments on campus such as student services. Their work
enhances the in-class learning provided by the faculty by extending that formal learning
with supplemental literature and resources.

9

However, the literature regarding academic librarians does not look favorably
upon the premise that academic librarians are in fact faculty. Higher education literature
and the discussion on faculty habitually overlook the role of the academic librarian since
the role is considered an intrinsically different form and level of academic faculty
(Association of College & Research Libraries, 2013). At the same time, literature by
librarians concerning their role rarely considers higher education theory in an attempt to
bolster their argument that they are in fact equivalents to their professorial counterparts
(Hardesty, 1991). In short, higher education theorists and proponents of the tradition
faculty role view librarians as non-faculty, whereas academic librarians argue the
opposite. This discussion will assert through a case study analysis of academic librarians
at St. Jerome University [St. Jerome] 2 that academic librarians do not in fact deserve
faculty status. The activities of the academic librarians, while involving traditional mores
of research, instruction, and service, occur on a different plane of involvement than do
tenure-track faculty.
The consideration of academic librarians as true faculty- at least amongst higher
education theorists- is peripheral at best; academic librarians argue that their roles are
consistent with faculty. If academic librarians are not tenure-track faculty, then what is
their classification? The aim of this study, therefore, is to determine what the actual role
of female academic librarians by investigating their positions with higher education
theory. By establishing through empirical evidence and qualitative research that their
active roles significantly differ from the traditional model of tenure-track faculty, the
2

Citations related to St. Jerome will not be listed with the references due to the potential for human subject
identification.

10

research therefore seeks to determine the exact features of this position. Once the study
concludes what they are, the discussion may turn to who they are. By solidifying the
professional roles the study then may consider the perceived identities of the librarians.
How do they view themselves within the academic community? The higher education
framework by which the question of identity of these individuals may be studied is called
blended professionalism.
As institutions have evolved to meet the demands of their age, the exact
specifications of the roles of the roles of various forms of academicians subsequently
changed as well (Gordon & Whitchurch, 2007). The combination of these new, actual
roles and perceived identity create what Whitchurch (2009) defines as the blended
professional. Blended professionals are individuals who “are characterized by an ability
to build common ground with a range of colleagues, internal and external to the
university, and to develop new forms of professional space, knowledge, relationships and
legitimacies associated with broadly based institutional projects such as student life,
business development and community partnership” (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 417).Basically,
blended professionals bridge gaps in both institutional and external silos in order to
perform their professional and academic duties; the roles and the environment in which
they are performed create professional identities.
Blended professionalism is influenced by and enhances prior identity models.
Regarding individual self-identity, Giddens’s (1992) model has a noteworthy impact.
Giddens (1992) regards identity as a “reflexively organized endeavor…which consists in
the sustaining of coherent, yet continuously revised, biographical narratives [and] takes

11

place in the context of multiple choice as filtered through abstract systems” (p. 5).
External influences and spaces such as jobs and professional roles therefore impact
individual identity (Whitchurch, 2009). Whitchurch also cites Rhoades’s (2005)
development of professional identities of management in academe. Rhoades (2005)
asserted that shifting roles for non-faculty administrative managers and how that
influenced faculty identity as managed professionals and affected shared governance (p.
39). The modification of management ultimately was found to have impacted faculty
socialization and roles (Rhoades, 2007; Deem, Hillyard, & Reed, 2007). Faculty identity
has also been tied to the activities of research and instruction (Deem, 2006), yet like
Giddens’ (1992) general model is fluid and in constant flux because it is internally
perceived (Beijaard, Meijar, & Verloop, 2004). The key addition of Whitchurch’s model
is that though the prior models acknowledged shifts in roles, they did not overly develop
considerations of the blurring of specific professional responsibilities and the resultant
outcome on identity. As such, the relative activities of these blended individuals merge
and develop a new professional identity not readily codified in previously existing
identity theories.
Whitchurch considers and surveys several members of what she considers
blended professionals, such as those who “areas of work variously described as learning
or business partnership, student life, diversity, outreach, institutional research, program
management and community development (Whitchurch, 2009, 408). A major area of
thought left out of Whitchurch’s analysis, though, is the role of the academic librarian in
the institution. It is clear from a study of Whitchurch’s (2013) subsequent work that

12

academic librarians do not even come under consideration with respect to the blended
professional concept.
Even so, academic librarians perform a variety of functions in the academy that
comprise aspects of research, instruction, and service and require networking and
influence in a variety of physical and virtual spaces (Crawford, 2012). Academic
librarians, with their numerous and sometimes ambiguous roles, also may be considered
blended professionals. The exact specifics of depends upon the academic librarians’
personal interpretation of their roles and the associated perceptional identity of their
positions.
Therefore the first guiding question of this study is:
What is the blended professional identity of female faculty librarians?
The researcher will argue that the traditional mold of tenure-track faculty does not fit the
roles of academic librarians. However, by utilizing Whitchurch’s blended professional
model, the study will better establish the specifics of the position in the context of their
professional duties. Whitchurch’s four-tiered frame considering space, knowledge,
relationships, and legitimacies is an apt model for analysis as librarians operate in a
blended professional manner on a daily basis. The explicit use of female academic
librarians also provides additional insight into the blended professional, specifically due
to the additional concept known as third space.
Whitchurch (2009) asserts that blended professionals are individuals “who not
only cross internal and external institutional boundaries, but also contribute to the
development of new forms of third space between professional and academic domains”

13

(p. 408). Third space is a theoretical sphere built through an individual’s ability to
interact and intertwine with many different communities, thereby developing
commonalities between diverse populations (Whitchurch, 2013; Whitchurch, 2008). With
this in mind, the second guiding question of the study becomes:
What is the third space that female academic librarians occupy?
In addition to the library, interactions for and by academic librarians occur in a
variety of physical and virtual settings across institutions and with a diverse assortment of
the populace, to include other library staff, faculty, and students. The role and identity of
academic librarians is often an afterthought for higher education theorists. In contrast,
literature from the standpoint of the library expounds on the positive additions that
academic librarians provide at the academy. The specifics of the position beyond the
relative boundaries of the library and its personnel are mitigated due to prevailing
perceptions, creating a confusing and complicated professional and academic
environment for the librarian.
Part of the difficulty arises from the theoretical conception of the environment.
Third space encompasses both the actual role and space of the librarians as well as their
perception of that situational setting. This may be a positive opinion if the individual
feels supported. However, internal and external forces can create real or artificial
boundaries for mobility, thereby potentially limiting growth and development. This
environment in turn develops the professional identity. The supposition here is that due to
their status as female faculty and their professional positions, the academic librarians
operate on a difficult plane of third space due to preexisting biases. This space of

14

operation has a significant chance of influencing the academic librarians’ professional
development.
This reality provides the third guiding question of this work:
How does the blended professional identity shape the female academic librarians’
professional growth?
Numerous studies document the historical discrimination and gender inequality
that almost always favors men (Blau, Gielen, & Zimmermann, 2012; Lorber, 2010;
Vianello & Siemienska, 1990). The prior section of this work mentioned the biased
gender trends in academic libraries, where despite the greater number of female librarians
women earn less compensation in directorships. This is perpetuated throughout higher
education. For example, in the academic year 2005-06, only 31% of tenure-track
positions were filled by women (West & Curtis, 2006), despite the fact that the majority
of master’s (62.3%) and doctorates (53.3%) were conferred to women (National Center
for Education Statistics, 2012). Another example in higher education is leadership
positions, as in 2006 only 23% of university president positions are filled by women
(American Council on Education, 2007). The historical model of the tenure-track faculty
is based upon an image of a profession that developed from a male-only role. Women
gradually gained positions in the professesoriate, but there always have been consistent
gender-based inequities concerning course loads, student and faculty expectations, and
domestic responsibilities (Trower, 2012). Compound this with the prevailing perception
that librarians on not on equal footing with tenure-track faculty counterparts (Coker, van
Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010).

15

The combination of all of these factors creates a presumably difficult third space
in which female academic librarians might thrive. The purpose of this investigation is to
determine how the confluence of these dynamics affects the academic librarians’ ability
to thrive as blended professionals in the collegiate environment. This is a significant
conceptual addition, as Whitchurch (2009) primarily considered the fractured divisions in
the workers’ professional positions. The linking and codification of these academic
librarians in a distinctive third space creates a unique prism through which members of
the faculty might be examined.

Significance of the Study
At the base level, this study extends multiple conversations regarding academic
librarians and their place in the professoriate. Misunderstanding of the role has led to an
under appreciation of the contributions of the librarians on campus and this study in part
attempts to clarify the involvement of these individuals within the collective whole. This
study gains significance by analyzing this issue; the work recasts academic librarians as
blended professionals and as such provide the opportunity to reevaluate their worth and
significance to the goals of the university system.
Additionally, through the employment of this higher education-based frame and
theory the work provides a wholly new prism through which librarians might investigate
their roles in the context of higher education theory. Librarians have complex and
sometimes ambiguous roles and duties within the university, the understanding of which
might facilitate a more complete understanding of the perception of the position. This

16

study offers insight into the roles and development of female academic librarians and
provides a model that might be replicated in other geographic and demographic settings
to the benefit of staff and management alike. Simply put, this study ascertains a new, reimagined understanding of the professional identity of academic librarian. The blended
professional identity approach enhances the appreciation of what librarians do at the
academy and who they are (or more accurately, who they think they are).
On an individual perspective, this study and its replication offers professional
individuals and opportunity for self-reflection and analysis, which may have a positive
individual outcome (Cooper, 1999). The primary argument put forward here is that the
role of the librarian remains so inherently different from a tenure track route that
classifying them as faculty becomes problematic and incorrect. However, librarians gain
alternative analytical perspective on their roles and consequently may better understand
and articulate their identity when evaluated through the higher education scope.
From a managerial perspective, the study potentially provides the opportunity to
discover obstacles preventing staff members’ successes in regard to performance and
professional development. While this study focuses on one segment of the faculty in the
form of academic librarians at one specific university, it is applicable in other units and
departments. This is to include positions interior to the library, such as a cataloguing
librarian, and exterior departments in student affairs that also nominally qualify as faculty
but share blended roles, such as career services. The process also may be replicated in
other positional demographies, geographies, and manners of collegiate institutions. This
study’s significance derives from the contextualization and codification of the attendant

17

contributing factors to librarian role and identity construction whilst employing higher
education framework of blended professionalism.

Conclusion
The following chapter will discuss literature regarding the evolution of the faculty
role and the development of the position of the academic librarian in the context of
historical narrative. In addition, through preliminary role comparisons the chapter will
establish that the academic librarians in this study do not share the same functionality as
tenured track faculty. A further historical discussion on the inequities regarding the
experience of women in higher education will follow. The chapter will conclude with a
critique of the literature and underscore the means by which the application of the theory
of blended professionalism will address gaps in the arguments.

18

CHAPTER TWO

Introduction
When reviewing literature regarding academic librarians as faculty, two distinct
themes emerge. Scholars from a library background assert that academic librarian duties
are similar enough to those of tenure-track faculty that the librarian position should be
considered true faculty. Conversely, most literature written from the higher education
perspective regards the academic librarian as a form of sub-faculty, if the work even
thinks to include a discussion on librarians at all. Here, the position will be that of the
latter stance; academic librarians are not on the same level as tenure-track faculty.
First through a historical narrative and then through preliminary comparison, it
becomes apparent that though tenure-track faculty and academic librarians share the
similar responsibilities and expectations regarding research, instruction, and service, the
substance of the activities is inherently different. The following chapter will outline the
literature regarding these professional roles as well as discuss the difficulties facing
women in higher education in the context of a chronological description.

Role of Academic Faculty
The contemporary role of academic faculty is something that has been scrutinized
through a good deal of literature, to include Finkelstein (1984), Boyer (1990), Lucas

19

(2006), and Schuster and Finkelstein (2006). Still, the actual faculty roles have shifted
over time, beginning as lecturer and evolving into the current research-instruction-service
model (Thelin, 2004). Therefore it seems apt to briefly describe the basic modifications
that have taken place through the history of American higher education.
Historically, the faculty of early American colleges would probably be better
classified as “instructors” or “tutors” as opposed to a practiced professoriate who lectured
on all topics of instruction instead of specializing in one discipline or another. The early
faculty came from an established social class, though their wages did not reflect upon
their up-bringing. “The faculty were similar to clerics in that they were expected to teach
for the privilege of affiliating with the college” (Cohen & Kisker, 2010, p. 32).
Stratification of the role, such as junior and senior positions, did not occur until the midnineteenth century. Not until the late 1800’s did the notion of a career as a professor
become a viable and respected opportunity, leading to the growth of faculty size and
disciplinary specializations (Finkelstein, 1984).
Colleges seemingly existed as more of a male finishing school (all early colleges
were male-only) that prepped young gentlemen for civil positions such as ministers,
doctors and public servants (Lucas, 1994), though early faculty often dealt with mischief
amongst the student body. “Drunkenness was rampant, as were violent assaults,
uncontrolled gambling, and debauchery of one sort or another” (Lucas, 1994, p. 111). As
a result, interactions between faculty and students occurred both within the classroom and
on the grounds of the campus, as “college life was characterized by perpetual tensions

20

between students and faculty” (Thelin, 2004, p. 21). As such, the early faculty also
carried a “head master” disciplinary role in addition to their instructional roles.
The concept of the position’s role began to change in the 1800’s as bidding wars
orchestrated by institutions, particularly the University of Chicago and its president
William Rainey Harper, began to push faculty salaries upward (Cohen & Kiser, 2010).
The commoditization of the job also afforded the ability of faculty to reduce their in-class
teaching time as well as schools to attract scholars from fields to this point not
traditionally academic, such as scientists who did research in addition to teaching duties
(Lucas, 2006). Additionally, the Morrill Act passage in 1862 noticeably enhanced the
number of positions available, which in turn provided for the subdivision of “professorial
ranks into assistant, associate, and full, and [systematized] the procedures for
advancement in rank and the probationary period prior to tenure” (Gappa, Austin, &
Trice, 2007, p. 51). The key attribute of the faculty around the turn of the twentieth
century was that they were full-time employees.
Indeed, the stratification of the ranks provided the basis for institutions (and their
administrators and Boards of Directors) to create expectations of the incoming faculty’s
function, such as education level, teaching requirements, and publication. The former role
of exclusive instruction was essentially eliminated as “promotion, tenure, salary, and
professional esteem were all associated with research and scholarship” (Lucas, 2006, p.
305). Colleges also codified their organizational structures, introducing administrative
positions that supported the educational goals of the system, albeit in a business-like

21

mode (Lucas, 2006). It also bears importance because it introduced the concept of
academic freedom among the professoriate.
The American Association of University Professors (AAUP) was founded in
1915, with the intention of stemming a series of well publicized academic firings around
the turn of the twentieth century (Fruman, 2009). Establishing a codified structure of
tenure and its subsequent privileges became a primary goal of the AAUP. In addition,
faculty desired the provision of “freedom of expression and economic security” (Gappa,
Austin, & Trice, 2007). “It took decades for many colleges and universities to accept that
unless professors were secure in their jobs, after a probationary period of no more than
seven years, genuine academic freedom would be constantly threatened.” (Fruman, 2009,
p. 342). The AAUP spent 25 years of negotiations with the colleges themselves to
produce the “1940 Statement of Principles on Academic Freedom and Tenure” that
ultimately defined academic freedom and tenure as the model of the professoriate
(Wilson, 2007).
In addition, the introduction of seminal college funding programs such as the GI
Bill (Mettler, 2007; Pusser, 2006), the National Merit program (Turner, 2006) and the
Higher Education Act (HEA) of 1965 and its succeeding editions (Pusser, 2006), as well
as innovations to travel (Turner, 2006) during the middle decades of the twentieth century
created an influx of students with the ability to attend collegiate institutions. In response
to these mainly federal and state-backed initiatives, faculty enjoyed an “academic job
market [that] became a seller’s market, in which individual professors negotiated

22

premium salaries and the average salary improved significantly” (Gappa, Austin, &
Trice, 2007, p. 52). The professoriate became a highly desirable and respected position.
This “golden age” of faculty was not to last, however, as social and economic
concerns arose (Sorey & Gregory, 2010). As mentioned, though violence between parties
on campus was not a new concept, those conflicts occurred either out of drunken
buffoonery or dissatisfaction with college rules and regulations (Bledstein, 1976).
Instead, these later demonstrations of the 1960’s and 1970’s carried a political shade that
compromised the notion of the institution of the faculty. Tied to political protests of the
era, “student protests during the late 1960’s and early 1970’s attacked irrelevant courses
and uninspiring teaching. Since the protests took place at universities with the greatest
concentration of leading scholars, they exposed the myth that all that is required to be a
good teacher is to know one’s subject” (Gaff & Simpson, 1994, p. 168). In essence,
students of this era, inspired by the questioning of political authority of the time, latched
on their own dissatisfactions with the educational system and its faculty to the ongoing
protests.
This development is not necessarily a detriment because it demonstrates a growth
of cultural and communal awareness by the student base, thereby indicating that some of
the educational development garnered in a college education took hold. However, it
predicated a general downtrend in the esteem of the profession, especially when financial
considerations also drove institutions to find means to alter personnel regulations. This
resulted in the (still continuing) downturn in the number of the tenured faculty and the

23

revision of instructional roles around academe (Nelson, 2008; Marcus, 2000; Bowen &
Schuster, 1986).
Resulting from the decline of tenured numbers was the increased amount of parttime and contract faculty employed in the instructional role. “Outside academe, the
tendency in the 1990’s was to reduce the number of full-time staff who had rights to their
jobs and to employ temporary staff…the universities…were among the last bastions of
career security and norms of professionalism” (Cohen & Kisker, 2010, p. 361).
Resistance to the adjunctification of the faculty did not last though, as by 1995 41% of
faculty was part-time, almost double of that in 1970 (Cohen & Kisker, 2010).
The reduction in full-time roles was caused “not by a shortage of qualified
candidates but by the desire of administrators to save money at a time of rapidly
increasing expenditures” (Cohen & Kisker, 2010, p. 223). Administrators were beginning
to see a reduction in the amount federal and state monies supporting the institution of
higher education and as a corollary sought to trim down faculty expenditures.
Consequently, these changes “helped institutions balance the budget, but at the same time
they diminished faculty professionalization because they did not adhere to the traditional
core values that included not only teaching but also research, public service, service to
the institution, and commitment to a career in which they were judged by their peers”
(Cohen & Kisker, 2010, p. 364).
Full-time and tenure-track faculty still retained their previous responsibilities
though (Lucas, 2006). For example, total workloads remained heavy and participation in
service, both internal to the institution and in external associations was emphasized. By

24

the 1990’s, full-time instructors were working around 53 hours per week (Cohen and
Kisker, 2010). For tenure-track faculty, this included not only the expected
responsibilities of teaching but also research and service, both to the public and to the
institution (O’Meara, LaPointe Terosky, & Neumann, 2008). Mentoring (Houser,
Lemmons, & Cahill, 2013; Lechuga, 2011) and advising (Baker & Griffin, 2010) are
commonplace responsibilities of contemporary faculty. Consequently, despite the
adjunctification of the faculty, in many sectors, the professor’s role has returned to its
previous incarnations with the reemphasis on research and publication (Lucas, 2006).
Therefore, in summary, the role of the faculty in American higher education has
evolved from primarily a lecturer to a researcher, instructor, and service-minded
individual. As well, contemporary conditions of the higher education field have split the
professoriate into increasingly distinct full-time or part-time positions, though the
permanent positions and their responsibilities largely reflect the later historical model.
The evolution of academic librarian roles follows a similar path to that of the faculty.

Role of Academic Librarians
Similarly to faculty roles, the role of academic librarians and its evolution has also
been discussed extensively in historical analyses (Mullins, 2012; Greer, Grover, &
Fowler, 2007; Rubin, 2004; DeVinney, 1986). In its current incarnation academic
libraries offer a substantial connectivity to the university academic collective as they
provide assistance and guidance to both students and faculty. Libraries and their
librarians aid the acquisition of information for the student that supplements in-class

25

learning. Historically, however, an academic librarian’s role followed an evolutionary
path similar to that of the faculty as the position progressed from a stationary data
organizer into a dynamic and multifaceted university role.
The concept of the academic librarian is a relatively more modern development
that coincided with the evolution of the faculty role during the 19th century. The position
of academic librarian emerged in the 1800s as the model of the collegiate institution itself
evolved. Rubin (2004) cites three specific catalysts that led to the development of the
academic librarian role: changes in the curriculum, the rise of the research model, and the
Morrill Land Grant Act of 1862 (p. 278). As mentioned the curriculum shifted from a
liberal arts and classics-based core to more pragmatic disciplines (Lucas, 2006). This
changed the faculty’s instructional techniques from lecture-based learning to a model that
required more research outside of the classroom, particularly at the library (Hanson,
1989).
The research model university developed from both the alteration to the
instructional style and American’s borrowing the German university form (Adrian, 2003).
“The seminar model of teaching was emphasized and students were encouraged to
consult a wide variety of published sources” (Rubin, 2004, p. 280). The university
repositories required professionals to sort through and direct students and faculty to these
materials, creating the need for a librarian.
The Morrill Land Grant Act produced federally-backed universities across the
country. The act provided land for the establishment of institutions that expanded
educational curriculum beyond classical studies to include mechanical and agricultural

26

arts (Duemer, 2007), again denoting the need for more research outside the classroom. As
well, the goal was to expand access to academe to more than just the individuals who
could afford to entertain the idea of attending a Harvard or Yale. As mentioned, the
Morrill Act created a building boom. The legitimacy of the universities rested upon their
ability to develop academic repositories, again generating a need for formal academic
librarians (Rubin, 2004).
Thus as the role expanded, the education required to practice as a librarian
developed as well. Rubin cites the major influence of Mevil Dewey as the driving force
behind the codification of library science as a discipline. “Dewey was not alone in
promoting the field of librarianship and library education, but he was a central figure
whose energy and devotion advanced the profession” (Rubin, 2004, p. 441). Dewey was
instrumental in establishing the first library school at Columbia in 1887 and helped
organize the American Library Association, not to mention the eponymous library
classification system (O’Reilly, 2013). Though O’Reilly (2013) faults Dewey for helping
establish an ideology that library work was less demanding and therefore deserved less
compensation, his work nevertheless led to the organization and proliferation of library
science programs.
By 1919 15 library programs existed (Maack, 1986) and a variety of degree
levels- bachelors and masters- emerged (Robbins-Carter & Seavey, 1986). A review of
the value of these 15 schools led to the Williamson Report of 1923, which above all
recommended that library education take place at the university (Hansen, 2004). The
report “affirmed that a substantial part of librarianship was, or should be, a form of

27

education…and forced the profession to consider the importance of consistency and high
quality in the curricula, administration, and teaching in library schools” (Rubin, 2004, p.
450). Essentially, library education was formulized and it somewhat minimized the
likelihood of an oversaturation of the degree. In fact, currently in 2014 there are only 63
American Library Association-accredited programs in the United States, Canada, and
Puerto Rico (ALA, 2014).
Subsequent to the addition of the Morrill Act, other government-supported
initiatives followed, increasing the number of financially capable students. Work-study, a
federal program that subsidized student labor on campus, continued to be provided for
students during the Great Depression (Lucas, 2006). The introduction of seminal college
funding programs such as the GI Bill (Mettler, 2007; Pusser, 2006), the National Merit
program (Turner, 2006) and the Higher Education Act (HEA) of 1965 and its succeeding
editions (Pusser, 2006) created an influx of students with the ability to attend collegiate
institutions. All of these initiatives led to an ever increasing need to expand and
professionalize the librarian positions that would be needed to supplement the
educational learning of the rapidly expanding student base.
As with the faculty, librarian’s status increased throughout the twentieth century,
when the scope of the librarian role expanded as universities branched out and associated
technology improved and increased in availability. As opposed to being confined to the
physical space of the libraries, academic librarians were able to explore marketing and
interaction avenues in different departments across physical and virtual academic
campuses. Graham asserts that the evolved definition of “an academic librarian is an

28

individual possessing a Master's in Library Science and working in a college or university
library or library system” (p. 11). This is a generalization of the role, as academic
librarians participated in instruction (Sproles, Johnson, & Farison, 2008), collection
development (Bracke, Herubel, & Ward, 2010), peer mentoring and management (Fyn,
2013), and their own research and subsequent productivity (Schrimsher & Northrup,
2013).
Academic librarians also gained several modes of outreach and interaction with
students on campuses, such as invited lectures, roving reference (where librarians
carrying laptops aid research at different locations on campus), and in-class instruction,
but the marketing of their abilities was usually done by the individual librarian by a
variety of means (Aguilar et al. 2011). As well Shupe and Pung (2007) note that in the
“traditional model, the librarian managed informational resources of the local holdings in
the library” (p. 409). The physical library and collection were no longer the boundaries of
expertise, as advancing technology has resulted in the availability of more research tools
for the librarians to utilize (Cardina & Wicks, 2004). The changes in the ability to
outreach increased the spaces and spheres of influence within which academic librarians
could operate.
The role of the academic librarian certainly evolved with this influx of
technology. Tucci (2011) supports integrating librarians into the academic community
outside of the library, particularly with faculty/librarian relationships, as a means to
enhance student-learning outcomes. The popular suggestion to accomplish this is through
embedment of the librarian in the classroom or program office, either virtually (Bennett

29

& Simning, 2010; Hawes, 2011) or physically (Freiburger & Kramer, 2009; Tumbleson
& Burke, 2010). Another means to interact with the campus community is through the
highlighting of librarian experience (Nunn & Ruane, 2011).
As a result of these opportunities, and similarly to the tenure and non-tenure track
counterparts though, librarians have experienced an increase in the volume and
complexity of their work, though the status of the position continuously changes. They
operate in many professional spaces- at varying degrees of involvement and acceptanceand as a result fit the description of a blended professional. With faculty, many of the
instructional roles are being filled by part-time and adjunct faculty. Librarians find that
their roles are being reclassified as non-faculty staff (Dunn, 2013) or filled by differently
qualified individuals, such as non-MLS-holding librarians (Simpson, 2013). These trends
have reignited the debate as to the actual and perceived role of the librarian in the
academy.

Perception versus Actuality of the Librarian Role
Perceptions of the academic librarian’s role amongst members of the academic
community remain questionable due to misconceptions about librarian instructional
efficacy and training, scholastic ability, and service related activities (Association of
College & Research Libraries, 2012). Librarians themselves view their position as
seminal to an institution’s mission (Lynch et al., 2007). “As academic personnel,
librarians are at the core of the University’s teaching, learning, research and service
mission” (St. Jerome University Librarians’ Handbook, 2012). Yet the rest of the

30

academic faculty, particularly the deans and provosts, view libraries and librarians as a
merely pragmatic means of finding information and is supplemental not primary to the
university’s mission (Lynch et al., 2007). This is due to ambiguity in the description of
the roles of faculty and librarians, as on the surface they appear similar. Delving into the
specifics makes the differences in the levels of the individuals.
O’Meara, LaPointe Terosky, and Rice (2008) provide a standard description of
faculty role:
As professionals, faculty apply their developed knowledge, skills, and
values to complex problems, challenges, and goals for the benefit of
society. Professionals such as faculty have significant autonomy and
privilege and are expected to commit themselves to the highest standards
of excellence and ethical behavior in exchange for this
autonomy…Faculty, as professionals, will continue throughout their
careers to update their knowledge, skills, and ethical and practical
competence in the service to their profession (p. 5).
This description, though thorough, is nonetheless nebulous because a variety of
professions may fit into that definition. Few if any librarians will not assert the value of
their skill-base when addressing any variety of problems and ethical behavior is
something of an expected understanding in higher education. Librarians also assert
privilege in their roles when compared to their colleagues and frequently publish and
participate in scholarly practices associated with their profession. Compare the above
depiction to the definition of academic librarians from St. Jerome University’s- the site of
this study- Librarians’ Handbook:

31

Librarians at the University are responsible for acquiring, organizing,
managing, and providing access to a multitude of scholarly resources. In
addition, librarians may fulfill research consultation and instruction
responsibilities in the University. The multiplicity of functions performed
and the varied specialties possessed by librarians at the University reflect
the diversity of the Libraries' programs, collections, and related service
obligations. All librarians share a responsibility to perform at the highest
level of professional competence, provide consistently high quality service
to students and faculty, and to engage actively with and meaningfully
contribute to the academic and research enterprise of the University (p.
19).
Here, librarians categorize materials, teach on campus, retain professional competence,
and participate in service and research activities. While the description leaves room for
more of a service-based orientation, the librarian role may be interpreted as comparable
to the faculty.
St. Jerome’s Faculty Handbook echoes much of what has been said about the
expectations of the faculty role, specifically concerning instruction, research, and service.
“Candidates for renewal, promotion and tenure will be evaluated in light of the missions
of the University which are teaching, research and scholarship, both theoretical and
applied, and service” (p. 26). The St. Jerome University Librarians’ Handbook also
addresses these responsibilities. Beginning with instruction, the St. Jerome University
Librarians’ Handbook states that librarians are responsible for “instruction
responsibilities in the University” (p. 19) and “teaching courses or giving lectures beyond
the library's instruction program” (p. 24). Librarians do engage in a good deal of

32

instruction in the university, both in person (Margino, 2013; Hall, 2013) and virtually
(Stiwinter, 2013; LaGuardia, 2011). As well, they cater to varying levels of educational
expertise, covering undergraduate (Clark & Chinburg, 2010; Lieberthal, 2009), graduate
(O’Malley & Delwiche, 2012; Shaffer, 2011), and faculty (Watson et al., 2013).
Extensive research demonstrated the efficacy of librarian instruction in a variety of
settings, including community colleges (Arp, Woodard, & Warren, 2006; Johnson, 2004),
4-year institutions (Cooke & Rosenthal, 2011; Clark & Chinburg, 2010), graduate
schools (O'Malley & Delwiche, 2012; Shaffer, 2011), and in distance settings (Hemmig
& Montet, 2010; Shiao-Feng & Kuo, 2010; Charnigo, 2009; Hines, 2008). Research
suggested that the actual institution, library, or funding had less influence on the quality
of the instruction than the individual librarian themselves (Hines, 2008). Roles did not
predicate effectiveness, motivation did.
Opponents of librarians as faculty suggest the role and responsibilities of
librarians differs too drastically from traditional faculty. Of the conversation, Coker, van
Duinkerken, and Bales (2010) note that “academic librarians do not often ‘teach,’ at least
in the manner typically attributed to teaching faculty, nor are librarians required to obtain
the PhD for employment (leading to the conclusion that they must play catch-up in
research or their research is of lower quality)” (p. 408). Other institutions have librarians
instructing formal for-credit classes similar to the faculty, usually dealing with
information literacy (Rogers, 2013). At St. Jerome though, the instruction that the
librarians perform is more workshop oriented (Jacklin & Robinson, 2013; Hanz & Lange,
2013) or through individual consultations (Meyer, Forbes, & Bower, 2010). The

33

comparison of the instruction between faculty and librarians at the institution of studywhile still defined as instruction- is fundamentally different.
Next, consider research requirements. Faculty are expected to research and
publish. “Genuine excellence must be exhibited in the areas of teaching or research and
scholarship and high competence must be exhibited in both” (St. Jerome University
Faculty Handbook, p. 27). Librarians also carry the expectation that they will contribute
to the field through scholarship. “Librarians have privileges and responsibilities
commensurate with their academic role as professional faculty at the University. As
members of a profession, librarians are expected to keep current with and contribute to
the advancement of the profession” (St. Jerome University Librarian Handbook, p. 24).
Academic librarians publish. A recent study found that of 347 active collegiate librarians,
78% actively published researched material (Baruzzi & Calcagno, 2015). Lamothe (2012)
advocated publishing due to its facilitation of discussion amongst individuals in the
academic environment. “Writing and publishing is an opportunity for conversation
among professionals where ideas are exchanged, agreed upon or argued, elaborated, and
clarified” (Lamothe, 2012, p. 157). This can also include collaborative ventures, as
librarian and faculty collaboration has been proven successful (Kennedy & Monty, 2011).
Due to mixed responsibilities of librarians at different institutions though,
librarians do not always emphasize their professionalism through publication (Lamothe,
2012). This likely contributes to the misunderstanding of the role of the librarian around
campuses. Tenure-track faculty have to publish. An easy way for librarians to gain their
attention, if not respect, is to do the same. Hansson and Johannesson (2013) found that

34

despite the knowledge of the processes, the daily duties of the librarians (i.e. collection
development, research consultations, etc) took away from the librarians time for research
and in fact Schrimsher and Northrup (2013) suggest such duties make them wary of that
researcher role. This is unfortunate because as Wolfe, Naylor, and Drueke (2010) assert,
“reference librarians are perfectly positioned to collaborate with other stakeholders…[as]
they operate in integrated virtual and physical worlds, where the human and the computer
work together” (p. 110). Opportunities are therefore missed due to misconceptions about
the actual role and abilities of the academic librarians.
Moreover the nature of the institution shapes the productivity of the academic
librarian. At some institutions, librarians are full, tenure-track members of the faculty; at
other institutions, they may be professional or contract faculty, or even staff. These
differences affect the productivity of the librarians, as for example the tenured faculty
librarian will have publishing expectations that the librarian staff will not have to address.
However, tenured faculty librarians regularly do not have the same goals as their
counterparts in academic departments. “Often, the publishing and service requirements
for tenure are lower for librarians than for other tenured faculty. This is not because of a
lack of academic rigor, but rather because of a lack of time and funding” (Coker, van
Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010, p. 415). This partly is due to the fact that the responsibilities
of librarians, tenured or otherwise, inherently differ from the traditional faculty.
The relative quality of library publications also bears reflection. Nixon (2013)
revisited a 1985 article by Kohl and Davis that ranked the value of library journals by
aspects such as acceptance rate and impact factors. Acceptance rates are the percentages

35

of submitted manuscripts that are subsequently published. A lower acceptance rate
traditionally has meant more scrutiny in the editorial process and therefore more quality
in the finished product (Haensly, Hodges, & Davenport, 2009). Impact factors measure
the number of citations taken from recent issues of a specific journal; the higher the
number, the more influence that journal has on the field. Nixon (2013) cited the top
library journals as College and Research Libraries, Information Technology and
Libraries, and Journal of Academic Librarianship. Compare the acceptance rates and
impact factors to top journals in a different field, such as Higher Education. Beach (2014)
lists The Journal of Higher Education, The Review of Higher Education, and Research in
Higher Education as leading journals in that field.

Journal title
College and
Research Libraries
Information
Technology and
Libraries
Journal of Academic
Librarianship
The Journal of
Higher Education
The Review of Higher
Education
Research in Higher
Education

Review process
Peer Reviewed

Acceptance rate
30%

Impact factor
0.683

Peer Reviewed

40%

0.528

Peer Reviewed

40%

0.87

Peer Reviewed

8%

1.157

Peer Reviewed

6-10%

0.758

Peer Reviewed

11-20%

1.221

36

Table 1. This table illustrates the acceptance rates and Impact factors of the top three
journals in the fields of Library Science (in red) and Higher Education (in blue). Statistics
are from: Nixon, J. M. (2013). Core journals and information science: Developing a
methodology for ranking LIS journals. College & Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/early/2012/07/23/crl12-387.short?rss=1 and Cabell’s Directory.
(2011). Education journals impact factors and acceptance rates. Retrieved from
http://classguides.lib.uconn.edu/content.php?pid=65298&sid=1310559

All of these journals are peer-reviewed, meaning that article submissions are judged for
worthiness by members of the (theoretically) same academic community. It is considered
an extra level of quality assurance since it adds additional scrutiny to the arguments
presented. The comparison of the acceptance rates shows that all of the higher education
journals had a substantially lower acceptance rate when compared to the library journals.
In addition, the impact factor tended to be higher for the higher education journals. These
statistics are not flawless. For example, the way in which acceptance rates are calculated
is not universal (Perry & Michalski, 2010) and the impact factor can be manipulated by
self-citation (Mannino, 2005). However, if these criteria are one of the considerations
when judging the quality of faculty productivity during tenure review, they cannot be
discounted (Campanario, 2010).
Finally the question of service is considered. Service is an inherent aspect of
faculty work. “Departments are established to carry out programs of instruction, research
and scholarship, and public service in particular fields of knowledge” (p. 12) and “some

37

specific administrative or service functions may also be attached to the teaching,
research, or clinical focus” (p. 17). While service can be a nebulous term, O’Meara,
LaPointe Terosky, and Neumann (2008) categorize service as institutional, disciplinary,
community, and scholarly (p. 76). Institutional service refers to the work done at the
employing university, such as inter-departmental committee work and disciplinary
service follows a similar vein, only the service comes through work in professional
organizations. Community service affects the process of providing information to the
community at large. Scholarly service is the interesting frame, because it pertains to the
professional expertise of the faculty member. Scholarly service therefore may concern
dissertation and thesis committee advisement and participation, academic advising, and
other forms of direct mentorship.
Similarly, librarians are charged with providing “service to the University and/or
the University Libraries through participation in the work of committees, task forces and
special projects at the University, Libraries, or departmental level” and “service to the
community through participation in educational service activities external to the
University community such as library boards, literacy programs, or other appropriate
volunteer work” (St. Jerome University Librarians’ Handbook, 2012, p. 24). Librarians
are expected to serve on a variety of institutional committees (St. Jerome University
Librarians’ Handbook, 2012). Just like the faculty, librarians are meant and expected to
participate in all manner of disciplinary service activities and national associations such
as American Library Association (American Library Assocation, 2012). In fact, the
Association of College and Research Libraries- the university oriented division of the

38

American Library Association- had 11,944 members in 2013 (American Library
Association, 2014). In addition, many librarians have supplemental memberships in
subject-specific associations, such as a chemistry librarian retaining an affiliation in the
American Chemical Society (Bennett, 2011). Librarians also participate in community
service outside of the university, providing information and resources to the larger
population (Press & Diggs-Hobson, 2005; de la Pena McCook, 2000).
The scholarly frame is where the service models of faculty and librarians diverge.
At some institutions, academic librarians serve as advisers to members of the student
population (Kelleher & Laidlaw, 2009), but not at St. Jerome. In fact, part of the
difficulty faced by librarians in the scholarly service sector deals with their terminal
degree level. In order to serve on doctoral dissertation or master’s thesis committees,
faculty members must have an equivalent degree (St. Jerome University Academic
Catalog, 2014). Given that the terminal degree for a librarian is often at the master’s
level, this limits their ability to serve in that capacity in a doctoral granting institution.
Another issue with librarians is that the role becomes blended between service
and services. In contrast to the service provided by the faculty, librarians are viewed as
auxiliary service personnel, present to assist students and faculty with the simple
acquisition of resources. Service, not instruction or research, is viewed as their primary
role. Steven J. Bell, president of the Association of College and Research Libraries states:
“We see ourselves as being closely connected to the educational mission, yet librarians
are often perceived as academic-support personnel” (Dunn, 2013). In this manner,
academic librarians frequently are viewed as service-oriented, non-collaborative sub-

39

faculty (Wyss, 2010; Given & Julien, 2005; Julien & Given, 2002). This position or
marketing affects other issues, such as librarian participation in governance issues.
Librarians are often left out of decision making processes available to other faculty
members around campus, to their detriment. “[Librarians] should be involved in library
governance, and that involvement in university governance improves the perception
among the teaching faculty of academic librarians” (Wyss, 2010, p. 381). Despite the
discussed evolution of the role of the librarian, the perception of their work in service to
the community is often mitigated and renders their influence ineffective.
Academic librarians fill a variety of roles on campus- researcher, collaborator,
administrator, instructor- that blends some of the responsibilities of traditional faculty
with the role of a librarian. Yet their comparative position on campus is tenuous, as the
services provided by librarians often supersede their instruction and research endeavors.
Whereas with faculty service appears to be a tertiary consideration, it is the primary focus
of the academic librarian, potentially to the detriment of the perception of their role and
identity. At the same time, the level, type, and quality of instruction and research
performed by libraries appears to be of lesser substance than that offered by the academic
faculty.
Because of the relative ambiguity of their professional and academic roles, the
librarians fit the concept of a blended professional. The question then becomes whether
or not their role influences their perceptions of their personal professional identities. This
becomes all the more relevant when considering female role and identity throughout
higher education, particularly as faculty and academic librarians.

40

Women in Higher Education
If academic librarians are to be considered second-tier in faculty due to their roles,
they share similar perceptive experiences with women, particularly women faculty, in
higher education. Based upon their roles, academic librarians have historically found it
difficult to gain ascendancy of any kind within the professoriate. Female members of the
academic community have long experienced the same difficulties and operate in a similar
plane of third space, struggling to obtain even equality in academe.
Even so, women and other underrepresented minorities first obtained faculty
positions in the 18th and 19th centuries. For example, 1783 Washington College hired
Elizabeth Callister Peele and Sarah Callister to instruct in painting and drawing
(Washington College, 2013) and Sarah Jane Woodson Early was the first female African
American college professor at Wilberforce College in 1858 (Lawson & Merrill, 1984).
Opportunities were not plentiful, but one of the first successful incarnations of female
higher education was the Southern Women’s Colleges of the 1800’s. Several
contributions of women’s education during this period include the creation of elective
courses, standardization of instruction, growth of the public school system and furthering
employment opportunities (Farnham, 1994). Most importantly, in a fixed and male
dominant society, these colleges demonstrated that women could learn and be successful
outside the home.
Women in the Southern Women’s Colleges were educated in curriculum on par
with what was being taught at the men’s colleges and the Seven Sisters. Math, English

41

grammar and sciences (botany, astronomy, mineralogy, anatomy) were commonplace
courses. “The classics were considered the core of a liberal arts education and the fact
that by custom they were not forbidden to Southern women as inappropriate to their
gender is of special significance” (Farnham, 1994, p. 73). The women were also taught a
variety of classical and foreign languages, such as Greek, Latin, French, and Spanish and
the education was on par with counterpart male institutions (Thelin, 2004). For instance,
the Southern Carolina Female Collegiate Institute at Barhamville had a (native German)
instructor that taught both German and instrumental and vocal music (Farnham, 1994). In
contrast to prevailing society, in the collegiate environment, men and women were found
to be intellectual equals though parity of access was not ensured.
One might mention the contemporary existence of northern women’s colleges
such as the Seven Sisters, the first of which- Mount Holyoke College- was founded in
1837. These colleges were established as female “companion” schools to their male-only
Ivy League counterparts (Rosenberg, 2004). Unfortunately, they also had similar
restrictions to race and ethnicity well into the 20th century, paralleling faults of access
similar to Ivy League schools at the time (Johnson, 2008; Rosenberg, 2004). For
example, Barnard’s Dean Virginia Gildersleeve developed a series of complicated
application forms, tests, and subjective interviews similar to those utilized at Princeton at
the time meant to limit the number of non-white, Christian women admitted (Karabel,
2005; Rosenberg, 2004). Indeed, Barnard did not admit an African American woman
until the 1920s (Rosenberg, 2004).

42

Despite the shortcomings regarding race equality, the education received at
women’s only institutions was stout. The students’ acquisition of knowledge represented
a level of curricular and civic education that might translate to a measureable production
of public good in an assortment of social eras, including the present. These schools
succeeded in spite of the societal restrictions in place during their time of operation. The
same cannot be said for other incarnations of male-only educational institutions due to
varying combinations of restricted or flawed access, curricular shortcomings, or financial
limitations.
The integration of women and faculty into male-only institutions was a slow and
progressive journal. Echoing Oberlin’s original model, co-educational institutions began
to emerge after the Civil War at institutions like Cornell University, though single-sexed
colleges continued to be the overwhelming standard (Thelin, 2004). Admissions
opportunities emerged, as between 1890 and 1910 women accounted for 40% of
undergraduate enrollment (Thelin, 2004, p. 226). It did not result in a plethora of higherlevel graduates though. Columbia only conferred 8 doctorates to women in 1900
(Rosenberg, 2004, p. 91). In addition, many of the leadership positions and clubs on
campuses remained exclusive to men, either in practice or policy (Cohen & Brawer,
2010).
Later programs like the GI Bill in the 1940’s and Title IX in the 1970’s increased
access for women and provided increased entry into traditionally male disciplines such as
engineering and the sciences (Cohen & Brawer, 2010). Enrollment percentages continued
to increase in favor of female students. In 1976, women represented 48% and 46% of the

43

undergraduate and graduate population, respectively; by 1993, that percentage jumped to
56% and 54% (Cohen & Brawer, 2010, p. 334). Again though, the progress was sluggish
and deliberate, with equitable treatment difficult to find. Yale did not even admit a female
student until 1969 (Harvard Crimson, 1968). For the female faculty, improvements were
equally trying.

Female Faculty and Administration
The historical female faculty role and experience might be best summed up with
the statement that equal distribution of and compensation for the professorial roles were
(and still are) not on level with male faculty (Chisholm-Burns, et al., 2012; Lanier,
Tanner, & Guidry, 2009; Bowen, 2005; Fowler, et al., 2004; Guillory, 2001). The initial
difficulty of equality emerged in the curricular offerings to which women had access.
Women were somewhat preemptively placed in detrimental spaces that limited
their opportunities within academe. While the curriculum at the Southern Women’s
Colleges and Seven Sisters was on par with what was studied at male institutions, it often
remained in the classical and liberal arts fields. Women were slow to receive admittance
to scientific fields and when they eventually did matriculate and graduate, employment
opportunities were few. “Women students were often pigeonholed and thwarted in the
curriculum and in campus life; and most, invidiously, those who completed advanced
degrees encountered blatant discrimination in the academic job market” (Thelin, 2004, p.
143). Slow acquisition of degrees and positions continued until World War II (Cohen &
Brawer, 2010).

44

Professional opportunities for women following World War II were more
obtainable on a larger scale than in any previous era and a move towards more diversified
and inclusive curriculum ensued (Lucas, 2006). Women in the profession increased by
13% from 1945 to 1975 (Cohen & Kisker, 2010). That does not speak to the true
struggle. Even today- despite the fact that women now receive the majority of conferred
doctorates- women account for only 23% of full professors (Mason, 2011). “Academic
women…continue to be 20% less likely than men to perceive equitable treatment.
Moreover, the percentage of women strongly agreeing that gender equity has been
achieved is only half that of men” (Schuster & Finkelstein, 2006, p. 139). In spite of
studies showing a higher level of intrinsic motivation in female faculty, thereby
indicating a propensity for academic productivity that exceeds that of male counterparts
(Chen & Zhao, 2013), financial recognition for female faculty remains lower.
Salary differential is far from equal, especially at the higher ranks of the
professoriate (Fowler, et al., 2004). Only 1 in 4 college presidents are women (Ward &
Eddy, 2013). No one single factor can be pinpointed as the culprit for these present
inequities, though several explanations have been offered. For instance, gender biases
have been cited as reasons for the dearth of women in leadership positions (Fulmer, 2010;
Bagilhole & White, 2008; Garn & Brown, 2008). By far the most cited factor is time on
the job, which predicates the possibility of time of service, amount of publications, and
tenure prospects (Guillory, 2001). That discussion then leads to the implications of
maternity leave.

45

Child rearing also impeded professional growth and development of the female
faculty role, particularly in tenure where expectations of productivity are established. “It
is noteworthy that women on the tenure track are more likely than men to avoid marriage,
delay parenting, or limit the number of children they raise” (Jackson, 2008, p. 227).
Mason (2013) suggested that having children as a young professional negatively affected
professional development because professors “get little or no childbirth support from the
university and often receive a great deal of discouragement from their mentors.” Gibbard
Cook (2004) reiterated that children also hampered job possibilities due to a lesser
amount of relative mobility when compared to non-parents. Available child care for
working mom in higher education is problematic as well (Jackson, 2008). Consider the
simple biological window. If female faculty wish to have children, then it likely will
occur during when it is physically feasible to conceive, either during their doctoral
studies or during the first few years of post-doctoral work (Gibbard Cook, 2004). It then
becomes a matter of choice- work and potentially struggle as a professional mother or
lose time and productivity in the workforce.
Additionally, any increase in women faculty members and doctoral recipients has
not promoted an equally friendly work environment. Politics and sexist work
environments have also impeded women gaining stronger footholds in leadership roles
(Ward & Eddy, 2013). “Despite earning doctorates in ever-increasing numbers, many
women…are eschewing academic careers altogether or exiting the academy prior to the
tenure decision because both groups experience social isolation, a chilly environment,

46

bias, and hostility” (Trower & Chait, 2002). Such working environments amplify jobrelated stress and workplace dissatisfaction (Lease, 1999).
Thus, research suggests that while opportunities are available, the environments in
which women faculty’s identity may be shaped are historically and contemporaneously
inequitable and this creates complicated and challenging spaces of influence. “[Female
faculty] in the coeducational university faced marginalization at every turn. They were
expected to be simultaneously a part and apart from the faculty culture” (Thelin, 2004, p.
144). Female faculty, in essence, was tiered into a caste system of rank in higher
education set up for inequity and interestingly this leveled perception is similarly felt by
faculty academic librarians in the third space of the professoriate.

Faculty Identity and Historical Narrative Critique
Similar to the analyses on roles, the professional identity of collegiate faculty has
been explored in a variety of settings. For example, scholars have analyzed full-time
faculty, both tenure track (Abu-Alruz & Khasawneh, 2013; Lieff et al., 2012) and nontenure track (Levin & Shaker, 2011). Tenure-track faculty defines its identity through a
combination of the department environment, communication with colleagues and
mentors, and personal motivations and initiatives (Lieff et al., 2012). Non-tenure track
faculty are something of a hybrid (Levin & Shaker, 2011). They require the same form of
training and education as tenure track (Schuster and Finkelstein, 2006), but occupy a
position that is often lacking the benefits (actual and perceived) of tenure-track faculty
such as autonomy and job security (Kezar & Sam, 2011). Depending upon the institution,

47

academic librarians may obtain either position, though the suggested perceptions around
academic campuses tend to force librarians into a placement similar to non-tenure track
faculty.
Part-time or adjuncts’ identity- both at community colleges and 4-year
institutions- has also been considered in literature (Levin, et al., 2013; Thirolf, 2013;
Thirolf, 2012; Dolan, 2011; Daffron, 2010; Outcalt, 2002), though the research suggests
that the experience is mixed. The mission of community colleges is inherently different,
as they serve continuing, community, and teacher education in addition to traditional
college-aged students, therefore the roles of the faculty accordingly adjust (Vaughn,
2006). They also have a high ratio of adjunct instructors limiting the cohesiveness of
departments and organizations within the actual college (Cohen & Brawer, 2008).
However, the core role of the profession- instruction- does not change. “It is readily
apparent that the distinctiveness of the clientele served by community college faculty
exists in nominal form only” (Outcalt, 2002). In essence, the professors are still teaching
college students, regardless of their own professional title and instructional platform. As
was mentioned tough, these conversations considered full-semester instruction as the
standard, which librarians at St. Jerome do not perform.
Academic librarians carry similar traits to non-tenure track faculty and adjuncts,
at least in their perception around campus. They fulfill many roles, but balance between
the faculty role and function of academic librarians has been greatly discussed (Wyss,
2010; Wyss, 2008; Jablonski, 2006; Bhuiya, 1981). For example, Hosburgh (2011) noted
that librarian roles affect tenure opportunities, salary, and research or presentation

48

funding. However, the identity of academic librarians only has been examined in passing.
Bennett (1987) suggested that institutional structures promoted a secondary identity for
librarians, but does not delve into the professional identity. Downing (2009) utilized
social identity theory to examine the roles of librarians, finding that the roles were
influenced by variables such as race, gender, and age. The key component of Downing’s
study was to assert that a diverse workplace benefits that collective library whole. What
about the individual though? How does that personal identity influence concepts of
professionalism? This question concerning the professional role and identity of the
academic librarian is a major gap in both higher education and library science literature.
A major frame by which librarians have yet to be formally analyzed is blended
professionalism, put forth by Whitchurch (2009). As noted earlier, blended professionals
are individuals who operate internally and externally through a variety of academic and
professional realms (Whitchurch, 2009), which is precisely what academic librarians do
in the course of their daily work. To this point, the discussion has noted “binary
perceptions” amongst the faculty and the librarians (Whitchurch, 2013). Each side
marginalizes the role of the other, thereby creating strain. However, the expansion of the
historical roles of both faculty and librarians calls into question this inherent bias, as “a
diversifying workforce raises questions about what it means to be a professional in
contemporary higher education” (Whitchurch, 2013, p. 8). All parties in higher education
appear to be moving to a “third space” of interaction, one that transcends purely
academic and professional roles (Whitchurch, 2009). The concept of third space is
employed here “as a way of exploring groups of staff in higher education who do not fit

49

conventional binary descriptors” (Whitchurch, 2013, p. 21). As is customary in higher
education literature though, Whitchurch did not consider academic librarians in the
blended professional role.
Based in part on Giddens’ (1992) self-identity theory and Rhoades’ (2007, 2005)
managed professional identity theories, Whitchurch’s system provides a model to
develop professional identity through the criteria of spaces, knowledges, relationships,
and legitimacies. Spaces are the physical, virtual and theoretical (through third space)
spheres in which an individual operates, though the blended professional readily adapts to
change and operates outside of formal organizational boundaries. Knowledges are
assimilated professional and academic knowledge, which may be utilized to investigate
organizational activity and link together multiple settings on campus. Relationships allow
the blended professional to network, function in academic conversation, develop crossunit alliances, and establish autonomy of one’s own organization. Finally, legitimacies
are the letters after an individual’s name on their business card and the relative
productivity of the academic and professional person; they allow and establish access into
academic environments. The malleable nature of these active roles develops the
perceived professional identity of the individual. By examining academic librarian usage
of Whitchurch’s criteria of spaces, knowledges, relationships, and legitimacies (outlined
in Appendix A), the function of the librarian and the subsequent professional identity
may be mapped.
The goal of this work will be a qualitative case study analysis of how the blended
professional role and identity of faculty academic librarians shapes their development as

50

professionals. How do these librarians see themselves as faculty? Does their experience
hinder or promote their academic achievements, communication, or collaborative
opportunities? Do they believe their abilities to develop are similar to other faculty? Do
the librarians feel loyal to certain departments or individuals in their field? These
questions speak to the function of identity in the professional and will address a gap in
both the academic library and higher education literature. It is significant in this way
because it will provide a new structure through which academic librarians may analyze
their role, standing, and potentially development in the academy. It can identify barriers
for librarians (internal and external) for finding promotional opportunities and
establishment of full faculty status.

Conclusion
This chapter established that the role of tenure-track faculty varied over time, but
the present incarnation is one that emphasizes research, instruction, and service as the
primary tenants of faculty output and behavior. Further, it detailed the evolution of the
academic librarian from an isolated repository position to one that becomes increasingly
complicated due to escalation in technology and professional expectations. Still, the
comparison of the research, instruction, and service conducted by librarians does not
equally balance with that of tenure-track faculty. If it may be accepted that activities of
librarians in this manifestation are not equivalent, the study might be able to better
establish the true academic and professional role and identities of this particular group.

51

The corollary to that notion is gender, as this chapter also inferred that women
have experienced a history of inequality as both students and faculty in higher education.
Since this study solely will consider the identity of female academic librarians, it suggests
that any environment in which the librarians work will provide obstacles to professional
development. Until now, professional role and identity of academic librarians has been
largely ignored by higher education literature, providing a significant gap in the literature
and provides the basis for this study. The following chapter will detail the methodology
through which this work will be conducted.

52

CHAPTER THREE

Introduction
During the conceptual phase of this project, several replicable methodological
avenues were considered. The central construction of the research- the blended
professional identity of female academic librarians- is perceived by the individual
experiencing the role. Since these identities are individualized it was believed that
qualitative interviews would produce the most profound, direct feedback on the blended
professional identities of the academic librarians and illuminate the working third spaces
as well as the obstacles to professional development. Therefore a qualitative case study
was chosen. The following chapter will outline the methodology utilized in this study
along with the procedures implemented.

Methodology
For these research questions, qualitative research presents a viable methodology.
Mauch and Park (2003) define “qualitative research as describing a situation as it exists,
without involving formal hypothesis, but focusing on explaining social processes in great
detail” (p. 125). The research concerning the identity of the librarians is subjective and
based upon experiences of individual librarians within an academic community. A

53

qualitatively collected sample would offer direct connection with the experiences of the
academic librarians, as responses would be tied to experience and emotion.
This is of consequence, since “securing accurate information about feelings,
sensitive behaviors, and other personal experiences is critical in many areas of research”
(Mauch & Park, 2003, p. 18). The interviewee’s personal experiences will educe relevant
information that may be applied to the theoretical and actual role and identity of the
academic librarian. It is possible to write a generic report regarding the roles of academic
librarians without formal interviews; however, the direct experiences – to include the
successes, the challenges, the frustrations, the emotions, and so on- produce personal
recollections and anecdotes that create a fuller understanding of the person and the
environment of study.
By interviewing the librarians the hope is to gain a better understanding of the
effect that the role has on the blended professional identity and development of the
academic librarian. In addition, one of the prime benefits for faculty members to
participate in a study such as this is that it allows the practitioner to self-reflect on their
roles, challenges and opportunities that exist in the navigation of their instructional
responsibilities. This type of analysis has been demonstrated to have positive pedagogical
effects on the participating members because of its ability to positively identify obstacles
(Zha, Adams, & Mathews-Ailsworth, 2013; Dausien, et al., 2008).
Method
The context of this study is developed with a historical role in mind, but the
results are based upon contemporary experiences. Therefore, a case study method of

54

analysis becomes the best option. “The case study relies on many of the same techniques
as a history, but it adds two sources of evidence not usually included in the historian’s
repertoire: direct observation of the events being studied and interviews of the persons
involved in the events” (Yin, 2009, p. 11). Historical works often analyze people, events,
and environments where the seminal contributors to any theory are no longer available,
rendering the evidence finite to a degree. This contrasts case studies examining
contemporary situations where opinions are documented and witnessed by the researcher.
As well, the case study “method is heuristic- a term for self-guided learning that employs
analysis to help draw conclusions about a situation” (Ellet, 2007, p. 19). Unlike purely
historical studies, where the availability of the studied individuals may not be available
due to the distance of historical time, a case study offers the ability to study and interact
with the individuals in a contemporary context.
Case studies become viable methods when the researcher has no influence on the
individuals studied. “The case study is preferred in examining contemporary events, but
when the relevant behaviors cannot be manipulated” (Yin, 2009, p. 11). The experiences
of the academic librarians are developed through their relative experiences. This is
relevant in this instance, as the researcher has no control over the events that lead to their
beliefs, as he has no influence on their role requirements involving research, instruction,
and service. The researcher also is not in the position of librarian supervision and has no
ability to develop policy or procedure that might sway their behavior.
Identification and Recruitment of Participants

55

Yin (2009) affirms that “convenience, access, and geographic proximity can be
the main criteria for selecting a pilot case or cases” (p. 93). In this particular case, the
participants were identified due to the researcher’s proximity to the sample organization
and geographically it allows for minimal travel for the qualitative process. As well, since
he is not a librarian the researcher is not a member of any regional, national, or
international professional library organizations. His professional affiliations are in the
higher education sector and there is not a great deal of organizational overlap with library
associations. As a result, the vast majority of library contacts and associates for the
researcher are located at the sample institution, St. Jerome University [St. Jerome].
St. Jerome is a mid-Atlantic state university with approximately 34,000 students
spread across 200 degree programs located on three main campuses: St. Gabriel, St.
Michael, and St. Raphael. St. Gabriel Campus is in an urban setting, St. Michael Campus
is in the suburbs, and St. Raphael Campus is rural. About 6,100 students live on campus,
primarily at the St. Michael Campus. There are about 6,400 faculty and staff working at
St. Jerome. Of a total of about 130 full-time employees that includes classified staff,
between 40 and 45 jobs in the libraries at St. Jerome are academic librarian positions,
though duties vary.
Just as with the faculty itself, librarians are stratified by their role and
responsibilities. St. Jerome has several types of librarians on staff in departments such as
technical services, cataloguing, and circulation services. However, these librarians
perform more administrative tasks and rarely engage in instruction of students and
faculty. Also, there are classified staff that perform many of the same duties as librarians

56

such as instruction, but do not have master’s degrees in library science. As a result, the
librarians surveyed in this sample will be liaison librarians employed at St. Jerome.
As opposed to the traditional model of librarians that field either random or
subject specific inquiries at a physical desk in the library, liaison librarians are attached to
a specific academic department or sector of the community, such as undergraduates in
entry-level required English courses (Crawford, 2012). Crawford (2012) defines liaison
libraries as the “old subject librarian PLUS” who operates “beyond the traditional
realms…to explore new possibilities” (p. 3). Therefore, the role of the liaison librarian
fits the concept of blended professional in definition and function; as individuals who
operate internally and externally through a variety of academic and professional realms,
they work within the library, liaise with their academic department and its constituents,
and in various communities around the campus. In addition, at St. Jerome these librarians
have renewable contracts and perform versions of the faculty role through instruction,
research, and service.
At St. Jerome, the status of the librarians is based upon “professional competence,
scholarship, service, and experience [as academic librarians]” (St. Jerome University
Librarians’ Handbook, 2012, p. 20). Four levels of librarian exist: I, II, III, and IV. The
length of appointment is determined by the rank; Librarian I is for 2 years, Librarian II is
for 3 years, Librarian III is for 4 years, and Librarian IV is for 4 years. Similar to an
academic department, there are a higher number of the lower ranked positions available.
The librarians surveyed came from two sectors of the library- Research Services
and Gateway Services. The main difference between these two departments is that the

57

latter specifically markets to the undergraduate population, whereas the former interacts
with all levels of patronage. Both departments report to the same Associate University
Librarian. St. Jerome also has four distinct libraries spread across three different
campuses. Table 2 below indicates the library name and the campus location.

Library

Campus

Alexander VI Library

St. Michael Campus

Stephen VI Library

St. Michael Campus

Urban II Library

St. Gabriel Campus

Clement V Library

St. Raphael Campus

Table 2. This table shows the library and corresponding campus.

Each of these libraries has the position of “head” or “director.” Gateway Services is
located in the main undergraduate library at St. Jerome, Stephen VI Library, though the
head of that department reports directly to the Associate University Librarian as opposed
to the head of the Stephen VI Library.
This sample made a practical case study due to the demographics of the potential
interviewees. Comparing the relative professional identities between male and female

58

librarians in this case study makes little sense, as all but three of the librarians and the
department heads are female. Therefore, the survey specifically examined the
professional identity of the female librarians. In addition, the consideration of race did
not appear a feasible topic of inquiry, as only one of the female librarians was of minority
status.
At the time of research, there were 21 female academic librarians in these
libraries; 17 of these librarians participated in this study. The librarians were recruited via
an email, which was sent out July 7, 2014. A copy of this email is attached as Appendix
B. Seventeen of the 21 recipients of the email responded and interview times and dates
were arranged according to the librarians’ schedules. Each librarian was interviewed
alone with the researcher. The 17 interviews took place between July 7, 2014 and August
12, 2014.
The questions were designed around the juxtaposition of role and identity. As
well, they used the framework of the concept of the blended professional put forth by
Whitchurch, as such a model provides the researcher “ways of identifying and
understanding important aspects of a situation and what they mean in relation to the
overall situation” (Ellet, 2007, p. 19). The questions fielded by the librarians are found in
Appendix C.
The interviews with librarians based on the St. Michael Campus as well as one
librarian working on the St. Raphael Campus occurred in the Alexander VI Library
conference rooms. The interviews with the librarians at the St. Gabriel Campus occurred
in the Urban II Library conference room. The interview with the librarians at the St.

59

Raphael Campus occurred in that librarian’s office. All interviews were recorded with an
Olympus VN-702PC Digital Voice Recorder. The 17 interviews totaled 788 minutes.
Following the interviews, the researcher transferred the digital recordings to a
4GB thumb drive. The researcher transcribed the interviews and double-checked them for
veracity between July 8, 2014 and August 19, 2014. Following the completion of the
transcriptions, the interviews were printed out and stored in a legal document folder in a
locked desk in the researcher’s office. Institutional Review Board approved consent
forms signed by the librarians prior to the start of each interview. These consent forms
are stored in a separate folder within the same legal document binder.
In order to enhance the validity of the results, the responses from the qualitative
interviews were triangulated. “Triangulation may be defined as the use of two or more
methods of data collection in the study of some aspect of human behavior. Triangular
techniques in the social sciences attempt to map out, or explain more fully, the richness
and complexity of human behavior by studying it form more than one standpoint”
(Cohen, Manion, & Morrison, 2007, p. 141). Similar to the construction of the questions,
the triangulation techniques were designed with role and identity in mind.
To inspect blended professional roles concerning spaces and relationships,
schedules were examined. These documents and observations gave the researcher
information on where the primary working spaces of the librarians were and with whom
and how the total working time of librarians was being spent. The researcher chose to
examine the schedules of the interviewed librarians from Sunday, September 21, 2014
through Saturday, September 27, 2014. Depending on the discipline, librarians have

60

varying responsibilities at different points in the semester. As a result, this week in
September was chosen at random without catering to one discipline or another. In order
to obtain the schedules, the researcher contacted the respective librarians and mapped out
their schedules on a standard calendar ledger. He then added the total time spent in
various activities and tabulated the results.
Similarly, the researcher studied librarian-developed Infoguides and Research
Portals in order to establish activities regarding knowledges. The 17 interviewed
librarians collectively created and continuously update 193 Infoguides and 21 Research
Portals. While Infoguides and Research Portals are effectively the same thinginformation on the resources available to library patrons- Infoguides are geared towards
more generic undergraduate learning whereas Research Portals are oriented towards
graduate students with discipline or program specific problems and provide more indepth tools for the viewing researcher. These documents are publically available via the
internet on the St. Jerome University library website and required no contact with the
librarians. The online materials detailed the librarians’ subject knowledge expertise.
Additionally, the researcher arranged to observe instruction of 8 librarians between July
9, 2014 and September 19, 2014. These classes took between 60 and 150 minutes in
length.
For legitimacies, the researcher examined physical artifacts such as business cards
and office spaces to note presence of established credentials and experience. Items of
interest included diplomas, award certificates, training certificates, mementos from
academic conferences, and other miscellaneous objects that denoted professional

61

experience and achievement. The inspection of the 17 librarians’ offices and working
spaces took place immediately following the interviews and generally lasted 15 minutes
or less.
Field notes were compiled in a 5”x 9” spiral bound notepad. Upon return to his
office, the notes were transferred to a confidential master spreadsheet stored on the same
USB thumb drive as the transcriptions. A chart outlining the methods of inquiry is found
in Appendix A.
Data Analysis
One of the difficulties in constructing a qualitative research project is that there is
“no precise or agreed-on terms describe varieties and processes of qualitative analysis”
(Patton, 2002, p. 452). Many recommendations in literature vary in steps and
terminology. As well, the process is subjective. “Qualitative research is ‘interpretive’
research in which you make a personal assessment as to a description that fits the
situation or themes…the interpretation that you make of a transcript differs from the
interpretation that someone else makes” (Creswell, 2005, p. 232). This researcher’s
understanding of the collected data may differ from the next researcher who either reads
this report or conducts their own field work using a similar model.
In general though, this study followed Creswell’s (2005) “bottom-up” approach
(p. 231):
1. Collect data
2. Prepare data (transcription, etc.)
3. Read through data
4. Code data

62

5. Code text for themes
6. Interpret data
The interviews, transcriptions, and verification of the accuracy of the transcriptions- steps
1 and 2- were completed by August 19, 2014. The actual qualitative data analysis was
developed with inductive analysis. “Inductive analysis involves discovering patterns,
themes, and categories in one’s data. Findings emerge out of the data, through the
analyst’s interactions with the data” (Patton, 2002, p. 453). Specifically, this study
employed inductive content analysis to code the data and develop categories and themes.
The intent of this method was to cultivate core concepts that emanated through the
existing data (Glaser, 1992).
So that he might accomplish this task, the researcher read the entirety of the
interviews upon completion of the transcription process (step 3). The researcher then did
not look at the transcripts for seven days and occupied himself with hobbies and vacation
in order to garner a fresh look during subsequent readings. Following the week respite,
the researcher began step 4 and numbered the survey questions and then noted in each
text where that particular question was asked, which was the beginning of the open
coding scheme (step 4). “Open coding is the commencement of…working the raw data,
through constant comparison, initial conceptual identification, and categorization” (Price,
2010, p. 157). Open coding, while a rigorous and exhaustive process, allowed the
researcher to identify relevant patterns and themes related to the framework of blended
professionalism. He then underlined key sentences and phrases under each numbered
question in the transcript text, thereby segmenting information (Creswell, 2005).

63

This process follows Patton’s (2002) recommendation suggesting that “a good
place to begin inductive analysis is to inventory and define key phrases, terms, and
practices that are special to the people in the setting studied” (p. 454). Following the
completion of the underlining and note-taking process, the researcher copied all
underlined and noted phrases into a file with their corresponding numbered survey
question. This process was replicated for all 14 of the formal survey questions asked of
the interviewees. The reason for utilizing this method was to create a means of
comparing the results with the existing literature on blended professionalism and the
academic librarians’ role in a more structured manner. By configuring the analysis in this
way, the researcher was better able to analyze and conceptualize simultaneously both
individual segments and the totality of the emerging information within the data.
From there the underlined sentences and phrases were distilled in order to create
short, collective bullets. Finally, the researcher bolded the significant words into “a
manageable…coding scheme” within the bullets (Patton, 2002, p. 454). After developing
the codes, the researcher considered themes that emerged from this process. Themes were
created (step 5) with the use of handwritten mind-maps comprised of the codes (Creswell,
2005). A mind-map is a model illustration used to visually consolidate and shape
substantial information (Munim & Mahmud, 2011). Mind-maps have been shown to
enhance understanding of data by allowing the researcher to view problems on a
multidimensional plane, which allows for more complete understanding of the
information (Munim & Mahmud, 2011). The emergent themes from the mind-maps

64

became the core and structure of the interpretation of the findings (step 6) found in
Chapter 4.
The Researcher’s Role and Limitations
Ideally the researcher will approach the process from a purely objective position
in order to develop rational and valid results (Greenbank, 2003). Rarely though is this
perfect model obtainable and in some ways it was not achieved in this model. Biases and
suppositions, resulting in potential limitations in this study, exist due to the researcher’s
familiarity with the survey sample. Reflection and disclosure of these established
perspectives though support the development of the validity regarding the total study
(Greenbank, 2003). As such, in this case study the researcher’s role is that of an insider
given that he works at the same institution as the interviewed librarians; yet due to his
non-librarian job he is an outsider as he shares a different social and professional
standing.
As a result of his employment at St. Jerome the researcher has also experienced
similar challenges and opportunities that academic librarians might face as blended
professionals, albeit at a non-faculty level of classification. The researcher has worked
with the majority of the librarians in an assortment of professional capacities. In addition,
the researcher has developed assumptions about the roles and activities of the academic
librarians through years of interaction in a variety of campus settings.
Consequently it was difficult for the researcher to divorce himself from some of
the data, especially concerning productivity and academic professionalism. The
administration celebrates the achievements of the academic librarians much more

65

vociferously than the accomplishments of the classified staff. This is an annoyance and
slight to the ego and difficult to overcome with an objective analytical perspective.
Upon reflection though, it became apparent to the researcher that the obstacles
that limited the productivity and professional development of the librarians inherently
were different due to the individuality of those who perceive them. The researcher’s
professional and personal roles vary significantly from the interviewees and projecting
his own expectations on that community acted as a severe disservice and would mitigate
the librarians’ respective voices in the data.
In qualitative models the researcher has the ability to become a member of the
collective. Conversely, the researcher might find that the aim of objectivity creates a
greater divide between the individual and the interviewed group (Punch, 1998). In his
experience, the researcher did improve communication with several interviewed
librarians. In some cases the interview was the first formal in-person contact that the
researcher had with that particular librarian. Following the research though there was
little impetus for the librarians to remain in contact with the researcher and these
relationships and the researcher’s capacity to engage in that particular academic realm
have become stagnant.
The researcher does not have the realistic ability to become a member of the
librarian community. It is true that he belongs to the same university and in some cases
the same department as some of the interviewed librarians. However, within the academic
hierarchy the researcher remains classified staff. No amount of personal or professional
connections developed through research will ever elevate him to the respective level and

66

standing of the interviewed librarians. This research in some ways further defines the
boundaries that prevent the mixing of the roles by codifying the role of the academic
librarian at St. Jerome. In short, the researcher is not a librarian and therefore cannot join
that exclusive community.
Further the researcher’s activities were usually as a separated function to the
activities of the librarians. His instruction has been detached from that of the librarians;
whereas librarians often teach library instruction the researcher focuses on more
discipline-oriented, lecture-based topics given in graduate student settings. The
researcher is not a member of any of the professional library service organizations, such
as the American Library Association. The researcher also has performed only one
collaborative research project with one of the liaison librarians. The rest of his projects
were individual or conducted with non-library staff. The professional roles of the
researcher and the academic librarians essentially diverge when considering research,
instruction, and service.
Also, the premise of this study is to establish how academic librarians develop
within the blended professional role. This may be done regardless of established
professional relationships because the factors influencing the librarians’ opinions are not
controlled by the researcher. No aspect of the researcher’s professional or academic
position sways any of the policies and procedures that govern the work environment of
the librarians. Furthermore, as classified staff, the researcher occupies a lower
hierarchical and theoretical organizational position that the libraries. Due to position
rank, he does not participate at all in the librarian administrating committees that have the

67

potential to modify the roles of the librarians. In short, though the researcher works in the
same organizational unit, the spaces and spheres of influence are inherently separate.
The study also considers one segment of the population of the non-tenure track
faculty at one mid-Atlantic university. Professional role experiences and opinions on
identity will differ by department even at the studied institution, so the results cannot be
considered comprehensive for the entirety of non-tenure track faculty and academic
librarianship. The hope though is that through the demonstration of the viability of this
model other researchers might explore the concept of blended professionalism in varying
departments and demographics.

Conclusion
This chapter established the framework of the qualitative research methodology
utilized by the researcher in this case study. Blended professional identities are perceptual
and therefore these identities are personalized. It was believed that qualitative interviews
would generate the most reflective, direct opinions on the blended professional identities
of the female academic librarians and provide insight into the third spaces as well as the
obstacles to professional development. Following the completion of the interviews,
coding, and analysis, this qualitative process seemed successful as it produced animated
responses and viewpoints in spite of the aforementioned limitations. The next chapter
will discuss the findings of this case study.

68

CHAPTER FOUR

Introduction
During the data analysis, several themes emerged from the findings, such as the
distinctive differences between librarian and tenure-track faculty roles, the composition
of the librarians’ third space, the librarians’ perceived role with respect to the blended
professional model, and the obstacles to professional development and librarian success
at St. Jerome. These themes are all tied together by the core theory produced from this
study. Specifically, the functional aspects of the librarians’ role places structural
limitations on their influence; the perceptual and socially constructed limitations further
enhance these issues by restricting the blended professional effectiveness and operational
third space, which creates both artificial and actual obstacles to professional
development. Simply put, the academic librarians at St. Jerome are in fact blended
professionals that operate in a unique third space within higher education. However, real
or manufactured limitations confine that blended role and third space.
This chapter will begin by briefly reaffirming the differences that emerged during
the interviews between the tenure-track faculty and academic librarian role at St. Jerome.
The discussion will turn to the consideration of the academic librarian as blended
professional. Finally, the causes and validities of professional obstacles will be examined.

Section I: Tenure-track versus Academic Librarian Role

69

As asserted earlier, the roles between tenure-track faculty and academic librarians
historically have been distinct. Gradually, the responsibilities of the librarians increased
and began to resemble the activities of the tenure-track faculty in terms of research
requirements, instructional duties, and provision of services. However, at St. Jerome
these core tasks of research, instruction, and service remain distinct between the two
factions.
It was postulated earlier in this work that the roles of academic librarians and
tenure-track faculty at St. Jerome are inherently different in the substance of their
activities. Nothing in the findings refuted this assumption. In fact, this assertion was more
firmly verified.
While academic librarians engaged in activities that mimicked tenure-track duties,
the librarian workload might be best labeled as “tenure-track lite.” Understanding of this
realization might best be related through the words of Sofia.
I know a lot of tenure-track faculty very closely and that makes me want
to say that it’s nothing at all like it. I deliberately chose not to take that
path so I tend to emphasize the distinctions. In terms of responsibilities,
duties, burdens, workload…this is much less high stakes, right? There is
no point in my job where I feel like it’s “x” or perish.
In short, the pressures and the burdens of the librarians at St. Jerome at present are less
severe than an individual faculty member pursuing tenure. In order to establish librarians
as blended professionals and gain a better understanding of the third space that they
occupy, a brief comparison to the tenure-track faculty role is required.
Research

70

The librarians feel that their administration is strongly encouraging that they
create high-level research projects that replicate those produced by the tenure-track
faculty. The librarians were skeptical of their ability to accomplish this aim.
Irene: The research expectations that [the administration] might
have…we’re never going to have anything like that. I mean, we may have
research expectations and it seems like the administration is pushing us
that way but it’s going to take a lot of years before the research that we do
is anything like the same caliber of research that the tenure track faculty
have to do.
This is in part due to the disciplinary area that the librarians are focusing on, specifically
library literature. When asked the question “What kinds of research do you do?” only two
of the librarians responded saying that they did disciplinary research. The rest of the
librarians’ research related in some form to the libraries, such as technology used in
instruction, library sustainability, and other pragmatic projects that furthered discussion
on processes within the library.
However, library-oriented research did not garner respect even from the librarians
themselves. As Valeria somewhat lightheartedly commented: “Don’t get me going.
Library literature being its own joke. I didn’t say that on tape. But oh my gosh.” Valeria
later defined it as “abysmal.” The researcher understood this perspective to relate to the
lack of a difficulty gaining acceptance into library publications mentioned earlier in
chapter two as well as a systemic devaluing of their own contributions to the literature.
Both legitimate qualitative and quantitative projects produced by librarians are
cycled through St. Jerome’s Institutional Review Board. However, the librarians
denigrated the output time and again as “not real research.”

71

Laura: It’s not a real research thing. And [the Data Services Research
Consultant] is helping us and maybe she can turn some switches on
statistics and make it more…really what you’re going to come out with is
some sort of impression from this particular snapshot.

Researcher: The librarians tend to use the terminology “we done good.”

Laura: Yes, yes. And that the kind of thing that I have [quote hands]
published; more or less reports of projects that I did that turned out well.
Yeah, things like that.
A “we done good” paper or presentation in the parlance of academic librarians is the
equivalent of a report in other disciplines. The project generally did not require
qualitative or quantitative analyses. It is often an experiment that involved applying
conditions to a particular unit and reporting on the results. It generally will just feature a
literature review, a summation of the steps in the process, and then end with
considerations for future applications of a similar project.
The project Laura is listing above actually was more sophisticated than a “we
done good” report. Laura and her co-author analyzed the receptiveness of library users to
instruction at the reference desk through a sophisticated survey approved by St. Jerome’s
Instructional Review Board. Even so, Laura and other librarians pursuing similar projects
often lowered the perceptive quality of the project through their own interpretations. The
librarians just did not appreciate the level of erudition required to complete some of their
work.
It is possible- and likely, given the interview responses- that for this perspective to
stem from a lack of formal understanding of the substantive research process. As Valeria

72

stated: “I can wing it. I can partner with people who know how to do it, but [I don’t].”
Another librarian noted that her article that featured two years of data collection might
have been accepted in a “better journal,” but it would have required more qualitative
methods that she did not know how to complete in large part due to the scholastic
preparation that the librarians receive in library school.
The quality of research fundamentals covered in library school was seen as a
pitfall for many of the librarians. In the librarians’ eyes, this contributed to poorer
literature output.
Lucy: But I know a lot of librarians and I know to a degree that some of
the library scholarship is or can be pretty sad and that people do it just
because they have to and it’s not always good quality. Because we don’t
get really exposure in our programs to that. Our programs, at least in my
day because it’s been awhile since I graduated, were way more vocational.

Researcher: Yeah, there’s not the quantitative or qualitative research
courses.

Lucy: Right. We took a research methods class but for goodness sakes it
didn’t teach us anything. I mean, I think that all I really had to do in that
class was fake apply for a grant…like write a grant proposal and fake
apply for a grant. We did not learn methods. Like we learned that there
was difference between qualitative and quantitative but we didn’t learn
how to do it, you know?
The library science degree is a practical program designed to prepare librarians to work in
the field (American Library Association, 2008). Theory, especially research
methodology, is not emphasized in library school curriculum (American Library

73

Association, 2008). This spoke to the level of methodological understanding that the
librarians gained during their library school programs.
Valeria: Even if I had all the time in the world to publish…[if] I had one
of those jobs where I picked-and-choose where to go [publish], the MLS
didn’t give me the means to analyze the data in ways I need to in order to
conduct a really methodologically sound study. I don’t feel like I have that
background.
For librarians, the term “research” predominantly refers to the acquisition and exploration
of materials needed to complete a formal project. The American Library Association
Standards for Accreditation of Master’s Programs in Library and Information Studies
states:
The curriculum of library and information studies encompasses
information and knowledge creation, communication, identification,
selection, acquisition, organization and description, storage and retrieval,
preservation, analysis, interpretation, evaluation, synthesis, dissemination,
and management (American Library Association, 2008).
Note that the word “production” or an equivalent is missing from that description. For
accreditation purposes, the American Library Association emphasizes the “knowledge
of” research as opposed to the ability to produce. Melania affirms: “We aren’t trained in
research methodology in library school. Maybe we will in the future but right now the
curriculum is very resource oriented, which is not good for academics librarians.”
Research for tenure-track individuals includes both the acquisition portion of the
endeavor as well as the composition of the completed project. At St. Jerome, research for
tenure-track faculty is defined as:

74

Scholarly achievement is demonstrated by original publications and peer
reviewed contributions to the advancement of the discipline/field of study
or the integration of the discipline with other fields; by original research,
artistic work, software and media, exhibitions, and performance; and by
the application of discipline-or field-based knowledge to the practice of a
profession.
Here is a fundamental difference in philosophy for the two roles. Academic librarians
find; tenure-track faculty produce.
The librarians at St. Jerome are working within an environment where the
constituents often have as much or greater education in terms of the complete definition
of “research.” The mission and substance of their educational makes it highly challenging
for the librarians to succeed in the equivalent production of research or gaining a
collaborative foothold. They are the buttresses to the research process, not the
foundation, walls, or the towering pillars that form the cathedral of academe at St.
Jerome. This restricted role in the research process creates a constructed limitation on the
extent of their influence- and third space- within the academy.
Instruction
The instruction that librarians perform also falls short of that completed by their
tenure-track counterparts. The overwhelming manner in which the academic librarians
teach at St. Jerome is in the form of the one-shot. “The one-shot library instruction
session has long been a mainstay for many information literacy programs. Identifying
realistic learning goals, integrating active learning techniques, and conducting
meaningful assessment for a single lesson” (Watson et al., 2013, p. 381). One-shot

75

instruction is formulaic. If the class is longer (and the students have access to computers,
such as in one of the library instruction rooms), it consists of a four step process.
Specifically:
1. Introduction
2. Overview of Resources
3. Interactive Searching
4. Questions and Conclusion
If the librarian has an abbreviated time or computers are not readily available, then step 3
from the above process is skipped. Step 2 may also vary in terms of complexity when
librarians deliver a one-shot. Some of the classes in which the librarians speak,
specifically those taught to incoming freshmen or students new to St. Jerome, require
very basic resources. These often include more generic databases such as Academic
Search Complete or Proquest Research Library.
Unfortunately, the one-shot hampers the librarians in a couple ways. In his
4-stage learning cycles model, Kolb (1984) stated that “learning is the process
whereby knowledge is created through the transformation of experience” (p. 38).
Kolb (1984) asserted that the four stages consisted of concrete experience,
reflective observation, abstract conceptualization, and active experimentation. The
one-shots benefit the concrete experience aspect of learning because that stage
emphasizes “doing.” However, in the short amount of time, there is not
necessarily enough opportunity for the students to progress through deep and
thoughtful considerations. The major problem with this reality is that not all
students learn in the same manner. Therefore, the active learner might gain a great

76

deal from the interactive lessons designed by the librarian, but the reflective
learner might find little or no value in that methodology.
The researcher observed eight individual one-shot instructions performed by eight
librarians. There were many positive aspects of the instruction sessions that validated the
academic librarians’ expertise on library resources. The librarians observed are adept at
“gaining the buy in” from the students. They present the relevant resources that students
in the respective classes might utilize. Mere mention of the cost of some of the database
resources especially when emphasizing the place that the students’ tuition might play in
their purchase often grabs and keeps the attention of the classroom. They also explain the
role of the librarian and encourage questions, visits to the library, and follow-up
consultations.
It is very impressive to see the librarians work specifically within their subject.
They “speak the language,” which gives them instant legitimacy. For example, a student
asked one librarian a question about a very specific disciplinary database. The researcher
had never even heard of the resource, yet the librarian promptly and accurately responded
to the student’s question.
Several aspects of the one-shot role, though, reiterated the librarians’ guest
speaker status. For instance, librarians teach across several departments and sometimes
instruct a class that is not within their specialized field. One librarian stated during her
presentation that “I don’t know what you guys do in [your discipline]” and “I have no
idea what that [disciplinary term] means.” It seems fine to enter an instructional situation
without a complete grasp of the entirety of the disciplinary field. However, projecting

77

that fact hinders the likelihood that a specialized student would contact the librarian and
again demonstrates the ancillary nature of the librarian within the classroom.
The librarians did not engage in any grading or assessment for these classes, so
when matters concerning the application of resources to projects arose the librarians
conceded control of the classroom back to the professor. For example, when questions
pertaining to the assignment come up, such as “Is this a resource that I can use for my
paper?” the librarian always deferred the question to the professor. She responded to one
student with “Ask your professor. I am not grading your paper.” After providing a similar
response to two more students, comparable questions were then directed to the professor
and not the library instructor.
In another instance, the librarian was not present when questions of substance
were fielded. The second half of the class consisted of research done by the students with
minimal supervision. The librarian in fact left the room for the majority of this time and
the professor alone answered questions from the students. Most of these questions
appeared to be pertaining to the assignment, such as with the structure of the upcoming
written project. Students’ actions in the librarian’s absence, unfortunately, defined her
role in the class.
Finally, nerves apparently affected the delivery of one librarian. Several times
during the presentation the librarian apologizes, saying that she is running out of time,
causing the delivery to be stunted, rushed, and awkward at times. In total, the librarians
demonstrated their acumen concerning useful resources applicable to student study.
Slight flaws in their deliveries might be addressed through simple coaching. In doing so,

78

the academic librarians might better bridge the gap between “guest lecturer” and
collaborative individual.
As a result, there is also no real connection between the librarian and the students
during the one-shots. In a recent article, Chambliss (2014) advocated that professors take
the time to learner their students’ names for the following reason:
Any person’s name is emotionally loaded to that person, and has the
power to pull him or her into whatever is going on. But more than that,
calling a student by name opens the door to a more personal connection,
inviting the student to see the professor (and professors generally) as a
human being, maybe a role model or even a kind of friend (Chambliss,
2014).
Chambliss is clearly speaking to his colleagues in the professoriate but the value of
knowing the names is clear. It provides a bridge building connection that is unavailable to
the guest-speaker. The librarian’s role in the one-shot classroom is of an auxiliary
individual, present only to supplement the instruction provided by the main librarian.
In some cases, librarians do have a more substantial role, such as when librarians
are embedded. An embedded librarian is a librarian that either co-teaches a course with a
faculty member or has a role that extends for a series of classes or in some cases the
entirety of the semester (Kvenild & Calkins, 2011). The activities of the librarian are
more substantive, such as grading or assessing assignments semester (Kvenild & Calkins,
2011). For example, when the librarian is embedded in the course, the librarian has a
better understanding of the needs of the faculty member for whom they are instructing.
As Valeria states: “I think…that in those more enhanced relationships you get a better
feeling for what the professor wants and is trying to achieve in terms of objectives,

79

learning outcomes, and so on.” The situation also provides the opportunity to develop
more in-depth student-librarian relationships.
Valeria: You get to development a better relationship with students. And
as a consequence you build trust so they feel like they can come talk to
you in a way that they might not consult their instructor. They know that
you don’t give them a grade. And when they’re struggling a lot of times I
felt like they would be more open with me than they would a professor.
It does, however, require the cooperation of the faculty member and this was an issue
confronting many of the academic librarians at St. Jerome. Faculty did not provide many
embedded opportunities at this point for the librarians. As Bridget stated: “I think the
liaison role provides access but I don’t think that it necessarily provides inclusion.” Thus,
during the course of this project, none of the interviewed librarians participated in
embedded classroom instruction, so unfortunately the researcher was unable to observe
the nuances in this altered version of instruction.
Service
Service for the librarians entails many activities as well as the mindset of the
librarian. Briefly to the latter, some of the librarians considered the foundation of the role
as service-based due to the ambiguity of the description of service activities. Service for
librarians could involve everything from helping a student at a reference desk, to buying
books for the collection to attending conferences. These activities comprise a significant
portion of the daily activities of the librarians and therefore represent the foundation of
the role of the academic librarians at St. Jerome.

80

Service provides the foundation of the librarian role. Juxtaposed with the
traditional tenure-track model with research being the significant foundational base of
activities, this altered the perspective of the role both externally and internally for the
interviewed librarians. Adele states: “I would say [tenure-track model] is kind of flipped
on its head, which in some ways is why we don’t get the same kind of respect.” For other
librarians, the term “service” equated to “support.”
Laura: I am definitely a support role to the tenured faculty and helping
them and their students. Now I do see that I have a role in helping the
tenured faculty with research because I know things that they don’t know
and I can help them. I have in the past been on grants with…PhDs and
stuff and I know that there’s a role that we can serve but I really do see it
as a support role and not on the same level.
Because service is a foundation of the librarian role the ability to create a distinction
between collaborator and service-provider is difficult, which results in issues relating to
respect and minimizes opportunities for librarian-faculty collective ventures. This
“support” ideology had implications, particularly concerning gender, that will be
discussed later in this chapter.
While transdisciplinary, multidisciplinary, and interdisciplinary work can appear
in instructional literature and best practice materials may bridge disciplinary gaps, the
main body of research focuses on department-specific articles, books, and other forms of
academic productivity. This actuality promotes difference and siloing amongst the
university departments. This is not to say that tenure-track does not perform service and
outreach, but the goal of tenure-track research promotes an inner-facing perspective.

81

Service, on the other hand, is outreach-based. The goal of the librarian is to help
whomever, whenever. Ideally the librarian is working with department specific people in
the liaison role, purposely since the librarians are trained to “speak the language.”
However, the nature of the role promotes the instruction of all manner of patronage, from
freshmen 101 students all the way up to tenured faculty and department chairs.
The librarian will help a patron regardless of the topic. Questions come to the
reference desk from all manners of patronage. The problem is either solved therein or the
patron is referred to the appropriate party. This ideology predicates an interdisciplinary
approach and role. The mindset emphasizes the blended professional model and validates
the inclusion of librarians in conversations regarding the model’s application.

Section I Summary
Demonstrated in the table below, the academic librarians’ role at St. Jerome does
not compare equally with the tenure-track faculty due to the differences in research,
instruction, and service obligations.

82

Table 3. This table is a brief summation of the roles of the academic librarians when
compared to tenure-track faculty at St. Jerome.

These are legitimate, functional separations that define who and what the librarians are at
this particular institution. At the same time, perceptions of the defined limitations of the
librarians’ role create socially constructed obstacles that further limit the effectiveness of
their role as blended professionals. Findings related to the blended professional model are
where the conversation now turns.

Section II: The Academic Librarian as Blended Professional
The academic librarians at St. Jerome perform an assortment of functions in the
academy that comprise aspects of research, instruction, and service and necessitate
interaction and influence in a variety of physical and virtual spaces (Crawford, 2012).

83

Academic librarians, with their numerous and sometimes ambiguous roles, also may be
considered blended professionals.
Once again, blended professionals are individuals who “are characterized by an
ability to build common ground with a range of colleagues, internal and external to the
university, and to develop new forms of professional space, knowledge, relationships and
legitimacies associated with broadly based institutional projects such as student life,
business development and community partnership” (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 417).
Principally, blended professionals engage with a variety of individuals and departments
in order to perform their professional and academic duties; the actual roles and the
surroundings in which they are executed generate perceived professional identities.
More so, the hierarchical and perceived placement in the process of curricular
student learning between faculty and students places academic librarians in an
exceptional space within the context of higher education. Whitchurch’s four-tiered frame
considering space, knowledge, relationships, and legitimacies is a suitable model for
analysis as librarians operate in a blended professional mode on an everyday basis. The
librarians interact with nearly every facet of the university community in one way or
another. Yet the librarians’ role affects their perception of their abilities and limits the
completeness of their ability to blend into all real or perceived contexts around the
university.

84

Influences on
blended
professional
role of
academic
librarians at
St. Jerome

Spaces
Geography

Knowledges
Resource
Evaluation

Stigma &
Misunderstanding Disciplinary
of Role
Language
Technologies

Social
Language

Relationships
Managerial
Perspectives

Legitimacies
Workspace

Colleagues

Legitimizing
Knowledge

Faculty

Status Quo

Students &
Staff

Table 4. The table above lists the traits of the blended professional along with the
categories that emerged from the qualitative interviews and field research and serves as a
roadmap for Section II. The model is adapted from the model of Whitchurch, C. (2009).
The rise of the blended professional in higher education: A comparison between the
United Kingdom, Australia and the United States. Higher Education, 58(3), p. 410.

Each category in Figure 4 has the ability to influence the librarians as blended
professionals’ approach and style depending upon the perception of the activity. The
resulting opinion then defines the workable ability of the librarians at St. Jerome to blend
into different communities around the institution. In essence, the categories help explain
the boundaries of the academic librarians at St. Jerome and form the basis for the
following section.
Spaces
The previous section affirmed that the academic librarians at St. Jerome have
fundamentally similar roles as the tenure-track faculty yet the output is less and the
emphases are inverted. The following will discuss how the academic librarian fits into the

85

blended professional model and how their particular position in the campus community
creates a unique third space. The third space that the librarians occupy might best be
explained with a quote from Veronica. After much petitioning, she finally was added to
her department’s email list serve.
The email thread for that one was interesting for how many people it had
to be punted to saying “Oh yeah, she can be on it” or…but I guess
whoever was the gatekeeper was like “Yeah, you’re not a student. You’re
not faculty. So you’re not going to be a part of it.”
The librarians are not students or faculty, but they have the potential ability to balance
between both entities and contribute to the complete campus collective. It is a unique
space in that the librarians’ purpose is to extend in-class learning. Other blended entities
on campus, such as student affairs department, supplement purely academic student
learning with extracurricular activities and functions.
Therefore librarians have access to physical and perceptual communities on
campus due to what they can provide. In Whitchurch’s (2009) words, the academic
librarians of St. Jerome “accommodate the ambiguities of third space between
professional and academic domains” (p. 410). Their role extends beyond administrative
and professional responsibilities due to their contributions to the academic endeavors of
the community, yet the limitations of their position and expertise thwart a wholly
academic identity. Indeed, who they are prevents their complete acceptance into the
communities with whom they interact. The contributing factors around their positions
will now be examined.
Geography

86

One of the basic challenges concerning place that the librarians face at St. Jerome
pertains to geography. As mentioned, St. Jerome’s librarians are spread across three
campuses: St. Michael, St. Raphael, and St. Gabriel. The Alexander VI and Stephen VI
libraries are both on the St. Michael Campus, which is a sprawling residential campus in
a suburban area. Clement V Library is located on the newly residential St. Raphael
Campus, which is in a rural setting approximately 15 miles to the west of the St. Michael
Campus. Urban II Library on the St. Gabriel Campus is in an urban setting and caters
primarily to professional, non-residential students.
St. Jerome is in a metro area where traffic congestion makes travel between
campuses problematic. This reality in itself creates artificial siloing between the libraries
at the campuses that has implications beyond mere isolation.
Susanna: St. Michael…I feel totally isolated from. St. Raphael I tend to
forget about. Unless one of them contacts me I tend to forget that they
even exist. Being out here [St. Michael’s librarians] completely forget
what we can do out here and sometimes they forget that we’re out here in
general. Then they also don’t realize that sometimes, because they don’t
interact with us, what our specialties are.
Again, remember that the librarians at St. Jerome are liaison librarians. The liaison
librarian fits the concept of blended professional in definition and function; they work
within the library, liaise with their academic department and its constituents, and in
various communities around the campus. One of the benefits of this model is that
specialists exist and when complicated disciplinary questions emerge the patron may be
referred to a particular librarian with a background in that field. In Susanna’s case, she
has a very unique social sciences specialty that may be considered a subset of other

87

disciplines. As Susanna is implying, the librarians at St. Michael, due to a lack of
sustained interaction, tend to disregard her abilities and refer patrons to more generic
disciplines. This may create problems for the patron because they are potentially referred
to an individual without the expertise to solve the problem. It also complicates the role of
the librarian who is being asked to resolve an issue that they might not have the ability to
grasp in its entirety.
The geographic situation also exacerbates other manners of isolation. One
librarian described her boss as a micromanager who required all staff to have approval to
travel to different campuses. The librarian had made some collaborative connections with
librarians located on different campuses, but in her opinion her supervisor prevented
travel because there was a personality dispute. Melania states: “I feel isolated now in my
own library and also isolated from what’s going on at other campuses.”
In other instances, siloing emerged between libraries on the same campus. In the
past two years, the librarians at Stephen VI have begun to focus heavily on instruction
and outreach to the undergraduate community. Alexander VI in contrast has shifted its
charge to providing service to the graduate and faculty populations at the St. Michael
campus. The ideology of “facilitating information to students and faculty” of St. Jerome
remains the same. However, graduate and faculty work is seen as “real research” and
more pedantic in substance. It intensifies division. As Lucy stated:
I felt like the Alexander VI librarians were very…like, “We are the subject
liaisons, and we are…” I don’t know where they get that attitude. I’m not
saying that translates to everyone but they sometimes come off as
elite…or better than the other librarians. And I’ve heard them say bad

88

things about other librarians on the other campuses if that…as if the other
campuses are inferior. Which I think goes back to the whole “We are one
library” thing, but we’re not really becoming one library.
Part of the problem with Lucy’s statement is that regardless of whether or not the
Alexander VI librarians have or display elitist attitudes, the sensitivity exists. Perceived
belief may have just as much of a likelihood to create negative professional opinions as
an actual attitude or obstacle.
Perhaps a contributing factor to this concern is the location of the library
administration for St. Jerome. The librarians at Alexander VI have offices located in a
“cubicle farm.” Within that room is the supervisor of all the librarians at St. Jerome.
Across the hall is the office of the Dean of the Libraries. The decision-making process
consistently was described as Alexander VI-centric. Important meetings, trainings, and
even holiday parties are planned with this library in mind. The implication was that the
location of the administration itself influenced this process, again providing the
perception of favoritism and further isolating the other libraries.
Communication, or lack thereof, does not help the siloing. Decisions are made
frequently with the St. Michael Campus libraries in mind. However, the policy decisions
are universal, often without definitive explanation:
Gwen: I definitely feel like some decisions are made within the library
system centrally that, like unless I'm very aggressive and or nosy, don't
always necessarily trickle down or then maybe they just trickle down later
than other things that are happening.
A formal example of this occurred in the summer of 2014 when the research for this
project was ongoing. Circulation staff was to receive uniform training on answering

89

reference questions. All circulation staff at St. Michael attended four weekly 1.5 hour
trainings during the month of July. Ava, located at the St. Gabriel campus, stated that
their staff training would be a single session and occur just prior to the start of classes at
the end of August. It also would be taught by a different librarian. The quality of training
at the St. Gabriel Campus was invariably different than that received at the St. Michael
Campus due to the amount of time spent. In addition, the librarian who taught the classes
at the St. Michael Campus developed the training. St. Gabriel essentially received a
distilled training from a supplemental trainer.
Throughout the community of librarians, geography encouraged siloing, creating
situations where librarians move primarily within their own spheres of influence, be that
a specific library or campus. These findings are significant because this compounds the
academic librarians’ isolation amongst the greater academic community because it
restricts the limits of blended professional’s spatial mobility.
Stigma and Misunderstanding
The academic librarians at St. Jerome have difficulty gaining acceptance in the
greater academic community, in part due to some of the differences in the roles of the
librarians and the tenure-track faculty outlined in the previous section. The level of
research is different between the two entities, which frequently puts the librarians into a
service-oriented role. The lack of a foothold in the academic community was often
credited to a misunderstanding of the role of the librarian.
Laura: Generally I don’t think that faculty recognize what we…because
we haven’t educated them, or they just don’t know, or they’re too busy, or

90

whatever…they don’t recognize what we can contribute. So we’re isolated
in that kind of context.
Again, this misunderstanding by the faculty may directly relate to the conflicted role that
the librarians have of themselves. They view themselves as service providers, yet the
administration emphasizes collaboration. Collaboration suggests equal or at least similar
standing in role. Service retains the connotation of “servant.” These are completely
different ideologies that are difficult to reconcile, resulting in a lack of shared ventures
and a prevalent and restricting stigma about the librarians’ role. The mere perception of
that identity creates a formidable challenge to overcome.
Unfortunately, college faculty primarily still utilize the library and its librarians
principally for the acquisition of materials and occasionally as space for research labors
(Marcus, Covert-Vail, & Mandel, 2007). For example, one study found that a vast
majority of faculty value library services, but only a fraction utilized their liaisons for
instruction, finding the greatest use of the library to be ordering books or serials for the
faculty (Yang, 2000). As repeatedly asserted, collaboration is not viewed as the purpose
of the space in which librarians at St. Jerome occupy.
Bridget: [Faculty] don’t do research the way we [librarians] think about
research. They know people in their specialty so they’re going directly to
them. So in some ways they see the librarian as very much for the students
but they’re not going to use them necessarily for themselves unless it’s
something very, very tricky.
Essentially, research has shown that faculty like and seemingly appreciate the services
provided by the libraries (Bausman, Ward & Pell, 2014; O’Clair, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010),

91

but the faculty does not wish to maintain or initiate them and therefore they may not
provide long-term opportunities for collaboration.
As a result, librarians have found it difficult to gain respect for collaboration or
outreach in the academic departments. According to Elizabeth: “I’ve put out feelers about
collaboration, collaborating on research, but nothing’s ever come out of it.” In fact, the
survey of librarian schedules at St. Jerome found that only 3.9% of their time was
scheduled to be in office hours located in an academic department. This is unfortunate
because activities like office hours provide a means for the librarians to engage with the
university community outside of the physical confines of the library.
Julia: When I'm over there [in the department for office hours], I am not
only meeting students, I am in a physical place where faculty members
come through that particular office all the time too. So if someone needs to
ask me a question, I'll tell them I'll be over there on Tuesday from 5 to 7,
you can pop in and some people just come by and say hello because they
know that I'm there or they need something or whatever. So it's really an
advantage to have a known presence in a building like that.
Without a physical presence provided by office hours outreach becomes more
challenging and time-consuming for the academic librarians.
Even on a real social level there appears to be a significant barrier between the
occupied places of the librarians and the tenure-track faculty. Jessica related the
following example.
The faculty, it’s weird. This is so weird. I was going to someone’s
retirement party a couple months ago and I actually ended up running in to
a couple of English faculty members, one of whom turned out to come
from the same part of the country as I do. And it was weird because it was

92

very collegial. I almost felt out of place. I felt odd and I wasn’t quite sure
what to make of it. But then when I saw one of them later at a conference,
it felt much more distant. I don’t know. It’s a little uneven.
McHenry and Sharkey (2014) assert that “growing distinction between tenured and
tenure-track faculty members on the one hand and tenure-ineligible lecturers or part-time
adjuncts on the other has produced an academic caste system that is undermining the
raison d'être of our institutions of higher learning” (p. 35). Similar to the geographic
restrictions, these limitations are also perceived in that there is no written or physical
barrier truly preventing interaction. Yet the perceptions of both the faculty and the
librarians engage to create a socially constructed boundary that inhibits the interactions of
the blended professional.
Therefore, librarians at St. Jerome do not achieve complete acceptance into
communities around campus perhaps because they have a lower rank in social capital
(Burns, 2004). They have the ability to interact but cannot achieve a true foothold and
their space is defined by what they are not. These discoveries therefore suggest that the
academic librarians exist on a third space that is subordinate to tenure-track faculty and at
the same time the librarians find socially constructed restraints preventing the complete
amalgamation of blended professional their role.
Technology and Space
It was mentioned that the purpose of the librarian role is often misinterpreted by
members of the academic community. Part of that stems from the historic model of the
librarian working within a building crammed with volumes of books and journals.

93

Valeria: I think there are a lot of truly academic organizations out there
that really don’t see the purpose of us. I think in a lot of institutions people
question the value of the librarians. I mean I think in an old fashioned way
they think of us as the keeper of a collection.
This notion increasingly is becoming obsolete due to the continued advances in library
technologies.
On the positive side, librarians do have a technological advantage that spreads the
blended space in which they work. Academic libraries offer a substantial connectivity to
the university academic collective since they bridge the information gap between the
faculty and the student. The actual use of the once-traditional, physical library itself
began to shift in the late 1990’s (Lougee, 2002). Physical volumes of some journals are
being phased out in favor of online subscriptions. The on-campus library is evolving into
a smaller study center and less of a repository (Jeevan, 2007; Lougee, 2002). This
modification of thought is significant since it made the transition to servicing the campus
community in their ubiquitous digital learning much more natural.
Despite this reduction in physical presence, librarians at St. Jerome have several
options for outreach and interaction with campus community patrons such as online
information guides (Roberts & Hunter, 2011; Robinson & Kim, 2010) and live and
recorded web tutorials (Shiao-Feng & Kuo, 2010; Charnigo, 2009; Dunlap, 2002).
However, the popular suggestion to achieve rapid interaction is through virtual
communication (Hawes, 2011; Bennett & Simning, 2010), labeled in library-parlance as
Virtual Reference.

94

The premise of virtual reference is simple. The librarian is not tied to a specific
reference point, such as a desk or phone, and the interaction is immediate, so the
communication is quicker than email. The medium of communication creates the
potential for extended hours of service both on-campus and off. Virtual reference
includes avenues of written digital communication such as Instant Messaging (IM)
(Whitehair, 2010; Bower & Mee, 2010) and video chat, such as via Skype (Booth, 2008).
Virtual Reference grew from libraries attempting to use digital tools in order to
provide learning opportunities and communication with patrons who could not directly
visit a reference desk. It is a different interaction though from consultations that occur in
person.
Lucy: Even someone who has a lot of experience [with virtual reference]
and I think I’m pretty good at that…it can be hard sometimes and
sometimes you have to take a step back and realize that you can’t show the
empathy that you’re trying to that you would show in person. You have to
be almost more demonstrative and over exaggerate it.
Any form of virtual reference requires patience and training. As Lucy says: “You have to
refine your skills to work in that environment.” The journey into technology requires a
willingness on the part of the librarian to extend beyond the traditional definition and
image of a librarian perhaps requiring a shift in paradigms, both personally and
professionally. The ability to extend space virtually enhances the academic librarians’
capacity to reach a larger populace.
In an environment where many actual or perceived roadblocks to collaboration
exist, technology is a means to bridge many gaps. The usage of virtual reference at St.

95

Jerome continues to increase on an annual basis. For instance, in the calendar year of
2011, there were 1,926 questions fielded via IM; in 2012 that number increased to 3,016.
It is a popular medium through which librarians may interact with the university
community and represents a viable means to continue to blend professional boundaries in
spite of physical and cultural hindrances.
Spaces Summary
Technology greatly enhances the third space in which the academic librarians are
able to interact and extend their professional boundaries and third space. However,
geographic restrictions develop physical and then subsequently cultural silos between
personnel at the various libraries of St. Jerome. Their limitations are further complicated
by the academic community’s misunderstanding of the librarian role as well as the
personality and gender traits of the librarians themselves, which is something that will be
discussed later in this chapter. These findings indicate that the academic librarians have
the ability to blend across different barriers of space but the existing complications
greatly diminish the librarians’ effectiveness as blended professionals because the
obstacles limit the actual or perceived interactive spaces in which the librarians might
work and thrive.

Knowledges
Whitchurch (2009) asserts that the knowledge or knowledges that a professional
retains and distributes creates a blended identity. With tenure-track faculty, this
knowledge would be their personal specialty knowledge within their discipline. The

96

liaison librarians at St. Jerome who were interviewed on the other hand all provide the
ability to find and evaluate materials needed by the academic community. As Maria
states: “Our job is to find additional information, or the data, or additional
data…whatever they need relevant to whatever experiment that they’re doing.” That is
the basic knowledge that all librarians at St. Jerome may provide by one means or
another; it is an expectation of librarians in general. In terms of collaboration and
acceptance across boundaries at an academic institution though, secondary abilities and
skills earned through disciplinary study also come into play and form a key function of
the ultimate success of the blended professional.
Evaluating Resources
The knowledges concept of blended professionalism helps explain the unique
third space that librarians occupy. Discovering and assessing researchable information is
a key function of academic librarians in the context of higher education. The librarians
fill that knowledge gap between faculty instruction and student learning. It is a unique
academic space occupied by librarians.
Knowledges do vary though, even at the generic level. When asked about the
most important knowledge that they might provide, the answers were varied. This is not
surprising as knowledge, or perception of knowledge, is subjective and based upon
personal experience (Buckland, 1991). However, the most common response regarding
significant knowledges dealt with finding and evaluating resources.
Researcher: What would you consider the most important knowledge or
expertise that you provide?

97

Melania: Teaching students how to evaluate resources and choosing the
right resources to conduct their research.
In the field of library science, the evaluation of information falls into the realm of
knowledge management. In general, knowledge management consists of “accessing,
evaluating, managing, organizing, filtering, and distributing information in a manner that
is useful to end users--professional judgment-based activities perfected by librarians”
(DiMatta & Oder, 1997, p. 33). The complexity of the problem addressed will alter the
steps in the process and the resources consulted. However, historically this is the basis of
the role of librarian: evaluate and categorize materials required by the patronage of that
particular library (Rubin, 2004).
Systemic change complicates the distribution of knowledge as well. Modifications
in how the library is viewed and used due to the influx of technologies, ubiquitous
learning, and philosophical roles impact the blended places of the academic librarians in
the academy.
The philosophy of knowledge management…is proving to be a catalyst for
change- creating an atmosphere in which focus is no longer upon
processes taking place in buildings called libraries, but upon knowledge
workers as information intermediaries and upon organizing systems to
capture that knowledge embedded therein and then transmitting it to those
customers who seek answers (Stueart & Moran, 2007, p. 45).
The academic librarians themselves are a vehicle of knowledge. They are the individuals
that interpret the resources available and “create an interactive knowledge environment”
(Whitchurch, 2009, p. 410). As well, this transmission of knowledge may occur in a
scheduled or random environment. For example, Gwen relates: “A lot of that is kind of

98

more ad hoc, like in individual conversations with people that I might happen to have
about their research. I might mention, like “Oh we actually have this really great
[product]. Have you tried that?” Synthesis of the problem becomes a seminal part of the
academic librarians’ interaction with patronage (Bopp & Smith, 2011).
Comfort and understanding related to knowledge management enhances
collaborative attitudes (Aharony, 2011). Demonstrating an ability to analyze knowledge
effectively, as well as understand and utilize resources, particularly with faculty,
sometimes shocks the patronage.
Lucy: I think that faculty are often surprised by how much librarians do
know. But it’s getting the opportunity …I think like one of the biggest
things is to let faculty see that librarians do know things about student
learning and how to align student learning outcomes with research needs
and library needs and how to show through assessment measures that
something’s been accomplished…[but] they don’t always let us in that far.
This surprise at the expertise of the academic librarians at St. Jerome extends back to the
difference in the production of research discussed in the first section of this chapter.
Tenure-track faculty are proficient in the totality of the research process, which as
mentioned includes the production of disciplinary research. Librarians, however, truly are
experts in the evaluation, acquisition and dissemination of resources and knowledge. This
aspect of the findings is key, universal trait that all librarians retain as blended
professionals.
Speaking the language
Every discipline employs its own vocabulary, a language often best understood by
those in the discipline. The librarians at St. Jerome are no different, using terms, or

99

jargon, that are specialized and often confusing for non-library personnel and patronage.
Adele states that during instruction: “I try not to throw library jargon at them. I don’t
know if that’s a teaching method but I try to use more natural language when talking to
them.” These terminologies change depending upon the institution. For example, at St.
Jerome, the electronic catalog labels a book that has been “checked out” as “charged;” a
returned book is “discharged,” as opposed to “returned.”
More in-depth, research terminology has its own code as well. Many librarians
employ the use of Boolean operators for their searches. For instance, if an individual
searches for “higher AND education” they will find only materials including both terms.
In contrast, if the individual searches for “Higher OR education” they will find more
results because the findings will include one or both of the terms. The use of this method
often requires explanation. “Oh, okay. You want to use a Boolean search. Oh, you were
born in 1995. You don’t know what that means.” However, it behooves librarians to
teach this methodology because it has been shown to enhance research skills in even
novice users (Dinet, Favart, & Passerault, 2004).
Also, while unified service models are being utilized in 3 of the 4 libraries at St.
Jerome, the largest library, Alexander VI, still utilizes a separate Circulation Desk and a
Reference Desk. In general, circulation desks are staff by classified, non-librarian staff
whereas reference desks are populated by academic librarians. Circulation staff handle
the acquisition of the materials (checking out books, ordering materials), whereas
librarians at the reference desks help evaluate and locate information for the patron.

100

The librarians asserted a misunderstanding of the duties of the personnel at the
various desks. “I think that everybody thinks that everybody that works in a library is a
librarian,” to include sometimes even the student workers. As a result, it is not always
readily apparent that a student should visit a reference desk in order to find research
assistance. Even simple things like this add to confusion to patrons that are newer to the
system. Navigating and translating this language allows the librarian to better
communicate with the general university population.
In addition, the databases and catalogs also have their own terminologies. For
example, in the medical field there is a vocabulary known as MeSH (Medical Subject
Headings). “It is designed to help quickly locate descriptors of possible interest and to
show the hierarchy in which descriptors of interest appear” (NIH, 2014). Articles in
databases are linked together using subject headings deriving from the language.
Demonstrating and communicating the effectiveness of the usage of this language is an
important facet of the librarians’ abilities.
Researcher: What’s the best way that you can communicate that kind of
knowledge?

Laura: Showing them how to use that language when they’re doing
searches. So keywords, controlled vocabulary, about things that are
relevant. And then contrasting it with how they’re doing their current
searching. Like if they’re using Google Scholar search and then I can take
them into [a disciplinary database] and say “We can use this term that’s
been assigned that might work…”

Researcher: So distilling their process?

101

Laura: Yeah.
The other major cited way to communicate this knowledge is through interactive
instruction. During the observed one-shot instruction sessions when time allowed, the
students practiced searching for resources with the librarian present. Often the mistake
made by the student was overcomplicating the search. They would use too many words
and then return no results. The librarians offered more effective search methods and
terms, such as “productive” as opposed to “good.” Understanding and applying this
knowledge of vocabulary greatly enhances a researcher’s ability to find relevant materials
in a short amount of time.
While Google and similar search engines have led many to believe that searching
for information is a simplistic task, effective research is much more complex. This
actuality gives the librarians as blended professionals the ability to interact with a wide
range of the university populace. However, in order to gain more intimate acceptance in a
disciplinary role, the findings indicate that an additional knowledge in the form of
language is often required.
Social Language
Speaking the language also extends to social interactions with certain disciplines.
The librarians who held a secondary subject masters often cited that degree’s ability to
open doors.
Veronica: Oh, knowledge. Well, considering that I do have that
[disciplinary] background it seems like I have a little edge in that aspect
then because in terms of meeting with my faculty and students since I do

102

have that background I don’t have to be shy that I’m not familiar with the
programs because I am.

Researcher: You speak the language?

Veronica: I speak the language.
Some of this interaction involves verbal communication and terminology. The example
previously mentioned during the discussion on one-shot instruction observation is a
primary example of effective knowledge of verbal communication. The question fielded
by the librarian was so specific that only a knowledge-area specialist would have been
able to interpret correctly the question and formulate a precise response.
The other component is the understanding of the social habits of the individuals
within specific departments. In-depth interactions provide understanding of the needs of
specific academic sectors (Jankowska & Marshall, 2003), which is especially important
when effective written or verbal communication is not a forte of members of that
discipline (Steiner, 2011).
Now this is going to sound really egotistical but I think one of the things
that I bring definitely to the department and maybe to the community….is
my training in the sciences. We have how many science librarians and
how many of them actually have a degree in it? Two. And it’s a whole
different thought process and I think you know being able to sit in a group
of people and say “You don’t understand the way the science faculty are
really thinking about this or the way they’re going to do it.”

103

It is an acculturation process often learned as graduate students in non-library degree
programs (Mitchell & Morton, 1992) and provides a disciplinary identity (Xiaoli, et al.,
2010).
The surveyed librarians seemingly understand the efficacy of disciplinary
language, yet it was not universally mentioned perhaps because not all of the librarians
had multiple master’s degrees. Establishing the importance of that knowledge in line with
professional success suggests that an additional degree is required and possibly not all of
the librarians were willing to make that commitment. However, consider all of the
aforementioned physical and social limitations facing the academic librarians when they
perform outreach and seek to gain “admittance” to particular disciplinary departments.
Language, in spite of those obstacles, opens the proverbial door for the librarians.
As a result, the particular knowledge of language serves as a key to the effectiveness of
the blended professional model. Language and its presence in the librarians’ discussions
designate its importance for developing collaborative opportunities and extending the
boundaries of the perceived third space.
Knowledges Summary
The academic librarians at St. Jerome valued their ability to evaluate information
and provide methods for their patronage to acquire the resources needed to complete their
projects. Speaking the language and having the ability to acculturate oneself into an
academic community was a skill specified by the librarians with disciplinary master’s
degrees. Clearly those librarians who mentioned it perceive language’s significance as it
almost automatically extends the librarians’ third space from the general realm to the

104

disciplinary fields. This is noteworthy in the conversation on blended professionalism
because that additional avenue of communication with the university community. If the
library science degree and general librarian role offers the perceived “support” stigma,
then the language provides the librarians a means at least to partially overcome that
obstacle and gain social and intellectual access to specific factions of the academic
community.

Relationships
Professional relationships “are networks of connections among employees, staff,
and external organizations that are primarily relational in nature. They exist to foster and
promote good relations among team members” (Olson & Singer, 2004, p. 9). At St.
Jerome, these partnerships exist on a variety of vertical and horizontal levels both interior
and exterior to the library. They represent the personal third spaces that the academic
librarians occupy.
Again, third space is the theoretical sphere built through an individual’s ability to
interrelate and intertwine with many diverse communities, thus increasing commonalities
between varied populations (Whitchurch, 2009; Whitchurch, 2008). Real or perceived
boundaries have the ability to influence and construct the extending limits of the working
third space. In the context of blended professional relationships, this is essential because
the third space will influence with whom an individual might develop a professional
connection.

105

As a result, one’s blended professional role, specifically at St. Jerome, influences
the perspective of the significance of the relationships. For example, academic librarians
who manage other librarians have a more holistic view of the institutional relationships
and spheres of influence whereas the liaison librarians tend to focus more on the
immediate, departmental networks. The librarians at St. Jerome have connections within
a variety of spheres, though again the perceived and constructed limitations of their role
inhibit their ability to maximize opportunities.
Managerial Perspective
All four of the supervising librarians interviewed conspicuously mentioned the
support staff exterior to the library as being significant. This reflects basic recommended
library management strategies and reveals their concern for holistic matters regarding
their libraries. “Spend time building relationships with partners, key stakeholders, and
decision makers…outside your organization” (Olson & Singer, 2004, p. 105). As Maria
relates, the point of enhancing and strengthening these relationships is that the alliances
with exterior stakeholders allow transitions to occur and progress to be made
(Whitchurch, 2009).
Maria: They’re the budget people. They’re the facilities people. People
that…and again, I don’t want to make it sound like I’m game playing but
you’ve got to know what side of the bread your butter is, you know? I’d
say I have a good relationship with a lot of the facilities guys just because
of some of the adventures that I’ve fallen into or projects that I’ve been
told to take care of.
Befriending, say, the IT personnel is not politicking or game playing. It is contingency
planning. It allows an organization to seamlessly progress when challenges occur. It is

106

also important to gain support from locational influencers such as executives so that they
understand what the library intends on achieving. “You will need to gain management
buy-in early and often. Involve stakeholders groups in the planning” (Harriman, 2008, p.
6-7).Therefore developing relationships with management of exterior and lateral
departments becomes important (Riccobono et al., 2014; Kaplan, 1984).
Catherine: Certainly folks within the University Life and other
departments like that…health services…university registrar’s office,
campus police, the bookstore, info desk…you know, all of those backbone
folks, I would say. I don’t know as well, say, the folks in my liaisons area.
I don’t know the facilities guys as well as my access services supervisor,
who’s also our campus liaison but I know them and they know me.
Without the proper development of these relationships, it becomes difficult to succeed in
a constantly changing environment like that at St. Jerome. This is a universal trend and it
is incumbent upon the librarians to build these relationships because the multiplicity of
the relationships effectively extends the third space in which the librarians operate..
Two of the supervisors also asserted that one of their primary roles was in the
facilitation of the success of their librarians. Maria calls it “servant leadership” and the
preservation of a “positive psychic environment.” The premise is that her staff was
professional and it was her responsibility to create a positive working atmosphere in
which those professionals could succeed.
Maria: My job was to keep my antennae out to make sure there wasn’t too
much incoming or other weirdness that would put too much pressure on
[them]. I make sure that they’ve got the platform for what they need to do.
So they can jump, spin, run, skate…do what they need to do whatever they
need to do within their disciplines or however their disciplines work or

107

how their students work or their faculty or whatever so they can do their
job.
The implication of this evidence is twofold. First, it indirectly refers to the factors
(described here as “weirdness”) that influence and define the boundaries of the librarians’
third space. The managerial ideal is that they might mitigate these concerns and allow the
librarians to blend further into the university community. Second, if the goal of the
organization is to extend the third space boundaries of influence and increase
collaboration, the minutia as well as the complex concerns must be addressed so that the
individuals charged with the more complex tasks may focus their energy on those instead.
It enables the self-sufficiency of the manager’s workers (Whitchurch, 2009).
Managers also involve themselves in mentoring, but often administrative
responsibilities limit the amount of time that a manager may devote to such activities. For
instance, one manager stated that she very much enjoyed management, but did not have
the time to properly develop mentoring relationships with all members of her staff. Five
librarians report to this manager. Given this assertion, it seems unlikely that the manager
with eleven librarians reporting to her would have better success in this regard.
These conclusions are significant because reality may create issues with
professional development because it limits the ability to conceptualize career planning
from someone who has achieved a more advanced rank. If librarian third space is seen in
the vertical plane in terms of career professionalism, then the lack of mentoring may be a
space-restricting complication as well. As a result, a lot of the mentoring falls to
colleagues, which were the most cited significant relationships during the interviews.
Colleagues

108

Mentoring on the lateral level develops skills that enable an individual to succeed
at that particular level (Parker, Hall, & Kram, 2008; Bryant & Terborg, 2008). As well,
within a geographically diverse community this type of mentoring extends boundaries
and influence because individuals seek guidance from other equally-leveled collaborative
partners. There is a “clear link between career success and having a mentor. Many studies
provide evidence of this; their findings are fairly consistent in stating that very few
individuals advance to the top administrative ranks in an organization without the help of
a mentor or several mentors” (Stueart & Moran, 2007, p. 274). However, if the ambition
of the librarian is to move up in the chain of command, they might fare better from the
advice of individuals already in the position of leadership.
Laura: The other liaisons have been very supportive and I learn a lot from
them just watching what they do. And I would have to say that would be at
a lateral level. I don’t feel that way [hands mimic moving up].

Researcher: You’re talking about the library administration.

Laura: Yes. I don’t feel like…

Researcher: Why not?

Laura: I like the autonomy but I don’t like the lack of feedback…the lack
of critical constructive evaluation.
In this way the dependence upon becomes problematic, especially in an organization such
as St. Jerome where upper level opportunities are not abundant. As will be discussed in
the third section of this chapter, a lack of prospects hindered professional development of

109

the librarians. None of the librarians mentioned mentors exterior to their department or
St. Jerome as an institution. Only three cited specific mentoring relationships amongst
their immediate colleagues. One wonders if a lack of leadership mentoring relationships
helps create this impediment. Organizational structure is also a suspect and this will be
addressed in section three of this chapter.
On a basic level though, colleagues become the most important relationship that
the librarians might have at St. Jerome because they generally interact with them on a
daily basis (Smith, 2014). A positive relationship with colleagues makes the environment
bearable.
Veronica: In terms with colleagues…these are the folks that you work
with and every day…so it would be more pleasant if you are on a more
friendly or collegial relations with them. Otherwise it will probably be
pretty horrendous to go to work every day if your goal is to avoid them at
all costs.

Researcher: So collegiality by necessity.

Veronica: [laughs]. I guess if you were to break it down that way…well,
yeah. We’ll go with that.
The librarians do not always interact with members of the academic community outside
the library. They may not teach a class or meet with a student on a given day so as a
result their social interaction is with the people that they see most frequently: their
coworkers. As well, given the barriers to collaboration concerning research that the
librarians have experienced, the colleagues in the room or department are often the best

110

options for joint projects. Above all, the mission of a particular department is best
understood by the individuals experiencing the same environments (Lin & Fraser, 2008).
Researcher: What aspect of those [collegial] relationships makes them
significant?

Valeria: I think we get each other. I think we’re both here for a similar
purpose and we both understand what the barrier are and so I feel like
when we work together there is a sense of we’re in this together.
The challenges and successes facing the librarians of St. Jerome are somewhat unique to
their field. As a result, finding empathy in colleagues makes the daily tasks less daunting.
This understanding sometimes extends to professionals in positions exterior to the library
as well.
Non-library Professionals
The St. Jerome librarians asserted that the professional departmental staff “tend to
get what we do a lot more than the faculty” in large part due to their service-oriented
roles that created levels of social grading. As a result, working within formal,
hierarchical structures…individuals [are] also developing lateral relationships and
networks” (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 409).The staff also “probably get the same brunt” of the
approach from the higher-ups. Therefore developing these lateral relationships is
important because “you can build a collaborative relationship with your peers by helping
them when they need help- and then asking them to return the favor” (Garfinkle, 2012, p.
4). There is a reflexive understanding, which is important at St. Jerome because of the
relative pecking order.

111

There is a distinct hierarchy in academe and some faculty treat support staff as
subordinates. This is similar to what Laura related about a former corporate role: “I was
never on the same level as a physician, or even a nurse, you know. I was a support role
and support staff.” Librarians have had similar experiences, again in part due to the
misunderstanding of the librarians’ role. The reality that librarians are in is misconstrued
as the “Librarians are here to help the faculty.”
The relationships with the staff can be quite fruitful and advantageous though
(Garfinkle, 2012). Sofia describes one of her colleagues in a department that she works
with:
[There’s] another blended professional. She’s the PhD adviser for [the
disciplinary program] and she and the other professional advising staff in
the school have become a real sort of anchor as it were. I learn a lot from
them. They sort of help me figure out…they keep me on top of what’s
going on with their students so opportunities for involvement. So the
advising staff are actually…and I’m trying to force that in the other
department because it’s been so successful in [that department]…the
advisers are highly educated people…multiple masters or
doctorates…working in that sort of lineal role.
The terminal degree in higher education may not be sufficient to garner worth in that
field. The tenure-track faculty focuses on research and everyone in the surrounding roles
becomes supportive. This creates a feeling of camaraderie amongst the non-tenure-track
entities on campus that aim primarily to serve the needs of students and faculty. As
Jessica states: “We have more in common in that we tend to serve the students and the
faculty and honestly they tend to be more receptive than the faculty do.”

112

Still, these internal and external lateral relationships may not be as beneficial as
they appear on the surface. When success with outreach is unsuccessful, these
relationships tend to become a fallback and may lead to complacency. If the librarians
perceive their boundaries of influence only extending to the departmental staff and not
the faculty, it artificially creates a boundary to overcome. Outreach for a blended
professional should endeavor to extend beyond the perceived limitations of the respective
third space and attempt to find audience in both higher and lower levels. It is difficult to
engage with, say, the faculty if the professional comfort level is only with the colleagues
in the same office.
Faculty
Within higher education, tenure-track faculty occupy a different and elevated
level of social space. As a result, developing relationships with faculty can be difficult, in
part due to the issues raised in the previous section about research foundations and
abilities. As well, it is difficult to portray oneself as a collaborator when the basis of the
librarian’s work is service. These are both socially constructed and legitimate obstacles to
relationship development in the blended professional context. Yet these relationships can
be quite successful.
Gwen: I think faculty support is really important, we definitely…there's
some faculty that, you know, kind of couldn't be bothered with us and
don't have any interest but on the flip side we have faculty that are really,
really big library proponents and always like questioning things and [are]
always talking us up and kind of willing to go to bat for us.
Faculty relationships may be beneficial for professional development as well.

113

Melania: I have good relationships with my faculty. They’re really good
and I’m proud of that. And they are important to me…when I’ve needed
recommendations from them they’ve given them to me and they always
acknowledge the contribution that I make.
Elizabeth cited communication as the key developer of relationships with her faculty.
However, Elizabeth teaches in a discipline that is more accepting of librarian interaction
and assistance so an enhanced librarian-faculty relationship in that regard seems
plausible. The lines are more open for clear objectives and communication. Extension of
third space in that atmosphere is prominent and successful.
As a result, the interesting aspect of the librarian-faculty relationship was that the
librarians citing those relationships as significant either work in smaller libraries at St.
Jerome or taught a significant number of classes. Headway into other fields such as
STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) and in larger campus
environments seemingly was more difficult. A STEM librarian explained the dynamics of
her relationship with the faculty in this way:
With the scientist aspect it’s like they want to fiddle around with it first
and then they’ll come back to you if they need help. But for the most part,
they’re like hermits where it’s “Let me tinker with it first. I don’t need you
to tell me what to do.”
Consequently, in addition to the librarians needing to overcome the realities of the
representation of their service role, they also need to manage personalities in order to
succeed in relationship development with their faculty. This creates an additional border
for the extension of the blended professional influence.
Students and Classified Staff

114

Significant in the results were two categories of relationships conspicuous by their
lack of mention: students and classified staff. When asked about the primary role of the
academic librarian, most interviewed librarians replied by describing interactions with
students. Yet only one librarian cited students as the most significant relationship.
Susanna: To me the most important relationship is with the students
because you want them to know they come and we’ll help. We’ll do it.
It’s always…I think I enjoy working with students more because they
talk the field that I learned. It’s always nice to have an academic
conversation with people and have an academic debate. I think it’s really
important that I talk with them because I’m with them…my people.
For Susanna, the interaction with students provides an intellectual connectivity with the
community. It is what Whitchurch (2009) describes as the ability to “enter and
understand academic discourse/debate” (p. 410). If the silos of the university are
independent Towers of Babel, then here in these relationships they both speak the same
language. However, Susanna and all of her colleagues viewed students as patrons and not
potential research partners. This perspective limits what might be the most abundant and
productive partnerships available to academic librarians. The librarians in essence are
ignoring potentially 34,000 research partnerships!
As well, the term “colleagues” was never meant to refer to classified staff. Many
of the classified staff personnel, particularly in the research-oriented departments, have
multiple master’s degrees or are pursuing doctoral degrees. These staff members have
research experience through both education and industry. As well, presumably the staff
will benefit from academic productivity, especially if they intend to work in some facet
of higher education that requires presentations or publications.

115

Yet the non-librarian staff often is not considered for partnerships on projects so
unfortunately they are an untapped resource, therefore limiting the internal networks
(Whitchurch, 2009). These discoveries are important in relation to the blended
professional model in that they present a mindset that creates an imagined professional
border and again limits the third space through which the librarians might thrive by
ignoring potential collaborative partnerships. It is a similar manifestation of the socially
constructed and somewhat artificial hierarchy that the librarians themselves must
navigate at St. Jerome and will be a component of the analysis of the organization in the
next section.
Relationships Summary
Managers have concerns supplemental to the success of their librarians. If, for
example, a snake is found in a chair (this did indeed happen!), then it is beneficial to have
a solid working relationship with the facilities crew members. Also unsurprisingly, the
academic librarians at St. Jerome viewed their colleagues as the most important
partnerships. Stakeholders such as faculty, students, and other classified staff were
secondary considerations or complete afterthoughts when discussing significant
relationships. These findings are significant because they demonstrate the creation of
artificial boundaries that encumber the blended professional role. While it initially
appears negative, this actuality provides substantial opportunity for outreach and
professional development, which leads to the extension of third space and the blended
professional role.

116

Legitimacies
Legitimacy is something of an abstract perception. Legitimacies can be gained
through experience or innate development. For example, some of the qualifications of the
librarians addressed practical matters in their ability to perform their duties. One manager
stated that her knowledge of management responsibilities enabled her to succeed in her
role.
Catherine: I would have to say all of the management, whether it’s time
management, resource management…all that understanding of
management. Whether it’s making sure we meet a deadline. So getting the
guideposts in place or if they use the grid or however you take that apart
and put the pieces together. But I would say that management component
benefits...is broadly based and bleeds into everything.
Other librarians cited personality traits as a legitimizing force in their position.
Gwen: I think you wouldn't get this from a resume but I think I'm pretty
good in terms of, I take a lot of responsibility for projects and I think I
carry them through really well, but that isn't something that I think that's
just more of innate quality and not something that I've attained.
Yet managerial acumen and personal drive may represent knowledges that may enable
legitimacy. In the academy, letters after one’s name often determine position and
acceptance into various circles of influence and the third spaces that may be occupied.
Again though, the findings related to the establishment of legitimacies indicate that the
academic librarians at St. Jerome as blended professionals have the capacity to engage
across boundaries through the provision of their services and knowledge but their role is
of a lower socially constructed rank than their tenure-track counterparts and therefore
provides real hurdles that the librarians must navigate.

117

Office Spaces
In order to understand the legitimacies of the academic librarians as blended
professionals at St. Jerome, the physical spaces in which they work required analysis. In
terms of personal space, of all the librarians interviewed, only one had an office space
that was accessible to the public within the library itself. Librarian offices at Clement V
Library actually are on the second floor of the building, exterior to the library. The rest of
the librarians worked in cubicles arranged in offices locked to the public. As well,
librarians at Alexander VI frequently meet with students in a public space such as the
reference desk because meetings in their cubicles distract coworkers.
The offices or more often cubicles themselves also are not very large. The average
cubicle in the Alexander VI Library is 70 square feet. A GSA study (2011) found that
within academic institutions support staff were allotted between 64-100 square feet of
cubicle space; administrative managers were afforded between 100-160 square feet (p.
30). The librarian who is assistant head of Alexander VI Library’s reference- the
equivalent of an administrative manager in the study- has an 80 square foot cubicle.
According to St. Jerome’s own facilities website, administrative/professional faculty (the
rank of the academic librarians) are supposed to have a private office of 120 square feet.
Consequently in terms of space as a legitimizing factor, librarians are negatively
influenced.
This observation is significant because the perception of the working space has
the potential to undermine librarian legitimacy by placing them organizationally within a

118

non-academic working space. One of the interviewed librarians specifically cited offices
for librarians as a change in a new library.
Sofia: I would have an office with a door. You know, the first library that I
worked at…the Library of Faculty…the faculty had written into their
contract “Every faculty member shall have an office with contiguous walls
that touch the ceiling without break and a door that locks and is
contiguous with all walls. And every one of these shall have a window.”
They had made it so that you literally couldn’t cubicalize the faculty.
The reasoning behind this request relates to both identity and productivity. To the latter,
this librarian routinely arrived at the office early in order to focus on research prior to her
colleagues’ morning arrival and the potential distractions that accompany them. For
identity, it undermines authority. Offices are status symbols and cubicles are low in the
hierarchy. As Sofia contends, a proper librarian’s office “would be professional like a
faculty member’s office. It’s not behind locked doors like a staff person.” If one of the
primary points of outreach by the librarians is to establish a collaborative academic role
within the greater academy, then the librarians may need more traditionally academic
space in order to project academic professionalism and extend blended professional
boundaries.
If the librarians remain in “cube-farms” for the extended future, there is
opportunity to promote legitimacies within those spaces. In the librarian’s space in the
Alexander VI Library, there are a lot of blank walls. There are three Employee of the
Month awards hanging on the side of the first cubicle. Only two of the recipients still
work for the university. There is also a team award on the same wall dating to 2009. The
surrounding walls are blank, except for one massive 8ft x 4ft poster from a poster session

119

at American Library Association conference. It is a visual representation of research
performed by librarians in the room. Nearly all members of this cube-farm have
published or presented materials in the past. If some of these pieces are framed and
placed around the room, then those that enter the room, either students, faculty, or library
administration, will be able to recognize that productivity is in fact occurring within the
department.
The most obvious means in which to establish legitimacy in an academic setting
is through the exhibition of educational or specialized qualifications (Whitchurch, 2009).
In order to examine how the librarians offered their academic or professional credentials,
the researcher took field notes documenting relevant materials displayed around their
personal spaces. Only two librarians displayed work-related awards. Five displayed
materials denoting conference attendance, of which one prominently displayed
approximately 25 attendance and presenter nametags. One librarian hung a school
pennant. Finally, only one librarian had her degrees framed and displayed on the wall; a
second librarian had her degrees in her office, but they were not displayed.
Studies have been done on the psychological reasons behind the arrangement of
office spaces; for example, a messy desk denotes creativity whereas a clean desk suggests
a conventional thinker (Vohs, Redden, & Rahinel, 2013). This analysis though was more
concerned with what the librarians chose to display. Family and vacation photographs
were much more prominent that institutional items, perhaps due to a minimal amount of
natural light in the cubicle areas (Bringslimark, Hartig, & Grindal Patil, 2011). There
have long been discussions on the lack of windows in working spaces and the effects on

120

workers (Finnegan, 1981; Taylor, 1979). Alexander VI Library is currently under
renovation and one of the three windows in the liaison librarian’s cube farm has been
removed. Due to ongoing construction, the blinds are almost always drawn so it is not
surprising in that the employees seek to decorate their own personal spaces.
Ultimately, there are opportunities to legitimize the working spaces of the
librarians through decorations and celebrations of achievements. It is difficult to project
validity in their current working spaces. If they continue to view the “cube farms” as a
professional slight though, which they appear to believe due to the characterization of the
working space during the interviews, then it will take more reformation of the spaces in
order for the librarians to view their working spaces as a vehicle of their legitimacy at St.
Jerome.
Legitimizing Knowledge
Many of the responses from the librarians regarding legitimacies mimicked
findings concerning knowledges. In reading these sections, pieces are repetitive but they
demonstrate that knowledge, or better yet the ability to find knowledge, is a legitimizing
factor for the librarians. In order to find or acquire knowledge, individuals must navigate
the available resources. In this expedition, librarians serve as their guides. That ability
retained and demonstrated by the librarians has the potential to validate their overall
presence in the community.
Both subject and general knowledges serve as legitimizing forces. Subject
knowledge- particularly with the secondary master’s- promoted legitimacy first by
enabling the librarians to get their position in the field.

121

Veronica: I would probably say my disciplinary degree because even
applying for this job…when they say “[specific discipline] preferred,” I
was like “If I can’t even get an interview for this position then I don’t
think that I would have a knack
The ability to “achieve credibility in academic debate/space” (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 410)
is gained through specialized understanding of the knowledge field. It extends the
conversational and functional space that the librarian might not otherwise encounter.
Not all of the librarians had multiple master’s degrees. In these cases, experience
provided additional legitimacy. Experience, which theoretically enhances knowledge,
may also promote legitimacy and blend the professional role.
Laura: If I ever get to talk to anybody I can say I’ve been doing this for 30
years in different ways. But once you hit that you say “and I’m here to
serve you. What services can I provide for you?” That’s more of a
qualification that’s they’re interested in.
Both service and experience were important factors. Knowledge gained from working in
the field legitimized their sense of belonging.
Jessica: I know libraries and I have a sense of what they don’t know. The
problem is that they think they know everything and then they don’t.
Sometimes it’s difficult because we’re being asked to anticipate what
people want and what they may need, which is a funny kind of role. I have
libraries, and I have the broad picture. I have the big picture.
At the very least, all of the librarians have the general skills needed to find the basic
materials and resources, with a subject specialist providing additional support. As Maria
defines herself: “I’d say I’m a generalist. Bottom-line, get them started, let’s get going.”
That mindset comes through both the education and experience and extends the blended

122

professional boundaries even when a legitimizing force such as a secondary master’s is
not owned.
Status Quo
The only segment of the legitimacies in the blended professional model that the
librarians did not specifically connect with is the “challenging of the status quo”
(Whitchurch, 2009, p. 410). Valeria connected it to poor marketing.
Valeria: One of the weaknesses is that we don’t do a good job advocating
our resources and our services. Describing why a relationship with a
library or a librarian is beneficial to a student or faculty member.
Again, misunderstanding of the role of the academic librarian as blended professionals
has the potential to place the librarians at St. Jerome in a tenuous third space. Since they
are not faculty and have no representation on the faculty senate, they have difficulty
addressing the prevailing perceptions around campus. This is an actual barrier to the
blended professional abilities of the librarians and this structuring might have
consequences for the longevity of the position.
Valeria: I think it’s probably always been important that libraries promote
themselves but I think it’s now more so than ever with the advent of the
internets…as we call them. I mean, that’s how this program with the
development office came about. The development officer “I can’t believe
we still have a library. Who needs it? Isn’t that what Google’s for?” And
that’s what started this whole process. There’s just a lot of thinking like
that out there.
Therefore not only do the librarians at St. Jerome need to market themselves but they
require outreach to demonstrate the viability of their institution in the digital age.
Contrary to popular belief, Google is not the most effective tool for a researcher

123

(Behrends, 2012). When officer-level members of one’s own institution begin to question
the value of a library it becomes exceedingly difficult to promote change within the
institution. The librarians tend to think of themselves in the traditional and conservative
role and hesitate to become movers and shakers. Thus the librarians at St. Jerome are
blended professionals, but the limitations of their perceptive positions inhibit their ability
to counter prevailing ideologies and perceptions of worth at their institution. This
perception may prevent them from thinking and acting “outside of the box” that is their
constructed third space. The librarians therefore somewhat unwittingly define their own
workable third space by placing or accepting artificial professional boundaries around
their role.
In part, social presentation may play a role in the librarians’ ability to challenge
the status quo. Only 1 of the 4 managers wore jeans to the meeting with the researcher.
However, 10 of the other 13 librarians wore jeans to the interview, including every
librarian working at the Alexander VI Library. This observation was informal. The
researcher did not request nor expect the librarians to dress in business casual attire for
the interviews. As well, the meetings also took place during the summer session, when
dress codes seem to relax.
Still, professional appearance has been shown to affect perception (Keenum,
Wallace, & Barger Stevens, 2003) and career promotional prospects (Haigh, 2013). At
least one interview took place on every weekday (Monday through Friday) so the relaxed
dress cannot be discounted as a “casual Friday” phenomenon. Many librarians spoke of
management aspirations though and 3 of the 4 managers interviewed wore business

124

casual attire. Formalizing the dress code might enhance individual and collective
legitimacies of the librarians and extend their blended professional boundaries. If they
perceive their roles as requiring more professional attire, then perhaps they will interpret
their position within the academy in a more legitimized light.
The researcher also examined the professional business cards of the librarians. 9
of the librarians listed their degrees and certifications after their names, including all but
one of the librarians at Alexander VI Library. Only 1 of the remaining 8 librarians- all
from different libraries- listed their credentials. Part of the siloing between the libraries,
specifically cited by Lucy, dealt with the perception that Alexander VI librarians
displayed a snobbish attitude towards their counterparts in the other libraries. The
hegemonic business cards did not necessarily dispel this contention.
As well, when degrees were listed on the card and the librarian had a secondary
master’s, the library science degree always was listed second. Some librarians
appreciated the pragmatic and professional understanding that the degree provided.
Ava: I do think the MLS is helpful because I guess I have more of an
understanding about how libraries work in the grand scheme of things. It
opened my eyes to different modes of learning, different ways of
accessing information. So I think in my job that benefits me a lot.
Others were less enthusiastic about the library science degree’s ability to promote
legitimacy. As Laura states: “I don’t think anybody’s impressed with an MLS. Pffffh.”
Indeed, the librarians viewed the subject master’s as more important in this regard than
the MLS.

125

Susanna: I think actually my [disciplinary] degree benefits me the most
because I feel like it opens more doors for me than the librarian degree.
Because I feel like…if I just had a librarian degree I wouldn’t be able to
get positions that I care that much about. But because I have the
[disciplinary] degree I feel that I have more opportunities to do things that
are more interesting to me.
This perception is important because it seems evident that even though the library science
degree was the “handshake that got them in the door,” the disciplinary expertise held
greater esteem and opened other doors and spaces around the academic community.
Therefore, in order for the librarians to effectively challenge the status quo and
overarching perceptions of who they are and what they do, it seems that the librarians
with formalized disciplinary backgrounds have the best opportunity to flourish. The
librarians’ established third space limits the likelihood of success in this regard. However,
these librarians with multiple degrees have the blended professional traits concerning
knowledges that will open doors and provide an audience through which improved
legitimacy might be established.
Legitimacies Summary
Presuming that the physical offices of the academic librarians at St. Jerome
represent their status in the institution, then their legitimacy as blended professionals in
the university community may be diminished. The findings demonstrate that while
disciplinary backgrounds and degrees open more doors for the librarians, emphasizing
these skills inadvertently marginalizes the expertise of the librarian. Yet, while
experience or ability to find materials enables the librarian to gain audience with the
academic community, their disciplinary knowledge or degree fosters the acceptance.

126

Section II Summary
In spite of gap-shrinking opportunity provided by technological innovations,
geography develops physical and cultural silos throughout the library system, which are
perpetuated by the marketing shortcomings of the academic librarians themselves. The
librarians are adept at finding and interpreting knowledge, especially in their respective
fields, a key and unique function of the librarians in higher education; yet they often
underutilize and undervalue their own research, thereby contributing to the
misunderstanding of their roles. The librarians, perhaps due to the third space that they
occupy or accept, value their colleagues and under-appreciate other collaborative
avenues, mitigating the true efficacy of their blended role. They are able to “speak the
language” but their lack of doctoral level skills limits their ultimate acceptance and
relegates them to a professional third space that is a perceived rung below the faculty at
the institution.
Yes, the data collected suggests and demonstrates that the academic librarians at
St. Jerome are blended professionals. However, the unique combination of their roles,
their perceptions of those roles, places them into a unique third space developed by
perceived boundaries that are balanced between the tenure-track faculty and the students.
They are fixed in the middle of the hierarchy that is academe at St. Jerome and this space
creates many obstacles to their professional success. These challenges are where the
conversation now turns.

127

Section III: Obstacles to Professional Success
Section II discussed how perceptions of the academic librarians’ role created a
unique third space. Working within this constructed third space creates a blended
professional identity for the academic librarians at St. Jerome. The data obtained
additionally found acknowledged obstacles related to their professional success and
development as blended professionals. When compared with the data from Section II, the
additional consideration does not change the results. Instead, the additional layer of
information amplifies the difficulties that the academic librarians at St. Jerome
experience as blended professionals by creating supplementary difficulties to navigate in
their professional roles.
Thematically, three distinct obstacles to the librarians’ success in the blended
professional model arose during the interviews: time and money (or compensation),
gender, and organization. Again, these impediments were at times artificially created
through perception, but in other instances the concerns were very real and tangible. The
problem with contrived obstacles is that they may have the same effect as real limitations
if the individual perceiving them allows the issue to affect their how they function.

128

Figure 1. This figure symbolizes impediments for librarians as blended professionals to
success and development. The working third space of the academic librarians is in the
center, surrounded by additional obstacles. The colors of the boundaries indicate the
severity of the obstacle, with green being perceptually the least serious and red being the
most difficult.

Figure 1 above represents the categories of obstacles to professional development
of the academic librarians at St. Jerome. Section II established the blended professional
identity of academic librarians and categorized the boundaries of their unique, working
third space. Further fencing surrounds this identity, creating supplemental difficulties to
the blended role.

129

The additional obstacles in Figure 5 are categorized by their basis in reality.
Analysis of the data suggests that time and money are perceived impediments. The
librarians believe that they exist so that perception effects how the librarians view their
positions. However, since they are supposed instead of actual concerns these might be
alleviated with dissemination of comparative data.
Gender as an obstacle is not black and white. While some of the librarians viewed
aspects of their gender as impacting their ability to do their job effectively, the sentiments
were not universal. Gender perception has the ability to hamper the professional
development of the individual if they consider their gender an influencing factor but not
all librarians may consider- either deliberately or subconsciously- gender as an obstacle.
Yet bias is real. The literature review documented the challenges facing women in the
higher education workplace. Female librarians face this reality every day, whether they
acknowledge it or not. Therefore gender as an obstacle balances between perceived and
real.
The structure of an organization is more concrete as an obstacle. The librarians
have the ability as blended professional to maneuver between different social
environments interior and exterior to the library but organizational policies, practices, and
procedures truly impede the librarians’ effectiveness in their endeavors. The following
section begins by analyzing the perceived complaints about time and money, transitions
to a discussion on gender, and then concludes with an analysis of the definitive
difficulties organizational complications hindering to the librarian role.

130

Time and Money
The absence of time to complete their required duties as blended professionals
and a lack of funding or compensation to undertake said activities arose quite frequently
during the course of the interviews. Of the concerns raised by the librarians regarding the
obstacles to their professional development, time and money seemed to be the most
straightforward to address in a reasonable discussion because the limitations they produce
in this particular environment are artificial in creation. Time and compensation may be
limited for the academic librarians of St. Jerome. However, their situation is not terrible
especially when compared to the tenure-track faculty; still, the librarians think that it is
and this generates an artificial obstacle.
Time
Time was overwhelmingly cited as an obstacle to the professional success.
However, the activities of the librarians at St. Jerome must be considered prior to making
an assessment on demands on their time. Bridget defines their role as “reference,
instruction, collection development, [and] outreach.” Since the administration is also
emphasizing research, that enterprise becomes another facet of their position.
The fact that the administration is promoting academic professionalism in recent
years creates a shift in the librarians’ initial role at St. Jerome. “The outputs librarians are
measuring are not directly associated with specific practices that lead to improved lives
for the people we serve. If we cannot make that connection, we have no way of knowing
how well we are doing our jobs” (Bonfield, 2014). The librarians at St. Jerome were hired
to provide reference services to the university community. Publication was not significant
in this task, despite the current interpretation of the Librarians’ Handbook by the present

131

administration. The standard duties of the librarians have remained similar (reference
desk shifts, individual consultations, instruction, collection development, etc.).
Valeria: The idea that you could ask a librarian that’s responsible for a
collection, a service desk, a building that may be open 24 hours a day
(which it is at most libraries these days) and to ask them to publish in the
same way in which you would ask someone on a 9-month appointment.
That doesn’t make sense.
The added expectation of research requires supplementary time for such productivity,
which was something often cited as an obstacle to professional success because they are
still expected to perform the outreach required by a blended professional but the added
job requirements limit that ability.
The librarians at St. Jerome have the opportunity to apply for up to ten days of
research leave per year. However, even when they receive the additional leave they have
difficulty scheduling absences from their desks.
Lucy: I’ve got research leave but I can’t figure out when to take it because
when you get back you have all these things, you know, that…especially
when faculty are often building their courses during the summer for fall or
spring delivery. Luckily I just got a new staff person, but somebody has to
train him. I can’t just go on leave for a week when he’s new so it’s tricky
because the research leave is supposed to be the way to solve this but no
one covers your responsibilities when you’re on research leave.
Clearly, some librarians think that research time is hard to obtain. The traditional time for
research is often during the summer. However, American Library Association’s Annual
Conference is always scheduled at the end of June a few weeks after the spring semester
ends. This allows the librarians to make travel plans and last minute research adjustments

132

if they are presenting at that conference. Marketing and preparation for outreach also
takes up a considerable amount of time in the summer, as librarians attend orientations
multiple times per week for most of June, July, and August. Other ad hoc issues, such as
assisting faculty in their development of course reserve materials and preparing online
tutorials and webinars for the upcoming semester. In short, summer is already a
demanding time for the librarians at St. Jerome.
Even so, it is difficult to quantify the librarians’ duties and time management.
Again, it appears to be less than what is expected by the tenure-track faculty.
Researcher: In terms of time, do you think the amount of time that’s
expected for a librarian is similar to what’s expected for your field.
Sofia: [laughter].
Researcher: Okay.
Sofia: No. [laughter] Not even close.
Consider first instruction. Tenure-track faculty instruction is more time consuming and
substantive than all manner of instruction taught by academic librarians, particularly at
St. Jerome. Susanna relates:
The difference is that I don’t do as much [work as tenure-track]. My
sessions are only 30 minutes long and they don’t happen very often. I feel
like they spend a lot more time and effort figuring out and organizing how
they’re going to set up the session, how they’re going to set up their
courses, their syllabi, and things like that. Whereas it takes me maybe a
couple hours to figure out a lesson plan for an instruction session.

133

The differences exist for varied reasons. First, the resources and generic information
covered for the librarian instruction sessions rarely change. The librarian will
demonstrate usage of the resources available to the students, specifically library
catalogue(s), periodical database, electronic journals, research portals, and material
acquisition. This formulaic aspect of the instruction means that a librarian will not have
to spend an absorbent amount of time preparing for each individual class.
One librarian estimated that she taught 30 classes in a semester, which could
include 20 minute to 3 hour sessions. This librarian was in the top three librarians at St.
Jerome in terms of courses taught. Therefore, her in-class instruction time was
significantly higher than some of her peers. For an estimate, let us say that the average
class length for this librarian was 1.5 hours. If the librarian spent 1 hour preparing for
each of those classes, this would equate to 75 hours a semester spent in the classroom
teaching ((30 classes x 1.5 hours class time) + 30 hours preparation time).
In contrast, consider for example an instructor teaching Western Political Theory
as a seminar that meets weekly for 3 hours. The material for each course changes as the
course topically progresses. One week may be spent reading Machiavelli whereas the
following week Rousseau may be the focus of discussion. This necessitates continual
preparation. In fact, the American Faculty Association (AFA) estimates that an instructor
should prepare 2-4 hours per 1 hour of class time taught (AFA, 2012). As Irene
succinctly says: “Yes, I may do instruction but in a whole year I may teach the same class
44 times whereas the instructor is teaching three classes every semester, so the preps are
different.” Therefore, for a 15 week seminar course, that equates to between 135 and 225

134

hours a semester devoted to classroom teaching (Classroom Time (1 class x (15 weeks x
3 hours)) + Preparation Time ((1 class x (15 weeks x 3 hours)) x 2 (or 4)). If the faculty
member is teaching two or more classes, that time is doubled or tripled.
Even if one considers the reference consultation time into the total instruction
statistics, the librarian time spent teaching still falls short of the tenure-track faculty. The
librarians at Alexander VI library average about 30 consultations per semester. If a
generous estimate of 1 hour per consultation and a very generous 1 hour of preparation
time is allotted, then the librarians spend 60 additional hours per semester in this
instructional capacity. This amounts to 135 hours of librarian instruction time per
semester (75 classroom instruction hours + 60 consultation hours). If a tenure-track
faculty is teaching three classes in a semester, then they will devote to instruction
between 270 and 540 hours based on AFA estimates. Time-wise, library instruction and
tenure-track instruction are two different animals.
However, reference and instruction are the only two of those activities to which a
reasonable calculation of time may be applied. For those two activities they are in a fixed
location for a specific amount of time. In contrast, librarians might schedule time for
collection development or outreach but the productivity of the time spent (books
purchased and appointments scheduled) does not necessarily reflect the time and effort
placed into the enterprise.
Research is the most nebulous of the activities. Collecting relevant materials for a
literature review constitutes research and the time spent could vary depending upon the
difficulty of the process of acquiring those materials. Organization, composition, and

135

editing of research articles and writing varies depending upon the individual. Therefore, it
is difficult to effectively estimate the amount of time librarians actually spend on their
daily research activities aside from counting the number of citations listed in the quarterly
University Librarian’s Newsletter. In 2013 the liaison librarians in the Alexander VI
library collectively published two articles.
Many of the librarians telework, either on a scheduled day or unplanned based
upon the need for them to be physically present on campus. There has been research that
suggests that teleworking increases productivity by eliminating in-office distractions
(Pace, 2004; Manley, 2002) and aids in the retention of staff (Smith & Van Dyke, 2008).
The potential for distraction might be higher than that for the tenure-track given their
office arrangements. A tenure-track faculty member may shut their office door for
privacy; the same level of seclusion is difficult in a “cube-farm.” Therefore teleworking
does make logistical sense.
Conversely, teleworking might be less successful in developing staff relationships
(Fay & Kline, 2011) and attitude towards the job directly influences productivity
(Neufeld & Fang, 2005). “The common fear among…the managers is that without the
vigilant eye of a supervisor or the snoopy gaze of a coworker, what typical employee is
not going to resist the temptation to sleep late, watch television, take naps, snack often,
and quit early” (Manley, 2002, p. 124). It is difficult to gauge the productivity of the
librarians at St. Jerome who telework, especially from the position of the researcher.
While the librarians might send productivity reports to their supervisors, these are not
public documents.

136

However, one librarian related a story from one of her days off. During the middle
of the day she went to Barnes and Noble to do some shopping and noticed one of her
librarian colleagues spending time with her family. The librarian colleague was supposed
to be teleworking at that time. While lunch breaks are permissible, the implication was
that the colleague was not working. Given that this is only one example a wholesale
damnation of the teleworkers seems a bit out of place.
Admittedly though, the illustration of this story in combination with the
researcher’s informal observations of the librarians at St. Jerome biases his opinion,
particularly concerning usage of time. For every instance that he sees a librarian working
late or on a weekend there is another where he walks past a cubicle and notices mahjong
being played on a desktop computer.
In order to obtain an improved, more impartial understanding of how the
librarians were utilizing their time, the researcher examined the librarians’ schedules for
the week of Monday September 22, 2014 through Friday September 26, 2014. He then
compiled and tabulated the activities. The results are displayed in Table 5 below.

137

Table 5. The percentages here represent the amount of a 40-hour work week spent in the
described activity.

Given the fluctuation in instruction assignments, the week was chosen at random during
the fall semester. The statistic that stands out is the final one: miscellaneous/unscheduled.
The assumption from the researcher was that the librarians each worked a 40 hour week
during the examined time. As seen in Figure 6, only about 30% of their days were
formally scheduled; the rest of the time was open. Perhaps during that 70% of their time a
random student or faculty member visited for a research consultation, but it represents a
lot of unplanned time from individuals who stated that they had little time to spare.
Conceivably a more in-depth analysis of the librarians’ usage and scheduling of their
time, either by the individual librarians or management, might illuminate more open time
to engage in activities such as research.

138

In the end, how one views their role may do more to influence their productivity
than any external factor. The perception of the impediment creates an artificial boundary
that renders blended professional activity less effective. For example, many librarians
view the librarian role as subservient to the faculty place in the campus hierarchy. As
Laura states: “Yes, I am definitely a support role to tenured faculty…I really do see it as a
support role and not on the same level.” Yet there is nothing that legislates this as fact.
Yet the librarians accept this position because they believe it to be accurate. This
mentality creates the belief that the librarians should not perform similar activities,
regardless of ability, as faculty because it is not their perceived role in the university.
This in turn limits the librarians’ success as blended professionals because it constructs
boundaries on their sphere of influence. A lack of time is ultimately just an excuse that
manifests from this accepted perception.
The academic librarians, once they become fully cognizant of the situation, have
the choice of whether to let a perceived lack of time undermine their professional
successes. On the other hand, success, as Sofia relates, can be an alternative choice.
Sofia: So the idea that time…do you have time? Bullshit. If you have to do
it, you do it and that’s it. But for me, the thing that made me so flip was I
didn’t have to do this. Why do I have to do this? I didn’t need a second
degree. I could have been a stay at home mom. I choose to do these things.
I don’t have to publish articles in my field. I don’t have to see if I can get
my book out. I don’t really have to do ALA stuff. I could do something
much more micro. I choose to do all of it. I also exercise. Regularly. And
have hobbies that aren’t exercise and do those. How? Because my day has
48 hours, thank you. I actually live in a space time warp thing.

139

Researcher: I understand.

Sofia: Yeah. So the time thing, I get…and especially because of the
pressures on research and instruction faculty. Our job is not even remotely
equivalent. Not even remotely equivalent.
Clearly the academic librarians at St. Jerome do not expect to produce at the level of their
tenure-track counterparts. If librarians had a better holistic perspective of how their
counterparts spend their time, then the librarians’ perspective might be altered.
Acknowledging this notion will help break down a wall and amplify the blended abilities
of the academic librarians within the St. Jerome community.
Money
Financial concerns occasionally entered into the organizational level, such as with
insufficient funds to order proper marketing and outreach materials. However, the lack of
personal financial backing to do their strongly encouraged professional academic pursuits
was an oft cited complaint of the librarians. “Go publish. Go present. Here’s 50% of what
you need.” It led to some amusing conversation.
Susanna: Money is the most significant obstacle. Because everything else
is pretty easy, especially if you’re thinking of professional development
terms for a librarian. As long as you can afford it, you’re golden. But…
Researcher: Can you afford to go to as many conferences as you want?
Susanna: Noooo…no I can’t. I get really…I get…this is really sad and
pathetic. I convince my parents sometimes to go on vacation in the towns

140

where my conferences will be as a way to save money so that I don’t have
to pay for housing.
Many librarians extended their conference travel into vacations. As Julia states: “There's
nothing wrong with going on a conference and building in a little vacation but it still
costs a lot of money to essentially go somewhere where I wouldn't choose to go.”
Strategically planning conference attendance became a prime tactic.
Admittedly though, there are some concerns with the way that money is allotted
for travel. Librarians stated that they generally would receive more money to attend a
disciplinary conference instead of a library conference. The distance of travel also
influenced compensation. As well, more money was allotted to present at a conference
than to just attend. Aside from that there did not appear to be any standard disbursement
of travel monies.
The assumption from many of the librarians was that the expectation for
publications and presentations from the administration was not matched with monetary
compensation.
Lucy: So that can be really challenging because how can you ask people to
present and to further themselves professionally by going to conference
and presenting and you’re not going to pay them and [what] they make…
isn’t bad depending on where you live, but isn’t like a lot.
Researcher: It’s less than tenure-track faculty?
Lucy: Yes, definitely. No matter where you live it’s less than tenured
faculty.

141

In reality, however, there is not a significant variance. The Bureau of Labor Statistics
listed the median compensation for post-secondary instructors as $68,970 (Bureau of
Labor Statistics, 2014). A whistleblower website in the state that St. Jerome operates lists
the salaries of all state employees. In 2011 the average salary of the librarians
interviewed for this project was $62,057. Therefore, the academic librarians at St. Jerome
were only making about 10% less than their tenure-track counterparts.
What about travel stipends? The travel allotment from the university forces
librarians to make decisions about which conferences to attend. As Lucy states: “We get
travel but the way it’s done here we never get the full amount. And if you ask for two
things, you get each partially, but very partially so that you almost have to decide which
one to take.” However, this assumes that the tenure-track faculty receive a significant
amount of travel money. At St. Jerome, the maximum award for conference travel for
tenure-track faculty is $500, though some individual departments offset the cost with
additional financial support. It is similar at their peer institutions. For example, at Florida
State University, the maximum is $1500. It should be noted that the librarians at St.
Jerome are strongly encouraged to present and publish but it is not required. Tenure-track
does not have the luxury of choice in this regard.
Consider as well the cost of investment. The National Center for Educational
Statistics lists the average tuition and required fees at public institutions in the 2009-2010
academic year as $8,763; at private institutions, the tuition and fees were $20,368
(National Center for Education Statistics, 2011). It takes approximately two years of fulltime study to complete the credits required for the library science master’s degree. A PhD

142

or equivalent doctorate needed for tenure-track employment takes at least five years. Two
years at a public institution would run a student $17,526; five years in the public system
would cost $43,815. If the doctoral student is not being subsidized through a research
stipend then they will have many more loans to pay upon completion of their program,
which will also occur three or more years after a librarian may have entered the
workforce.
Ultimately, compensation should not be perceived as a limitation to a blended
professional role or professional development as there are low cost means to build
legitimacies and other facets of the model. For example, many academic journals require
little or no publication fee. The lack of produced research, for any of the variety of
previously mentioned reasons, is the true obstacle to professional success in this context,
not the lack of compensation.
Time and Money Summary
Tenure-track faculty might not have a substantially better financial situation than
their librarian counterparts. Based upon the estimated time spent during instruction
covered earlier, they almost certainly have less time. Many of the perceptions of the
librarians appear based upon assumption; particularly that tenure-track faculty are
significantly more compensated. It might not be fully appreciated because the librarians
are being asked to perform more tenure-track associated duties in addition to their
blended professional. However, similar to the issues regarding a lack of time, a better
understanding of the totality of the financial situation at the university might demonstrate
that money is not as unique a concern to the academic librarians as they might believe.

143

Neither concern realistically should obstruct the academic librarians’ roles as blended
professionals. Addressing these perceptions either individually or through the counsel of
management may alleviate some of the artificially created boundaries impeding the
academic librarians’ blended professional role and career development.

Gender
Gender is not a consideration featured in the blended professional model. This
might be in part due to the fact that a woman’s role in the working world has evolved past
the expected jobs of teacher or nurse (Boyd, 2009). No one is suggesting that there is
equality in the workplace. Yet Whitchurch considered the model in an age when gender
did not have as severe of a restriction on professional opportunities. Additionally, the
questions asked of the librarians during the interviews pertained to the blended
professional model’s characteristics and generic professional roles and challenges. The
researcher never asked a question along the lines of “How does being female affect your
professional opportunities?”
Still, during the proposal stage of this project and prior to the start of the
interviews, the expectation was that gender identity would come up in the course of
conversation much more frequently than it did. It is possible that the male identity of the
researcher made the topic less comfortable for the female interviewees to talk about. As
well, while age of the interviewees was not asked, for the most part the more veteran
librarians voiced their concerns about gender more regularly than their younger
counterparts. Yet during the analysis of the interviews, the researcher began to

144

understand that some of the conversations regarding gender manifested in different, less
explicit forms, all of which create additional professional hurdles for a blended
professional to clear.
The librarians already occupied a unique third space as blended professionals at
St. Jerome. Their place within the structure of the university was determined by their
respective blended professional abilities and these relative attributes, in combination with
perceived limitations, provided the boundaries of the libraries blended role. The
additional consideration of gender placed an extra fence around their sphere of influence.
Age and Appearance
Some aspects of an individual’s identity may be acknowledged and potentially
modified if it is deemed negative or a severe inhibition. For example, the introversion
mentioned in the previous chapter might be viewed as a limitation due to the restriction
on the ability of the librarian to market their resources. One librarian offered the
suggestion of putting small headshots on the library marketing materials sent out to the
various departments. This way the faculty and students of the department will have a
means to attach a name and a face, even without the need for the sometimes difficult
social interaction.
Other aspects are more ingrained within the individual, such as of the gender
identity of the person. For some of the interviews, gender was not specifically mentioned
as an obstacle to professional success but it appeared unspoken in other conversations.
For instance, age and appearance seemed to emerge in conversations contextually
associated with gender.

145

Susanna stated that she was more comfortable interacting within the student
crowd as opposed to faculty. “I feel intimidated by faculty, whereas with students…I
guess I see myself as a student more often than not. I feel more comfortable working in
that kind of environment.” Susanna is still a student and seemingly never transitioned
from that role to an equal collaborator with faculty members. At the same time though,
she is also one of the youngest librarians interviewed. Age also was perceived as a
negative in advancement.
Gwen: As someone who's younger in this profession…I feel like it's not so
easy. I had a lot of friends that really wanted to work in academic libraries
and couldn't get those jobs and so work in public libraries and that's kind
of where they are now. So I feel like the profession is skewed against
younger people. I know for a fact [that it is] in this particular organization.
It must be acknowledged that there is a notable dearth of open positions. Three of the
four upper-management positions at St. Jerome (to which Gwen might advance) have
remained filled by the same individual for at least 15 years. The connection with gender
and Gwen’s perceptions arises from the social dynamic in management mentioned by
another colleague.
Lucy: And it was hard too because some of the librarians that worked with
me ended up working for me and that was hard because some of them
were males my father’s age. And it was very hard to be their supervisor
because they had no respect for…you know, “You’re young. And you’re
female. Why should I listen to you?” So I’m sure that it happens in almost
every field, but it’s almost ironic that it happens in the librarian field
because we’re female dominated. This should be no surprise to males that
become librarians that they will have a female boss at one point.

146

A portion of that experience derives from age and learning to manage one’s elders in the
workplace. However, the gender of the subordinate employees might not be considered if
the manager was male.
All the same, appearance does effect professional perceptions. Based upon her
appearance, one librarian received a unique welcoming into an instruction session.
Lucy: [In my previous job] there were a lot more males. I was the business
librarian and it was hard at first. When I first started, a lot of the business
faculty had been there for a long time. I called them the “Grey Beards”
because I couldn’t tell them apart. They all wore grey beards, I swear. And
they were all middle-aged, white men and it was very homogenous. And
they did not want to have much to do with me.
I probably shouldn’t tell you this but I went into a class once and the
professor was like “Little girl? Little girl? I think you’re in the wrong
room.” Yes, I did look young for my 28 years, but mortifying being told
that in front of a class when you’re coming in to do instruction for his
class.
Even physical presence during presentations may put women in a precarious
position. Taller women make more money (Sinberg, 2009) as do individuals with
lower voices (van Vugt, 2013).
Adele: Now that I’m thinking about it the majority of places that I’ve been
the chairs have been male.
Researcher: Why do you think?
Adele: Because we live in a sexist society? Yeah, I would say it probably
relates to the gender bias anyway. And sometimes I’m guilty of it too, you
know, when I talk about the authority that goes along with the male voice
versus the female voice. Just thinking of the Chronicle of Higher

147

Education article that came out years ago where they were talking about
women with deeper voices earn more respect just naturally in the
classroom or in the administrative setting.
Researcher: It could be appearances too. I mean, if both you and I are
dressed in… we’re standing in front of a room. I’m a lot taller than you.
My voice is a lot deeper.

Adele: It is and I kick myself too, but I’m guilty of it on occasion too. I
think there is something engrained either if you want to say it’s socialized
or learned behavior. There is something to that I think.
Appearance can almost be a double-edged sword for women in the workplace. Studies
have shown that if they gain weight, they will make less money (Sinberg, 2009). “Being
very attractive can especially make it difficult when it comes to co-workers who might
have assumptions as to how you got your job, which means that you have to work even
harder to prove yourself” (Madell, 2014). One case cited a Harvard librarian who was
passed over for 13 promotions on the grounds that she was too pretty (Nicole, 2006).
Being male, it is difficult for the researcher to fully grasp the experiences and
perceptions of the interviewed librarians regarding gender, age, and appearance,
especially when the findings were connected sometimes through his own interpretations
of unspoken intimations. All four who specified those three factors are under forty years
of age. Without having a qualified rating system, the women all look their ages. It seemed
that the confluence of their age and gender inhibited their perceived values in the
workplace. They thought that it affected their production so it in fact did.

148

Additionally, the phrase “I probably shouldn’t tell you this but…” came up in
various forms during a lot of conversations. It was as if they felt like they were gossiping
and that was somehow wrong because female gossipers have a negative stigma in the
workplace (Farley, Timme, & Hart, 2010). That conceptualization itself is a form of
gender bias; in casual conversations, men “converse” whereas women are said to
“gossip.” Lucy defined the social interactions as potentially malevolent.
I think as far as gender goes the department that I work with that are more
mixed seem to work better. And that seems like a very un-feminist thing to
say, but it seems like if there’s more balance between men and women in
the library there’s better results. My experience has been that reference
departments that were exclusively or almost exclusively female were very
catty. So there’s that…at least in the professional there’s that reputation,
you know?
Gossip has been suggested as a customary tool of female aggression in social settings
(McAndrew, 2014; Miller-Ott & Kelly, 2013). The librarians at Alexander VI were
described as very “cliquey” in a negative connotation by their counterparts at the other
libraries. According to the most senior members of the staff there the department always
has had a female majority. It is difficult to say how much gender has an influence on this
reputation, though colleagues at other libraries apparently believe that contributes to the
atmosphere there.
Engrained Learning
Characteristics may be ingrained and learned in addition to being perceived both
professionally and through formal educational experiences. For example, to many faculty
the role that the librarians have is of a glorified graduate assistant.

149

Jessica: As we were being taught by our senior librarians…about how to
be a liaison, how to act…we, the librarians, were supposed to be [the
faculty’s] academic handmaidens. “Anything we can do for you. Anything
we can get.”
Compound this ideology with the traditional view of women in service (Wilson, 2014;
Johnson, 2013) within the workforce and the librarians are almost automatically placed in
a tenuous spot.
Laura: I know that there’s a role that we can serve but I really do see it as
a support role and not on the same level.

Researcher: Okay, so more hierarchical?

Laura: Yeah. And that’s gender related by the way.

Researcher: Why would you say that?

Laura: Because, you know, unfortunately the idea of woman being of
service and being in a service profession.
This data is significant because it seemingly indicates that gender influence on place in
this context reemphasizes the service focus and resulting blended professional sphere of
influence described by the librarians at St. Jerome. In this professional case, the
limitations created by external factors and interpretations of the librarians’ role by the
faculty impede their blended professional influence and confines their third space. This
ideology again is perceived and not legislated. In fact, the administration is pushing
collaboration with faculty, which is antithetical to the handmaiden role since it promotes
partnership and not subordination.

150

Educational opportunities also are often divided from an early age. As a
consequence of sex differentiation, “the girl…does not learn to assert herself, has not
studied science, technology and ‘heavy’ craft [and]…is primarily handicapped in
the[labor] market, because she lacks the skills which lead to higher-paying jobs”
(Delamont, 1990, p. 4). These behaviors begin in grade school and then persist within
higher education (Huhman, 2012). Interactions between the librarians and STEM faculty
often perpetuated a service or subordinate role.
Jessica: There’s still a lot of weird gender stuff outside the libraries.
When I [worked with STEM faculty], you know, I think there was a weird
gender thing going on with the male faculty members. “Oh, you. You do
my work for me.” I’ve had strange expectations from library users about
what we would do for them. Every so often, it’s a little weird.
Due to a lack of numbers, women in the sciences do not often have a position of
authority. In 2010, women represented only 28% of the workforce in engineering and the
sciences (Nuehauser, 2014). There is a notion of gender equality in education that
attempts to provide equal footing for women and men from an early age.
Gender equality in education not only implies that both girls and boys
have equal access to schooling, but also that the process of education
provides all girls and boys with a range of equal opportunities and
experiences for expanding their capacities to the fullest potentials in a
manner that they are able to contribute to the making of a just, responsible
and compassionate society (Jha, Page, & Raynor, 2009, p. 1).
At this point though, statistics do not support the realization of an equal
educational system. Social constructs preserve existing constructs in the education
field.

151

Researcher: A lot of them have issues with the self-marketing and that
inhibits their ability to reach members of the community. Do you feel
that’s accurate?
Valeria: I don’t feel that’s accurate for me but I do feel that it can be
accurate. One of the interesting things you talk about is how many women
there are. Women by rule are not taught to promote themselves, to “lean
in” as we like to talk about it in the current vernacular. The other thing you
have to realize is that a lot of the people who go into the field…and again
I’m generalizing…is that it’s a helping profession and you want to help
people and that doesn’t mean putting yourself first. Helping, but staying
behind.
Researcher: Serving?
Valeria: Serving, you know? I think that’s a key difference.
This conclusion is noteworthy because it suggests that the passive or servant behaviors of
some of the librarians discussed in the context of their roles and the perceptions of their
positions are learned. That makes change very difficult and effects the flexibility required
to maximize the blended professional role. At the same time, it is possible that awareness
of these issues may provide opportunity to manage them so that they do not inhibit
professional growth.
Family
Women in the household raising children while the husband works is not a
worldwide gender role. “On the whole people who have studied anthropology tend to
incline towards the idea that gender is socially created, because every culture discovered
across the world has such different norms for ‘masculinity’ and ‘femininity.’ Childrearing

152

is not a women’s task universally” (Delamont, 1990, p. 8). Yet some of the librarians
interviewed here connected their limitations to gender roles in the household.
Bridget directly related the lack of funding for conferences and salary to the fact
that administration expected the female librarian to be the secondary breadwinner in the
household.
Bridget: Professional development funding is very restrictive and this is a
common theme among librarians because they are not the main
breadwinner. So my professional travel is funded on the fact that my
partner makes a good salary and says “If you want to do this, don’t worry
about it.” Or we go together.

Researcher: So it’s almost like you’re saying…the administrative views it
as a gender…

Bridget: No, what I’m saying is that we’re primarily a female-dominated
profession…we are able to live a comfortable lifestyle…and define that
however you wish…but because our partners can support us. And our
partners can support our professional development activities. If I didn’t
have [my partner] I would be making a lot of difficult choices. I would not
be going to mid-winter and annual. I would have to turn down committee
appointments because I could not meet the committee requirements.
Again, money is a concern for the librarians but the connection between compensation
and gender is something wholly different. Here it constructs a professional limitation
based upon the expectation that a (presumably male) spouse would support professional
academic endeavors. The logic in Bridget’s presumption is not flawless because one
wonders then if compensation would rise if the female librarian were single or in a same-

153

sex partnership. The answer is likely no since complaints about money were uniform in
spite of mentioned relationship statuses. At the same time, though, it raises a concern
because the perception of the librarian is that she is compensated for what she is as
opposed to what she has done or might do professionally. Bridget, in essence, thinks that
she is paid less because she is female with a significant other.
Other librarians specifically cited their familial roles as limitations in the
professional aspirations. Catherine mentioned a lack of professional development
opportunities at St. Jerome due to a contentious relationship with a male supervisor. She
believes that her only hope for advancement will come elsewhere. Accordingly, she has
pursued options.
Catherine: For me, my personal life…I don’t want to say kept me here, but
has influenced my not going anywhere else. My kids are in absolutely in
great schools [here] with opportunities their cousins don’t have, whether
they’re in Florida or Ohio or Southern Virginia. They don’t have that. So
as a mom and a parent and a spouse as well as other things in my
life…you make decisions.

Researcher: Do you think if you went elsewhere your opportunities would
be better, equal, or worse?

Catherine: I interviewed about a year ago. I was offered a library director
position. It was not a good fit for my family. It was a fabulous opportunity
for my career. Yeah. I know I could. I’m quite sure there are a lot of things
out there that I can do but I chose to have a husband. I chose to have two
kids. And on balance I would say that take more priority than my career.
And I had my career for many years before I had them so I knew what I

154

was headed to with what I was investing in my career. For me, I’ll get
there. But these folks in my life need me to be where I’m at right now, so
that’s…yes. I know I could.
Despite a belief in her own abilities, Catherine seemingly defaulted to the familial role.
Yet another librarian described balancing multiple jobs (and roles) in order to support.
I’m trying to figure out…it’s entirely possible that this job that I have right
here…if I do this and [a second job], I can float financially. Sleep is for
the weak. I can manage. I can see my kids just enough to qualify as a
parent. I could be at a sweet spot where I’m balancing two roles. I could
stay here. Just saying. It’s a possibility. I’m not sure. We’ll see…maybe
sleep is just for the weak.
Parts of that interview were difficult to conduct because the researcher could sense that
the librarian was “burning out” from the dual stresses of professional and family life.
Overall, there was no indication that the librarians who mentioned family regretted their
decisions but it was clear that limitations arising from family obligations and their
personal roles therein made their ability to negotiate professional opportunities much
more challenging. With the increasing expectations of the female librarians in the
workforce, it remains difficult for women, despite improvements in work-life balance, to
have an equal work-life balance (Slaughter, 2012).
Gender Summary
The mention of gender with respect to the blended professional is in itself
significant. The model is based upon how one views their role as a professional. The
construction of this perception is personal and gender- in this case- appears in some ways
to influence the academic librarians’ perception of their role at St. Jerome.

155

Again, from the prospective of the researcher, the obstacles that gender may
present to a blended professional librarian are difficult to assess. It is clear though that
perceptions of gender identity present inherent difficulties for the female librarians to
overcome. At the same time, changes in attitudes and beliefs of the individual librarians
will only address so much of the problem. At St. Jerome, it is systemic.
A librarian mentioned that she spoke with the male library director about her
forthcoming marriage. The director asked questions particularly concerned about the
financial stability of the groom, which the librarian took mean that he was questioning
whether or not she would leave the library job if he found other employment. Similar
questioning arose when she became pregnant. A colleague echoed similar frustration.
Susanna: I feel it’s always easier for promotion for the male librarians than
it is for the female librarians. Mainly just because…it seems like to me
there’s this feeling like “Oh God, once she gets married just write them
off. They’re here in body, but…they’re going to be gone soon. Let’s not
bother with the continuing on with their training or anything like that.”
That’s honestly how it always feels. It feels like you get fewer
opportunities to do things.
This is the atmosphere- a uniquely gendered third space- in which the librarians are
attempting to advance their careers. It is definitely a challenge since it creates limitations
to the effectiveness of the female librarians in the blended professional role because in
addition to the already constructed boundaries of influence, gender also generates
challenges. Change will come slowly, as evolution requires that society and perceptions
change.

156

Organization
In terms of organization, the libraries operate in an academic caste system that
previously was mentioned. It is what Bolman and Deal (2003) refer to as a “structural
frame.” In essence, the organization is configured of “a small number of authority figures
at the top and a much larger number of grunts at the bottom” (Bolman & Deal, 2003, p.
41). In smaller settings, there are political interactions with individuals playing people
and resources off of each other for personal gain. There is also symbolism with St.
Jerome colors around the library and on print and electronic materials circulated within
the community.
However, no one is citing the key to their day as demonstrating the St. Jerome
spirit and fulfilling the mission of the university. Instead the librarians tend to perceive
the hierarchical levels within the system. With respect to the blended professional model,
the regimenting of their organization creates institutionally constructed restrictions that
inhibit the librarians’ ability to truly blend their role and modify their third space. The
genuine limitations of their skills and abilities within the blended professional role, the
perceived concerns about time and money, and the additional consideration of gender all
are compounded by the structure of the organization and the problems therein.
Even as blended professionals, the librarians are, in effect, boxed in. Faulty
communication, lack of professional mobility, overly structured job descriptions, and
poor use of talent within the organization all hinder the librarians’ professional
development. These factors perpetuate the limits on the third space that they might extend
by creating impediments to personal growth, outreach, and success.

157

Communication
Active communication is an important element in the blended professional role
because it facilitates contact and collaboration. There was mention of some typical
organizational concerns during the interviews, particularly dealing with vertical
communication. On a personal level there was evidence of manager-employee poor
communication. One manager cited her managerial skill and acumen as her best asset on
the job. Yet a librarian on her staff cited that manager as the key obstacle to her own
professional development. Clearly something was amiss in that relationship.
Larger organization-wide communication concerns also emerged in the
interviews. Bolman and Deal suggest that the structural organizational approach exists to
act as “a blueprint for formal expectations and exchanges among internal players and
external constituencies” (p. 46). When this system fails, obstacles appear. Recall for
instance the librarians’ uncertainty on the expectations for promotion. In addition, many
changes occur in the system without clear written or verbal communication and this was
cited as an obstacle.
Researcher: So you’re kind of being limited by…

Irene: Administrative decisions that we were given no input in!
The most frequently mentioned during these interviews was the forthcoming change to
some of the reference duties of the librarians. Basically, in order to encourage outreach
some of their reference desk duties are being eliminated. Given the discussion about
introversion and outreach challenges it is not surprising that this initiative has proved
unpopular.

158

This is not to say that administration does not have the right or ability to make
wholesale changes to the roles and duties of the workers. However, in cases of major
change it benefits the organization as a whole to have the ability to offer feedback or be
“bought in” by managerial notice. Otherwise conflict occurs and the absence of
bargaining promotes extended disputes (Bolman & Deal, 2003).
Helgeson (1995) argued that the hierarchical structure was created by a maledominated leadership force. In more inclusive systems designed by women “lines of
communication were multiplicitous, open, and diffuse” (Helgeson, 1995, p. 10), often
with a center-out instead of a top-down structure. This feedback is significant because it
suggests that the librarians in their roles do not feel that they have open lines of
communication with their superiors. Even if the communication is acceptable by
traditional organizational standards, the librarians at St. Jerome perceive it to be a
concern. Reorganizing communicational structures with this thought in mind might
alleviate some of these concerns.
Recognition and Advancement
It was previously mentioned that some librarians did not appreciate the push to
produce professional academic works when the administration was not publishing in
kind. That annoyance is compounded when the recognition offered those librarians who
do engage in professional work falls short of their expectations. “One cause of
disappointment is [the] failure to recognize that excellence requires much more than
sermons from top management” (Bolman & Deal, 2003, p. 400). Congratulations on
successful work can be very minimal.

159

Adele: Maria and I were talking about the poster for ACRL last year and
the director had come in to ask her a question about something else. So
Maria was showing him “Oh, Jessica and Adele are doing this
poster…blah blah blah.” No “That’s great!” No “Congratulations!” His
comment was “Oh, I hear those [posters] are really expensive.”

Researcher: To make?

Adele: To buy. I’m just like “That’s your feedback?!” And I just feel like
in some ways it’s very indicative of the problems here where they don’t
understand that this helps us…this gets us national attention. I do find that
frustrating.
The project is precisely what the administration has been pushing- academic productivity
recognized on the national level- yet the major concern was cost to the department. This
is not to say that there should be a party or the individual should receive a reward for
every significant product that they produce. However, it is difficult to motivate
employees to succeed when there is little to no acknowledgment.
An additional problem was the lack of advancement opportunity within the
system. When asked about developing a new library, Susanna said:
I probably would promote myself because…the one thing that I really hate
about libraries is that it’s really hard to move up. It’s almost impossible to
find ways to promote yourself up a level. So I would just naturally throw
myself up there. And I don’t know if I’m ready to be a supervisor, but I’m
going to promote myself to a higher level.
Promotion is hard to gain and demonstrates a non-Human Resources organizational
frame (Bolman & Deal, 2003). Successful companies recruit employees with pay and

160

benefits. “To keep them, they protect jobs, promote from within, and give people a piece
of the action” (Bolman & Deal, 2003, p. 137). That does not occur in this organization.
At St. Jerome, 3 of the 4 director level positions have been filled by the same
(male) person for at least 15 years. The female in the fourth position recently replaced a
(male) veteran of 14 years. Yet in order to be considered for management positions,
librarians must have supervisory experience. Since most of the librarians do not have
professional supervisory experience, the rare promotional opportunities are filled from
outside the university.
The librarians understand this is the system in which they work yet this working
environment generates an issue with motivation. What is the incentive to push boundaries
if there is not an opportunity for reward or advancement? Why push the third space
boundaries for collaboration? This is the mindset that curtails the necessary outreach for a
blended professional to be successful in their role.
Differentiation and Integration
The academic librarians at St. Jerome are blended professionals. Unfortunately
due to organizational restrictions, many of their colleagues reside in more fixed roles.
Bolman and Deal (2003) specify two key elements of the organizational structure: “how
to allocate work (differentiation) and how to coordinate roles and units once
responsibilities have been parceled out (integration) (p. 49). Feedback from the librarians
interviewed suggests that St. Jerome has issues with both of these features. Productivity,
morale, and the professional environment are impacted by the structural realities of the
organizational system at St. Jerome.

161

First, differentiation is difficult in St. Jerome’s system due to the distinctions
between classified staff and the professional or administrative faculty. A general
characteristic of these two roles is that classified staff tend not to have the MLS whereas
the faculty are trained librarians. There are levels of both forms of employee; the more
advanced the rank, the more responsibilities allocated to that particular role. In theory,
this should be successful because “clear, well-understood roles and relationships and
adequate coordination are key to how well an organization performs” (Bolman & Deal,
2003, p. 44). At St. Jerome though the limits on the duties are very strict because the
responsibilities correspond to state-wide classifications.
Jessica: It gets into class differences more or less and…we actually lost…I
don’t know if you knew [a former classified staff member], but my
understanding from hearsay is that…well we all knew that he did
spreadsheets. The man was a wizard at spreadsheets. And he wanted to do
more with the data but they would not give him a more professional role
so he said “I’m done. I’m done with stats. Someone else can deal with it”
because he felt like he was doing more than what was required by the
position and he was not being rewarded for it. And I can understand that.
If a worker exceeds the responsibilities outlined in their respective job description the
state mandates that they should be compensated for the work. That becomes problematic
when economic constraints make raises and re-classification of positions impossible.
Work therefore at St. Jerome is differentiated between the ranks but the ability to blend
roles within the organizational structure is limited by the constraints of specific rankings.
The functionality of the roles for the most part is based upon skills and knowledge
(Bolman & Deal, 2003). Each library has separate units such as reference or circulation

162

that vary in size based upon the needs of that particular location with other factors such as
shift time or geography playing lesser roles. This becomes awkward at St. Jerome
because the integration of the skills of the classified workers sometimes intersect with
those of the librarians.
Jessica: I’ve been hearing a lot of bits and pieces from conferences and
elsewhere where the role of librarians and the role of non-librarians is
becoming a lot more fuzzy. I don’t think that’s necessarily a bad thing but
part of me says “I went to library school, darn it!” I wouldn’t have gone to
library school if I hadn’t had to. I only went because that’s how you got a
job, otherwise I would have never gone to library school. I’m not really
sure that I can say that the MLS should be required. I feel like the fact
that…I feel that the quote para-professional role and the librarian
role…I’m not seeing a clear distinction these days.
Think back to the conversation on the quality of library school education. The degree did
not so much legitimize the professional as much as it simply opened the door. The skills
of the job are pragmatic and experiential and therefore acquirable by staff performing the
same duties as the librarians. “The concept of a non-MLS librarian may appear to demean
the profession by suggesting the degree is not essential to being a librarian in the sense
that the degree serves as a professional credential indicating mastery of theory and
practice of librarianship” (Simpson, 2013, p. 2). The librarians do not appreciate the
infringement upon their professional territory, especially when they are simultaneously
vying for credibility and legitimacy around campus themselves.
Part of this hierarchical argument may be seen in the titles assigned to the
classified staff in the libraries: paraprofessional. The term itself denotes assistance to the

163

licensed professionals, which in this case are the librarians. Librarians can be keen to
point out this difference in ability.
Bridget: And I’m not…this is not an insult to the paraprofessionals at all
because I think you know I think you guys are awesome…but I think
there’s…maybe I’m generalizing and maybe that’s too much because I
like to think of what I do on the reference desk. The student does not know
the question they need to ask. But through my experience and my
opportunities, I’m like “Oh, that’s where you need to go.”
At St. Jerome, paraprofessionals attached to liaison librarian departments were
additionally labeled “librarian assistants” or “LA’s” further creating a role distinction,
which is not necessarily beneficial to the professional environment or productivity.
Lucy: When it becomes a distinction I think it creates an atmosphere that’s
not good for anyone and I feel that distinction is definitely made more at
Alexander VI then it is maybe at the other libraries. And truthfully a lot of
our LA’s or whatever we call them nowadays have higher degrees or are
pursuing higher degrees or have more academic research than the
librarians get, so I mean, yeah. I think the reason we’re so hung up on the
MLS is there has been pockets where that…idea that an MLS is even
necessary is being challenged.
The librarians of course also are guarding this legitimacy of their position for financial
reasons. A 2011 study found that 78% of library directors consider budget as a significant
reason for hiring non-MLS holding individuals as librarians (Simpson, 2013). The
classified staff makes less money than the faculty-level librarians. If the financial
situation dictated change, then what would be the sense of hiring an MLS-holding
librarian when a non-librarian staff member can do the same job for 75% of the salary?

164

At the same, the managers realistically cannot ask employees to complete the
same duties as a librarian or a higher ranked classified staff member. This creates a
motivational and potentially disciplinary concern as well. The state system makes
discipline very complicated though.
Gwen: [In order to fix the system] I might change the fact that we can't
terminate people here or then it's such a like arduous process.

Researcher: Eighteen…eighteen months to terminate anybody who's
classified.

Gwen: Yeah. I would maybe change that. My husband always says to me
that no actual business could function the way your library functions.
There's just no way. Businesses couldn't be profitable if they have people
that just kind of showed up and then went home. So I would probably
change that and I recognize there's benefits the system that we have now,
but that's something that I would change.
The constraints of the role description for classified staff make the integration of
motivating tasks for the employees. If the employee balks at change, they will have three
6-month long disciplinary reviews prior to termination. Systemically, the structure of the
organization makes management and mobility very challenging.
The totality of these findings is significant because they demonstrate the difficult
structural environment in which the librarians attempt to blend professionally. The
librarian role transcends a great deal of organizational boundaries. Unluckily though the
personnel who might amplify the success in they blended role are unable to extend out of
their restricted positions.

165

Use of Personnel
In the course of the differentiation and integration of the various roles within the
library system, the rigidity of the classifications impedes librarian blended professional
development and growth. The issue is recognized by several managers and senior
librarians yet they lack the ability to enact true change. “Experienced
managers…understand the difference between possessing a tool and knowing how to use
it. Only experience and practice bring the skill and wisdom to size up a situation and use
tools well” (Bolman & Deal, 2003, p. 13). Too often though, screwdrivers are being used
to pound in nails.
Jessica: We should be grooming people and that’s one of the things that
we have not done. Actually that is a barrier since there’s a tendency to see
people in little pegs. You do this job, you do that job, and you do that job,
and there hasn’t been as much interest in letting people do things that are a
bit broader and fuzzier.
Part of the issue is that St. Jerome must work in the boundaries defined by the state. At
the same time though, the system retards the development of ambitious classified staff by
limiting their practical experience in their current position. It leads to a high amount of
turnover amongst that level of staff.
Gwen: I feel like I'm hiring people that are either out of undergrad or out
of library school. They want some experience and I expect them to leave,
like they're going to get bored. They want to learn new things and I can
only offer so many training opportunities or responsibilities and they're
going to get bored and then they're going to move on and I expect that.
Some of the managers actually suggested utilizing staff in more substantial roles for the
classified staff. As Catherine proposes “I see the [LA level III] as almost an

166

administrative librarian in their role. Because you want folks to grow…and we don’t have
that for those folks in those [classified positions]…so I would change that.” This type of
change would require a systemic overhaul of the function and ideology of the libraries
though and the economic realities of a publically funded institution create an unlikely
scenario in which this change might occur.
This system also potentially impedes the productivity of the librarians themselves.
Part of the reasoning behind the paraprofessional label was that the classified staff would
be in place to aid the librarians on projects. Librarians state that they do not have enough
time to complete substantial research. As well, library school may not have equipped
them with the abilities to complete significant quantitative or qualitative methodological
studies. As Lucy asserts: “You are the stats guy and there is no way I would deny that. If
I were going to have a stats question, I would ask you, because you know stats. It doesn’t
matter if you have an MLS.” At the same time though, not all librarians are willing to ask
for help from the lower ranks due to perceived statuses. Therefore, this insight gains
importance because it denotes both the librarians’ weakening of their blended
professional role external to the library by restricting the collaborative opportunities
internal to the organization itself.
Finally, the appropriate use of personnel is inhibited by the same siloing
mentioned previously that affects internal collaborative opportunities.
Maria: In general, I think we’re really bad at recognizing peoples’ innate
talents and interests and trying to develop those professionally. I’ve
always thought that. You get these people and you see them 3 months out,
6 months out, maybe even a year out and you say “Gosh, well I didn’t

167

know they could do that.” Well they said they could do that on their
resume but I didn’t know they did this. You know what I mean?

Researcher: Compartmentalization.

Maria: Thank you. And I think for all their talk about de-siloing they
reinforce it by not recognizing the innate skills of people and maybe
putting people with like skills together in a unit. Not just a temporary
taskforce…not just a team…but you structure it.
Librarians perform service work on a variety of committees within the library system at
St. Jerome. Temporary fixes have not resolved the organizational issues due to the
aforementioned communication concerns and structural restrictions. Again, St. Jerome
would require major systemic change in order to find realized success for the librarians as
blended professionals.
Organization Summary
It seems somewhat ironic that a project detailing how the academic librarians at
St. Jerome are blended professionals suggests that the organization within which they
work structurally prevents the success of that very model. Yet their professional growth is
stymied by the same structural system that allows for their roles to branch across sectors
of the academic community. Vertical communication is poor and internal opportunity is
exceptionally limited. Also interesting is the experience of rank denial that the librarians
experience within faculty circles is then passed on to the classified paraprofessionals.
Unless regulations on the roles of the classified staff and librarians improve, the
organizational culture seems as if it will be a self-perpetuating cycle of semi-dysfunction.

168

Section III Summary
Time and money (or compensation) are big complaints of the academic librarians
at St. Jerome. However, it appeared that they based their opinions on misconceptions
about their tenure-track counterparts. Increased tenure-track-like research responsibilities
are encroaching on their schedules. Still, the amount of time spent on their activities does
not approach that of the tenure-track.
Money is also a specious complaint. How many people enter the academy due to
financial motivations though? The tenure-track faculty might make slightly more on
average than the academic librarians but the differences are not great. Still, the perception
that time and money are impediments to the academic librarians’ success as blended
professionals. Better understanding of the expectations of the librarians through improve
communication from the administration might alleviate some of these misconceptions.
Gender is a far more complicated obstacle than either time or money to address,
in part because some of the complaints were implied. It is apparent that perceptions of
gender identity offer intrinsic challenges for the female librarians to address. At the same
time, alterations in outlooks and beliefs of the individual librarians will only speak to so
much of the dilemma. At St. Jerome, it is organizational.
Organization brings the final professional obstacle identified by the librarians.
The structural frame of the organization inhibits personal and professional growth and
enables a caste system to stymie any opportunity. Promotion is not often available and
the use of personnel often results in counter-productivity. While time and money were the

169

most often cited complaints, the true professional obstacles lay in the gender identity of
the academic librarians and the structure of the library organization at St. Jerome.

Conclusion
Once again it was established that the academic librarians at St. Jerome have
similar roles to the tenure-tracked faculty, but the level of the work may best be defined
as “tenure-track lite.” The length and breadth of the librarian activities just does not meet
the level of the faculty. However, this reality places the academic librarians in a wholly
unique third space within the context of higher education. They serve as a potential
conduit between the curricular learning that takes places between faculty and students in
the academic classroom.
The academic librarians at St. Jerome are blended professional that utilize space,
knowledges, relationships, and legitimacies to extend this space and their influence
around campus. At the same time though, they allow the real and perceived boundaries to
limit the effectiveness of their blended professional abilities. These limitations create
equally real and perceived obstacles that inhibit the librarians’ personal and professional
growth, adding another layer of complexity to the notion of the librarian as a blended
professional.
Some of the issues affecting professional success and development, such as time
and money, are easier to nullify than other more difficult obstacles like gender
perceptions and organizational structure. The following chapter will attempt to provide

170

solutions to these concerns. As well, the work will conclude with opportunities for the
expansion of research around the topic of academic librarians as blended professionals.

171

CHAPTER FIVE

Introduction
The previous chapter provided the findings from the study. This chapter will
compare these findings with respect to the existing literature on librarian role and
literature and the blended professional model. Since the assertion formally has been made
that librarians are in fact blended professionals, the conversation then will consider how
the academic librarians at St. Jerome might address some of the limitations that persist in
their role as blended professional. The chapter will conclude by proposing pragmatic
means to enhance the success of the blended professional role of the academic librarians
at St. Jerome and how they might address and overcome the real and perceived obstacles
to their professional success. Finally, the prospects of future research will be offered.

Place in Literature
Contrasted with the existing literature on the topic of librarians as faculty
members, this study finds cohesion with the argument that suggests the duties of the
academic librarians do not compare equally with tenure-track counterparts (Schrimsher &
Northrup, 2013; Hansson & Johannesson, 2013; Coker, van Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010).
While it is clear that librarians do publish (Baruzzi & Calcagno, 2015; Lamothe, 2012)
and instruct (O'Malley & Delwiche, 2012; Cooke & Rosenthal, 2011; Shaffer, 2011;
Clark & Chinburg, 2010), the level of productivity and complexity of the role found in

172

this study is not on the same level as tenure-track faculty. Academic librarians at other
institutions in fact might dispute some of these findings because the arguments may not
accurately reflect their role at their particular institution (Dunn, 2013) and reiterate the
benefits of full faculty status for librarians (Parker, 2011). That is acceptable and
somewhat expected when a case study is performed. These findings firstly consider St.
Jerome. The method may be applied to other colleges and universities and then
comparisons and debates may commence.
At the same time, exterior entities opinions of the librarians’ and their purpose
from faculty and administration are sometimes misguided (Rogers, 2012; Katz, 2003;
Hardesty, 1991). At St. Jerome though the academic librarians occupy a tenuous third
space predicated by the real and perceived institutional silos and boundaries that inhibit
their blended abilities. Defining this third space and the resulting obstacles serves to
provide a model where other libraries might examine the specific roles of their librarians
and illuminate prevailing challenges. This dissertation provides the basis of a model for
the understanding of librarians’ perceptions of their duties and position within the context
of higher education.
Still, this project does not imply that librarians do not deserve to be considered
faculty or have a role within the governance of the university, which is a predominant
assertion within higher education literature (Association of College and Research
Libraries, 2012; Wyss, 2010; Welch & Mozenter, 2006). The libraries and their academic
librarians just fill a unique and different role and space within the educational process. As

173

a result, this study further refines the definition of the librarian role when compared to
existing literature.
As stated, the librarians’ blended role is much more direct to the curricular student
learning process than other non-instructional faculty or student affairs positions. Yes,
significant student growth and personal understanding may be found through a student
affairs organization, such as a special interest club. However, academic librarians provide
the access to and evaluation of researchable material that may directly contribute to
student academic success, which is a core mission of any higher education institution.
Library literature often focuses on the assessment of library instruction (Sobel &
Sugimoto, 2012; Oakleaf, 2009), which is only a portion of the student’s academic life
cycle (Passehl-Stoddart & Monge, 2014).
Findings here suggest that the librarians have the potential for a more significant
impact on student learning through their blended role. When unimpeded, librarians have
the capacity for more substantive collaborative projects as opposed to mere instruction of
information literacy (Baruzzi & Calcagno, 2015) and tangible academic value (Oakleaf,
2010). In this way, the application of this blended professional model to academic
librarians allows for the argument that the librarians at the very least should be included
in more significant communication around the St. Jerome campuses in organizations such
as Faculty Senate and curriculum committees.
The argument here also disagrees with literature that suggests that libraries “do
not seem to directly contribute to gains in information literacy, to what students gain
overall from college, or to student satisfaction” (Matthews, 2007, p. 77). Academic

174

librarians have the ability to be integral cogs in the machinery of student learning.
Restrictions on their abilities to blend and interact with different segments of the
university community though, both internal and external to the library organization itself,
require attention. This study, by applying the blended professional model to the library
role, adds another layer to the literature that searches for definitions of librarian role and
working space and enhances the arguments that suggest librarians have significant
contributions to university students’ learning.
This study is very distinctive in that it applies a higher education-focused model
to the role of academic librarians. This is something rarely seen in literature because
higher education theorists seldom consider librarians as faculty. Library literature
infrequently takes this approach either. A great deal of library-oriented literature related
to the function of librarians seeks to make a direct comparison to the faculty (Coker, van
Duinkerken, & Bales, 2010; Welch & Mozenter, 2006). This usually fails to make an
impact because, as asserted in this study, the librarian role is much different than most
faculty and the faculty do not fully understand the actual role of the librarians.
By utilizing the method demonstrated here, this study advocates that librarians
have a shared but different role in the production of educated students and scholars. This
does not extend fully to the librarian literature that suggests librarians and faculty are
equal in their charges. Instead, this work applies the blended professional model in order
to codify the working third space of the academic librarians with respect to the faculty
position. Simply put, this method employs the indirect route to validation and may gain
more traction because it is not a frontal assault overstating the librarian role.

175

It was telling that Whitchurch did not consider applying the blended professional
model to librarians in her original studies, yet she examined other blended positions such
as individuals working within academic advising. This perspective is understandable and
expected having read the existing literature. The librarians’ degrees are not respected or
(often) at an equivalent level to the rest of the faculty around collegiate campuses and the
function of their role is misunderstood. Whitchurch’s model is just another example of
librarians and their contributions being overlooked by the higher education community.
This study differs in its approach and provides the mold in which to amend that
consistent oversight in higher education and librarian literature.
Yet by employing a research model originating in higher education, this study
provides the blueprint for inclusion of librarians in the conversation involving faculty and
collegiate educators. It merges two fields of academic thought so that librarians might
conceptualize themselves as higher education professionals in addition to being library
experts. This philosophical nudge empowers the librarian role by demonstrating its
significance in the total context of higher education.

Modifying the Blended Professional
The blended professional frame was intended to analyze the professional roles
and identities of the traditional conception of academic faculty. The librarian’s blended
professional experience never was considered. Whitchurch’s model is also relatively new
(published in 2009) so the application of the theory to varying classifications of faculty
has yet to occur. As a result, there is no direct comparison in the literature to which the

176

findings of this study might be compared. This study is an entirely new addition to the
literature in that regard.
Therefore foremost contribution of this dissertation concerning the blended
professional model is the study’s application of the frame to a new professional in the
academic realm- the academic librarian. The employment of the blended professional
model on academic librarians demonstrates the malleability and usefulness of the frame
when applied to non-tenure track or traditional faculty members of the university
collective. As well, Whitchurch (2009) described the experience of blended professionals
as navigating the “history and tensions between different factions and groups” (p. 408).
This held firm for the librarians studied here. The academic librarians must negotiate the
expectations of the library administration, interpret the ever-changing expectations of the
student populace, and perform outreach to faculty, all while combating the historical role
of a librarian as a mere administrator of the university repository. With this in mind, it is
clear through this analysis that academic librarians are blended professionals.
Additionally, aspects of the model netted sundry or completely different attributes
when applied to librarians. For example, the spaces for librarians are clearly librarycentric. Everything originates from the understanding of the library, its resources, and the
navigation thereof. In contrast, spaces for other blended professional would extend out
from either an academic department or the classroom. This should be expected due to the
fact that librarians functionally have different roles than the professionals studied in the
original model. All of these factors intertwine and aid in the construction of the librarian
as a blended professional.

177

For the most part, the existing blended professional model generally retains
usefulness when analyzing current professional identities within traditional higher
education settings. What the model does not fully take into account is the driving force
behind an individual’s change from a traditional, encased role to that of a blended
professional. Whitchurch implies that the institutional environment or management
promotes the blended role. For example, “leadership was described variously as ‘a
facilitator’, ‘identifying new initiatives and projects,’ ‘creating opportunities’ and
‘releasing potential’” (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 418). This is certainly one of the catalysts at
St. Jerome, as administration is promoting more academic professionalism and librarian
outreach. Other factors, such as financial cuts that create the elimination of positions and
encourage the development of cross training skills to account for personnel shortfall also
surely are a catalyst. However, that ignores the major consideration of technology,
especially within the libraries.
The researcher’s first job in a library as a graduate student involved “sweeping”
bound journals once an hour. Library patrons routinely left piles of these periodicals by
photocopiers because print copies of these materials were the only way to obtain them.
Approximately ten years later, the majority of print periodicals are in off-site storage
because patrons find access to journals online. That student role in the libraries is
completely different due to technological advancement.
The academic librarians’ roles surely have changed as well, from their
understanding on how to obtain the materials to the navigation and interpretation of the
resources. Their working third space undoubtedly is more extensive with the availability

178

of online resources and interactive materials. As well, the librarians’ ability to interact
with a larger populace in a less fixed environment has also shifted. Technology will have
a greater impact for some sectors of higher education blended professionals like librarians
than it will for other workers in different departments.
If this model was applied in 2005, the results and perceptions of professional
identities of the librarians and other professionals likely would be different than the
findings of this study, or one conducted in another 10 years. Although this is a case study
analyzing one segment of the university community, the educated guess is that such
insight would help professionals other than librarians gain the most practical information
when applying the frame. Granted, the goal of a model such as this is not to examine the
catalysts of the development of professional roles and identities but rather the forces
shaping the conceptualization of that identity once it is formed.
The blended professional model consequently provides an accurate snapshot of
the perceptions of current working conditions but the usefulness of findings might have a
short shelf life due to factors promoting changing roles. Therefore, being cognizant of the
causes of changes regarding blended professional identities will help further identify
solutions for the obstacles to professional success and development that impede blended
professionals and their organizations because it will offer a total understanding of the
role. While adding considerations on causes to the actual model is not recommended, the
addition of a question regarding the perceived factors initiating or perpetuating blended
professional activities should be added to the qualitative questions as it will provide
supplemental perspectives on the formation of the subjects’ professional identities.

179

Also while the blended professional model as a whole is exceptionally useful for
gaining insight into the professional identity of higher education professionals, there is
another distinct suggestion for revision. Whitchurch’s frame does not have an actual
consideration of the impact of gender identity on professional identity. This is a case
study analyzing the perceptions of 17 female workers in one segment of the university
community. As well, not all interviewed librarians even explicitly stated that gender
influenced their perception of their job. This reality limits the researcher’s ability to
promote a wholesale change to the process of professional identity investigation.
Still, though gender-related obstacles were not a universally cited concern with
the interviewed librarians in this case, additional studies utilizing the blended
professional model might consider employing questions that directly ask about
perceptions of gender. Librarianship is statistically two-thirds female and at St. Jerome
that percentage is even higher. Other blended professional fields in higher education
where employees also have professional faculty status such as career services have a high
percentage of female employees. For example, at St. Jerome there are 20 full-time
employees in the career services department; 17 are female. Consequently, multiple
blended professional fields in higher education will have a significant female presence.
In addition, existing literature suggests that women often already possess blended
roles (wife, mother, employee, etc.)(English & Calloway, 2013; Couzy, 2012; Rao, 2003;
Stefanisko, 1997). Several conversations in this study confirmed this assertion. It has
been established that women do not have a fair chance for professional equality in higher
education (Schuster & Finkelstein, 2006). Literature also states that women as

180

professionals are hampered by inherent and existing gender biases (Fulmer, 2010;
Bagilhole & White, 2008; Garn & Brown, 2008). Again, the findings from this work
verify that some women are indeed obstructed professionally by gender prejudices.
Therefore, it is reasonable to postulate that given these biases that exist in the
workplace and higher education as a whole, female professionals in fields other than
library science might have an altered perspective on their roles within the academy due to
experiences with blended roles and confrontations with partiality. Logically, this
indicates that examining gender as an influencing factor for the development of
professional identity of female blended professionals in higher education is valid. The
application of the blended professional model with respect to gender melds these
conversations- women in higher education and blended professionalism- and provides for
a further understanding of women’s role within the academy.
This is especially important within the context of all higher education because the
literature has demonstrated that there is a consistent lack of egalitarianism and
opportunity for women in the academy (Chisholm-Burns, et al., 2012; Mason, 2011;
Lanier, Tanner, & Guidry, 2009; Schuster & Finkelstein, 2006; Bowen, 2005; Fowler, et
al., 2004; Guillory, 2001). This reality very likely has an effect on the spaces and
relationships that a blended professional might inhabit and develop by placing real or
artificial boundaries around the professional third space. Are the knowledges and
legitimacies of working women equally mitigated? With librarians, the limits of their
education inhibited the extension of their profile. Do female blended professionals with
doctoral degrees still face biases regarding knowledges and legitimacies? The assumption

181

based on existing literature and this study is yes, the biases persist. The application of the
blended professional model with additional questions or categories considering gender
may better codify the concern and elucidate realistic solutions.
Therefore a modification to the blended professional model allowing for the
impact of gender might be in order for future studies that seek to employ it. Even on the
smallest scale, explicit questions regarding gender should be asked of interviewees in
order to assess the amount of influence this factor has on their professional identity
development. If a significant number of respondents in the future studies indicate that
gender does play a major part in their professional identity, then adding gender as a fifth
category in the blended professional frame will become more reasonable.
For librarians, this was a micro study that provided the model for the analysis of
their role in the larger context of higher education. Reflexively, the application of gender
to the blended professional model demonstrates its usefulness on the macro-scale. This
dissertation suggests that gender has at the very least a partial impact on the perception of
professional identity for one segment of workers in the higher education community.
However, by adjusting the blended professional model to reflect the influence of gender,
this study establishes another means by which to codify the experience and perception of
women in higher education on a much larger level. It is another argument in the
conversation on how unequal treatment in the workplace may negatively affect the
worker and the organization.
Again, the size of this study does not allow for a conclusive argument suggesting
a major overhaul to the blended professional model. This dissertation is one very small

182

enhancement to the literature on female academic librarian role with respect to
professional identity. Yet the anticipation is that an expansion of the frame will benefit
the codification of the blended role within all of higher education. This approach for
future studies will give a more comprehensive understanding of the blended role because
it specifically addresses an issue that continues to be a concern in higher education- the
impact of gender on professional role, identity, and development.
Practical Recommendations
In terms of pragmatism for the immediate study, the findings presented in the
previous chapter indicate that the librarians at St. Jerome are indeed blended
professionals. However, restrictions of space and professional challenges prevent the
librarians from being fully effective in their capacity as blended professionals on an
academic campus. The following is meant to offer potential solutions that will address
directly the some of the cited concerns from this case study and hopefully alleviate some
of these difficulties for the academic librarians at St. Jerome.
At the same time, through the analysis of the interviews and the librarians’
comments and concerns, the researcher become more cognizant of his own standing in
the community of librarians interviewed. As a result, he is attempting to provide
illumination of issues and potential solutions without projecting his own personal
perspectives or work ethic on that of the librarians. This admittedly is a challenging
mission. While this dissertation furthers the researcher’s empathy regarding the role and
professional identities of the librarians at St. Jerome, the experiences of the interviewer

183

and interviewees inherently remain separate and unequal. Simply put, the roles of the
researcher and the librarians are different on a social and logistical plane.
This work additionally is an opportunity for an underrepresented or unheard
faction of the university community to voice their opinions and beliefs about their role. It
is therefore crucial that the suggestions for situational improvement do not trample these
views by projecting them as mere musings of a disgruntled sect. The findings presented
illustrate valid opinions of these female academic librarians and symbolize a unique
insight into one specific yet significant campus group.
Take the deliberation about lack of time for instance. The implication is that there
is more time available to complete tasks and projects that might improve the social and
cultural standing of librarians at St. Jerome. However, the researcher’s perception of time
might be wholly different from the librarian quoted in chapter four as having difficulty
managing the complexities of work, life, and motherhood. The goal then is to detail these
concerns and perceptions without undermining their validity through biased
interpretation.
At some point the obstacles becoming impassible realities. Consider the librarian
who had a great opportunity to advance her career but chose not to leave her current job
due to familial reasons. She geographically is limited in the scope of options and there are
few in any opportunities to advance in her current role. In that case considerations
external to the job converge with the realities of the role to create a substantial if not
immovable obstacle. Situations like this make any proposed resolution suspicious due to

184

the most significant professional obstacle detailed- the library organization and
administration at St. Jerome itself.
The researcher believes that aspects of the organization must change in order to
benefit the librarians’ experience. On the micro-scale librarians might address concerns
with colleagues and managers in hopes of improving on the basic obstacles to their
professional success. However, for several reasons previously asserted- organizational
structure, poor communication, and inability of the administration- the researcher does
not believe that wholesale revolution in this environment is a likely outcome.
It is understandable that some librarians might not want to or cannot leave St.
Jerome for any variety of personal or professional reasons yet they still might desire
improvement in spite of organizational limitations. At that point when the situation is not
likely to change the only option is that the individual’s reaction to the circumstances must
be altered. The librarian then might focus on the aspects of the job in which they find the
greatest enjoyment. Many librarians cited working with students and faculty and
interacting with the community at St. Jerome as gratifying. Focusing on the positive
facets of the role might in some cases be the only true real or perceptual change that a
particular librarian might make at this point in their lives.
Again, the argument here is not to mitigate the concerns raised by the librarians
but instead alleviate some of the obstacles standing in their path. While many of the
forthcoming suggestions might address some of the concerns, in some cases
comprehensive change is not realistic. In those circumstances though even small

185

perceptual alterations, however pedestrian that proposal might seem, might improve the
overall situation.
Spaces
A few of the recommendations provided here will bridge multiple characteristics
of the blended professional. For instance, office space improvements speak to both spaces
and legitimacies. If an office is a sign of a legitimate faculty member on the St. Jerome
campus, then the academic librarians appear lacking in that regard. Fortunately, there is
an ongoing construction project at the Alexander VI Library that will completely redesign
the working space of the librarians. Each librarian presently is slated to have their own
office. This will mean that all of the liaison librarians at St. Jerome libraries except those
at the Urban II will have personal working space. The librarians and managers at St.
Jerome should be cognizant of the pre-existing perception of Alexander VI Libraryoriented decision-making biases. The difference in office provisions might further divide
Urban II librarians from their colleagues through perceptions of unfair practices.
Increasing an understanding of the technologies used also would enhance the
spaces in which librarians might develop. There has been some reluctance to incorporate
technologies into the daily routine of librarianship at St. Jerome though. As Lucy states:
[Librarians] don’t want to admit that they don’t know how to do it. So
that’s the worst thing. If you say “Yeah, I want to help but I don’t know”
I’d be fine with that. But some people say that they know how to do it but
then when you work with them you find that they really don’t and they
don’t want to admit to ignorance.

186

Right now, all of the librarians use virtual reference but not as many use Skype, the
Blackboard portal tool Collaborate, One-Button Studio video maker, and other forms of
interactive technology. There is a learning curve for these technologies and not all
products are useful to every discipline. Discretion should be exercised when deciding
which technologies to harness and master. Still, while there still is significant value in the
physical space of a traditional library, in order to maintain a presence with the ubiquitous
learners frequenting the campuses of the 21st century, the understanding of a librarians’
third space must now extend to the virtual realm as well.
Knowledges
There is no reasonably quick development for some knowledges. Take for
example the librarians who cited their job experience as the factor that led to their ability
to navigate the resources. That type of knowledge simply requires time and effective
practice. Other aspects though have much more rapid resolution.
The inability to conduct high-level quantitative or qualitative research due to a
lack of coursework and training during their graduate education confounded many of the
interviewed librarians. A simple solution to that obstacle is to enroll in methodology
courses in order to gain the education needed and desired to complete these research
projects. Coincidentally, St. Jerome offers 12 free credits of course study per year (with a
maximum of 6 credits per semester) to all full-time employees.
This suggestion might be met with scrutiny by the librarians that suggest their
time already is at a premium. Is sitting in class until 10pm one or more nights a week

187

always enjoyable? No, it is not. However, it serves the purpose of increasing the
knowledge of a blended professional at a minimal cost.
There are some current librarians at St. Jerome that take advantage of this benefit.
Other librarians enroll in courses at external universities (at their own expense). It might
be worth either the librarians themselves or managers consulting these individuals in
order to ascertain how they are able to balance the roles of librarian and student. Perhaps
librarian schedules might be modified in order to accommodate the professional growth
associated with knowledge development.
Relationships
Around campus, expanding relationships into certain sectors is difficult if not
impossible. Some of the faculty simply has no interest in having the librarians in their
classes nor do they wish to work with them on projects. No amount of academic
productivity or outreach by the librarians will change their minds. Aside from direct
orders from their department dean, there is no chance of developing a relationship.
One current library administration-backed project is the Balanced Scorecard,
which is a management strategy designed to align personnel activities with institutional
missions (Balanced Scorecard Institute, 2014). Because it attempts to apply numerical
expectations to activities that are difficult to quantify, such as research or outreach, its
intrusion is not appreciated. The end result is academic librarians attempting to navigate
what is perceived to be unnecessary or unrealistic change, producing frustration and
exasperation.

188

The researcher understands that administration as part of the Balanced Scorecard
is pushing the academic librarians to increase (numerically) partnerships throughout the
university, so it puts the librarians in a bind. Here, being realistic makes sense. First, get
rid of any statistical pressure to “make friends” in different departments around the
university. The library is not a sales department. Productivity should not be measured
through factors that require persuasion of individuals into equal partnerships. Second,
keep the door open if these resistant faculty ever wish to ask for assistance, but do not
spend the effort on a lost cause. Work with the faculty who are receptive and strengthen
those relationships. If the librarians focus on the productive partnerships, then it will save
a lot of time and energy over the long haul.
The relationships internal to the library also have to extend beyond the boundaries
of the individual libraries and campuses. Schedule visits once a month to libraries on the
separate campuses in order to maintain or develop rapport and keep colleagues abreast of
current projects. Travel between campuses can be difficult with the traffic congestion, but
once a month- 12 visits per year- is not too much to endure if the activity is meaningful.
As well, these may be informal meetings over coffee or lunch. Formality is not a
necessity for relationship development and in some ways casual gatherings might serve
as a welcome relief from the daily librarian grind.
The librarians also must broaden their pool of prospective research partners.
Specifically, they must begin to regard both students and classified staff as potential
collaborators. As liaisons, they have access to many graduate students working on theses
or dissertations. Also, many of the classified staff workers within the organization, often

189

in the same department, have advanced degrees and experience in high-level research and
publication. Start projects with these folks. Both students and staff members benefit from
collaboration with the librarians because they enhance their research skills and resumes
so that they might advance in their field. The librarians also profit because they are
performing outreach thereby increasing their blended role and producing academically as
well.
One of the better ways to develop a research pipeline is to connect with one or
more individuals on prospective projects. It reduces the total workload per research
venture, thus allowing for the researcher simultaneously to complete multiple studies.
This ideology simply provides the partnerships.
Legitimacies
Similar to the discussion with knowledges, coursework provides the opportunity
to expand legitimacies of the academic librarians at St. Jerome. Taking the suggestion a
step further, completing a certificate or degree program may increase legitimacy by
providing the librarian with the all-important hegemonic device of higher educationletters after one’s name. The additional knowledge of program language further extends
boundaries and opportunities for the academic librarian.
Again, this recommendation might find protest due to the time required for
collegiate study. Nevertheless, if the librarian seeks to use only the 12 free credits per
year, their student status will remain part-time. While taxing with a full-time job, family,
and social life, this represents a reasonable opportunity for motivated individuals.

190

This proposition may be trickier though than merely enrolling in research
methodology courses due to the potential for inadvertently creating a student-faculty
relationship instead of a librarian-faculty association. Building collaborative relationships
becomes problematic when the librarian registers for a course taught by a member of the
department for which they liaison. This is especially so if the librarian performs poorly as
a student!
At the same time, a good performance in the class might provide for the
development of future collaborations by establishing a working relationship. The
librarian truly concerned by this might strategically avoid certain faculty throughout their
studies or simply seek to define the roles with the faculty member prior to the start of the
class or program. In the end, enrolling in a degree or certificate program is a costeffective means to add layers to the blended professional role.
Final Thoughts on Blended Professionalism
The above suggestions represent what the librarians as individuals might do in
order to be successful in their blended positions. The librarians cannot succeed alone in
their endeavors though. In total terms of increasing the blended professional role and
third space of the academic librarians at St. Jerome, the administration also must
aggressively promote these professionals’ skills. Maria provided the following analogy.
That’s where I think the sales job needs to come from the director. Sales
job…I think I’ve used this analogy before. The director is the sales guy
out there with the plow. He’s plowing the field, sowing some seeds, you
know. Gosh guys, over here is going to be the wheat, over here is some
corn, over here are the soy beans, we’re going to let this sit fallow…bah

191

bah! Your librarians come in behind. Okay, we’re the wheat guys. We’re
the corn guys. We’re the soy bean guys and let’s get this crop going here.
But I think your leader…your top dog…is your lead liaison, if you will.
He’s the top salesman. And that’s the person who’s in these meetings with
deans and directors here.
As Maria asserts, that library director position has the ear of the executive levels of the
university and can bridge some of the silo gaps that encumber librarian outreach,
especially with highly resistant faculty. In general, the researcher’s understanding was
that the librarians did not feel that director of the libraries or his direct subordinates did
well enough work at promoting the research accomplishments of St. Jerome’s librarians.
If the director is analogous to the “sales guy,” then currently the librarians are his
assistants making cold calls on his behalf because he does not have enough active leads.
The academic librarians have specialties that would promote promising collaboration.
They just need some additional support from the top that endorses the variety of the
blended professional abilities that they might offer.

Additional Pragmatic Implications
As suggested, some of the obstacles perceived by the academic librarians at St. Jerome
appear artificial in creation. Yet the perception of the hurdles as truly existing may affect
the views that the librarians have of their own roles. For instance nearly every librarian
interviewed mentioned time and money as chief concerns. However, Section III in
Chapter 4 suggested that the perception of these factors as obstacles was misguided.
Other factors such as gender or organizational structure were less tangible yet provided

192

very real hurdles to professional success. The following is meant to suggest resolutions
that might alleviate some of the consternation for the librarians at St. Jerome.
Time
Time is a frustrating topic to discuss because when activities are actually
tabulated and measured within the context of higher education. Take instruction for
example. One librarian estimated that she taught 30 classes in a semester, which could
include 20 minute to 3 hour sessions. This librarian was in the top three librarians at St.
Jerome in terms of courses taught. Therefore, her in-class instruction time was
significantly higher than some of her peers. For an estimate, let us say that the average
class length for this librarian was 1.5 hours. If the librarian spent 1 hour preparing for
each of those classes, this would equate to 75 hours a semester spent in the classroom
teaching ((30 classes x 1.5 hours class time) + 30 hours preparation time).
In contrast, consider the for example an instructor teaching Western Political
Theory as a seminar that meets weekly for 3 hours. The material for each course changes
as the course topically progresses. One week may be spent reading Machiavelli whereas
the following week Rousseau may be the focus of discussion. This creates the need for
continual preparation. In fact, the American Faculty Association (AFA) estimates that an
instructor should prepare 2-4 hours per 1 hour of class time taught (AFA, 2012). As Irene
succinctly says: “Yes, I may do instruction but in a whole year I may teach the same class
44 times whereas the instructor is teaching three classes every semester, so the preps are
different.” Therefore, for a 15 week seminar course, that equates to between 135 and 225
hours a semester devoted to classroom teaching (Classroom Time (1 class x (15 weeks x

193

3 hours)) + Preparation Time ((1 class x (15 weeks x 3 hours)) x 2 (or 4)). If the faculty
member is teaching two or more classes, that time is doubled or tripled.
Previous discussions (and feedback from the librarians themselves) in this work
suggested that other activities of the librarians did not encompass as much depth or
breadth as other professionals on campus. The bottom line is that the academic librarians
at St. Jerome have more time than their faculty counterparts in most of their activities.
What they perceive as constricted time is actually not that bad! However, the fact that the
librarians perceive their time to be overly saturated with activities creates a tangible
obstacle to professional success and suggests that additional perspectives and analysis
from colleagues or managers are needed.
For matters of time, librarians might do a desk audit of their schedules and keep
track of their hourly activities for a week, a month, or longer. This will demonstrate how
their hours are being used and when discussed with a manager or colleague viable
scheduling plans might develop. In the short run, this method might open the librarians to
micro-management by allowing increased inspection of activities. However, the overall
understanding of productivity and time management benefits the librarians in the end by
providing means for increased efficiency. If time constraints really do heavily effect the
productivity of librarians, then spread some of their responsibilities to the classified staff
in order to lighten the load (and provide the classified staff with new or expanded
professional development opportunities). In this way the librarians might maximize their
ability to stretch their operational third space in a more efficient manner.
Money

194

Librarians presume that having the responsibility, or at the very least strong
encouragement, of the production of tenure-track-level research remains unfair due to the
discrepancy in comparative salaries and compensation between the two factions. Chapter
4 suggested that the gaps in pay are far less than the librarians believed. Yes, there are
STEM faculty and full professors walking around St. Jerome’s campus who annually
make well into the six figures. However, there also are plenty of PhD-holding assistant
professors making $53,000 as well.
Truthfully though, a lack of a high salary or compensation should not prevent
research productivity. The concept of pay-for-productivity is a mentality best suited to a
sales environment, not a research department in a higher education library. At the very
least, the librarians who produce scholarship are adding valuable lines to their curriculum
vitae. Holistically though academic professionalism benefits the individual(s) because it
increases understanding of the research process, which is seminal to an academic
librarian’s role.
Also, thousands of journals do not charge for publication and there are a variety
of cost-effective conferences to attend. In fact, with many of the free qualitative and
quantitative research programs provided by the library, conducting research and
producing scholarship can cost nothing at all. If substantial funding is required, then
apply for grant funding. This is not meant to be groundbreaking advice; it is an
encouragement to be realistic and work with the limited funding to the best of one’s
ability.

195

The benefits received by the librarians meet the standards of the field. Few people
enter higher education to become rich. It seems foolish then to fault low compensation as
a hindrance to success in that chosen field.
Again, the researcher is classified staff and not a librarian. Hierarchically he is a
subordinate. As a result if he himself asserts his findings concerning librarian
compensation during a staff meeting it is likely not to be well-received. However if
librarian peers or managers illustrate this reality then contextually some of the concern
might be assuaged through reasonable discussion.
Gender
It was stated that the researcher was surprised by the rather reserved
representation of gender in the comments by the librarians. It must be noted though that
perhaps the librarians have become accustomed to the situation in which they work or
they have become complacent with the role and space. Unless prompted, they might not
even perceive a gender difference because this is their daily existence. In addition, the
researcher is male. Some of the librarians might have been more forthcoming speaking
with a female interviewer. Hopefully this project at least provided the interviewed
librarians with an opportunity to reflect upon their jobs with respect to gender and
contemplate how it might affect their blended professional role.
In terms of change though, there have been numerous studies suggesting ways to
create positive change towards gender equality in the workplace. In order to provide
equal pay and opportunity for working women, there have been suggestions to add
benefits such as on-site daycare (Alsever, 2013), the proposal of legal initiatives

196

demanding equal pay from as high up as the White House (White House, 2014), and the
establishment of higher quality mentoring programs in order to promote female managers
(Ibarra, Carter, & Silva, 2010). These are great suggestions, but St. Jerome already has a
daycare facility, actively encourages managers to consider equal compensation and
promotion in spite of gender, and has several faculty and staff mentoring programs in
action. Yet in spite of these and like initiatives, concerns persist.
The goal here then is not to suggest overarching modifications. Realistically, if
the researcher had drastic solutions to these concerns, he would be assessing corporations
professionally and be far, far richer. Instead, the hope is that the recommendations will
serve this immediate case and potentially expand through further research and
assessment.
On a university level, perhaps an increased positive understanding of the
academic librarian role at St. Jerome throughout the university community would provide
the continued opportunity for the librarians to assess their professional challenges. Again,
the misunderstanding by the faculty may directly relate to the conflicted role that the
librarians have of themselves. They view themselves as service providers, yet the
administration emphasizes collaboration. Collaboration suggests equal or at least similar
standing in role. Service retains the connotation of “servant.” These are wholly different
ideologies that are difficult to reconcile, resulting in a lack of shared ventures and a
reduction in blended space.
Given the feedback that many of the female librarians felt like “academic
handmaidens” or “minions” of the faculty, administration should adhere to one identity

197

and stick to it. If the administration desires collaboration, then promote the academic
achievements of the librarians instead of emphasizing service. If service is to become the
main provision, then the administration should be cognizant of how this identity effects
the perception of the role for female librarians and be prepared to address any potential
fallout.
In the hierarchy of higher education, academic production is valued over service.
The researcher would recommend the focus on academic professionalism in order to
bolster collaborative opportunities. How might this be accomplished? Promote the
positive academic contributions of the female employees.
However, the librarians at St. Jerome seem apprehensive at personal selfpromotion, in part due to personality. For example, introversion was suggested as
possibly preventing outreach. Lucy confessed: “I think a lot of librarians by default are
more introverts. Yeah, let’s just face it. By librarian standards I am not an introvert but by
regular human standards I am.” This inward-facing mentality was apparent when many
librarians cited individual consultations as opposed to classroom instruction as the most
pleasant contributions to a good day in the library. Julia echoes many similar statements
when she says: “I think that the most important thing that I do is working with students
individually.” Studies have shown that 65-75% of the general population is extroverted
whereas approximately 63% of librarians are introverted (Milford & Wisotzke, 2011).
Compound this with the “service-first” mentality that many of the librarians hold due to
gender expectations. It is possible therefore that librarians excel at one-on-one

198

interactions and consultations but fail to thrive in outreach endeavors (Milford &
Wisotzke, 2011).
Therefore in lieu of personal outreach, the female librarians might benefit from
administrative outreach. Individual librarians might make contacts with some of the
faculty in a department. However, the administration has a better opportunity to gain the
ear of deans and department heads due to the relative equality of the professional levels.
As opposed to opening a few doors, this approach may open all of them. This is
especially important in fields where a female presence is lacking, such as STEM.
Another basic recommendation is for the increase in the diversity of the librarians.
Ethnic identification was not asked of the librarians during the interview. However,
within the American Research Libraries in 2011-2012, 85.8% of the librarians identified
as Caucasian; only 14.2% held minority status (Chang, 2013). Anecdotally, this trend
continues at St. Jerome and this is something that may affect the productivity in the
libraries. As Lucy states:
I think one of maybe the big problems with stagnation with some of the
libraries that I’ve worked with or in that were bad was that the
demographic was all the same. Very similar in ages, background, ethnicity
whatever. I think that’s one of the problems with attracting the diversity
and having a vibrant field is that there’s been a lot of concentration of
people who think the same and we need more perspectives. We need more
diversity, period.
It seems kind of odd that one would suggest decreasing the percentage of white women in
a position in order to advance their role within an organization. However, a different

199

professional and personal experience brought to an organization by a diverse group of
individuals provides the opportunity for a dynamic workplace. Diversity provides the
chance to view problems from a variety of perspectives not necessarily available to a
homogenous group. In order to further the collective roles of the female academic
librarians at St. Jerome it would be useful to have individuals with specialties and voices
who might interact and blend professionally with a greater population of the university
community.
St. Jerome has generic faculty and staff mentoring programs in place. However, a
formalized library-based mentoring initiative might help increase support and promote
cross-departmental collaboration. The interviews suggested that any mentoring, either
vertical or lateral in nature, originated and stayed within contained departments. Some
librarians even expressed disappointment with the inability to work together with
librarians on different campuses. This compartmentalization might hinder professional
growth and development by limiting the viewpoints and alternatives presented regarding
professional options.
There are female leaders within the libraries and many took different paths to
their current roles. How did they get into their position? What was their career path? If a
director in, say, the Urban II Library met with an Alexander VI librarian it would offer
additional professional perspective not available necessarily within the department. Due
to the geographic and cultural silos that presently exist, this sort of partnership might
require the intervention of administration in order to ensure that the program commences
and maintains activity though.

200

This paper certainly is not going to solve the longstanding issue of gender
inequality within higher education. Like it not, biases exist that make it very difficult to
encourage positive change, especially in systems as regimented as a state institution of
higher education where evolution occurs at a glacial pace. However, awareness of the
issue and internal and external conversation by the female academic librarians at St.
Jerome is a start and hopefully in some small way this project may increase their blended
professional roles through cognizance.
Organization
Finally, one of the benefits of a case study is that the recommended pragmatic
changes occur on a micro-scale. It is much easier to address operational concerns on a
university level than to attempt to produce system-wide changes. Communication
seemingly is the easiest to address. These suggestions serve St. Jerome; while they may
apply at different universities as well, prior blended professional research and
institutional assessment must transpire prior to consideration.
The first matter to consider is the organization itself. To start, in a hierarchical
system positive change occurs from the top (Bolman & Deal, 2003). Administrators have
the opportunity to lead by example. For instance, if the desire is to promote librarian
academic professionalism and productivity, then the administration might publish or
present as a means of inspiration. The librarians at St. Jerome do not feel that this occurs
however. As Bridget said: “There’s also very much a level of ‘you all do this [academic
productivity]…’ But I don’t see the administration doing any of it. And that sort of
hypocritical situation is sort of frustrating.” This is a relatively simple resolution for the

201

administration. If they are not publishing, then seek to publish. If they presently are
successful in these pursuits, then effectively communicate so that subordinates may know
and appreciate the efforts.
Continuing with communication, many of the librarians noted that the personal or
electronic contact from the director level of administration particularly was poor. For
instance, at the Alexander VI Library the reference desk is being eliminated. The general
understanding is that the initiative will increase customer service and provide librarians
with more time to perform outreach. Still, the librarians do not understand the “how” and
“why” this change is taking place. This particular issue might be resolved with an open
forum, yet it has festered since prior to the interviews for this project. This does not
suggest that non-managerial employees should know all of the reasoning behind
executive decisions. However, in order to “gain the buy-in,” proper and timely
explanations regarding significant role changes or other pertinent concerns should reach
the appropriate constituent parties. The effective communication will benefit the
organizational morale and productivity by removing the specter of uncertainty in their
daily activities.
Another major hurdle for change concerns professional advancement. As
mentioned, the librarians do not have many upward options within the St. Jerome system.
While presumably the four individuals at the VP level eventually will retire, this cannot
be counted on as a means for future librarian advancement due to the lack of a timetable.
As a result, administration must consider other internal leadership opportunities for the
academic librarians. Currently there are 2-year appointments for organizational needs,

202

such as Graduate Research Assistant Coordinator, Virtual Reference Coordinator,
Assistive Technology Coordinator, and Alexander VI Reference Department Assistant
Head. These are effective offerings that allow the academic librarians to bolster their
resumes for both internal and external opportunities when they arise.
Still, these positions codify and formalize basic activities that already existed
within the library system. Wholly new opportunities for the librarians should be
considered. For instance, the administration encourages academic professionalism. Why
not create a research-oriented position as well. This position might coordinate grant
writing, presentation proposals, article submissions, and so on. It simultaneously would
cater to the needs of administration and librarians.
Also contemplate classified staff. The “para-professional” title of classified staff
that works in the libraries creates the illusion that the present job is a stepping stone. For
example, the expectation is that the researcher, and all the other classified staff that earn
graduate degrees while working within the system, will graduate and find employment
elsewhere. Immediately following the interviews, nearly all the librarians asked “What
are you going to do next?” implying that the researcher would leave. What if a staff
member needs to stay due to personal or professional reasons? What happens if the staff
member actually wants to stay?
Organizationally, that is a mindset that needs to change. From a human resources
perspective, it makes little sense to train employees on a professional level and then let
those skills walk out the door. The resources invested in creating a marketable and
productive employee will benefit the future employer, not the St. Jerome libraries. As

203

well, it produces stagnation in the advancement of the employee. The researcher, along
with colleagues approaching the end of their studies, no longer receives on-the-job
professional development since it is viewed as “wasted energy” spending time improving
someone who inevitably will depart. It is a detrimental system for both the individual and
the organization.
Obviously the need for St. Jerome to work within the guidelines designed by the
state inhibits some of the opportunities for individual’s growth and advancement within
the organization. In fact, one of the librarians with the most seniority estimated that since
the mid-1990’s only 4 classified employees were promoted to the professional faculty
level. That amount of opportunity paints a bleak picture for classified staff currently
within the system.
Yet there is opportunity to redesign the classified roles so that the employee might
expand their responsibilities on the job. Recall the classified staff member mentioned by
Jessica who excelled at analyzing spreadsheets but grew frustrated with formal
restrictions and a lack of recognition. Management may modify the employee work
profiles of classified staff at any point during the calendar year. Rework job descriptions
and reward these employees for their productivity and enterprise. Elevation from
classified staff to administrative faculty may not be possible with state and budget
restrictions but the demonstration of flexibility promotes the idea of opportunity and
answers the concern about employee differentiation and integration.
It is at this point that the hierarchy that exists in the St. Jerome organization will
mitigate the efforts to change. Not all proponents of change have a viable means to

204

express their opinions. Ultimately, the researcher will offer the findings and suggestions
to his line manager and other director-level personnel. As classified staff, the researcher
is not a member of Librarians’ Council, which is the group that has the most control over
policy within the libraries at St. Jerome. As a result, the researcher really has no voice or
audience to speak on a larger level, which is similar to what the librarians themselves
experience being absent from St. Jerome’s Faculty Senate. If the academic librarians truly
would like change, then they will have to address the issue themselves through
petitioning of the administration. Whether that happens or will be successful remains to
be seen.

Future Research
The first logical step would be to analyze other academic librarians, both at St.
Jerome and other universities, with the blended professional model in mind. If the
postulated assertion is that academic librarians are blended professionals, then does this
trend extend to librarians working at universities that provide tenure to their librarians?
Concerns were raised in the previous chapter about librarians’ research preparation in
graduate school, the level of the terminal degree, and the amount and quality of research
productivity. Since the librarians did not all attend the same institution for their MLS
degrees and education standards put forth by the American Library Association regulate
curriculum in the accredited schools, it is reasonable to assume that librarians in other
institutions have similar experiences. It would therefore not be surprising if librarians at
those colleges and universities, even those with tenure for librarians, experience

205

comparable obstacles to professional success and occupy the same tenuous third space as
the librarians at St. Jerome. However, the degree to which the differing statuses affect the
blended role of the academic librarian at those institutions must be explored before a
definitive proclamation may be made.
Geography might play a role in the development of professional identity.
Constructions of social roles in different areas might restrict the blended professional
role, even within supposedly advanced communities such as higher education. For
example, would a female librarian in the Southeast be afforded the same flexibility as a
female librarian in Northeast? The hope is that geography would not have a tremendous
impact on the identity, but research is required to determine the presence of challenges in
this regard.
Since this study also focused on female academic librarians, additionally
expanding the demography will provide extra knowledge on the blended role. Is the
perception of male librarian counterpart similar to that of the females at St. Jerome? The
obvious next step would be to question the male liaison librarians at St. Jerome and gauge
their opinions on their roles and the perceptions of their positions within this particular
university. The opportunities for promotion are as limited for the males as the females at
the university, as there are only so many positions available regardless of gender. Given
the males in the upper-level administration positions though, the few men that work in
the liaison positions might not have as harsh of an opinion of the administration. It is not
possible to make a conclusion on this subject though without additional research on the
influence of gender.

206

Whitchurch did include the student affairs professionals in her consideration of
the blended professionals, but it was more in the mixed role of the faculty member. For
example, in Whitchurch’s assessment, the faculty person working as the program’s
graduate student adviser would be a blended professional due to the mixed roles of the
individual. The next step would be to extend the model to the other professional faculty
not in an instructional role whatsoever, such as the career counselors in a Career Services
Department.
There are many avenues to expand the conversation on academic blended
professionals, both internal and external to the libraries. The hope is that this initial model
provides a template to expand on for future research in these separate areas. This research
will provide a better understanding of the roles and professional identities of valuable
members of the academic community and help identify (and ease) some of the obstacles
to their professional development.

Conclusion
Librarians at St. Jerome are not on the same level as the tenure-track faculty,
either in actual function or perception of their role. The librarians have far different
emphases with respect to the core activities of research, instruction, and service.
However, the librarians functionally operate as blended professionals. Unfortunately,
these blended aspects of the librarians’ role places structural limitations on their
influence; the perceptual and manifest constructed limitations further increase these

207

issues by confining the blended professional effectiveness and functioning third space,
which produces both artificial and actual obstacles to professional development.
Geography, the hierarchical system of higher education itself, and socially
constructed departmental structures limit the spaces that the librarians might interact
within. While librarians gain a significant amount of pragmatic research experience
through their profession, library school and disciplinary studies do not always provide
sufficient knowledge needed to gain acceptance into research-oriented circles around the
institution. Relationships are restrictive in their scope and breadth. Due to their standing
within the hierarchy on campus the librarians find common ground with service-minded
staff external to the libraries and within their own immediate social and professional
groups, but often the librarians fail to consider how to collaborate more efficiently with
faculty, students, and other staff. Degrees and accomplishments often determine
legitimacies in higher education but the librarians do not market themselves in a manner
that emphasizes their academic professionalism or credentialing. The librarians have the
ability to interact with a wide range of individuals and departments in the academic
community, but these restrictions place boundaries around their essential third space and
mitigate the blended efficacy.
Some obstacles to professional development result from the librarians’ perception
of their role. A lack of time and money do not appear to have significant actual weight.
Sensitivity to the role that gender plays in the role and the structure of the organization
and its functioning ability though create tangible impacts on the perception of the job and
the resulting performance therein. While these concerns have no quick means of

208

resolution, awareness of their presence in the minds and actions of the librarians at St.
Jerome provides the initial stride towards constructive change.
The academic librarians at St. Jerome have a unique role and ability to contribute
to the overall success of the mission of the university. The application of the blended
professional model to their role is meant to aid in the understanding of that role and how
the librarians themselves interpret their place within the system. In gaining this
understanding, the hope is that the findings presented here will illuminate the difficulties
facing these libraries and provide context and communication so that they might increase
their abilities and successes in their role as blended professionals.

209

APPENDIX A

Dimension of professional activity*

Method of inquiry

Spaces
•Multiple perspectives on an institution
• Works in third space
• Adapts to changes in professional
boundaries
• Not restricted by formal structures
Knowledges
• Assimilates professional and academic
knowledge
• Investigates organizational activity
• Develops synergistic knowledge settings
Relationships
• Functions in academic conversation
• Establish alliances with important
individuals
• Assist or establish independence of own
unit
• Develop networks
Legitimacies
• Academic credentials
• Attain suitable standing in academic
environment (publish, etc.)
• Handle internal and external roles within
academic spaces

•Qualitative interview
•Document analysis (schedule: location of
shift, location of instruction session)

•Qualitative interview
•Document analysis (Research portals,
Infoguides)
• Observation of Instruction
•Qualitative interview
•Document analysis (schedule: office
hours, embedded hours, etc.)
• Observation of Instruction

•Qualitative interview
•Document analysis (business cards,
cubicles for diplomas, awards, etc.)

* (Whitchurch, 2009, p. 410)

210

APPENDIX B

Dear ColleaguesI currently am working on a doctoral degree in the Higher Education Program at St.
Jerome University. Under the supervision and direction of Dr. Jamie Lester, and with the
support of dissertation committee members Dr. Jan Arminio and Dr. Todd Rose, I am
carrying out research for my dissertation entitled: The Academic Librarian as Blended
Professional: Reassessing the Perception of the Position.
This study emerged based upon my professional experiences at both the Urban II Library
and Alexander VI Library here at St. Jerome University. As I am sure many of you can
attest, I have witnessed many misconceptions from faculty, students and staff alike about
the libraries and its personnel’s role at the university. From the perspective of higher
education theorists, the role and identity of academic librarians is often misunderstood.
This study will attempt to clarify some of these misconceptions by portraying academic
librarians from a viewpoint that utilizes higher education based-theory.
I will argue that the traditional mold of tenure-track faculty does not fit the roles of
academic librarians, who are better defined in higher education terms as blended
professionals. Blended professionals are individuals who bridge gaps in both institutional
and external silos in order to perform their professional and academic duties. By utilizing
the blended professional model, the study will better establish the specifics of the position
in the context of the professional duties of academic librarians.
Additionally this study will be gender specific in studying the identity of female
academic librarians, simultaneously analyzing the often challenging and complex roles
and identities of women and academic librarians within the position faculty. The study
endeavors to determine how the multiplicity of roles impacts the professional identity of
academic librarians and how this in turn might impact professional development.
Therefore, at its core this case study seeks to determine what the blended professional
identity of female faculty librarians at St. Jerome University is and how this blended
professional identity shapes the female academic librarians’ professional growth. Your
personal insight and experience will be instrumental in exploring these issues.
With the approval of the St. Jerome University Institutional Research Board, I ask you to
become a participant in the study. Participation is voluntary and you are under no

211

obligation to contribute. Interviews should take approximately 30-60 minutes. Names and
identities of participating librarians will be kept confidential.
I hope to schedule and conduct the interviews during the 2014 summer session. If you are
willing to participate, reply to this email and I willaccommodate any request based upon
your scheduling preferences. My planning to travel to the distributed campus libraries is
also expected and not an issue.
If you have questions about this project and would like clarification from someone other
than the researcher, email or call my dissertation advisor, Dr. Jamie Lester, Associate
Professor of Higher Education (phone: xxx-xxx-xxxx; email: xxxxxxx@xxx.xxx).
Thank you for your time.
Sincerely,

Michael Perini

212

APPENDIX C

Can you describe a good day for you in the library?
In what ways is your role as academic librarian comparable to tenure-track faculty?
What would you consider your primary role(s) as an academic librarian?
Would you describe your service affiliations and roles?
In what ways are you included or isolated in specific communities around the university?
How do you feel in describing them?
Tell me about your most important work at Mason. Where is it? What is it? What does it
add to you as a professional?
What do you consider the most important knowledge or expertise that you can provide to
the academic community? How do you provide it? How best do you communicate it?
What is (are) your most significant relationships in the academic community (students,
faculty, supervisor, etc.)
What type of instruction do you do? What is your preferred method?
What types of research do you do? (Can you list some of your publication and
presentation experience?) What do you enjoy the most about that process?
Which of your professional qualifications and/or abilities benefits you the most? Around
campus? With associations?
What are obstacles to your professional success?
Imagine creating a new library. How would it differ from your current library? What
would you keep the same? What role would you want in this library?
What else do you want me to know that I have not asked you?
Thank you.

213

REFERENCES

Abu-Alruz, J., & Khasawneh, S. (2013). Professional identity of faculty members at
higher education institutions: a criterion for workplace success. Research in PostCompulsory Education, 18(4), 431-442.
Adrian, W. (2003). Perils of the life of the mind: Lessons from the German university.
Christian Higher Education, 2(2), 155.
Aguilar, P., Keating, K., Schadl, S., & Van Reenen, J. (2011). Reference as outreach:
Meeting users where they are. Journal of Library Administration, 51(4), 343-358.
Aharony, N. (2011). Librarians' attitudes toward knowledge management. College &
Research Libraries, 72(2), 111-126.
Ahren, C. (2008). Closing the gap with student affairs staff: From margin to mainstream.
New Directions for Higher Education, (143), 83-91.
Alsever, J. (2013). Which tech company offers the best child care? Fortune. Retrieved
from http://fortune.com/2013/10/14/which-tech-company-offers-the-best-childcare/
American Council on Higher Education. (2007). The American College President: 2007
Edition. Washington, DC: American Council on Education.
American Faculty Association (AFA). (2012). Hours for teaching and preparation rule of
thumb: 2-4 hours of pre for 1 hour of class. American Faculty Association.
Retrieved from http://americanfacultyassociation.blogspot.com/2012/02/hoursfor-teaching-and-preparation-rule.html
American Library Association (ALA). (2014). Directory of ALA-accredited master’s
programs in library and information studies. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/directory
American Library Association (ALA). (2013). There is more to ALA. American
Libraries, (Supp), 9-10.
American Library Association (ALA). (2008). Standards for accreditation of master’s

214

programs in library& information studies. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/accreditedprograms/sites/ala.org.accreditedprograms/files/cont
ent/standards/standards_2008.pdf
American Library Association (ALA). (1999). Library directors: Gender and salary.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/research/librarystaffstats/diversity/libdirectors
Arp, L., Woodard, B. S., & Warren, L. A. (2006). Information literacy in community
colleges. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 45(4), 297-303.
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2012). Guidelines for academic
librarians without faculty status. College & Research Libraries News, 73(3), 161162.
Bagilhole, B., & White, K. (2008). Towards a gendered skills analysis of senior
management positions in UK and Australian universities. Tertiary Education &
Management, 14(1), 1-12.
Baker, V. L., & Griffin, K. A. (2010). Beyond mentoring and advising: Toward
understanding the role of faculty “developers” in student success. About Campus,
14(6), 2-8.
Balanced Scorecard Institute. (2014). Balanced Scorecard basics. Retrieved from
http://balancedscorecard.org/Resources/About-the-Balanced-Scorecard
Baruzzi, A., & Calcagno, T. (2015). Academic librarians and graduate students: An
exploratory study. portal.
Bausman, M., Ward, S., & Pell, J. (2014). Beyond satisfaction: Understanding and
promoting the instructor-librarian relationship. New Review of Academic
Librarianship, 20(2), 117-136.
Beach, A. (2014). Higher education journals and publications. Retrieved from
http://homepages.wmich.edu/~abeach/HEjournals.htm
Behrends, S. (2012). Libraries vs. Google in the 21st Century. The Idaho Librarian.
Retrieved from: http://theidaholibrarian.wordpress.com/2012/11/12/libraries-vsgoogle/
Beijaard, D., Meijer, P. C., & Verloop, N. (2004). Reconsidering research on teachers’
Professional identity. Teaching and Teacher Education, 20, 107–128.
Bennett, M. (2011). The benefits of non-library professional organization membership for
liaison librarians. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 37(1), 46-53.

215

Bennett, G. E. (1987). Conventions of subordination: An interpretive analysis of the
professional identity of academic librarians (doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from
Proquest Dissertations and Theses.
Bennett, E., & Simning, J. (2010). Embedded librarians and reference traffic: A
quantitative analysis. Journal of Library Administration, 50(5/6), 443-457.
Bhuiya, M. A. (1981). The faculty image of academic librarians in colleges and
universities of Pennsylvania: A measure of attitude (doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from Proquest Dissertations and Theses.
Blau, F. D., Gielen, A. C., & Zimmermann, K. F. (2012).Gender, inequality, and wages.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bledstein, B. J. (1976). The culture of professionalism: The middle class and the
development of higher education in America. New York: Norton & Co., Inc.
Bolman, L. G..& Deal, T. D. (2003). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and
leadership, 3rd ed. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bonfield, B. (2014). How well are you doing your job? You don’t know. No one does. In
the Library with the Leadpipe. Retrieved from
http://www.inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org/2014/how-well-are-you-doing-yourjob-you-dont-know-no-one-does/
Booth, C. (2008). Developing Skype-based reference services. Internet Reference
Services Quarterly, 13(2/3), 147-165.
Bopp, R. E., & Smith, L. C. (2011). Reference and information services: An introduction.
Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Bowen, R. W. (2005). Gender Inequity. Academe, 91(2), 128.
Bowen, H., & Schuster, J. (1986).American professors: A national resource imperiled.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Bower, S. L., & Mee, S. A. (2010). Virtual delivery of electronic resources and services
to off-campus users: A multifaceted approach. Journal of Library Administration,
50(5/6), 468-483.
Boyd, D. (2009). Teaching, nursing, and second wave feminism. Apophenia. Retrieved
fromhttp://www.zephoria.org/thoughts/archives/2009/10/19/teaching_nursin.html

216

Boyer, E. L. (1990).Scholarship reconsidered: Priorities of the professoriate. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc.
Bracke, M., Herubel, J. M., & Ward, S. M. (2010). Some thoughts on opportunities for
collection development librarians. Collection Management, 35(3/4), 255-259.
Bringslimark, T., Hartig, T., & GrindalPatil, G. (2011). Adaption to windowlessness: Do
Office workers compensate for a lack of visual access to the outdoors?
Environment & Behavior, 43(4), 469-487.
Bryant, S. E., & Terborg, J. R. (2008). Impact of peer mentor training on creating and
sharing organizational knowledge. Journal of Managerial Issues, 20(1), 11-29.
Buckland, M. (1991). Information as thing. Journal of the American Society of
Information Science, (42)5: 351-60.
Bureau of Labor Statistics. (2014). Postsecondary teachers. Retrieved from
http://www.bls.gov/ooh/education-training-and-library/print/postsecondaryteachers.htm
Burns, V. (2004). The academic caste system: Prestige hierarchies in PhD exchange
networks. American Sociological Review, 69(2), 239-264.
Cabell’s Directory. (2011). Education journals impact factors and acceptance rates.
Retrieved from
http://classguides.lib.uconn.edu/content.php?pid=65298&sid=1310559
Campanario, J. M. (2010). Empirical study of journal impact factors obtained using the
classical two-year citation window versus a five-year citation window.
Scientometrics, 87, 189-204.
Cardina, C., & Wicks, D. (2004). The changing roles of academic reference librarians
over a ten-year period. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 44(2), 133-142.
Chambliss, D. F. (2014). Learn your students’ names. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2014/08/26/essay-calling-facultymembers-learn-their-students-names
Chang, H. (2013). Ethnic and racial diversity in academic and research libraries: Past,
present and future. Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved
from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/confsandpreco
nfs/2013/papers/Chang_Ethnic.pdf

217

Charnigo, L. (2009). Lights! Camera! Action! Producing library instruction video
Tutorials using Camtasia Studio. Journal of Library & Information Services In
Distance Learning, 3(1), 23-30.
Chen, Y., & Zhao, Q. (2013). Gender differences in business faculty's research
motivation. Journal of Education for Business, 88(6), 314-324.
Chisholm-Burns, M. A., Spivey, C. A., Billheimer, D., Schlesselman, L. S., Flowers, S.
K., Hammer, D., & ... Vaillancourt, A. M. (2012). Multi-institutional study of
women and underrepresented minority faculty members in academic pharmacy.
American Journal of Pharmaceutical Education, 76(1), 1-13.
Clark, S., & Chinburg, S. (2010). Research performance in undergraduates receiving face
to face versus online library instruction: A citation analysis. Journal of Library
Administration, 50(5/6), 530-542.
Clarke, M., Hyde, A., & Drennan, J. (2013). Professional identity in higher education. In
The academic profession in Europe: New tasks and new challenges (pp. 7-21).
Springer Netherlands.
The Collaborative on Academic Careers in Higher Education (COACHE). (2007).
Tenure-track faculty job satisfaction survey highlights report. Harvard School of
Education. Retrieved from
http://isites.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic1023643.files/COACHE_ReportHighligh
ts_20070801.pdf
Cohen, A. M., & Brawer, F. B. (2008). The American community college, 5th ed. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cohen, A. M., & Kisker, C. B. (2010). The shaping of American higher education:
Emergence and growth of the contemporary system, 2nd ed. San Francisco: Jossey
Bass, Inc.
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2007) Research methods in education, 6thed.
New York: Routledge.
Coker, C., van Duinkerken, W., & Bales, S. (2010). Seeking full citizenship: A defense
of tenure faculty status for librarians. College & Research Libraries, 71(5), 406420.
Cooke, R., & Rosenthal, D. (2011). Students use more books after library instruction: An
analysis of undergraduate paper citations. College & Research Libraries, 72(4),
332-343.

218

Cooper, J. M. (1999). The teacher as a decision-maker. In J. M. Cooper (Ed.), Classroom
teaching skills, 6th ed. Boston: Houghton-Mifflin.
Couzy, M. (2012). Conflicting roles: Balancing family and professional life- a challenge
for working women. Master’s thesis, Linnaeus University, Sweden.
Crawford, A. (2012). New Directions for Academic Liaison Librarians. Cambridge:
Woodhead Publishing Limited.
Creswell, J. W. (2005). Education research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson
Education, Inc.
Daffron, E. (2010). The university chameleon: Identity and time issues faced by faculty
in dual positions. Academic Leadership (15337812), 8(4), 14.
Dausien, B., Hanses, A., Inowlocki, L., & Riemann, G. (2008). The analysis of
professional practice, the self-reflection of practitioners, and their way of doing
things. Resources of biography analysis and other interpretative approaches.
Forum: Qualitative Social Research, 9(1), 1-9.
de la Pena McCook, K. (2000). Reconnecting library education and the mission of
community. Library Journal, 125(14), 164.
Deem, R., Hillyard, S., & Reed, M. (2007). Knowledge, higher education, and the new
managerialism: The changing management of UK universities. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Deem, R. (2006). Changing research perspectives on the management of higher
education: Can research permeate the activities of manager-academics? Higher
Education Quarterly, 60(3), 203–228.
Delamont, S. (1990). Sex roles and the school, 2nd ed. London: Routledge.
DeVinney, G. S. (1986). Academic librarians and academic freedom in the United States:
a history and analysis. Libri, 36, 24-39.
Dickerson, A. M., Hoffman, J. L., Anan, B., Brown, K. F., Vong, L. K., Bresciani, M. J.,
& ... Oyler, J. (2011). A comparison of senior student affairs officer and student
affairs preparatory program faculty expectations of entry-level professionals'
competencies. Journal of Student Affairs Research & Practice, 48(4), 463-479.
DiMattia, S., & Oder, N. (1997). Knowledge management: Hope, hype, or harbinger?
Library Journal, 122(15), 33.

219

Dinet, J., Favart, M., & Passerault, J. (2004). Searching for information in an online
public access catalogue (OPAC): the impacts of information search expertise on
the use of Boolean operators. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 20(5), 338346.
Dolan, V. (2011). The isolation of online adjunct faculty and its impact on their
performance. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning,
12(2), 62-77.
Downing, K. E. (2009). The relationship between social identity and role performance
among academic librarians (doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest
Dissertations and Theses.
Duemer, L. S. (2007). The agricultural education origins of the Morrill Land Grant Act of
1862. American Educational History Journal, 34(1), 135-146.
Dunlap, S. (2002). Watch for the little red light: Delivery of bibliographic instruction by
unconventional means. Journal of Library Administration, 37, 279-285.
Dunn, S. (2013). Do librarians need tenure? Depends on which ones you ask. The
Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
https://chroniclevitae.com/news/139-do-librarians-need-tenure-depends-onwhich-ones-you-ask
Ellet, W. (2007). The case study handbook: How to read, discuss, and write persuasively
about cases. Boston: Harvard Business Press.
English, L., & Callaway, K. (2013). Business woman, earner, mom: A new and growing
role. Working Mother. Retrieved from http://www.workingmother.com/researchinstitute/business-woman-primary-earner-mom-new-and-growing-role
Farley, S. D., Timme, D. R., & Hart, J. W. (2010). On coffee talk and break-room chatter:
Perceptions of women who gossip in the workplace. Journal of Social
Psychology, 150(4), 361-368.
Fay, M. J., & Kline, S. L. (2011). The influence of informal communication on
organizational identification and commitment in the context of high-intensity
telecommuting. Southern Communication Journal, 77(1), 61-76.
Finkelstein, M. J. (1984). The American academic profession: A synthesis of social
scientific inquiry since World War II. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University
Press.

220

Finnegan, M. (1981). Work attitudes in windowed vs. windowless environments. Journal
of Social Psychology, 115(2), 291.
Freiburger, G., & Kramer, S. (2009). Embedded librarians: one library's model for
decentralized service. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 97(2), 139142.
Farnham, C.A. (1994). Education of the southern belle: Higher education and student
socialization in the antebellum south. New York: NYU Press.
Fowler, N., Arens, K., Gilbert, L. A., Payne, S. M., Reichl, L. E., &Staiger, J. (2004).
Graphic stories: representing the status of female faculty. Feminist Studies, 30(3),
689-701.
Fruman, N. (2009). The AAUP: A moral autopsy. Academic Questions, 22(3), 340-350.
Fulmer, C. L. (2010). Unpacking evidence of gender bias. Journal of Women in
Educational Leadership, 8(2), 81-97.
Gaff, J. G., & Simpson, R. D. (1994). Faculty development in the United States.
Innovative Higher Education, 18(3), 167.
Gappa, J. M., Austin, A. E., & Trice, A. G. (2007). Rethinking faculty work: Higher
education’s strategic imperative. San Francisco: Jossey Bass, Inc.
Garfinkle, J. (2012). Getting ahead. Personal Excellence, 17(1), 4.
Garn, G., & Brown, C. (2008). Women and the superintendency: Perceptions of gender
bias. Journal of Women in Educational Leadership, 6(1), 49-71.
Gibbard Cook, S. (2004). Mothers in the faculty pipeline. Women in Higher Education,
13(8).
Giddens, A. (1992). Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late modern age.
Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Given, L. M., & Julien, H. (2005). Finding common ground: An analysis of librarians'
expressed attitudes towards faculty. Reference Librarian, 43(89/90), 25-38.
Glaser, B. (1992). Basics of grounded theory analysis. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press.
Gordon, G., & Whitchurch, C. (2007). Managing human resources in higher education:
The implications of a diversifying workforce. Higher Education Management and
Policy, 19(2), 135-155.

221

Greenbank, P. (2003). The role of values in educational research: The case for reflexivity.
British Educational Research Journal, 29(6), 791-801.
Greer, R. C., Grover, R. J., & Fowler, S. G. (2007). Introduction to the library and
information professions. London: Libraries Unlimited.
GSA. (2011). Workspace utilization and allocation benchmark. Office of
Governmentwide Policy. Retrieved from
http://www.gsa.gov/graphics/ogp/Workspace_Utilization_Banchmark_July_2012.
pdf
Guillory, E. A. (2001). The black professoriate: explaining the salary gap for AfricanAmerican female professors. Race, Ethnicity & Education, 4(3), 225-244.
Haensly, P. J., Hodges, P. E., & Davenport, S. A. (2009). Acceptance rates and journal
quality: An analysis of journals in economics and finance. Journal of Business &
Finance Librarianship, 14(1), 2-31.
Haigh, G. (2013). Career mistakes. Times Educational Supplement, 11.
Hall, R. A. (2013). Beyond the job ad: Employers and library instruction. College &
Research Libraries, 74(1), 24-38.
Hansen, D. (2004). Professionalizing library education, the California Connection: James
Gillis, Everett Perry, and Joseph Daniels. Library Trends, 52(4), 963-987.
Hanson, E. R. (1989). College libraries: The colonial period to the twentieth century.
Advances in Library Administration and Organization, 8, 171-199.
Hansson, J., & Johannesson, K. (2013). Librarians' views of academic library support for
scholarly publishing: An every-day perspective. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 39(3), 232-240.
Hanz, K., & Lange, J. (2013). Using student questions to direct information literacy
workshops. Reference Services Review, 41(3), 532-546.
Hardesty, L. (1995). Faculty culture and bibliographic instruction: An exploratory
analysis. Library Trends, 44(2), 339-367.
Hardesty, L. (1991). The bottomless pit revisited. College & Research Libraries, 52, 219230.
Harriman, J. (2008). Creating your library’s business plan: A how-to-do-it manual with

222

samples on CD-ROM. New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers.
Harvard Crimson. (1968). Man and woman at Yale. Retrieved from
http://www.thecrimson.com/article/1968/11/18/man-and-woman-at-yale-pa/
Hawes, S. (2011). Playing to win: Embedded librarians in online classrooms. Journal of
Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 5(1/2), 56-66.
Helgesen, S. (1995). The web of inclusion: A new architecture for building great
organizations. New York: Doubleday.
Hemmig, W., & Montet, M. (2010). The “just for me” virtual library: Enhancing an
embedded eBrarian Program. Journal of Library Administration, 50(5/6), 657669.
Hines, S. (2008). How it's done: Examining distance education library instruction and
assessment. Journal of Library Administration, 48(3/4), 467-478.
Hosburgh, N. (2011). Librarian faculty status: What does it mean in academia? Library
Philosophy & Practice, 31-37.
Houser, C., Lemmons, K., & Cahill, A. (2013). Role of the faculty mentor in an
undergraduate research experience. Journal of Geoscience Education, 61(3), 297305.
Huhman, H. R. (2012). STEM fields and the gender gap: Where are the women? Forbes.
Retrieved from http://www.forbes.com/sites/work-in-progress/2012/06/20/stemfields-and-the-gender-gap-where-are-the-women/
Ibarra, H., Carter, N. M., & Silva, C. (2010). Why men still get more promotions than
women. Harvard Business Review. Retrieved from http://hbr.org/2010/09/whymen-still-get-more-promotions-than-women/ar/1
Jablonski, J. A. (2006). Conceptualizing the field of library and information studies: The
perspective of LIS faculty and LIS practitioners in the United States (doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest Dissertations and Theses.
Jacklin, M., & Robinson, K. (2013). Evolution of various library instruction strategies:
Using student feedback to create and enhance online active learning assignments.
Partnership: The Canadian Journal of Library & Information Practice &
Research, 8(1), 1-21.
Jackson, L. D. (2008). Reflections on obstacles and opportunities: Suggestions for

223

improving the retention of female faculty. Women's Studies in Communication,
31(2), 226-232.
Jankowska, M., & Marshall, L. (2003). Why social interaction and good communication
in academic libraries matters. Reference Librarian, 40(83/84), 131-144.
Jeevan, V. J. (2007). Technology-enhanced library services and the librarian's identity
crisis in academic and research libraries of India. Libri: International Journal of
Libraries & Information Services, 57(2), 100-109.
Jha, J., Page, E., & Raynor, J. (2009). School, gender and stereotypes: Despair and hope.
In E. Page & J. Jha (eds.), Exploring the bias: Gender and stereotyping in
secondary schools (1-32). London: Commonwealth Secretariat.
Johnson, J. M. (2008). Southern women at the Seven Sister colleges: Feminist values and
social activism, 1875-1915. Athens: University of Georgia Press.
Johnson, M. (2013). Women and work: Current situation. CQ Researcher, 23(27), 660662.
Johnson, W. G. (2004). Information literacy standards and library instruction. Community
& Junior College Libraries, 13(1), 25-32.
Julien, H., & Given, L. M. (2002). Faculty-librarian relationships in the information
literacy context: A content analysis of librarians' expressed attitudes and
experiences. Canadian Journal of Information & Library Sciences, 27(3), 65-87.
Kaplan, R. K. (1984). Trade routes: The manager's network of relationships.
Organizational Dynamics, 12(4), 37-52.
Katz, L. S. (2003). The image and role of the librarian. New York: Routledge.
Karabel, J. (2005). The chosen: The hidden history of admission and exclusion at
Harvard, Yale and Princeton. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Keenum, A. J., Wallace, L., & Barger Stevens, A. R. (2003). Patients' attitudes regarding
physical characteristics of family practice physicians. Southern Medical Journal,
96(12), 1190-1194.
Kezar, A., & Sam, C. (2013). Institutionalizing equitable policies and practices for
contingent faculty. Journal of Higher Education, 84(1), 56-87.
Kelleher, M., & Laidlaw, S. (2009). A natural fit: The academic librarian advising in the
first year experience. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 16(2/3), 153-163.

224

Kennedy, R., & Monty, V. (2011). Faculty-librarian collaboration and the development
of critical skills through dynamic purposeful learning. Libri: International
Journal of Libraries & Information Services, 61(2), 116-124.
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning experience as a source of learning and
development. New Jersey: Prentice Hall.
Kvenild, C., & Calkins, K. (2011). Embedded librarians: Moving beyond one-shot
instruction. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
LaGuardia, C. (2011). Library instruction in the digital age. Journal of Library
Administration, 51(3), 301-308.
Lamothe, A. R. (2012). The importance of encouraging librarians to publish in peerreviewed publications. Journal of Scholarly Publishing, 43(2), 156-167.
Lanier, P. A., Tanner, J. R., & Guidry, B. N. (2009). A comparison of gender and genderrelated issues in the business disciplines. Public Personnel Management, 38(3),
51-70.
Lawson, E., & Merrill, M. (1984). The three Sarahs: Documents of antebellum black
college women, Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellen Press.
Lease, S. H. (1999). Occupational role stressors, coping, support, and hardiness as
predictors of strain in academic faculty: An Emphasis on the new and female
faculty. Research in Higher Education, 40(3), 285-307.
Lechuga, V. (2011). Faculty-graduate student mentoring relationships: mentors'
perceived roles and responsibilities. Higher Education, 62(6), 757-771.
Levin, J. S., Walker, L., Haberler, Z., & Jackson-Boothby, A. (2013). The divided self:
The double consciousness of faculty of color in community colleges. Community
College Review, 41(4), 311-329.
Levin, J. S., & Shaker, G. G. (2011). The hybrid and dualistic identity of full-time nontenure-track faculty. American Behavioral Scientist, 55(11), 1461-1484.
Lieberthal, S. P. (2009). Teaching undergraduate business students to access public
company information: Assessing students' use of library resources. Journal of
Business & Finance Librarianship, 14(3), 230-247.
Lieff, S., Baker, L., Mori, B., Egan-Lee, E., Chin, K., & Reeves, S. (2012). Who am I?

225

Key influences on the formation of academic identity within a faculty
development program. Medical Teacher, 34(3), e208-e215.
Lin, A., & Fraser, C. (2008).The four constructs of collegiality. International Journal Of
Evidence Based Coaching & Mentoring, 6(1), 57-66.
Lorber, J. (2010). Gender inequality: feminist theories and politics, 4thed. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Lovitts, B. E. (2007). Making the implicit explicit: Creating performance expectation for
the dissertation. Sterling, VA: Stylus.
Lougee, W.P. (2002). Diffuse libraries: Emergent roles for the research library in the
digital age. Washington, DC: Council on Library and Information Resources.
Lucas, C. (2006). American higher education: A history, 2nded. New York: Palgrave
Macmillan.
Lynch, B. P., Murray-Rust, C., Parker, S. E., Turner, D., Walker, D. P., Wilkinson, F. C.,
& Zimmerman, J. (2007). Attitudes of presidents and provosts on the university
library. College & Research Libraries, 68(3), 213-227.
Maack, M. N. (1986). Toward a new model of the information professions: Embracing
empowerment. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 38,
283-302.
Madell, R. (2014). Your looks and your job: Does appearance affect advancement?
Career-intelligence.com. Retrieved from http://careerintelligence.com/appearance-affect-advancement/
Mannino, D.M. (2005). Impact factor, impact, and smoke and mirrors. American Journal
of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, 171(4), 117-118.
Manley, W. (2002). Telework, or watching television? American Libraries, 33(4).
Marcus, J. (2000). American academic tenures in decline. Times Higher Education
Supplement, (1429), 64.
Marcus, C., Covert-Vail, L., & Mandel, C. A. (2007). NYU 21st Century Library Project:
Designing a Research Library of the Future for New York University. New York
University.
Margino, M. (2013). Revitalizing traditional information literacy instruction: Exploring
games in academic libraries. Public Services Quarterly, 9(4), 333-341.

226

Mason, M. A. (2013). The baby penalty. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved
fromhttp://chronicle.com/article/The-Baby-Penalty/140813/
Mason, M. A. (2011). The pyramid problem. The Chronicle of Higher Education.
Retrieved from http://chronicle.com/article/The-Pyramid-Problem/126614/
Matthews, J. R. (2007). Library Assessment in Higher Education. Westport, Conn:
Libraries Unlimited.
Mauch, J. E., & Park, N. (2003). Guide to the successful thesis and dissertation: A
handbook for students and faculty, 5th ed. New York: Marcel Dekker, Inc.
McAndrew, F. T. (2014). The “sword of a woman”: Gossip and female aggression.
Aggression & Violent Behavior, 19(3), 196-199.
McHenry, L., & Sharkey, P. W. (2014). Of Brahmins and Dalits in the academic caste
system. Academe, 100(1), 35-38.
Mettler, S. (2007). Soldiers to citizens: The GI Bill and the making of the greatest
generation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meyer, E., Forbes, C., & Bowers, J. (2010). The Research Center: creating an
environment for interactive research consultations. Reference Services Review,
38(1), 57-70.
Milford, R., & Wisotzke, T. (2011). Introverts and customer service in the library: An
unexpected fit. OLA Quarterly, 17(3), 22-26.
Miller-Ott, A. E., & Kelly, L. (2013). Mean girls in college: An analysis of how college
women communicatively construct and account for relational aggression.
Women's Studies in Communication, 36(3), 330-347.
Mitchell, W. B., & Morton, B. (1992). On becoming faculty librarians: Acculturation
problems and remedies. College & Research Libraries, 53, 379-92.
Mullins, J. L. (2012). Are MLS graduates being prepared for the changing and emerging
roles that librarians must now assume within research libraries?. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 124-132.
Munim, M., & Mahmud, I. (2011). Mindmap: A powerful tool to improve academic
reading, presentation and research performance. Review of Higher Education &
Self-Learning, 3(11), 21-26.

227

National Center for Education Statistics. (2012). Degrees conferred by sex and race.
Retrieved from http://nces.ed.gov/fastfacts/display.asp?id=72
National Center for Education Statistics. (2011). Average graduate and first-professional
tuition and required fees in degree-granting institutions, by first-professional field
of study and control of institution: 1989-90 through 2010-11. Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/programs/digest/d11/tables/dt11_352.asp
National Institute of Health (NIH). (2014). MeSH browser. Retrieved from
http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/mbinfo.html
Nelson, C. (2008, September). Across the Great Divide. Academe. pp. 11-15.
Neufeld, D. J., & Fang, Y. (2005). Individual, social and situational determinants of
telecommuter productivity. Information & Management, 44, 1037-1049.
Neuhauser, A. (2014). Minorities, women still underrepresented in STEM fields study
finds. US News & World Report. Retrieved from
http://www.usnews.com/news/stem-solutions/articles/2014/02/06/minoritieswomen-still-underrepresented-in-stem-fields-study-finds
Nicole, P. F., Sheppard, C., Irish, M. S.,& Spence, B. (2006). Work appearance isn't skin
deep. Working Mother, 29, 19.
Nixon, J. M. (2013). Core journals and information science: Developing a methodology
for ranking LIS journals. College & Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://crl.acrl.org/content/early/2012/07/23/crl12-387.short?rss=1
Nunn, B., & Ruane, E. (2011). Marketing gets personal: Promoting reference staff to
reach users. Journal of Library Administration, 51(3), 291-300.
Oberst, L. R. (1995). Library support staff in an age of change: Utilization, role
definition, and status. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/offices/hrdr/librarysupportstaff/library_support_staff_in_an_a
ge_of_change
O'Clair, K. (2012). Sell what they're buying. College & Research Libraries News, 73(4),
200-201.
O’Meara, K., Terosky, A. L., Neumann, A. (2008). Faculty careers and work lives: A
professional growth perspective. San Francisco: Jossey Bass, Inc.
O'Malley, D., &Delwiche, F. (2012). Aligning library instruction with the needs of basic

228

sciences graduate students: a case study. Journal of the Medical Library
Association, 100(4), 284-290.
O'Reilly, M. (2013). Melvil's girls: Still struggling to survive. Feliciter, 59(2), 35-38.
Oakleaf, M. (2010). The value of academic libraries: A comprehensive research review
and report. Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Oakleaf, M. (2009). The information literacy instruction assessment cycle: A guide for
increasing student learning and improving librarian instructional skills. Journal Of
Documentation, 65(4), 539-560.
Oberg, L. R. (1995). Library support staff in an age of change: Utilization, role definition
and status. ERIC Digest. Retrieved from http://www.ericdigests.org/19961/support.htm
Olson, C. A., & Singer, P. M. (2004). Winning with library leadership: Enhancing
services through connection, contribution, and collaboration. Chicago: American
Library Association.
Outcalt, C. L. (2002). Toward a professionalized community college professoriate. New
Directions for Community Colleges, 2002(118), 109.
Pace, A. K. (2004). Librarians not in libraries. Computers in Libraries, 24(9), 32-35.
Parker, C. A. (2011). How law schools benefit when librarians publish, teach, and
hold faculty status. Legal Reference Services Quarterly, 30(3), 237-253
Parker, P., Hall, D. T., & Kram, K. E. (2008). Peer coaching: A relational process for
accelerating career learning. Academy of Management Learning & Education,
7(4), 487-503.
Passehl-Stoddart, E., & Monge, R. (2014). From freshman to graduate: Making the case
for student-centric institutional repositories. Journal of Librarianship & Scholarly
Communication, 2(3), 1-11.
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative research and evaluation methods, 3rd ed. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Perini, M., & Calcagno, T. (2013). Research and preparation for academic
professionalism: The role of the academic librarian. World Universities Forum,
6(2), 13-25.
Perry, S. D., & Michalski, L. (2010). Common acceptance rate calculation methods in

229

communication journals: Developing best practices. Journalism & Mass
Communication Educator, 65(2), 168-186.
Press, N., & Diggs-Hobson, M. (2005). Providing health information to community
members where they are: Characteristics of the culturally competent librarian.
Library Trends, 53(3), 397-410.
Punch, K. F. (1998). Introduction to social research: Qualitative and quantitative
approaches. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Pusser, B. (2006). Higher education, markets, and the preservation of the public good.
In D. W. Breneman, B. Pusser, & S. E. Turner (Eds.), Earnings from learning:
The rise of for-profit universities. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press.
Rao, K. (2003). Coping and subjective wellbeing in women with multiple roles.
International Journal of Social Psychiatry, 49(3), 175-84.
Riccobono, F., Bruccoleri, M., Harrigan, K. R., &Perrone, G. (2014). Do horizontal
relationships matter to production and operations managers? International
Journal of Production Research, 52(16), 4731-4746.
Rhoades, G. (2007). The study of the academic profession. In P. J. Gumport (Ed.),
Sociology of higher education: Contributions and their contexts (pp. 113–146).
Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Rhoades, G. (2005). Capitalism, academic style, and shared governance. Academe, 91(3),
38-42.
Riley, T. A., & Russell, C. (2013). Leadership in higher education examining
professional development needs for department chairs. Review of Higher
Education & Self-Learning, 6(21), 38-57.
Robbins, S. P. (2013). From the editor-balancing the personal and professional in an era
of transformed faculty roles. Journal of Social Work Education,49, 191-193.
Robbins-Carter, J., & Seavey, C. A. (1986). The master’s degree: Basic preparation for
professional practice. Library Trends, 34, 561-580.
Roberts, S., & Hunter, D. (2011). New library, new librarian, new student: Using
LibGuides to reach the virtual student. Journal of Library & Information Services
in Distance Learning, 5(1/2), 67-75.
Robinson, J., & Kim, D. (2010). Creating customizable subject guides at your library to

230

support online, distance and traditional education: Comparing three selfdeveloped and one commercial online subject guide. Journal of Library &
Information Services in Distance Learning, 4(4), 185-196.
Rogers, E. (2013). Teaching government information in information literacy credit
classes. Georgia Library Quarterly, 50(1), 13-22.
Rogers, J. (2012). Killing fear part 1: The problem. Attempting Elegance. Retrieved from
http://www.attemptingelegance.com/?p=1640
Rosenberg, R. (2004). Changing the subject: How the women of Columbia shaped the
way we think about sex and politics. New York: Columbia University Press.
Rubin, R. E. (2004). Foundations of library and information science, 2nded. New York:
Neal-Schuman Publishers, Inc.
Schrimsher, R. H., & Northrup, L. A. (2013). Helpful hints for every librarian's
nightmare: Publishing an article. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 20(1), 8794.
Schuster, J. H., & Finkelstein, M. J. (2006). The American faculty: Restructuring of
academic work and careers. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press.
Shaffer, B. A. (2011). Graduate student library research skills: Is online instruction
effective? Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning,
5(1/2), 35-55.
Shiao-Feng, S., & Kuo, J. (2010). Design and development of web-based information
literacy tutorials. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36(4), 320-328.
Shupe, E. I., & Pung, S. K. (2011). Understanding the changing role of academic
librarians from a psychological perspective: A literature review. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 37(5), 409-415.
Simpson, B. (2013). Hiring non-MLS librarians: Trends and training implications.
Library Leadership & Management, 28(1), 1-15.
Sinberg, L. (2009). Think looks don’t matter? Think again. Forbes. Retrieved from
http://www.forbes.com/2009/12/05/appearance-work-pay-forbes-womanleadership-body-weight.html
Slaughter, A. (2012). Why women still can’t have it all. The Atlantic. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2012/07/why-women-still-canthave-it-all/309020/

231

Smith, J. (2014). 10 tips for winning over your colleagues.Forbes.Com, 1.
Smith, D., & Van Dyke, T. B. (2008). A telecommuting interlibrary loan librarian’s
experience: The views of both the telecommuter and the on-site supervisor.
Journal of Interlibrary Loan, Document Delivery & Electronic Reserves, 18(4),
449-455.
Sobel, K., & Sugimoto, C. R. (2012). Assessment of learning during library instruction:
practices, prevalence, and preparation. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 38(4),
191-204.
Sorey, K., & Gregory, D. (2010). Protests in the Sixties. College Student Affairs Journal,
28(2), 184-206.
Sproles, C., Johnson, A., & Farison, L. (2008). What the teachers are teaching: How
MLIS programs are preparing academic librarians for instructional roles. Journal
of Education for Library & Information Science, 49(3), 195-209.
Stefanisko, M. C. (1997). Understanding how women make meaning of their multiple
roles: A cognitive-developmental analysis. (Order No. 9809402, University of
Massachusetts Amherst). ProQuest Dissertations and Theses, 168-168 p.
Retrieved from
http://search.proquest.com/docview/304350930?accountid=14541.
Steiner, D. G. (2011). The communication habits of engineers: A study of how
compositional style and time affect the production of oral and written
communication of engineers. Journal of Technical Writing & Communication,
41(1), 33-58.
Stiwinter, K. (2013). Using an interactive online tutorial to expand library instruction.
Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 18(1), 15-41.
Stueart, R. D., & Moran, B. B. (2007). Library and information center management.
Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Taylor, L. (1979). The natural history of windows: A cautionary tale. British Medical
Journal, 1(6167), 870.
Thelin, J. R. (2004). A history of American higher education, 2nd ed. Baltimore: The
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Thirolf, K. Q. (2013). How faculty identity discourses of community college part-time

232

faculty change over time. Community College Journal of Research & Practice,
37(3), 177-184.
Thirolf, K. Q. (2012). The faculty identities of community college adjuncts teaching in
the humanities: A discourse analysis study. Community College Journal of
Research & Practice, 36(4), 269-278.
Trower, C. A. (2012). Success on the tenure track: Five keys to faculty job satisfaction.
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Trower, C. A., & Chait, R. P. (2002). Faculty diversity: Too little for too long. Harvard
Magazine, 104(4), 33-37.
Tucci, V. K. (2011). Faculty/Librarian collaboration: Catalyst for student learning and
librarian growth. Science & Technology Libraries, 30(3), 292-305.
Tumbleson, B. E., & Burke, J. J. (2010). When life hands you lemons: Overcoming
obstacles to expand services in an embedded librarian program. Journal of
Library Administration, 50(7/8), 972-988.
Turner, S. (2006). For-profit colleges in the context of the market for higher education.
In Breneman, D. W., Pusser, B., & Turner, S. E. (Eds.), Earnings from learning:
The rise of for-profit universities. Albany, NY: State University of New York
Press.
van Vugt, M. (2013). Naturally selected: Understanding the human animal in the
workplace. Pscyhology Today. Retrieved from
http://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/naturally-selected/201306/the-soundleader-ceos-deep-voices-do-better
Vaughn, G. B. (2006). The community college story, 3rd Ed. Washington, DC: American
Association of Community Colleges.
Vianello, M., & Siemienska, R. (1990). Gender inequality: A comparative study of
discrimination and participation. London: SAGE.
Vohs, K. D., Redden, J. P., & Rahinel, R. (2013). Physical order produces healthy
choices, generosity, and conventionality, whereas disorder produces creativity.
Psychological Science, 24(9), 1860-1867.
Ward, K., & Eddy, P. L. (2013). Women and academic leadership: Leaning out. The
Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
https://chronicle.com/article/WomenAcademic-Leadership-/143503/

233

Washington College.(2013). Art and art history. Retrieved from
http://www.washcoll.edu/catalog/art-and-art-history.php
Watson, S. E., Rex, C., Markgraf, J., Kishel, H., Jennings, E., & Hinnant, K. (2013).
Revising the "one-shot" through lesson study: Collaborating with writing faculty
to rebuild a library instruction session. College & Research Libraries, 74(4), 381398.
Welch, J. M., & Mozenter, F. L. (2006). Loosening the ties that bind: Academic
librarians and tenure. College & Research Libraries, 67(2), 164-176.
West, M. S., & Curtis, J. W. (2006). AAUP faculty gender equity indicators. Retrieved
fromhttp://www.aaup.org/NR/rdonlyres/63396944-44BE-4ABA-98155792D93856F1/0/AAUPGenderEquityIndicators2006.pdf
Whitchurch, C. (2013). Reconstructing identities in higher education: The rise of third
space professionals. New York: Routledge.
Whitchurch, C. (2010). Some implications of “public/private” space for professional
identities in higher education. Higher Education, 60(6), 627-640.
Whitchurch, C. (2009). The rise of the blended professional in higher education: A
comparison between the United Kingdom, Australia and the United States. Higher
Education, 58(3), 407-418.
Whitchurch, C. (2008). Beyond administration and management: reconstructing the
identities of professional staff in UK higher education. Journal of Higher
Education Policy and Management, 30(4), 375-386.
Whitehair, K. J. (2010). Reaching part-time distance students in diverse environments.
Journal of Library & Information Services in Distance Learning, 4(3), 96-105.
The White House. (2014). Expanding opportunity for all: Ensuring equal pay for women
and promoting the women’s economic agenda. Retrieved from
http://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2014/04/08/fact-sheet-expandingopportunity-all-ensuring-equal-pay-women-and-promot
Wilson, E. (2014). Diversity, culture and the glass ceiling. Journal of Cultural Diversity,
21(3), 83-89.
Wolfe, J. A., Naylor, T., & Drueke, J. (2010). The Role of the academic reference
librarian in the learning commons. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 50(2),
108-113.

234

Wyss, P. (2010). Library school faculty member perceptions regarding faculty status for
academic librarians. College & Research Libraries, 71(4), 375-388.
Wyss, P. (2008). Library faculty member perceptions regarding faculty status for
academic libraries (doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Proquest Dissertations
and Theses.
Xiaoli, J., Di Napoli, R., Borg, M., Maunder, R., Fry, H., & Walsh, E. (2010). Becoming
and being an academic: the perspectives of Chinese staff in two research-intensive
UK universities. Studies in Higher Education, 35(2), 155-170.
Yang, Z. (2000). University faculty’s perception of a library liaison program: A case
study. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 26(2), 124.
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods. Los Angeles: Sage
Publications.
Yousef, A. (2010). Faculty attitudes toward collaboration with librarians. Library
Philosophy and Practice, 12(2), 1-15.
Zha, S., Adams, A., & Mathews-Ailsworth, J. (2013). Examining the blog use in a faculty
development programme: a multiple case study. International Journal of
Learning Technology, 8(1), 5-19.

235

BIOGRAPHY

Michael Perini was born on May 23, 1980, in Holland, NY, and is an American citizen.
He graduated from Holland Central High School in 1998. Michael received a Bachelor of
Arts in Classics and History, summa cum laude, from the State University of New York
at Buffalo in 2003, graduating Phi Beta Kappa and Phi Alpha Theta, as well as a Master
of Arts in History from the State University of New York at Buffalo in 2006. He
additionally was inducted into Phi Kappa Phi and completed the requirements for the
Master of Arts in Interdisciplinary Studies for Higher Education Administration at
George Mason University in 2011.
Michael worked as an Enrollment Counselor at the University of Phoenix’s Northern
Virginia Campus from March 2006 until April 2007, completing the company’s “APP”
management training and placement program in February 2007. In April 2007, he joined
George Mason University’s Arlington Campus Library, serving as the library’s
Circulation Supervisor until October 2010. Michael transferred to George Mason
University’s Fenwick Library Reference Department in October 2010 as a Research
Specialist. Promoted in July 2011, he is currently the Reference, Research, and
Instruction Specialist in Fenwick Library’s Research Department, focusing primarily on
academic publishing and conference presentations. Michael has published on a variety of
topics, including for-profit education, the public and civic good, distance education,
library management and theory, student engagement, and martial arts theory.
At the University at Buffalo, Michael acted as the Head Instructor of the university’s
intercollegiate Taekwondo team. Also a Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu competitor, he acquired
numerous titles and championships through active competition in a variety of regional,
national, and international striking and grappling events. Michael currently serves as
Master at MT Kim’s Stafford, VA school, holding the Kukkiwon Certified rank of 4th
degree black belt (License 05204570). He is a member of several charitable organizations
associated with the University at Buffalo, George Mason University, and the Catholic
Church. Michael and his family reside in Centreville, VA.

236

