Redefining the Twenty-First Century College Library:
Change Leadership in Academic Libraries

A Dissertation Presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College Graduate School of Library and Information Science in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

Dissertation Committee:
Laura Saunders, PhD, Co-Chair
Michele Cloonan, PhD, Co-Chair
Thomas Abbott, PhD
Joan Giesecke, DPA

By
Patricia A. Kreitz
May 2015

UMI Number: 3715613

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3715613
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  

	  
	  

2	  

	  

3	  

Copyright ©2015 by Patricia A. Kreitz
All rights reserved

	  
	  

	  

4	  
Acknowledgements
While one person may have authored this dissertation, it is a product of the

encouragement, patience, and support of many.
I would like to thank the members of my dissertation committee, Laura Saunders,
Tomas Abbott, Joan Giesecke, and Michele Cloonan for their guidance and support
throughout my dissertation journey. Laura Saunders' guidance, probing questions, and
high standards were critical to the quality of this work. Tomas Abbot and Joan Giesecke
both offered support and insights that helped make this a better dissertation and
encouraged me through the process. Michele Cloonan's comments on the text and
perceptive questions during my defense were both extremely valuable. I thank all four of
you for your time, energy, and wisdom.
This dissertation would not exist except for the generosity of the individuals at
each of the four institutions selected for the case studies. The library directors, senior
management team members, and provosts welcomed me and gave me a precious gift by
telling me their change stories. They were thoughtful, articulate, honest, and insightful in
sharing their experiences. I left each college library with a deep respect for the individuals
I had interviewed and the change journeys they had experienced. I was impressed by their
commitment to the centrality of the library in the academic life of their colleges and their
continuously evolving support of their students' learning and your faculty's teaching and
research. They embody the very best ideals of academic library service.
To my husband, Douglas, and to my children Alexander and Viktoria Kreitz, I owe
much. Alex and Vika, without your encouragement and support during these long hard
years, this dissertation would not have happened. My husband, in particular, has been an
	  
	  

	  

5	  

active partner in this work. Doug, your support, encouragement, and acceptance of the
time I needed for this were critical to my finishing. The clear and elegant graphics you
developed for my dissertation and my defense communicated my analysis far better than
words. In addition, your willingness to read and re-read versions vastly improved the
writing itself. But, most importantly, if you had not believed in me so constantly, I would
not have been able to accomplish so much.
To the wonderful members of the cohort that followed mine, Anne Marie Casey,
Jon Cawthorne, Kathleen DeLong, and Irene Herold. I want to thank you for taking me
under your wings and helping me "keep the faith." Together, you provided
encouragement, nagging, examples, and suggestions. Your dissertations were models for
mine. In particular, I want to thank Anne Casey whom I had originally encouraged to
enter this doctoral program. I had no idea how personally valuable you would prove to be
for my own success.
My friends and colleagues, Theresa Bryd, Deborah Dancik, and Erika Linke, were
always there for me throughout the years. Your friendship and support helped keep me
believing I could do this.
I also want to thank Bethami Dobkin, Provost and Academic Vice President at
Saint Mary's College of California, for her constant support and encouragement. In
addition, I want to thank Richard Carp, Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education at Saint
Mary's, whose insightful criticism always made my thinking better.
I offer my heartfelt appreciation to numerous family members, friends, and
colleagues, and, in particular, the staff at Saint Mary's College of California Library.

	  
	  

	  

6	  
Abstract

Academic libraries and their parent institutions are experiencing increasing social,
technological, economic, and political pressure in the twenty-first century. While the
academic library literature contains numerous discussions and case studies illuminating
how larger academic libraries are engaging in organizational change and experimentation
to respond to those pressures, libraries in smaller academic institutions are
underrepresented in those professional discussions.
This study examines liberal arts college libraries engaged in transformational
change. It explores ways academic libraries are aligning their purpose and services with
the missions, strategic priorities, and challenges of their parent institutions. Through four
case studies, it examines how library directors create change visions, enroll staff and
stakeholders in those visions, and the skills, tools, and strategies they use to lead and
manage organizational change.
Data were collected using narrative inquiry, a qualitative methodology.
Participants included library directors, provosts, and senior management team members.
After analyzing the data, two organizational change theories were applied. The first theory
focuses on what was changed--the antecedents and consequences. The second
organizational change theory focuses on how the change was done--strategies, tools, and
actions.
Data analysis reveals several findings. Directors who employed the greatest range
of political intelligence, emotional intelligence, and transformational leadership skills
were the most successful in creating lasting, radical organizational change. They were

	  
	  

	  

7	  

also most likely to align that change with the mission and needs of the colleges they
served. Directors who used frame bending rather than frame breaking approaches to
envisioning and communicating change were more successful in enrolling both library
staff and academic stakeholders in their change strategies and change goals.
The results of this study contribute to an understanding of how smaller college
libraries are leading and managing change. The findings identify potential obstacles to
successful change and provide examples of strategies used by other change leaders to
mitigate or surmount those obstacles. Those findings may be of value to other academic
library change leaders. Finally, this study also identifies change leadership skills and
strategies that were effective within the unique environment of academic institutions
which have a decentralized environment, distributed power and authority, and a shared
allegiance to the organization's history and culture.

	  
	  

	  

8	  

Table of Contents
Chapter One: The Challenges Facing Colleges and Their Libraries
Academic Libraries

19

Academic Library Change

21

Liberal Arts Colleges and their Libraries

21

Conclusion

22

References

23

Chapter Two: The Study’s Reflective Inquiry and Procedures

	  
	  

16

31

Problem Statement

31

Literature Review

32

Change in Higher Education

32

Change in Academic Libraries

38

Transformational Library Change Leadership

43

Academic Library Futures

45

Conclusion

48

Theoretical Frameworks

49

Grounded Theory

49

Organizational Change Theories

51

Research Questions

59

Procedures

61

Research Design

61

Methodology

75

	  

9	  
Data Quality

83

Limitations

86

References

88

Chapter Three: Overview of Case Studies and Thematic Development
Colleges and Libraries Studied

107

Case Study: College Library A

108

Case Study: College Library B

110

Case Study: College Library C

111

Case Study: College Library D

112

Coding and Thematic Development

114

Organizational Change and Change Outcomes

115

Change Goals, Change Strategy, and Vision

115

Institutional Context and Library/Campus Alignment

117

Leadership

118

Change Leadership—Conditions and Effects

120

Values

121

Conclusion

122

References

122

Chapter Four: Library and Campus Alignment
Higher Education Challenges Facing the Colleges Studied

	  
	  

107

124
125

Alignment: Provosts' Perspectives

127

Alignment: Library Directors' Perspectives

130

Alignment: Senior Management Team's Perspectives

137

	  

10	  
Conclusion

141

References

144

Chapter Five: Library Directors' Change Strategies
College Library A: Inventing Within the Structure

146

Change Strategy: Taking the Slow Road

147

Change Strategy: Empowerment

148

Cultural Change: Intergenerational Respect

151

College Library B: Crises Build Credibility

152

A Wounded Staff

152

A Firing Offense

153

A Faculty Crisis

155

Realizing the Vision

156

Campus-wide Impact

157

College Library C: Change through Partnership

158

Provost as Change-Enabler

159

Redefining Librarians’ Roles

160

Engaging Faculty in Change

163

College Library D: Bold Vision, Incomplete Implementation

164

Twenty-First Century Digital Services

166

Imagining a Twenty-First Century Library

167

Disruptive Implementation

168

A Truncated Result

170

Conclusion

	  
	  

146

171

	  

11	  
References

175

Chapter Six: Creating a Change Culture: Transforming the Team

176

Transformational Leadership Practices and Commitments

177

Directors' Transformational Leadership Behaviors

179

Model the Way

179

Inspire a Shared Vision

183

Challenge the Process

187

Enable Others to Act

190

Encourage the Heart

196

Conclusion

197

References

199

Chapter Seven: Theoretical Models and Academic Library Change
Change Theories

202
203

Change Goals: the What

203

Change Management: the How

208

Contextual Intelligence

212

Reflection in Action

212

Political Acumen

214

Emotional Intelligence

216

Resilience

218

Conclusion

221

References

225

Chapter Eight: Conclusion

229

	  
	  

	  

12	  
The Study's Research Objectives
Leading Change

230

Leadership: Values and Visions

230

Leadership in Context

233

Summary Analysis

237

Change Alignment

238

College-Initiated Change

239

Library-Initiated Change

240

Change Paths

241

Summary Analysis

242

Theoretical Change Frameworks

244

Transforming Within the Frame

244

Multi-Lens Framework

245

Summary Analysis

246

The Future of Academic Libraries

247

Alignment is the Value Proposition

247

The Future of Liberal Arts Colleges

249

Summary Analysis

250

Further Research

	  
	  

229

251

Leadership Styles

252

Does Size or Type Matter?

253

Theoretical Models

254

Stakeholders

254

	  

13	  
Conclusion

255

References

258

Bibliography

268

Appendix A: Sample Email Sent to Listservs

302

Appendix B: Sample Library Director Request to Participate

303

Appendix C: Sample Consent Form

306

Appendix D: Sample Interview Transcript Cover Letter

309

Appendix E: Library Director Interview Questions

311

Appendix F: Provost interview Questions

313

Appendix G: Library Senior Management Team Interview Questions

315

Appendix H: The Five Practices and Ten Commitments of Leadership

317

	  
	  

	  

14	  
List of Figures

Figure 1: Types of Change Management

53

Figure 2: Multi-Lens Framework

57

Figure 3: Frame Breaking and Frame Bending Strategies

204

Figure 4: Institutional and Environmental Influences on
Change Leadership
Figure 5: Conceptual Framework

	  
	  

222
238

	  

15	  
List of Tables

	  
	  

Table 1: Higher Education Challenges

17

Table 2: Master List of Potential Libraries

65

Table 3: Libraries/Colleges Organized by Source of Change

66

Table 4: Candidates for Case Studies

67

Table 5: Research Objectives and Interview Questions

71

	  

16	  

Chapter One
CHALLENGES FACING COLLEGES AND THEIR LIBRARIES

Colleges and universities are experiencing “a turbulent era of global
interdependence, economic uncertainty, and disruptive innovation” (American Association
of Colleges & Universities (AAC&U), n.d., p. 3). Academic institutions are increasingly
being held accountable for the public monies they receive and are expected to deliver on
the public good they claim they provide. Wrestling with a wide range of challenges,
colleges and universities are re-evaluating their missions, re-structuring various
organizations and services, and re-thinking how they deliver and support teaching,
learning, and research. They are engaged in a number of experiments as they define new
roles in response to these challenges. In the area of student learning, experiments have
resulted in innovations that range from high-impact practices, such as intensely studentfocused first year experience programs, to intentionally impersonal but broadly accessible
massively open online courses (MOOCs) (Butler, 2012; Jones, 2011; U.S. The White
House, n.d.).
While the American higher education system has experienced, and adapted to,
many challenges throughout the past centuries, in the twenty-first century the confluence
of changed expectations has created, perhaps, the greatest number of challenges and
opportunities in the history of higher education. New expectations such as providing a
path to the middle class, new demands, such as managing a campus like a business, and
new challenges, such as the e-revolution in scholarly information, all stretch the capacity
of individual higher education institutions to respond in meaningful ways. Table 1 Higher
	  
	  

	  

17	  

Education Challenges1	  outlines many of these. These challenges can cause institutional
disruption and uncertainty as “academics and support staff struggle … to identify what it
is they are trying to do and even to identify who the customers are” (Davies, Hides, &
Casey, 2001, p. 1025).
Table	  1	  
	  
Higher	  Education	  Challenges	  
	  
Changing	  Societal	  Needs	  
Economic	  Forces	  
Growing	  demand	  for	  
Increasing	  societal	  
outcomes	  assessment	  (e.g.	   demand	  for	  universities	  to	  
retention	  and	  graduation	   engage	  in	  privatization	  
rate	  improvements)	  
and	  commercialization—
adopt	  business	  models	  	  
Increasing	  diversity	  
Increasing	  cost	  of	  
(gender,	  race,	  nationality,	   educational	  activities,	  
socioeconomic,	  etc.)	  
(wages,	  services,	  
infrastructure,	  energy)	  
Demand	  for	  return	  on	  
Declining	  priority	  for	  
investment	  and	  re-­‐
public	  support	  of	  higher	  
definition	  of	  educational	  
education	  (public	  good	  or	  
value	  proposition	  
individual	  benefit)	  
Need	  to	  justify	  higher	  
Inability	  of	  libraries	  and	  
education’s	  contribution	  
their	  institutions	  to	  exert	  
to	  the	  public	  good	  and	  the	   market	  pressure	  on	  
value	  of	  the	  degree	  
information	  costs,	  access,	  
especially	  for	  employment	   and	  use	  policies	  
Expectation	  that	  higher	  
Inability	  to	  re-­‐engineer	  
education	  will	  provide	  
institutional	  cost	  and	  
upward	  mobility	  for	  all.	  
support	  structures	  (e.g.	  
health	  care,	  technology)	  
New	  learning	  required	  to	   Increased	  competition	  
prepare	  for	  the	  global,	  
(for-­‐profit	  educational	  
high-­‐performance	  
institutions	  and	  low-­‐cost	  
workplace	  
experiments,	  e.g.	  MOOCs)	  
Growing	  need	  and	  
Greater	  competition	  for	  
expectation	  for	  life-­‐long	  
funding	  (research	  grants	  
learning	  
and	  donor	  dollars)	  	  
Change	  from	  passive	  
Public	  resistance	  to	  
student	  to	  active	  learner	  
increasing	  cost	  of	  tuition	  
and	  demanding	  consumer	   and	  fees	  
	  
	  

Technology	  
Academia	  is	  knowledge-­‐
driven	  thus	  very	  
dependent	  on	  information	  
and	  communication	  
technologies	  
Lack	  of	  resources	  and	  
flexibility	  to	  respond	  
rapidly	  to	  technological	  
change	  
Internet	  challenges	  
geographically-­‐based	  
traditional	  learning	  
paradigms	  
Exponential	  introduction	  
of	  new	  technologies	  by	  
vendors	  resulting	  in	  no	  
common	  platforms	  or	  
access	  protocols	  
E-­‐research,	  e-­‐data,	  e-­‐
collaborations—challenge	  
traditional	  organizational	  
structures	  and	  disciplines	  
Competition	  from	  other	  
knowledge-­‐based	  and	  
technology-­‐intensive	  
industries	  
Born-­‐digital	  students	  
bring	  higher	  expectations	  
and	  new	  approaches	  
Exponential	  pace	  of	  digital	  
technology	  evolution	  

	  
Change	  from	  “just	  in	  case”	  
to	  “just	  in	  time”	  and	  “just	  
for	  you”	  learning	  
Disparity	  between	  high	  
school	  and	  college	  
teachers	  about	  high	  school	  
students’	  readiness	  for	  
college	  level	  work	  
Increasing	  stratification	  of	  
access	  to	  and	  success	  in	  
higher	  education	  based	  on	  
socio-­‐economic	  status	  
Devaluing	  of	  traditional,	  
faculty-­‐centric	  models	  and	  
emphasis	  on	  courses	  as	  
products	  
	  

18	  
Increased	  interest	  in	  pay-­‐
for-­‐performance	  models	  

	  

Decreasing	  state	  funding	  
	  
for	  higher	  education	  
coupled	  with	  increasing	  
state	  legislative	  regulation	  
and	  review	  
Competing	  economic	  
	  
models	  –	  massification	  vs.	  
specialization1	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1.	  Table	  derived	  from	  the	  following	  sources:	  
American	  Federation	  of	  Teachers,	  2011;	  American	  Library	  Association,	  2013;	  Baldwin	  &	  Baker,	  2009;	  
Baum	  &	  McPherson,	  2011;	  Council	  for	  Higher	  Education	  Accreditation,	  2013;	  Davies,	  Hides,	  &	  Casey,	  
2001;	  Duderstadt,	  2003a,	  2003b,	  2011;	  Faust,	  2012;	  Immerwahr,	  Jones,	  2011;	  Kelderman,	  2013;	  
Kezar,	  2001;	  Kiley,	  2011;	  Selingo,	  2013;	  Wagner,	  2006;	  Warnken,	  2004;	  Willinsky,	  2007;	  Zusman,	  
2005.	  

	  
	  

	  

19	  
Academic Libraries
Academic libraries, which play a key role in supporting the teaching, learning, and

research missions of their parent institutions, share in this challenging and uncertain
environment. Rapid and disruptive technical changes have reshaped the information
landscape, influencing how faculty, students, and researchers find, use, and create
scholarship (Campbell, 2006; Lewis, 2007). For example, “born digital” students entering
college increasingly “perceive … the World Wide Web as their information universe”
leading to a declining use of academic libraries’ traditional services (Jones, 2002;
Lippincott, 2005; The Times Higher Education, 2008).
This changing academic environment is also causing academic libraries to re-think
their missions and activities to ensure continued relevancy and sustainability (Hardesty,
2002, OhioLINK, 2006, Reyes, 2006). Various authors in the literature of academic
librarianship call for deep, transformative change that, if undertaken, could create radically
different academic libraries in the future (Brewer, Hook, Simmons-Welburn, & Williams,
2004; Miller, 2012, Neal, 2011; Stoffle, Allen, & Fore, 2000). In the process of
developing a new vision of the academic library, the profession is building a shared
conversation about possible future roles and services (Chu, 2014; Stoffle, Renaud &
Veldof, 1996, 2015; Neal, 2015; Walter, 2014). Many posit that those future roles and
services need to be broadened beyond academic libraries’ traditional responsibilities since,
as Curzon (2010) has observed, “the future of the academic library will be dependent upon
the future of learning” (p. 1) and learning, as an activity and a transformational process, is
changing (AAC&U, n.d.; American Federation of Teachers, 2011; The Chancellor’s desk,
2013). By aligning their missions and activities more directly with the college or

	  
	  

	  

20	  

university’s strategies and priorities, academic libraries move outside of their traditionallyfocused roles into a broader partnership with their academic institutions (Hickerson, 2011;
Housewright, 2009). Using their unique strengths to “boost the ability of higher education
to thrive, not merely survive,” these libraries could recalibrate “their historic value
proposition” (Wilson, 2012, p. 78).
Academic libraries have always supported teaching, learning, and research and
have encountered and responded to many of the same economic, social, and other
problems their parent institutions face as those core functions of the university evolve.
Academic library directors face challenges such as communicating value, costly and
rapidly changing information technologies, changing user behaviors and expectations,
increasingly diverse student populations, and rising costs coupled with insufficient
funding. Other challenges, although they may not appear similar, such as colleges
struggling with student enrollment and retention and libraries struggling to retain their
user base in the face of the “googilization” of information search and access, may share
similar approaches to their solutions.
While in past centuries the library’s mission may have been more “loosely
coupled” with its parent institution (Kezar, 2001, p. vi), many in the field of academic
librarianship are calling for more “rigor in documenting the library’s contribution to
campus-wide priorities,” (Wood, Miller, & Knapp, 2007, p. 181). The pressures on higher
education have grown so intense and campus resources have grown so scarce that, to
survive, every academic unit must “please the holders of the purse strings” (Wood et al.,
2007, p. 185). In this uncertain and rapidly changing environment, academic libraries
must demonstrate “by actions as well as rhetoric that the library understands and embraces

	  
	  

	  

21	  

the university’s values and priorities … [and is] ready to play a positive and unique role in
the teaching and learning community’s present and future success” (Wood et al., 2007, p.
185). Aligning the campus administration’s and the academic library’s mission, goals,
and services is critical, according to Schulenburger (2011), because colleges and
universities and their libraries “thrive or decline together” (p. 9).
Academic Library Change
The professional library literature has many examples of academic library change.
The majority of the articles and books focus on how large research libraries, typically
those whose institutions are members of the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) are
changing. This ARL-centric focus leaves a large gap in the profession’s knowledge about
how other academic libraries are responding to challenges such as changing user
behaviors, increasing technological competition from Internet-based information
companies, and depressed economic conditions. Non-ARL-member libraries are
“woefully underrepresented” in the professional literature and, as a result, information is
lacking about whether these libraries have engaged in experimentation that redefines the
library’s institutional role (McElrath, 2002; Riggs, 1997, p. 497). Non-ARL academic
libraries have different environments and cultures than ARL libraries and their unique
character may influence differently the ways they respond to the priorities and challenges
that they, and their parent institutions, face in the twenty-first century.
Liberal Arts Colleges and their Libraries
This predominant focus on larger institutions is not just in the academic library
field. In his analysis of the challenges facing liberal arts colleges, Ferrall (2011), notes
that, “relatively little is written about liberal arts colleges … most writers on higher

	  
	  

	  

22	  

education write about universities” (pp. x-xi). Liberal arts colleges number between 125
and 250 nationally. They are a distinct subset of higher education institutions sharing a
similar set of characteristics and values. These characteristics and values include small
enrollments, “the intimacy of the residential setting, the emphasis placed on teaching,
[and] the celebration of the liberal arts as the foundation for a lifetime of learning”
(Ferrall, 2011, p. 14). They have also been recognized as the subset of institutions that are
most threatened by the changes and challenges in the higher education landscape (Ferrall,
2008; Reuteman, 2011).
While this study did not originally identify liberal arts college libraries as a unique
subset for study, the process of identifying potential institutions that met the research
criteria ultimately resulted in four institutions which all described themselves as liberal
arts colleges—even though two of the four had “university” as part of their name. While
liberal arts colleges and their libraries constitute “by far the smallest piece of the vast
higher-education armada,” they present a valuable subset to study the ways academic
libraries are changing either in support of or in response to the challenges their parent
institutions are facing (Ferrall, 2011, p. 1). The pressures they are under may make
change manifest more quickly and comprehensively than at larger institutions and their
small scale and emphasis on community may make the change journeys they take more
explicit and observable. Their experiences may add to the field’s approach to what the
twenty-first century academic library can become (McElrath, 2002; TerHaar, 2000; Tobin,
2009).
Conclusion

	  
	  

	  

23	  
Academic library change has been a constant throughout the last half of the

twentieth century and the first decade of the twenty-first century. Recently the discussions
and debates over the nature and extent of change needed have taken on a greater urgency.
In a report on the recent situation at several liberal arts colleges where library directors
have lost their jobs, Geffert observes:
To my mind, all of this hubbub is probably exacerbated by the fact that
libraries are trying to figure out what they are and what their future is and
what their role is. ... Every time you have a body of people going through
this kind of existential crisis, conflict is inherent. As you're trying to
redefine an institution, you know there are going to be different opinions
on how that redefinition should happen. (Straumsheim, 2014, n.p.)
Studying how liberal arts college libraries have engaged in change, the
ways they re-invented their services and roles, may provide possible options for
other liberal arts college libraries. It may also inform the broader conversation
about how libraries should change in response to economic, technological, social
and political pressures they are facing, from their campus constituents and
externally. It may also illuminate the "'social smarts' needed to guide libraries"
through the challenging times they are facing (Straumsheim, 2014, n.p.)
References
American Association of Colleges and Universities. (n.d.). Strategic plan 2013-17: Big
questions, urgent challenges: Liberal education and Americans’ global future.
Washington, DC: AAC&U. Retrieved from
http://www.aacu.org/About/strategic_plan.cfm

	  
	  

	  

24	  

American Federation of Teachers: Higher Education. (2011, January 5). Student success
2010: The year in review. What Should Count? Frontline Perspectives on Student
Success and College Accountability. Retrieved from
http://www.whatshouldcount.org/?p=817
American Library Association. (2013). The state of America’s libraries report 2013.
Academic Libraries. American Libraries, Special issue. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/news/sites/ala.org.news/files/content/2013-State-of-AmericasLibraries-Report.pdf
Baldwin, R. G., & Baker, V. L. (2009, July 9). The case of the disappearing liberal arts
college. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/views/2009/07/09/baldwin.
Baum, S., & McPherson, M. (2011, January 18). Is education a public good or a private
good? The Chronicle of Higher Education: Blogs: Innovations. Retrieved from
http://chronicle.com.vezproxy.stmarys-ca.edu:2048/blogs/innovations/is-education-apublic-good-or-a-private-good/28329
Brewer, J. M., Hook, S. J., Simmons-Welburn, J., & Williams, K. (2004). Libraries
dealing with the future now. ARL: A Bimonthly Report on Research Library Issues and
Actions from ARL, CNI, and SPARC, no. 234.
Butler, B. (2012, October 22). Massive open online courses: Legal and policy issues.
Association of Research Libraries Issue Brief. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org/bm~doc/issuebrief-mooc-22oct12.pdf
Campbell, J. D. (2006). Changing a cultural icon: The academic library as a virtual
destination. EDUCAUSE Review, 41(1), 16-30.

	  
	  

	  

25	  

The Chancellor’s desk: New challenges to higher education. (2013, March 12). CUNY
Matters, The University. Retrieved from
http://www1.cuny.edu/mu/forum/2013/03/12/the-chancellors-desk-new-challenges-tohigher-education/
Chu, W. (2014). At a tipping point: U.S. academic libraries and the change agents in their
environment. Chinese Librarianship: An International Electronic Journal, 38.
Retrieved from http://www.iclc.us/cliej/cl38chu.pdf
Council for Higher Education Accreditation. (2013, April 13). Presidents FY 2014 budget
proposal contains funding for initiative to encourage new quality validation systems.
CHEA Federal Update, no. 31. Retrieved from
http://www.chea.org/Government/FedUpdate/CHEA_FU31.html
Curzon, S. C. (2010). “Ain’t what it used to be”: The future of academic libraries. In
Leaders Look Toward the Future a companion website to C.A. Alire & E.G. Evans,
Academic Librarianship. Chicago: Neal-Schuman, 2010. Retrieved from
http://www.neal-schuman.com/academic/
Davies, J., Hides, M. T., & Casey, S. (2001). Leadership in higher education. Total
Quality Management, 12(7/8), 1025-1030.
Duderstadt, J. J. (2003a, February 6). Higher education in the new century: Themes,
challenges, and options. Paper presented at the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California. Retrieved from
http://milproj.dc.umich.edu/publications/challenges_options/

	  
	  

	  

26	  

Duderstadt, J. J. (2003b, June 23). Higher education in the new century: Themes,
challenges, and opportunities. PowerPoint presented at University of Nagoya, Japan.
Retrieved from http://milproj.ummu.umich.edu/publicaitons/nagoya/index.html
Duderstadt, J. J. (2011, March 17). The future of the American research university. Paper
presented at the University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign. Retrieved from
http://milproj.dc.umich.edu/pdfs/2011/2011-UIUC_Address.pdf
Faust, D. (2012, January 20). Challenges of higher education. Harvard University, Office
of the President, as delivered, University of Mumbai. Retrieved from
http://www.harvard.edu/president/challenges-higher-education
Ferrall, Jr., V. E. (2008, February 11). Can liberal arts colleges be saved? Inside Higher
Ed. Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2008/02/11/ferrall
Ferrall, Jr., V. E. (2011). Liberal arts at the brink. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Hardesty, L. (2002). Future of academic/research librarians: A period of transition—to
what? portal: Libraries and the Academy, 2(1), 79-97.
Hickerson, H. T. (2011, December). Rebalancing the investment in collections. Research
Library Issues, no. 277, 2-9.
Housewright, R. (2009). Themes of change in corporate libraries: Considerations for
academic libraries. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 9(2), 253-271.
Immerwahr, J., Johnson, J., & Gasbarra, P. (2008, October). The iron triangle: College
presidents talk about costs, access, and quality. The National Center for Public Policy
and Higher Education (Report #08-2). Retrieved from
http://www.highereducation.org/reports/iron_triangle/index.shtml

	  
	  

	  

27	  

Jones, R. A. (2011, May). “Outcome funding:” Tennessee experiments with a
performance-based approach to college appropriations. National Crosstalk, 19(1).
Retrieved from http://www.highereducation.org/crosstalk/ct0511/news0511-tenn.shtml
Jones, S. (2002, September 15). The Internet goes to college: How students are living in
the future with today’s technology. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet & American Life
Project. Retrieved from
www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/.../PIP_College_Report.pdf.pdf
Kelderman, E. (2013, April 29). Oregon considers recasting governance of higher
education. The Chronicle of Higher Education: Government.
Retrieved from http://wiredcampus.chronicle.com/article/Oregon-Considers-BigChanges/138867/
Kezar, A. J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kiley, K. (2011, October 10). News: Starting to worry. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2011/10/10/decisions_at_smith_other_liberal_ar
ts_colleges_raise_questions_about_financial_model_s_sustainability
Lewis, D. W. (2007). A strategy for academic libraries in the first quarter of the 21st
century. College & Research Libraries, 68(5), 418-434.
Lippincott, J. (2005). Net generation students and libraries. In Educating the net
generation (13). EDUCAUSE. Retrieved from http://www.educause.edu/research-andpublications/books/educating-net-generation/net-generation-students-and-libraries

	  
	  

	  

28	  

McElrath, R. (2002). Challenges that academic library directors are experiencing as
perceived by them and their supervisors. College & Research Libraries, 63(4), 304321.
Miller, R. (2012). Damn the recession, full speed ahead. Journal of Library
Administration, 52(1), 3-17.
Neal, J. G. (2011). Prospects for systemic change across academic libraries. Educause
Review, 46(2), 10-11.
Neal, J. G. (2015). Still "choosing our futures": How many apples in the seed? College &
Research Libraries, 76(3), 310-315.
OhioLINK. (2006, Fall). Reinventing OhioLINK: New vision needed for a changed world.
OhioLINK Update, 12(2), 2. Retrieved from
http://www.ohiolink.edu/about/update/fall2006/fall06.pdf
Reuteman, R. (7 March 2011). Is the four-year, liberal-arts education model dead?
Education and You 2011 CNBC.com. Retrieved from
http://www.cnbc.com/id/41626661#
Reyes, V. (2006). The future role of the academic librarians in higher education. portal:
Libraries and the Academy, 6(3), 301-309.
Riggs, D. E. (1997). Editor’s observations. College & Research Libraries, 58(6), 496-497.
Schulenburger, D. (2011, February). The future of the US research university. Research
Library Issues, no. 274. Retrieved from http://publications.arl.org/rli274/2
Selingo, J. J. (2013). What presidents think: A 2013 survey of four-year college
presidents. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://images.results.chronicle.com/Web/TheChronicleofHigherEducation/%7B6e0efc

	  
	  

	  

29	  
69-0828-4b97-b51f5d9915a72aca%7D_CHECOR1081_Pres_Report_%28Pearson%29.pdf

Stoffle, C., Allen, B., & Fore, J. (2000). Reinventing academic libraries and librarianship.
College & Research Libraries News, 61(10), 894-897.
Stoffle, C., Renaud, R., & Veldof, J. R. (1996, 2015). Choosing our futures. College &
Research Libraries, 57(3), 213-225. Reprinted C&RL, 76(3), 316-327.
Straumsheim, C. (2014, December 10). Clash in the stacks. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/12/10/rethinking-library-provesdivisive-topic-many-liberal-arts-institutions
TerHaar, L. K. (2000). “Go where the students go!” The fate of the undergraduate library.
Library Journal, 125(18), 38-41.
The Times Higher Education. Opinions and Leaders. (2008, June 5). Leader: A Googleeyed view of the world. Retrieved from
http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=402256&sectioncode=2
6
Tobin, E. M. (2009, October 24). Eugene Tobin inaugural remarks: Remarks for Jonathan
Veitch’s inauguration as 15th president of Occidental College. Retrieved from
http://www.oxy.edu/x9241.xml
U.S. The White House. (n.d.). Education: Knowledge and skills for the future: Higher
education. Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/education/highereducation
Wagner, A. (2006, September). Measuring up internationally: Developing skills and
knowledge for the global knowledge economy. The National Center for Public Policy

	  
	  

	  

30	  
and Higher Education (Report #06-7). Retrieved from
http://www.highereducaiton.org/reports/muint/inex.shtml

Walter, S. (2014). Guest editorial: A new age of reason for academic libraries. College &
Research Libraries, 75(5), 612-615.
Warnken, P. (2004). New technologies and constant change: Managing the process. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 30(4), 322-327.
Willinsky, J. (2007). Rethinking what’s public in the university’s public mission.
Retrieved from
http://www.academia.edu/2851658/Rethinking_whats_public_in_the_universitys_publ
ic_mission
Wilson, L. A. (2012). Creating sustainable futures for academic libraries. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 78-93.
Wood, E. J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Zusman, A. (2005). Challenges facing higher education in the twenty-first century. In P.G.
Altbach, R.O. Berdahl, & P.J. Gumport, (Eds.), American higher education in the
twenty-first century: Social, political and economic changes (2nd ed., pp. 115-160).
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.educationanddemocracy.org/Resources/Zusman.pdf

	  
	  

	  

31	  
Chapter Two
THE STUDY’S REFLECTIVE INQUIRY AND PROCEDURES

College library directors "face a fluid and uncertain environment shaped primarily
by technological advances and demographic changes as well as by diminished resources
and new demands" (Coughlin & Gertzog, 1997, p. 1). In the process of balancing all the
above pressures and demands, library directors are also expected to lead in ways that
ensure the library remains aligned with and a vital to the college's academic mission.
"How well the librarians directly contribute to the aspects of academic life valued in that
institution (teaching, learning, discovery, and research) is the basis against which the
library is judged" (Nelson, 2014, p. 9). Examining how college library directors have led
organizational change that kept their libraries relevant to their colleges may offer models
and strategies that can be used by other academic library directors leading change.
Problem Statement
The challenges depicted in Table 1 affect the entire institution, administration,
faculty, students, and support services, including college libraries. No study has examined
how liberal arts college libraries are responding to the challenges facing higher education
and, in particular, how they may be re-defining themselves in the context of the pressures
and priorities of their parent institutions. This study fills that void by examining liberal
arts college libraries that have engaged in organizational change in the twenty-first
century, in particular to understand the change leadership of their library directors. It also
examines whether that change process responds to their parent institutions’ challenges and

	  
	  

	  

32	  

strategic changes and, if it does, in what ways the change process is influencing the library
and the college.
Examining the specific ways liberal arts college libraries are changing, the
processes they are using to manage these changes, and whether they are aligning those
changes with broader, institution-wide missions and priorities may identify strategies that
have not been used at larger, more diverse college and university libraries struggling with
the challenges of relevancy and sustainability in a twenty-first century in which many of
their former activities and roles in academia are becoming obsolete. Studying liberal arts
college libraries that may have developed a more closely coupled partnership with their
institutions’ goals and priorities can help the broader institution’s understanding of the
library’s overall value. Understanding how college libraries may be changing in response
to institutional challenges is also valuable. Implementing transformational change is
difficult, particularly in academia (Kezar, 2001, p. vi). Identifying how college library
directors lead their organizations through change may provide guidance to other library
directors and their campus administrations interested in implementing academic change.
Literature Review
Change in Higher Education
Higher education’s capacity and willingness to engage in change has been viewed
with mixed perspectives. The feeling that higher education is change-adverse is reflected
in a joke from The Chronicle of Higher Education:
Q. How many academics does it take to change a light bulb?
A. Change? Change? Who said anything about CHANGE?
(Kirschner, 2012, n.p.).

	  
	  

	  

33	  

Higher education institutions have frequently been viewed as conservators of tradition and
unwilling to change, particularly by business leaders who feel that many problems could
be solved through an application of business models and processes on academia (Denna,
2014; Kirshner, 2012). However, in a business environment, employers and employees
share a common set of understandings, such as the fundamental purpose of a company, the
employee/employer relationship, and the exercise of power. This common culture shapes
business leaders’ actions and possibilities in certain ways. Academic cultures typically
hold a very different set of shared values, relationships and assumptions of power and
process. Academic change leaders who try to apply for-profit change models must adapt
them to fit the unique mission, values, culture, and traditions of the academic institutions
that they lead (Chaffee, 1984; Steane, 1997).
Other researchers studying organizational change in academia argue that despite
the fact that “the university is among the most traditional of all the institutions of our
society,” it is simultaneously “surprisingly adaptive” (Clark, 1983, p. 101 & p.103; Elton,
1999; Van Vught, 1999). This capacity for adaptation and innovation is reflected in
accounts and case studies of successful academic change (Clark, 1995; 1998; Holley,
2009; LeBlanc, 2010; Morrill, 2007). However, the nature of academic culture makes
creating change—including deep, transformational change—difficult (Central European
University, 2011; Cohen & March, 1986; Kezar, 2001). Higher educational change is
messy and substantial change often fails (Kezar, 2001).
Reviewing a number of change models that have been applied to higher education,
Kezar (2001) concludes that change in higher education differs from change in for-profit
organizations. Companies are "are highly vulnerable to the external environment" (p. 81).

	  
	  

	  

34	  

In contrast, higher education organizations experience a more complex and nuanced
interplay between internal and external forces, where external pressures and challenges are
often filtered through a variety of internal lenses (Kezar, 2001, p. 81). A strategic
planning process designed to identify environmental pressures and then implement
appropriate change is less successful in academic cultures (Birnbaum, 2000; Chaffee,
1985; Keller, 1997). Instead, responses to external pressures are typically processed
through “collegial forms of decision-making, information-sharing, and other cultural or
cognitive processes in order to foster change” (Kezar, 2001, p. 83).
Keller (1997) observed, “there is no fixed protocol for academic strategic decision
making and even less similarity across institutions about how they implement and enforce
the strategic changes agreed upon” (p. 163). Academic change agents must be able to
work within the complex, loosely coupled, collaborative, and semi-organized anarchy of
the American college or university employing multiple strategies vertically and
horizontally to effect change (Austin, 2010; Cohen & March, 1986; Kezar & Eckel,
2002a).
Shared vision. However, in the organized anarchy of the academic environment,
there are some elements of classic change theory that apply. Vision and strong leadership
have been identified “as central to both implementing and accomplishing change” (Kezar,
2001, p. 88). Like their for-profit counterparts, academic change agents must offer their
stakeholders a compelling, inspiring vision of the future to which they can commit
(Austin, 2010; Nanus, 1992; Palmer, Dunford, & Akin, 2009). Yet even with vision and
leadership, deep change, while often attempted, is frequently problematic (Clark, 1976;
Cohen & March, 1986).

	  
	  

	  

35	  
Cowan (1993) examined some small colleges that were at risk of failing in order to

understand why some changed successfully and others failed. She found that for small
colleges, successful change requires a president with a vision, a collaborative process
honoring shared governance, a frame-bending rather than frame-breaking approach to
change that honors the institution’s values and its past, and effective support operations.
The successful presidents were genuinely transformational leaders who engaged the entire
community in the change visioning and implementation and who employed powerful
symbolic actions to maintain optimism and commitment during the change process.
Studying a five-year planned transformational change process at a mid-Atlantic
college, Souza (2007) found that resistance to change is overcome by a broadly shared
agreement that the college was in crisis coupled with a new president who provided
“energy, vision and a narrative for the institution” (pp. 129, 132). The president’s three
most successful change strategies were “a multi-modal communication process, broad
inclusion of the campus community, and the use of existing governance structures to
develop the strategic plan” (p. 129).
Pounder’s (2001) meta-analysis of transformational leadership research findings
concludes that academic leaders employ “transformational and transactional leadership
constructs” in different circumstances (p. 286). Transformational leadership as “a process
that changes and transforms people [and] is concerned with emotions, values, ethics,
standards, and long-term goals” and transactional leadership focuses “on the exchanges
that occur between leaders and their followers” (Northouse, 2013, pp. 185, 186). Pounder
(2001) found that in academic environments, transformational skills are more effective in
“generating and effecting change” (p. 286). He also concluded that leaders and staff

	  
	  

	  

36	  

agree, “on the importance of the visionary aspects of academic leadership … [and on]
generating a shared commitment to a vision” (p. 288). To create change in academia,
leadership must be inspirational and transformational.
In the higher education environment, one of the most compelling motivations for
change is a “clearly stated and significant mission” (Cowan, 1993, p. 33). This shared and
compelling vision then becomes “a rudder for change” (Wilson, 2013). Both researchers
and practicing leaders have attempted to analyze what makes a particular vision and
visioning process successful and typically identify three sub-processes beginning with
creating the vision’s content, communicating that content to employees and stakeholders,
and, finally, obtaining organizational commitment (Black & Gregersen, 2002; Bridges,
2003; Flamholtz & Randle, 1998; Kotter, 2007; Sashkin, 1988). Academic leaders who
follow these three stages of vision development have a higher potential for success
(Collins & Porras, 1991; Kantabutra & Avery, 2010).
The purpose of an inclusive approach was clearly recognized by the presidents in
Zhang and Strange’s (1992) study of academic presidents’ risk-taking strategies. These
presidents identified their change leadership tasks as (1) defining and charting the
institutional vision; (2) communicating the vision to constituents; and (3) encouraging
informed participation in and broad ownership of the vision (p. 9). Bringing constituents
into the vision formation process early meant that faculty and staff would work more
creatively and productively to achieve the vision and increase the likelihood of success.
The value of a clear vision, supported by the leader and developed with follower
inclusion, was affirmed in several other studies of academic change. In McFarland’s
(1993) study of privately funded colleges and universities, the presidents strongly agreed

	  
	  

	  

37	  

on the importance of diverse participation and organization-wide ownership of the vision
and the vision development process.
Crowe (1995) undertook a qualitative study of five higher education institutions in
Southern California to examine methods for generating buy-in and found that institutions
where presidents used the largest proportion of inclusionary strategies had the highest
amount of faculty and staff commitment to the vision and the change process.
Gioia and Chittipeddi (1991) studied the leader’s role in sensemaking and
sensegiving in a large, public university engaged in strategic change. Separating the
change management process into four phases (envisioning, signaling, re-visioning and
energizing) they documented activities the president used to move the process forward.
The president’s use of a “widening circle of idea sharing and consultation,” resulted in a
mutual negotiation of understanding and action (pp. 446-447). The change process’
inclusive nature “resulted in a wider commitment and stronger impetus for the entire
change effort” across all stakeholder and constituent groups (p. 441).
Engaging followers. Even if a vision is inspiring, well communicated, and
developed with stakeholder buy-in, it must fit both the organization’s culture as well as
employees’ values. According to Sarros, Cooper, and Santora (2010), transformational
leaders who are “able to articulate a vision and engage workers in that vision” created
sustained organizational growth and made their organizations more competitive (p. 301).
Employee commitment to a vision was driven to a large extent by the vision’s fit with the
organization’s culture and values. Other researchers also found that inclusionary practices
and a vision’s fit with values and culture were critical initial elements in successful change

	  
	  

	  

38	  

(Beauchamp, 2003; Dvir, Kass, & Shamir, 2004; Hannegan Jr., 1991; Lipton, 1996;
Sarros, et al., 2010).
The findings of these studies support Kezar’s (2001) argument that change
processes in academic environments differ from for-profit approaches. Academic leaders
must be strong communicators, must align the vision and the change with organizational
values and culture, and must be committed to the slower and often challenging process of
stakeholder participation (Bennis & Nanus, 1997; Herscovitch & Meyer, 2002; Marshak
& Grant, 2008; Palmer, et al., 2009; Weick, 1995). In academia, the process of vision
acceptance and the commitment to the changes is a “dance among multiple partners …
with the senior leaders playing a key role in the choreography” (O’Connell, Hickerson, &
Pillutla, 2011, pp. 105-106). Dance is a metaphor for administrators, faculty, staff, and
stakeholders engaging together to create change.
Change in Academic Libraries
Alignment. Paralleling their parent institutions, academic libraries are challenged
by the external pressures and challenges they face. In particular, they must change “in
response to changes in the learning and research environment and changes in the behavior
of library users” (Troll, 2002, p. 99). The disruptive technological and economic
challenges to academic libraries' traditional roles and activities have led to questions about
the viability of academic libraries, generating a great deal of discussion about how to
assess and communicate the value of the library to the academic enterprise.
As Troll (2002) warns, to continue to be viable, “librarians must work with
university or college administrators, faculty, and students to articulate clearly what
objectives they expect the library to achieve given the nature and mission” of the broader

	  
	  

	  

39	  

institution they serve (Troll, 2002, p. 117). Schulenburger (2011) puts this need for
alignment more bluntly, arguing that those academic units that “promote the ultimate ends
of the university, learning and research” will experience less organizational risk than units
that do not “demonstrate how the resources and services that they offer directly affect
student learning, retention, graduation, time-to-degree, faculty research and success in
winning competitive research grants” (p. 10).
While many in library and information science call for radical change, with
warning article titles such as “College Libraries: The Long Goodbye,” “Creative
Destruction: Academic Libraries and the Burden of Change” and “The Age of High
Anxiety: Threats that Fuel Library Nightmares,” these authors rarely address how that
change can better align the library with their parent institutions (Dillon, 2004; Shuler,
2005; Woodward, 2013).
One analysis, commissioned by the Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL), does examine library alignment with institutional goals and needs. It identifies
resources and existing research which libraries could use “to demonstrate the value of
academic libraries in clear, measurable ways” (ACRL, 2010, p. 8). Asking, “how does the
library advance the missions of the institution,” the report concludes that academic
libraries “can establish, assess, and link academic library outcomes to institutional
outcomes” such as student enrollment, retention and graduation rates, success,
achievement, learning, engagement, to faculty outcomes, including research productivity,
teaching, and service, and, finally, to the broader issue of institutional quality and
reputation (ACRL, 2010, pp. 11, 12).

	  
	  

	  

40	  
The majority of the literature in academic librarianship consists either of calls for

change or descriptions of individual libraries' change strategies. Those academic libraries,
which have recognized a need to change, describe their motivation as enabling the library
to better meet its basic mission—supporting teaching, learning, and research and
connecting users to scholarly information. These articles often focus on very specific
operational changes in services, reporting structures, and resources and rarely include
either a clear transformational vision, a detailed strategic plan, or a connection to the
broader strategic vision or plans of the college or university the library serves (Andrade &
Zaghloul, 2010; Fore, Knight, & Russell, 1993; Saw, Lui, & Yu, 2008; Schaffler, 2004).
Rather, the need for academic library change is justified by goals such as “increased
productivity, increased motivation for service,” “serving changing user needs and
expectations,” or “meeting future challenges” (Andrade & Zaghloul, 2010, p. 273; Fore, et
al., 1993, p. 97; Saw, et al., 2008, p. 51).
Even when identifying the goal of connecting the library to the broader university,
descriptions of change in the library and information science literature rarely make those
connections explicit. The Western Washington University (WWU) libraries were charged
by the campus administration with developing a three-year strategic plan to address how
the library could become “an integral part of the WWU’s mission” and that “aligned the
libraries with the university’s strategic initiatives” (Stephan, 2010, p. 189). While the plan
identified campus partners and administrators as stakeholder groups and referenced the
WWU strategic plan, the new mission statement did not directly link the library to the
university’s strategic initiatives. Instead, it highlighted the importance of the library’s

	  
	  

	  

41	  

traditional roles and focused on ensuring that the library was “the physical, intellectual,
and virtual center of the campus” (Stephan, 2010, p. 193).
This lack of a specific connection between the broader institutional aims and
outcomes and the academic library’s strategic planning process was identified in
McNicol’s (2005) study, which investigated strategic planning in United Kingdom
academic libraries. She concluded, “library and information service involvement in
institutional strategic planning is not a well-developed or embedded activity” (p. 496).
Most of the libraries she surveyed did not address how they aligned their work with the
institution’s strategic plan. They rarely addressed institutional strategic goals that seemed
to be appropriate for library involvement, such as “learning and teaching, widening access,
flexible delivery, improving retention, and research” (McNicol, 2005, p. 500). Sidorko
and Yang’s (2009) study is also typical of this disconnect. It reports on the specific
changes implemented at the University of Hong Kong libraries in response to user survey
data and an in-house analysis of problems but it does not define a clear vision of the
change goals nor does it connect the changes made to the university’s vision, mission, or
strategic goals.
Two articles, from very different perspectives, argue that libraries can, and should,
play an important role in achieving broader institutional objectives. Appleton, Stevenson,
and Boden (2011) examine several academic libraries in the United Kingdom, which
“have positioned themselves in order that they can effectively anticipate and identify ...
changes in teaching and learning behaviours, spot the trends, and respond accordingly
through their strategic developments,” (p. 343). They conclude that academic libraries are
uniquely positioned to identify changing learning paradigms and, by redefining

	  
	  

	  

42	  

themselves through innovative spaces and services, they can directly “contribute to the
university’s core mission, values and strategy” (p. 357). While this study does not make
the universities’ core strategies explicit, but rather assumes that learning is a core priority,
it at least focuses on how the library can take the strategic action to help meet that priority.
Chiware (2010) calls on academic libraries in Africa, particularly those in science
and technology universities, to “make a meaningful contribution towards solving the
continent’s main problems of hunger, poverty, disease, corruption and job creation” (p.
391). Not only is this visionary role critical to the future of African countries, he asserts,
but also it must be achieved “through a more proactive role of engaging with the strategic
directions of both the parent institution and its faculties and departments” or African
academic libraries risk “being ignored and marginalized from the core business of the
institution” (p. 394). He details a number of ways in which libraries can serve as an active
partner and an information bridge to African scholars, researchers, and communities.
Change and library size. Because most of the articles describing organizational
change discuss large academic research libraries, even less is known about how liberal arts
college library leaders create and implement change. A number of large university
libraries’ change journeys fit Rajagopalan and Spreitzer’s (1997) second theoretical
change model, the learning lens focus. These organizational change processes are often
described in a series of articles over time and reflect a continuous and iterative approach to
change. For example, at the University of Washington, the University of Arizona, the
University of Virginia, and the University of Pittsburgh, a consistent theme of the
directors and, eventually the staff, is that academic libraries should expect change to
continue and even to accelerate, and that library staff need to develop the ability to

	  
	  

	  

43	  

manage continuous change (Hiller & Self, 2004; Stoffle & Phipps, 2003; Wilson, 2012;
Wood, Miller & Knapp, 2007).
An exception to the general lack of explicit alignment is the University of
Washington Libraries, which has created over a decade of changes in response to one of
the most active programs of user surveys in the field (Hiller & Self, 2004). These changes
have evolved over time and, gradually have become more specifically aligned with
changing institutional strategic priorities (Hiller, 2001; Wilson, 2012). Another library
whose more than decade-long changes have been well documented in the academic library
literature is the University of Arizona Libraries. Arizona library staff’s approach was data
driven, consistently using “facts, research and analysis” to guide their strategic directions
and implement specific changes (Stoffle & Phipps, 2003, p. 26). The explanation of why
they engaged in change evolved over time. Originally it was described as a response to
institutional financial pressures. Later they identified a desire to serve the evolving
information needs of their user communities. Most recently their explanation has focused
on serving users. They have developed a clear, brief, and compelling vision, “wherever
you are, the library," (Stoffle, Leeder, & Sykes-Casavant, 2008, p. 3).
Transformational Library Change Leadership
Many of the articles in the academic library literature detailing the need for
fundamental change call for the type of transformational leadership that has been
identified by higher education researchers as most successful at leading change (Carver,
1989; Phipps, 1993; Riggs & Sykes, 1993; Sidorko, 2007). Yet, “very few research
studies on transformational leadership exist in the library science literature” (Gilstrap,
2009, p. 61). Albritton (1998) compared the effect of the transformational leadership

	  
	  

	  

44	  

model and the transactional leadership model on leadership outcomes such as employee
job satisfaction, effectiveness, and extra effort of subordinates. She administered the
MLQ to 23 library directors from randomly selected medium size university libraries and
six randomly selected staff from each library. She concluded that, “transformational
leadership was perceived as augmenting, or having more effect on leadership outcomes
and dimensions of organizational effectiveness” than transactional leadership (p. 78).
While research on transformational library leadership is lacking, much of the
field’s descriptive reports about how individual libraries are implementing organizational
change describe transformational actions taken by library leaders. Two of the most
frequently displayed transformational behaviors are inspirational motivation and
intellectual stimulation. Often reports in academic library literature focus on specific
changes and emphasize staff engagement in imagining potential future change (Argyris,
1999; Castiglione, 2006; Giesecke, & McNeil, 2004; Lee, 1993; Nutefall & Chadwell,
2011; Rogers, 2007; Somerville, Schader, & Huston, 2005; Wilson, 2012; Wright, 2010).
A typical example is the case study from the University of New South Wales library
(Wells, 2007). After creating futuristic scenarios, staff chose the “Learning Village,” and
strategized how to implement the changes that would manifest this end-state. They
envisioned a library which provided “environments conducive to learning; … [in which
the] equipment, study spaces, group study rooms, flexible expanses and information
technology infrastructure are of high quality and readily available” (Wells, 2007, p. 458).
Staff also identified changes needed in staff skills, organizational structure, and
management practices. However, none of these changes were described in any detail nor
were they linked to the broader needs and strategies of their campus.

	  
	  

	  

45	  
Mirroring Rajagopalan and Spreitzer’s (1997) cognitive lens framework, a

consistent theme in the academic library literature championing second-order,
transformative change is the need to adopt new mental models. Little research explores
library directors’ cognitive approaches to change. One example, Yi (2010), examined
academic library leaders’ change management models through a survey of library
directors randomly selected from various degree-granting U.S. colleges and universities.
Using Bolman and Deal’s (1984) four-frames model: structural, human resource, political,
and symbolic frames, Yi (2010) found that most directors used two of the four frames to
manage change with the structural and human resource frames being the most common.
He did not link the models used with organizational changes in which the leaders may
have been engaged.
Academic Library Futures
Although researchers have not examined how academic library leaders rethink
their mental models or construct their vision of the academic library, some authors offer a
future vision tied to a particular type of library. Two dissertations examine what
community college libraries will be in the future. Primarily, these studies have focused on
specific services and activities the library will perform rather than on developing the crisp,
compelling vision statement that researchers on visionary leadership and many leaders of
organizations consider a critical first step to organizational change. Sim’s (1997) Delphi
study used faculty, staff, and students at Mercer County Community College and
librarians working in other New Jersey colleges and universities to identify future roles
and then ranked the importance of the roles. The recommendations were more
evolutionary than radical. This incremental approach to imagining change may be a result

	  
	  

	  

46	  

of the fact that, during the late 1970s libraries were not experiencing paradigm-changing
competition challenging their role as the primary campus source of scholarly information.
More recently, Winters (2004) surveyed community college library directors to
compare the current services, functions, and challenges of community colleges libraries in
2003 with what the directors envisioned in 2015. She concluded that by 2015 these
libraries would be experiencing expanded demands to be both physical and virtual, to
increase services in the areas of distance-learning and information literacy instruction, and
to be more collaborative. She found no dramatic changes between what the directors saw
their libraries doing in 2003 and 2015. In fact she concluded that, “most respondents
appeared to prefer the status quo in many areas” (Winters, 2004, p. 111).
Baruchson-Arbib and Bronstein (2002) used the Delphi method to “formulate new
goals and objectives that will help informational professionals find their place in the
Information Society” (p. 400). They concluded that although libraries “will be radically
transformed in the next decades, their essence will be preserved” (p. 401). Libraries will
continue on a path of hybridization, with physical collections increasingly focusing on
rare, local, and archival materials and scholarly literature increasingly accessed through
licensing agreements rather than purchased physically. Future librarians will be teachers
of information literacy skills, research advisors, and trainers in information data and
content production and will require advanced social and communication skills. The
findings were logical extensions of activities that were already happening in 2002 and did
not address the mission and strategic goals of the colleges and universities in which these
libraries operated.

	  
	  

	  

47	  
Expecting that health science librarians would develop and deliver services and

collections differently in response to future “changes in technology, scholarly
communication, learning environments and the health care economy,” Ludwig and Starr
(2002) identified what the medical library’s services and collections would look like from
2010 to 2025 (p. 315). This study linked some of the changes for the future medical
library to the needs of the broader institution and to pressures from the external health care
environment. In particular, they focused on how the library could re-configure itself to
enable a more effective use of over-all hospital space and the need to embed librarians into
health care and surgical teams. Librarians would still play a traditional information supply
role, but more rapidly and more contextually.
A number of writers argue that libraries should change radically but explicitly
decline to define what that radical future vision should be. Some authors explain their
reluctance to articulate a specific vision by observing “every academic library shares the
mission and goals of its parent institution which can be defined broadly as social and
intellectual progress through research and learning” and thus the mission and vision of the
library should mirror that of its institution (Murray-Rust, 2010, n.p.). This approach is
explicit in Kaufman’s (2007) article declaring that twenty-first century libraries should not
be your parents’ library anymore. She warns academic libraries that they must choose
their roles within the academy and “the choices each library makes today and tomorrow
will differ greatly from one another (p. 10). The fact that different campuses have
differing cultures “will cause each library to make different choices that will result in them
looking less and less like one another” (p. 7). Thornton (2010) also believes that academic
libraries will change only in relationship to their parent organizations stating, “rather than

	  
	  

	  

48	  

each academic library looking the same, they will increasingly seek out the niches that
they can fill at their institutions” (n.p.).
Conclusion
Budd’s (2009) holistic analysis of library data agrees with Murray-Rust’s (2010)
and Thornton’s (2010) assertions that the future may hold many visions of academic
librarianship. He concludes that achieving a vision of the academic library is “a complex
dynamic that does not automatically illuminate a single path that the profession and its
spaces must follow” (p. 18). Rather, he maintains that the academic library should align
itself with the purpose of higher education “which remains the development of students’
potential as thinkers, communicators, doers, and citizens” (p. 19). He declines to address
how academic libraries should do this or what they might ultimately become, leaving that
for the future.
The preponderance of academic library literature describing twenty-first century
organizational change focuses on extremely detailed discussions of how the library should
change to continue to meet the changing information needs and use patterns of the
students and faculty. Until very recently, there has been little discussion of how the
library might take a more pro-active role in helping solve the broader problems or
strategic priorities of its parent institution (Crawford, 2015; Kopp, 2015; Lombard, 2012).
Also, in most of these articles, there is little analysis of the change management process
from any broader theoretical framework such as those used by organizational change
researchers. In many cases, writings in the academic library literature about library change
lack the rigorous data collection and evaluation that would provide concrete guidance to
academic library change leaders.

	  
	  

	  

49	  
Theoretical Frameworks

Grounded Theory
This dissertation will gather data using narrative inquiry and analyze it using
grounded theory. Grounded theory rests on the assumption that “through detailed
exploration, with theoretical sensitivity, the researcher can construct theory grounded in
data” (Richards & Morse, 2007, p. 59). The process was established by Glaser and
Strauss (1967) and then further developed by Strauss (1987) and Strauss and Corbin
(1990). It is appropriate when the researcher examines a process of change, particularly
over time, involving the actions and interactions of many participants (Creswell, 2007).
Subsequently, the researcher will apply theoretical change frameworks to the analyzed
data to see if they clarify the nature of the changes (the what) and the path of the changes,
(the how).
There are two reasons for this approach. First, as mentioned earlier, academic
organizational change is deeply influenced by shared cultural characteristics such as
distributed power structures, adherence to professional or disciplinary values over
organizational allegiances, indirect reward systems, and a tradition of intellectually
challenging discourse. The degree to which these influences affect change leadership in a
college or university can vary depending on the individual institution’s mission, culture,
and circumstances. Grounded theory allows the change stories, and the insights they may
provoke in the participants, to emerge unaffected by a particular theory of how change
should have developed.
Second, grounded theory is a particularly appropriate framework to use when
studying organizational change because of the nature of organizational change theories.

	  
	  

	  

50	  

Grounded theory applies when “a theory is not available to explain a process,” when
“theories may be present, but they are incomplete because they do not address the
variables of interest to the researcher,” or when the researcher wants to “explain practice
or provide a framework for further research” (Creswell, 2007, pp. 63, 66). There is
another role for grounded theory research in the field of organizational change since the
field, rather than having a lack of theory, has what may be seen as an over-abundance
(Palmer, et al., 2009).
Change management leaders and researchers are confronted with a “proliferation
of recommendations” about why to change, what to change, and how to change (Beer &
Nohria, 2000, p. 133). Van de Ven and Poole (1995) argue that in order “to understand
how organizations change, management scholars have borrowed many concepts,
metaphors, and theories from other disciplines, ranging from child development to
evolutionary biology” (p. 510). This diversity of theories and concepts has created a
“theoretical pluralism” (Van de Ven and Poole, 1995, p. 510). More recently, research on
organizational change has undergone a metamorphosis, developing even more complex
approaches that incorporate content, context-action connections, and process-sequencing
over time (Sturdy & Grey, 2003). The theoretical complexities multiply because, by its
nature, organizational change is unprecedented and unfolds “in ambiguous and uncertain
ways,” (Van de Ven & Sun, 2011, p. 67).
Grounded theory provides the most flexible framework for researching the
concepts, processes, motives, and actions involved in college library change.
Transformational change is the most complex of the change processes an organization can
undertake (Graetz & Smith, 2005; Noble, 1999; Pugh, 2007; Van de Ven & Sun, 2011).

	  
	  

	  

51	  

Pettigrew (1990) posits that change researchers must “explore the complex, haphazard,
and often contradictory ways that change emerges” and construct a model “that allows for
an appreciation of conflicting rationalities, objectives and behaviours” (p. 268). Exploring
the experiences, actions, and sense making of the change participants through grounded
theory allows the data to emerge relatively unaffected by prior assumptions and models.
Organizational Change Theories
Once the rich complexity of the change experience has been captured,
understanding the what, the conceptual framework within which change is born, and the
how, the process framework within which it is led and managed, can provide a richer
understanding of the experiences and, perhaps, guidance in creating future change. The
conceptual approach, the what of change, identifies the type of change and examines its
antecedents and consequences. Theorists and researchers using this approach study the
type of change being implemented—evolutionary or disruptive, reactive or paradigmatic,
incremental or transformational (Byrnes, 2004; Francis, Bessant, & Hobday, 2003; Latta,
2009). They also focus on the ways in which organizational complexity influences change
efforts, particularly in the need to use different leadership strategies and tools depending
on the nature and scope of the desired change.
Other researchers focus on the process, the how of change, such as the actions
taken by leaders and other organizational players engaged in change (Palmer, et al., 2009;
Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997). Theorists and researchers examining change processes
often create change process menus, for example The 8-Step Process for Leading Change
(Kotter International, 2015). Researchers analyzing organizational change developed
theoretical systems and structures that try to take into account the vast number of

	  
	  

	  

52	  

influences, e.g., stakeholders, cultural assumptions, resources, leader actions, that affect
the change path and outcome.
Using a conceptual approach, Romanelli and Tushman (1994) and Nadler and
Tushman (1995) developed a theory of “punctuated equilibrium” in which organizations
experience either gradual or radical change (1994, p. 1141). Often these are characterized
as first order or second order change (Byrnes, 2004, n.p.). Organizations in stable
environments engage primarily in incremental, first order change. As part of their normal
business model, they respond to frequent but relatively small changes in the economic,
technological, social, legal, or physical environment. Prompted by changes in the
environment, these periods of relative stability are interrupted by shorter periods of intense
and fundamental second order change. Institutions that survive these disruptive periods
successfully do so because they have radically changed their vision, processes, structures,
or stakeholders.
Figure 1 illustrates the change continuum developed by Romanelli and Tushman
(1994) and Nadler and Tushman (1995). During periods of equilibrium, the intensity (rate
of change) and the complexity (breadth and depth of change throughout the organization)
are both very low. As environmental pressures increase, the rate of change and the scope
of change increase, and are accompanied by an increasing level of difficulty in
successfully implementing the changes needed. Many academic librarians have argued
that libraries are facing a confluence of environmental pressures and changes that are
driving the intensity of change in academic libraries to a higher level.

	  
	  

	  

53	  

Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1989). Organizational frame bending:
Principles for managing reorientation. The Academy of Management
Executive, 3(3), p. 197.
Figure 1. Types of Change Management
Nadler and Tushman (1995) expanded their continuum above to include four types
of change, tuning, adaptation (normal change) reorientation (transitional change) and recreation (deep, strategic change). They argue that each type is successively more difficult
to achieve because it requires increasingly deeper and broader changes in strategy,
organizational structure, organizational processes, and reward systems (p. 196). Their
	  
	  

	  

54	  

expanded conceptualization of organizational change is built on their research into why
change fails. Change that bends the organization rather than re-creates it is less likely to
provoke resistance and more likely to result in transformation. This framework clarifies
the nature and scope of change choices available to organizational leaders. However, it
does not completely explain why some changes succeed and some do not.
Process theoretical models examine the paths change leaders take, which, when
combined with the conceptual approach to change theory, provide a richer understanding
of change success or failure (Sturdy & Grey, 2003; Van de Ven & Poole, 1995). The
process framework focuses primarily on the choices change leaders make as they engage
with their organization, its stakeholders, and the internal and external environments.
Process researchers examine how a leader’s choices are influenced by the ways in which
the leader conceptualizes change. Rajagopalan and Spreitzer’s (1997) review of theoretical
frameworks used in organizational change research identifies three change theories, the
rational process, the learning process, and the conceptual process. These theories share an
underlying assumption that change is driven primarily by the leader and is profoundly
shaped by how that leader thinks about and thus engages in change.
The rational lens framework does not look at the magnitude of change, as the
conceptual theorists do, but rather defines change as “a sequential, planned search for
optimal solutions for well-defined problems” (Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997, p. 50).
Typically, the leader performs an analysis of the environment’s threats and opportunities
and the organization’s strengths and weaknesses, and then creates a strategic plan
organized into a logical set of steps. This theory assumes that change managers are in

	  
	  

	  

55	  

control and change outcomes are intentional and achievable as long as the change manager
follows the appropriate steps (Kotter, 1990; Palmer, et al., 2009).
The strength of this theory is that it gives researchers a way to understand the
antecedents and effects of strategic change. Weaknesses in this framework basically rest
on the assumption of immutability and on its linear, cookbook approach. The rational
model does not account well for unanticipated changes in the internal and external
environments or for any new information or learning that may occur during the change
process.
In the learning lens framework “managers effect changes through a series of
relatively small steps designed to probe the environment and the organization”
(Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997, p. 56). This second process theory of change also
focuses on how the manager’s actions drive change, but defines those actions as iterative
and experimental. This theory assumes that implementation is not clear-cut because the
internal and the external environments are unpredictable and constantly changing. In this
approach, organizational change does not have separate creation and implementation
phases, but is emergent as managers learn from their actions and apply that learning to
evolving circumstances (Lant & Mezias, 1990; Miller & Friesen, 1980; Mintzberg &
Waters, 1985; Noble, 1999; Smith, 2009).
This framework’s strength is that it assumes a changing world in which many
forces can influence the organization and be influenced by it. By acknowledging that
learning takes place as strategies are implemented and outcomes are assessed, it
complements the rational framework. However, by defining change as an evolving

	  
	  

	  

56	  

process, cause and effect is more difficult to identify and understand (Rajagopalan &
Spreitzer, 1997).
The third process theory, the cognitive lens framework, focuses on how change
leaders’ thought processes and ways of understanding the world around them influence
their change choices and outcomes. Leaders’ “knowledge structures, core beliefs, cause
maps, and schemas” are the tools they use to make sense of the change process, to solve
problems, and to choose among available actions (Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997, p. 62).
Central to this theory is an assumption that other forces, intentionally or seemingly
randomly, are constantly influencing the organization and affecting the extent of success
change leaders achieve.
This approach shares with the learning lens framework a definition of strategic
change as iterative and influenced by external forces. Because it examines how managers
think and how their thinking changes over time, it can better illuminate the rationale
behind managerial actions. However, because cognitive lens researchers use a case study
methodology in which they ask participants to make sense of the past, the interaction it
tries to understand between thoughts, actions, and strategic processes may reflect
processed memories rather than events and thoughts at the time.
Concluding that all three theoretical models suffer from too narrow a focus to
allow them to explore and explain fully the complex process of organizational change,
Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) integrated them into a multi-lens framework. Blending
these frameworks mitigates the weaknesses of each. This multi-faceted approach
incorporates human behavior and environmental influences to provide a richer

	  
	  

	  

57	  

understanding of all the elements, pressures, and decision points that may appear in the
change journey an organization travels.

Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G. M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic
change: A multi-lens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy
of Management Review, 22(1), p. 70.
Figure 2. Multi-Lens Framework
Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) argue that this multi-lens framework integrates
the key elements from each of the single lens frameworks, rational, learning, and
cognitive. In this figure they have reconciled the elements, or linkages, originally captured
by each single framework so that “together they provide a more comprehensive
understanding of strategic change than any perspective by itself” (pp. 69-70). The
	  
	  

	  

58	  

numbers represent the linkages between and among the different elements that were
originally part of one of the single theoretical frameworks. One of the strengths of this
combined framework is that it integrates the direct and indirect effects of experience,
thought, and action on the organizational change process. It captures how one element
directly affects another, such as Link 14, which shows managerial cognitions, or how
managers think about change, directly influencing managerial actions.
The multi-lens framework also captures the influence of actions from outside the
organization, for example, Link 1, showing how environmental conditions and changes
have a direct effect on organizational outcomes. The dotted-line arrows show how
managerial learning through experience can modify the change process. For example, the
direct Link 14 and the learning Link 15 show that managers’ approach to change is no
longer fixed in just one direction. Instead, the way managers think about change is
influenced by the change actions they take. The integrated model does not show all the
original links from the single theoretical frameworks but subsumes some. For example,
“the direct effects of the environment and organization on managerial actions ([originally]
Links 4 and 6) are now subsumed within Links 12, 13 and 14” because actions are
primarily shaped by how managers think about the environment and the organization
(Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997, p. 71).
This multi-lens framework illustrates the interactive and interdependent nature of
the change process as it develops and identifies the key influences and players in that
process. As a model, it may better characterize the experience of academic change and
change leaders because it incorporates the realities of distributed influence and adaptive
response. Academic institutions are “loosely coupled systems” in which change is

	  
	  

	  

59	  

“continuous rather than episodic, small-scale rather than large, improvisational rather than
planned, accommodative rather than constrained, and … continuously updates itself”
(Kezar, 2001, p. 70). The academic environment requires successful change leaders to be
responsive, adaptive, and nuanced in their change strategies because they must
“continuously operate on contested and ambiguous terrain” (Bolman & Gallos, 2011, p.
112).
Capturing the rich complexity of the change experiences of the participants in
these four case studies through the application of the grounded theory framework allows
those experiences to be understood without pre-prejudicing them. However, once those
change journeys have been documented and analyzed, the punctuated equilibrium and
multi-lens frameworks offer ways to understand the multiple and iterative influences on
how library directors led change and the nuanced ways in which organizational change
unfolded at each institution.
Research Questions
Specific research questions were drawn from the theoretical framework and the
literature review with particular emphasis on organizational change leadership and
processes. Leaders’ change visions and strategies, stakeholder buy-in, and change
outcomes are specific areas of organizational change research that are included in this
study. Since all library organizational change takes place within a broader institutional
environment and culture, one of the purposes of this study was to explore whether
academic libraries were aligning their change strategies with the mission, goals, and
strategic priorities of their parent institutions. Questions have been included that explore
the relationship between the libraries’ and the colleges’ mission, visions and goals as well

	  
	  

	  

60	  

as the participants' perspectives about the purpose and value of an academic library within
the broader institution (Senge, et al., 1999, p.20).
This research also probes how leaders think about change—how they make sense
of the myriad, complex influences on the change process they are leading. Quinn (1996)
characterizes deep change as the experience of “walking naked into the land of
uncertainty” (p. 3). Engaging in organizational transformation is an uncertain undertaking
and leaders who attempt it often experience critical events or moments that challenge them
personally (Thomas, 2008). Bennis (2008) calls these experiences crucibles in which, if
learning takes place, the leaders are “lifted to new levels of understanding and mastery”
(p. viii). Library directors were asked to identify critical events or experiences during
their change journeys and to reflect on how those events influenced them. This focus fits
with the researcher’s methodology because narrative inquiry does
… not merely describe what someone does in the world but what the world
does to that someone….[illuminating] those events that happen unwilled,
unpredicted, and often unwished for by the actors, even if those very actors
set the events in motion in the first place. (Mattingly, 1998, p. 8).
Research Questions.
1. How do academic library directors lead and create change?
2. In what way do the college’s mission, strategic priorities, and changes influence
library change? In what way does library change affect the college?
3. Did the change process fit Nadler and Tushman's (1989) and Rajagopalan and
Spreitzer’s (1997) theories of organizational change?

	  
	  

	  

61	  
4. How do college administrators, library directors, and senior management team
members define the role of the academic library of the future?
Procedures

Research Design
These procedures describe a research design and methodology that used qualitative
techniques of in-depth interviews, group interviews, and document analysis to explore
college library change in the context of the changes affecting higher education—and in
particular liberal arts colleges—in the United States. This project used a qualitative
research approach because the experiences and events studied meet the following criteria:
1. There is a problem or issue that needs to be explored.
2. A complex, detailed understanding of the issue is needed.
3. The contexts or settings in which participants in a study address the problem or
issue are significant.
4. Partial or inadequate theories exist. (Creswell, 2007, p. 40)
Since “qualitative research lends itself to both theory generation and theory
testing,” it is an effective approach to understanding in what way the process of leading
college library change mirrors or differs from mainstream theoretical models of how
leaders engage in organizational change. A qualitative approach allows more potential for
discovery.
The field of organizational change research is replete with change theories,
methodologies, and processes. Rather than impose one or more of those models, the
researcher chose a grounded theory approach to identify the organizational change
strategies and actions that library directors are using without applying one or multiple

	  
	  

	  

62	  

change models. Once the narratives are analyzed to identify the leaders’ change visions,
goals, strategies, and outcomes, they will be examined within the framework of two
change theories, punctuated equilibrium and the multi-lens change framework.
Case studies. This research examined a purposeful sample of four case studies
selected to reflect different ways in which college libraries are changing, how institutional
change and library change interrelate, and the strategies library leaders use to create
change. By collecting data in the field “where participants experience the issue or
problem under study” (Creswell, 2007, p. 6) the researcher chronicles the real-life
experiences of organizational change and can “illuminate a decision or a set of decisions:
why they were taken, how they were implemented, and with what result” (Schramm,
1971, p. 12). Calling for “more comparative case studies” in leadership research, Gordon
and Yukl (2004) argue that since leadership is highly contextual and develops over time,
researchers would “benefit from the richness of field data” that case studies capture to
better understand the processes of leadership (pp. 361, 363).
As Yin (2009) observes, multiple cases are often chosen to generate results that are
either similar (literal replication) or contrasting (theoretical replication), allowing the
researcher to provide more robust insights (p. 46-47). Two cases were chosen to study in
which the institutions made significant changes that affected the libraries and two cases
where the libraries made significant changes that affected their institutions. The
researcher intended to examine similarities and contrasts in the purposes, nature, and
outcomes of the changes.
Case study selection. The researcher first created a pool of potential college
libraries that were identified by their peers and by the researcher’s dissertation committee

	  
	  

	  

63	  

as innovative and as having undertaken significant changes during the past thirteen years.
This time period was selected to capture academic and library change within the context
of the accelerating changes facing academic institutions and their libraries in the twentyfirst century.
The initial list of innovative college libraries came from several sources. The first
was college libraries receiving the ACRL Excellence in Academic Libraries Award
between 2000 and 2013. These award winners were included for two reasons. This
national award is given to college libraries that “support the mission of their institution”
(ACRL, Excellence in Academic Libraries, Award Background, n.d., n.p.). The award
guidelines specifically require a library applying to explain how it furthers the mission of
its parent institution and how the library’s innovative activity demonstrates one or more of
the following outcomes
•

Creativity and innovation in meeting the needs of their academic
community.

•

Leadership in developing and implementing exemplary programs that
other libraries can emulate.

•

Substantial and productive relationships with classroom faculty and
students. (ACRL, Excellence in Academic Libraries, Award
Guidelines, n.d., n.p.)

A second reason why these were included for initial consideration was that the
second source of suggestions of innovative libraries to study—various college library
listservs—resulted in at least half of the listserv respondents suggesting the ACRL award
winners. However, the researcher did not limit herself to this list for two reasons. The

	  
	  

	  

64	  

award does not specifically solicit innovations that go beyond the traditional scope of a
library’s academic mission so college libraries that are innovating in less traditional ways
might be missed by relying just on this list. Also, some college libraries have declined,
even when encouraged, to apply. Using only this list would omit some potentially
innovative college libraries.
The second source from which the original list was built was an email (see
Appendix A) sent to the listservs of three organizations, the College Library Section
(CLS) of ACRL, the Affinity group, and the Oberlin Group. The College Library Section
advances “college librarianship and encourages the development of library services in
baccalaureate-degree-granting institutions” and its listserv has 2,774 subscribers (ACRL,
CLS, n.d., n.p.). The Affinity Group is an invitation-only “organization of comprehensive
universities of similar structure” consisting of 33 private colleges and universities which
maintains a listserv for the library deans or directors (Affinity Group. n.d., n.p.). The
Oberlin Group, also an invitation-only organization, consists of 80 selective, top-ranked
colleges in the United States (The Oberlin group, n.d.). A member of the Oberlin Group
sent an email inquiry on behalf of the researcher asking the directors of Oberlin-member
libraries to send suggestions to the researcher.
Two other sources were also used. The researcher consulted a number of college
library directors confidentially to gather suggestions. Finally, the researcher searched the
Chronicle of Higher Education and subject indexes covering the fields of education and
librarianship for articles about colleges and academic libraries that were engaging in
substantial change. Primary subject terms were “transformation” and “reinvent” and their
variants, “organizational change,” “change leadership,” “change management,” and

	  
	  

	  

65	  

“crisis.” These sources, college library directors and articles in the Chronicle and other
higher education “news” magazines, were particularly helpful in clarifying the types of
changes that the libraries had made. The results were compiled into a table of 40 potential
libraries (see Table 2).
Table 2
Master List of Potential Libraries
________________________________________________________________________
Library

Carnegie

General

Source of

Descriptions/

Classification

Information

Nominations

Innovations

________________________________________________________________________
REDACTED
________________________________________________________________________
The researcher reviewed the list and eliminated colleges and universities either that
had more than 4,000 total students or that were not classified by the Carnegie Foundation
for the Advancement of Teaching’s Classification of Institutions of Higher Education as
either 2.2 Master’s Colleges and Universities or 2.3 Baccalaureate Colleges (Carnegie,
n.d., n.p.). The researcher made a spreadsheet of the remaining institutions and their
libraries which include their basic information such as size, degrees, mission statements, if
available, the source of their inclusion on the list, how long the library director had been in
place, and a brief descriptions of the innovation or changes for which they were being
considered.
Libraries where the director had been there two years or less were eliminated
because the researcher, in consultation with her dissertation committee, assumed that two

	  
	  

	  

66	  

years or less in a directorship was too short of time to accomplish substantive change and
be able to reflect meaningfully on it. Libraries where the changes for which the institution
had been suggested were recent, for example, the past five years or less, were noted for
further research. This resulted in a list of twelve institutions that were then divided into
those where the library seemed to have initiated substantial change and those where the
college seemed to have initiated substantial change (see Table 3).
Table 3
Libraries/Colleges Organized by Source of Change
________________________________________________________________________
Library

Carnegie

General

Source of

Descriptions/

Classification

Information

Nominations

Innovations

Disposition

________________________________________________________________________
A. Libraries changing based on their own initiative and/or have been recognized as
innovative.
B. Colleges that are changing in innovative ways or that are facing serious problems such
as enrollment drops or questions of survivability and how those innovations/problems
have influenced the Library's mission, activities, etc.
REDACTED
________________________________________________________________________
The dissertation committee then reviewed the remaining institutions and the
descriptions of their innovations and selected six libraries, ranking them in priority order
based on their perception of the degree of change identified and using Table 1: Higher
Education Challenges. Six were selected to allow sufficient flexibility to the researcher in

	  
	  

	  

67	  

obtaining agreement from the library directors, their provosts, and their senior
management teams to participate in the study (see Table 4).
Table 4
Candidates for Case Studies
________________________________________________________________________
Libraries that were influenced by campus change: REDACTED
1.
2.
________________________________________________________________________
Libraries that were self-innovating: REDACTED
1.
2.
3.
4.
________________________________________________________________________
From this final list, the researcher contacted the library directors to verify that the
time periods fit. In the conversations, the researcher reconfirmed her preliminary
assumptions as to whether the changes had been initiated by the campus and then affected
the library or initiated by the library and then affected the campus. The first four libraries
contacted agreed to participate and provided the desired characteristics. They were liberal
arts colleges experiencing substantive change within the time frame. Two had
experienced campus-initiated change (names redacted) and two had engaged in libraryinitiated change (names redacted). The four library directors were then invited to

	  
	  

	  

68	  

participate in the case study and were also asked if they would solicit their provosts’ and
senior management teams’ participation. The researcher left it up to the library director’s
discretion to choose who would be included in their senior management team.
In the following chapters, the institutions’, the libraries’, and the participants’
identities will all be masked and the researcher will refer to organizations and individuals
in generic ways. Because organizational change is a process involving human beings, it
can be deeply personal. All participants were promised that anything they said would be
used in a way that protected them from identification. Throughout the dissertation, all
institutions are referred to as colleges, all individuals are female, all heads of libraries are
directors and all the campus administrators to whom they report are referred to as provosts
(academic) or vice presidents (non-academic).
Narrative inquiry. Narrative inquiry, “a way of conducting case-centered
research,” was used in the library directors’ interviews to explore their organizational
change stories (Riessman, 2008, p. 11). Because those change journeys are often complex
and lengthy, the narrative approach situates the storyteller in a matrix of people, place, and
time, immersing him or her “in the midst of living and telling, reliving and retelling, the
stories” (Clandinin & Connelly, 2000, p. 20). As such, it is a useful method to make
meaning out of the messy, complex experience of organizational change since participants
in a change process may not understand their own “stories of experience” until they reflect
on that past to make sense out of it (Webster & Mertova, pp. 10, 71),
To help punctuate the change journey stories, the researcher asked directors to
identify critical events that were important or influential within the changes they had led.
Identifying critical events helps to understand “the many-sided, complex and often

	  
	  

	  

69	  

conflicting stories” told by participants (Flyvbjerg, 2004, p. 430) and enables the
researcher to identify “the core of what is important” in that change experience (Webster
& Mertova, pp. 71, 75). Because narrative inquiry supports exploring critical events and
decision points, it allows a deeper exploration of the process of organizational change
leadership.
Several researchers who use narrative inquiry often argue that it is particularly well
suited to studying leaders during times of organizational change because to effect change
successfully, leaders must help staff and stakeholders understand and accept it (Clandinin
& Connelly, 2000; Cuno, 2005; Klenke, 2008; Seidman, 2006). Leaders foster that
understanding and acceptance by communicating through images and stories, “giving
form and imaginative life to their vision for the organization” (Cuno, 2005, p. 205). These
“stories help create a vision of the future, a coherent sense of the past and a journey for the
listener” (Parry & Hansen, 2007, pp. 283, 284). The open, semi-structured format of
narrative inquiry encourages leader’s stories, capturing “the intentions, motivation, biases,
and values that shaped that journey” and creating the possibility of “a richer, deeper
understanding of the power of the social and organizational context of people’s
experience” (Seidman, 2006, p. 130).
Group interviews. Since narrative inquiry techniques are typically used with one
individual at a time, the data obtained can be strengthened by the data from group
interviews. This methodology uses “group interaction to produce data and insights that
would be less accessible without the interaction found in a group” (Morgan, 1997, p. 2).
These interviews are also valuable in circumstances “when time to collect information is
limited and when individuals interviewed one-on-one may be hesitant to provide

	  
	  

	  

70	  

information” (Creswell, 2007, p. 133). The stories from the senior management teams
enriched and illuminated the data derived from the directors’ interviews and, to some
degree, provided triangulation of facts, chronology, and impact. However, as Flick (1998)
concludes, “triangulation is less a strategy for validating results and procedures than an
alternative to validation … which increases scope, depth, and consistency” (p. 230).
Once the transcriptions of the interviews of all participants were analyzed for
themes, contrasts, and similarities, the identified change processes were then compared to
Nadler & Tushman’s (1989) model of types of organizational change and to Rajagopalan
and Spreitzer’s (1997) multi-lens framework of organizational change theory to
understand the nature and extent of change in these college libraries and the ways, if any,
that changes parallels or deviates from existing theory and practice (Creswell, 2007;
Palmer, et al., 2009).
Case study preparation and site visits. Interview questions were initially
developed from the research objectives and then further refined from examples drawn
from other narrative inquiry research. For her dissertation on organizational change in
history museums Matelic (2007) developed excellent questions probing time frames,
patterns, and catalysts for change (pp. 416-419). Hunter, Evans and Price (2011) created a
thorough set of questions for senior managers that addressed lessons learned. (p. 12).
Finally, Dervin (1992) focused on how individuals make sense of their actions, needs, and
goals by asking questions such as:
1. What let you to this situation?
2. Where did you want to get to [sic]?
3. What gaps did you see?

	  
	  

	  

71	  
4. What got in the way?
5. What help did you get along the way?
6. What emotions/feelings did you experience?
7. If you had a magic wand, what would you like to happen? (p. 70).
The questions in these three studies were used to inform and focus the interview

questions for the library deans, the provosts, and the senior management team members
(See Table 5).
Table	  5	  
	  
Research	  Objectives	  and	  Interview	  Questions	  
	  
OBJECTIVES	  
INTERVIEW	  QUESTIONS	  
1.	  Identify	  change	  at	  the	  campus	   a.	  For	  the	  institution,	  what	  are	  the	  major	  
level.	  	  (Drivers	  —	  history	  and	  
changes	  from	  2000	  forward?	  
context)	  
b.	  Why	  did	  it	  make	  these	  changes?	  Were	  they	  in	  
response	  to	  challenges	  or	  problems?	  	  
c.	  How	  do	  these	  relate	  to	  the	  broader	  challenges	  
facing	  higher	  education?	  
d.	  What	  are	  the	  campus’	  current	  strategic	  
vision,	  mission,	  and	  priorities?	  
e.	  How	  does	  the	  Provost/Chief	  Academic	  Officer	  
characterize	  the	  challenges	  the	  organization	  
faces	  and	  the	  changes	  enacted?	  
2.	  Identify	  change	  at	  the	  Library	   a.	  For	  the	  library,	  what	  are	  the	  major	  changes	  
level.	  (Drivers	  –	  history	  and	  
from	  2000	  forward?	  
context)	  	  
b.	  What	  challenges	  or	  problems	  (if	  any)	  
prompted	  those	  changes?	  
c.	  Which	  ones	  became	  most	  important	  and	  
why?	  
d.	  What	  are	  the	  library’s	  current	  vision,	  mission,	  
and	  strategic	  goals	  or	  priorities?	  
e.	  Were	  the	  library’s	  changes	  related	  to	  the	  
broader	  challenges	  facing	  higher	  education?	  
3.	  Identify	  the	  ways	  in	  which	  
a.	  How	  integrated	  or	  independent	  has	  the	  
library	  change	  and	  campus	  
relationship	  between	  the	  campus	  and	  the	  
change	  aligned	  and/or	  influenced	   library	  been	  from	  2000	  forward?	  	  	  
each	  other.	  
b.	  Has	  that	  relationship	  changed	  over	  time?	  
c.	  In	  what	  ways	  has/is	  the	  library	  aligned	  or	  not	  
aligned	  with	  the	  campus’	  mission,	  vision,	  and	  
	  
	  

	  

72	  
priorities?	  
d.	  In	  what	  way	  have	  the	  library’s	  changes	  
influenced	  the	  campus	  or	  the	  campus’	  changes	  
influenced	  the	  library?	  
e.	  To	  what	  degree	  were	  campus	  stakeholders	  
engaged	  in	  the	  Library	  change	  process?	  	  What	  
role(s)	  did	  they	  play?	  
4.	  Identify	  how	  the	  college	  library	   a.	  What	  was	  the	  vision	  for	  change?	  
director	  (CDL)	  led	  change.	  
b.	  What	  were	  the	  reasons	  for	  the	  change(s)?	  
c.	  What	  organizational	  changes	  were	  made?	  For	  
example,	  in	  priorities,	  activities,	  funding,	  
organizational	  structure?	  
d.	  Were	  other	  stakeholders	  (e.g.	  library	  staff,	  
faculty,	  students)	  participants	  in	  the	  change	  
process?	  	  If	  so,	  how?	  
e.	  What	  have	  been	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  
changes?	  
f.	  What	  was	  successful	  or	  unsuccessful?	  
g.	  What	  were	  critical	  events	  you	  experienced	  as	  
a	  leader	  of	  the	  change	  process?	  
h.	  Reflecting	  on	  your	  experience,	  are	  there	  any	  
ways	  you	  would	  have	  led	  the	  library	  differently	  
during	  this	  change	  process?	  	  What	  lessons	  have	  
been	  learned?	  
i.	  What	  advice	  would	  you	  give	  others?	  
j.	  Does	  this	  alignment	  with	  the	  campus’	  
priorities,	  and	  the	  changes	  made	  to	  the	  library’s	  
vision,	  mission,	  and	  activities,	  re-­‐define	  what	  a	  
college	  library	  is	  or	  should	  be	  in	  the	  21st	  
century?	  
k.	  Why	  or	  why	  not?	  
5.	  Identify	  the	  conceptual	  and	  
a.	  How	  does	  the	  director	  define/describe	  the	  
processural	  approaches	  to	  
organizational	  change(s)?	  
change	  
b.	  How	  are	  these	  changes	  characterized,	  e.g.,	  
level,	  scope,	  and	  impact?	  
c.	  How	  does	  the	  director	  describe	  the	  change	  
process,	  e.g.	  evolutionary,	  radical?	  
d.	  What	  external	  influences	  affected	  your	  
choices	  and	  decisions?	  
e.	  What	  learning	  and/or	  surprises	  occurred	  and	  
did	  those	  change	  or	  influence	  the	  process?	  
f.	  What	  mental	  models	  (rational,	  learning,	  
cognitive)	  are	  reflected	  in	  how	  the	  director	  
describes	  the	  organizational	  change	  and	  her	  
role?	  

	  
	  

	  

73	  
6.	  Identify	  the	  role	  and	  outcomes	  
of	  the	  change	  process	  from	  the	  
Senior	  Management	  Team’s	  
perspective.	  

7.	  Identify	  the	  role	  and	  outcomes	  
of	  the	  change	  process	  from	  the	  
Provost’s	  perspective.	  

8.	  Identify	  how	  the	  Library	  
director,	  Provost,	  and	  Library	  
senior	  management	  team	  define	  
the	  college	  library	  of	  the	  future.	  

a.	  How	  does	  the	  Library	  SMT	  describe	  the	  
changes	  and	  the	  change	  process?	  
b.	  What	  role	  did	  the	  Library	  SMT	  play	  in	  the	  
changes?	  
c.	  How	  have	  the	  changes	  affected	  the	  Library?	  
d.	  What	  are	  the	  consequences	  of	  the	  changes	  
(services,	  vision/mission,	  relationship	  with	  
campus?)	  
e.	  What	  was	  successful	  or	  unsuccessful?	  
f.	  What	  advice	  would	  they	  give	  others?	  
a.	  How	  does	  the	  Provost	  characterize	  the	  
Library’s	  organizational	  changes?	  
b.	  Is	  there	  an	  alignment	  with	  the	  broader	  
institutional	  vision,	  strategic	  plans,	  and	  goals?	  
c.	  What	  have	  been	  the	  change	  outcomes?	  
d.	  What	  role	  did	  she	  play	  in	  the	  change	  process?	  
e.	  Has	  the	  Library	  created	  outcomes	  that	  
contribute	  in	  new	  or	  non-­‐traditional	  ways	  to	  
the	  campus’	  broader	  needs	  and	  issues?	  
f.	  Have	  the	  changes	  changed	  the	  relationship	  
between	  the	  Library	  and	  the	  institution?	  In	  
what	  way(s)?	  
g.	  What	  advice	  would	  she	  give	  others	  
embarking	  on	  change?	  
a.	  Library	  director:	  Does	  the	  experience	  of	  
change	  at	  your	  library	  offer	  any	  ideas	  for	  the	  
future	  vision	  and	  mission	  of	  college	  libraries?	  
b.	  Library	  senior	  management	  team:	  Does	  the	  
experience	  of	  change	  at	  your	  library	  offer	  any	  
ideas	  for	  the	  future	  vision	  and	  mission	  of	  
college	  libraries?	  
c.	  Provost:	  Does	  the	  Library’s	  changes	  offer	  any	  
ideas	  for	  the	  future	  vision	  and	  mission	  of	  
college	  libraries?	  

	  
The researcher conducted a pre-test interview with a college library director and
with three members of his senior management team. The test college’s provost was
unavailable so the researcher asked her own provost to comment on the provost interview
questions. All participants wanted the questions less open-ended—and wanted a clearer
indication of what the researcher was trying to learn. They all said the quality of their
participation would increase if they received questions in advance. With this input, the
	  
	  

	  

74	  

questions were re-written borrowing specific words and phrases from the Research
Objectives and Interview Questions (Table 5). The revised questions were sent to three
college library directors who helped further clarify the questions and advised reducing the
number of questions and sub-questions. The researcher eliminated some redundancies and
removed all the sub-questions from the version that the participants would receive. The
sub-questions were retained on the researcher’s list as cues to follow-up questions. The
researcher’s dissertation committee then approved the revised questions.
All four directors confirmed their own and their provost’s and team’s willingness
to participate and sent their contact information. The researcher then sent all participants
the formal request to participate (Appendix B) and copies of the consent forms (see
Appendix C). The researcher worked with each director to schedule the interviews. At
three institutions they were conducted over a two-day period. At one campus, the
interviews were scheduled on one day.
Three weeks in advance of each site visit, the interviewer sent copies of the
interview questions to each participant. The researcher also worked with the library
directors before, during, and after each visit to identify and obtain relevant documents.
Before each visit, the researcher reviewed all relevant documentation for the campus and
the library and framed specific questions for the library director and the provost
interviews.
At the start of every interview, the researcher obtained signed consent forms,
leaving a copy with each participant (see Appendix C). Participants also were told that the
interviews would remain confidential and that the text of the dissertation would not
include any information by which the institution, an individual, or a library could be

	  
	  

	  

75	  

identified. Participants gave their permission to be audio-recorded and were advised that
the recordings and the transcripts would be retained for two years after dissertation
completion and then be destroyed.
After the transcripts were completed, the researcher gave a print copy to each
participant with an addressed, stamped return envelope and a cover letter (see Appendix
D) asking them to review the transcript (for their statements only if it was a group
interview) and to feel free to delete, change or augment the text as they chose. Seventy
percent of the respondents returned marked-up transcripts with most of the changes
involving typos or elimination of filler words or phrases unnecessary to the understanding
of the printed text. One participant deleted a text segment with the written explanation
that he had been unclear and could not remember what he had intended to say.
Methodology
Data collection documentation. The researcher obtained relevant institutional
and library documents in advance and during the site visits. The researcher was able to
obtain current institutional mission and vision statements and some campus strategic plans
or planning documents that involved the library from each campus’ website. Library
documentation either from the libraries’ websites or the directors included available
mission and vision statements, strategic planning documents, annual reports, organization
charts or lists of staff and their titles, grant applications, promotion and tenure documents,
newsletters, presentations, and other brochures and publications. These materials were
consulted before and after the interviews and were used as contextual background to the
change process at the institutional and library level and as “by-products of [the] ongoing
conversations” with the directors, provosts, and senior management team members

	  
	  

	  

76	  

(Krippendorff, 2004, p. 75). In this way the documents provided for a measure of
triangulation through fact checking, illumination of what the interviewees include and
omit from their narratives, and chronological event mapping. One institution provided
minimal documentation.
Personal interviews: library directors. Narrative inquiry was used with the
library directors to capture their “experience holistically in all its complexity and richness”
(Webster & Mertova, 2007, p. 10). Since organizational change is frequently messy and
complex—as are many lived experiences—participants often need time and reflection to
give meaning to their change journeys (Webster & Mertova, p. 71). To encourage that
reflection, the directors and the other interviewees were given their interview questions in
advance and asked to review and think about them (see Appendix E for the library director
interview questions). Two of the directors wrote extensive notes that they then used
during their interviews.
Personal interviews: provosts. The provosts’ semi-structured interviews were
intended to corroborate and provide a broader institutional context to the library directors’
narratives. Provost interview questions explored how the institution interpreted the
library’s innovations and in what way, if any, the library’s actions and changes related to
institutional goals and priorities. See Appendix F for the provost interview questions. The
questions in these interviews targeted the relationship between campus change and library
change. Finally, the provosts were asked to identify what they imagined as the future of
college libraries. Three of the provosts actually requested the questions in advance when
they agreed to participate. After reading the questions, one of the provosts stated that
while he was new and could not talk accurately about the past changes, he was passionate

	  
	  

	  

77	  

about the connection between libraries and the academic mission and would like to
participate if the interview could focus on those questions.
For the purpose of clarity, the interviews with this group will refer to all of them as
“provost” although their titles varied from provost to dean to chief academic or technology
officer to vice president. In one case, the provost interviewed was new to her position and
had not been at the college during the period of initial change. However, she had regular
meetings with the library director and felt she had a key role in advising and supporting
the library director and the library. The former provost, who had supervised the library
director during the changes, had left the college two years earlier. When that provost left,
the president decided to have her middle managers, including the library director, report
directly to him. At that college, the library director declined to ask the president to
participate but instead engaged the college’s provost.
Group interviews: library senior management teams. The questions used in the
group interviews were designed to encourage the participants to engage in conversation, to
interact and explore their individual and collective experiences and perspectives. At the
beginning of each group interview, participants were asked to identify themselves, to
allow the professional transcriptionist to recognize and identify each person’s
contributions. The group questions were focused on identifying the changes that took
place, how they participated in the change and what outcomes they identified, both
positive and negative. Participants were also asked what lessons learned they would share
with others and what future they envisioned for college libraries. See Appendix G for the
Library Senior Management Team Interview Questions.

	  
	  

	  

78	  
The library directors were requested to identify the individuals whom they

identified as their senior management team. Teams averaged six members at three of the
colleges and were composed primarily of librarians. Each of those teams also included at
least one paraprofessional who held a particularly key role, such as the main administrator
or the head of access services. At two of those colleges, one of the librarians who had
agreed to participate had to decline at the last minute, due to scheduling conflicts or
illness. At one institution, the library director identified eight individuals, seven of whom
agreed to participate. The researcher did not realize that they were not all senior managers
but chosen by the director to represent a broad spectrum of opinions on the library’s
change experience. All participants from that college were included in the senior
management team transcript.
Data analysis: analytical units. Krippendorff (2004) warns that “content analysts
must define sampling units so that (a) connections across sampling units, if they exist, do
not bias the analysis; and (b) all relevant information is contained in individual sampling
units, or, if it is not, the omissions do not impoverish the analysis” (p. 99). As mentioned
before, the researcher chose a purposeful sample of four colleges, two institutions
initiating substantive change at the college level, and two initiating substantive change at
the library level. Some connections did exist across the sampling units.
During the interview, one of the library directors mentioned that she had invited
another library director whose institution was part of this study to critique a major
proposal while it was under development and that the two had been team members on
assessment visits to other libraries. Also, when asked how she would advise other college
library directors leading change, the director referred to the changes made by the other

	  
	  

	  

79	  

director at her library in general terms observing that what she did would not work at her
institution. In another case, the provost at one institution had been a faculty member at
another of the colleges—and had chaired a committee for the library director.
The directors’ narrative interviews, the provosts’ interviews, and the senior
management team’s group interviews were treated as discrete stories and were analyzed as
individual units, allowing the researcher to construct a case-centered narrative for each
college library and to identify important differences in meaning of the same event for
different participants within a case study. The documents obtained from each institution
were not treated as coding units. Rather, they were used to familiarize the researcher with
the institution, the library, and the major changes that took place and then during postcoding analysis to corroborate strategic goals and plans, to check timelines, and, in
particular, to clarify relationships between the campus’ and the library’s mission and
goals.
Analysis of interview data. During each interview with the library directors,
provosts, or senior management teams, the researcher took brief notes but also recorded
the interview in total and then transcribed it using a professional transcription service. A
copy of the transcription was given to each participant who was free to revise it. Once that
process was complete, any changes a participant made were incorporated into the
researcher’s master copy. The twelve master copies were then imported into NVivo, a
content analysis tool that allows the researcher to “take segments of data apart, name them
in concise terms, and … develop abstract ideas for interpreting each segment of data”
(Charmaz, 2006, p. 45). “Content analysis is a multipurpose research method developed
specifically for investigating any problem in which the content of communication serves

	  
	  

	  

80	  

as the basis of inference” (Holsti, 1969, p. 2). While content analysis cannot predict causal
relationships, as a qualitative analytical tool, it is “chosen in situations where a detailed
understanding of a process or an experience is wanted, where more information is needed
to determine the boundaries or characteristics of the issue being investigated, or where the
only information available is in non-numeric (e.g., text or visual) form” (Bazeley &
Jackson, 2013, p. 2).
This content analysis is founded on abductive reasoning informed by expert
knowledge and experience (Krippendorff, 2004, p. 175). Abductive reasoning is “a
method of reasoning in which one … starts from a set of accepted facts and infers most
likely or best explanations. ” (Abductive, 2012). In this form of reasoning, conclusions
may not logically follow from observable circumstances but they would, “if true, best
explain” the circumstances (Abduction, 2014). To inform that best explanation, this
researcher used a combination of knowledge drawn from decades of experience as an
academic librarian, an extensive review of the organizational change and the library
change literature, and, as a touchstone, the participants’ own observations and
conclusions.
Krippendorff (2004) acknowledges that expertise creates a “hermeneutic circle,
using known literature to contextualize … readings of given texts, [and] rearticulating the
meanings of those texts in view of the assumed contexts” (p. 87). To better ensure that
this circular process did not result in an insular or limited approach to understanding the
participants’ change journeys, the researcher used several approaches to examining and
organizing the data.

	  
	  

	  

81	  
Data coding. Data coding was done at three levels, descriptive coding,

(institution, organizational role, and event timelines), topic coding (labeling text
segments), and analytic coding (developing theoretical categories and making
comparisons) (Richards & Morse, 2007, p. 137-143). Descriptively, these levels appear
sequential, but, as the researcher worked with the texts, the process became iterative. The
researcher first read every transcript without assigning codes. This enabled the researcher
to correct transcription errors and to become familiar with each person’s story and
perspective.
She then coded the library directors’ transcripts descriptively and topically. Next
she coded all the provosts’ and finally all the senior management teams’ transcripts. In
this first examination of the transcripts, the researcher used the seven basic questions
identified by Strauss and Corbin (1990) to begin identifying passages and assigning codes:
1. What? Which phenomenon is mentioned?
2. Who? Who are the persons involved? Which roles do they play? How do
they interact?
3. How? Which aspects of the phenomenon are mentioned (or not
mentioned)?
4. When? How long? Where? Time, course and location.
5. How much? How strong? Aspects of intensity.
6. What for? With what intention, to which purpose?
7. What are the means, tactics, and strategies for reaching the goals? (p. 77).
These questions are also recommended by Klenke (2008) as valuable for research projects
focusing on leadership (p. 93) and proved useful since participants did not always follow

	  
	  

	  

82	  

the sequence of the questions and keeping these in mind enabled the researcher to look at
the answers from a meta-level.
As new codes emerged from the texts, they were identified and dated in memos,
which included an initial definition of each new code. Those memos noted which
transcript first prompted the new topic and listed all the transcripts that should be re-coded
to that topic. This level of tracking ensured that all transcripts were reviewed for
emerging codes. As the coding developed, the researcher recorded in the project journal
broader themes that seemed to relate to more than one code, such as leadership, and topics
that seemed to cluster around certain themes, such as change culture, perhaps subsuming
risk-taking, and trust. Transcripts were then reviewed to apply the broader themes. All
transcripts went through at least three coding rounds where they were treated as separate
documents.
After coding the individual transcripts, the researcher then identified sets of topics
that were related but might have been inconsistently applied as understanding and insight
evolved. An example was the topics that clustered around the broader concept of change
leadership, “change vision,” “change goals,” and “change strategy.” All text passages
assigned to these topics were reviewed and compared. NVivo prints out the source
passages for each code in the same order so all the passages coded to a topic that came
from a specific transcript appeared in the same order for each printout. This made cross
code comparisons very efficient. Comparing what each individual said across codes
enabled the researcher to establish internal consistency in how the code was applied,
identify missed passages, and eliminate some passages that were coded in error. As codes
and topics developed, and the researcher’s thinking and understanding evolved, she kept

	  
	  

	  

83	  

careful notes in the project journal, detailing when a particular code was chosen and began
to be applied so that transcripts previously analyzed could be re-analyzed for that concept.
She also recorded possible future codes as well as definitions of the codes, particularly as
their meaning evolved and sub-codes emerged.
After comparing key sets of codes, the researcher then created and reviewed
printouts by source—that is, each individual’s or group’s transcript. For each source, all
text passages were printed, listed alphabetically by code. These source-coding lists
recreated a summary of the change journeys and participants’ stories (Riessman, 2008).
Using these printouts, the researcher was able to bring together in a distilled format the
essential parts of each narrative by person. The distilled narratives from each campus
together created a story of that institution’s change journey. Examining the coding lists in
this way provided a counter-point to analyzing texts into “bits and pieces” through coding
and offered a more holistic, “case-centered” understanding of each individual’s and, in
combination, each institution’s lived experience (Riessman, 2008, p. 12).
Data Quality
In all research, the reliability and validity of a study is only as good as the
researcher’s planning and methodology. “In qualitative research, this is particularly so
because the researcher is the instrument” (Richards & Morse, 2007, p. 190). In this
research study, one person performed the coding and analysis, so Bosk’s (1979) oftquoted observation is relevant, “All fieldwork done by a single field-worker invites the
question, ‘Why should we believe it?” (p. 193). In this research design and process, the
research employed a number of checks and balances to “get it right.”

	  
	  

	  

84	  
Webster and Mertova (2007) concluded that narrative research, in particular,

“should not be judged by the same criteria as those that are applied to more traditionally
and broadly accepted qualitative and quantitative research methods” (p.89). Because the
data captured in narrative inquiry is the participant’s experience and their stories cannot be
subjected to the traditional methods of assuring reliability and validity, they suggest a
redefinition of both concepts.
Reliability
Webster and Mertova (2007) redefine the measure of reliability to be “the accuracy
and accessibility of the data” (p.93). This research was a qualitative mixed methods
design, using narrative inquiry, individual interviews and group interviews, and content
analysis of the interview transcriptions and documentation obtained from the colleges and
libraries studied. This mix of methods and sources—participants experiencing change
from different positions within the organization—provides a triangulation of “multiple
data sources and/or methods to measure a construct or a phenomenon in order to see if
they converge and support the same conclusions” (Bickman & Rog, 2009, pp. 22-23).
The interview questions developed by the researcher were designed to explore the
research objectives and research questions in order to identify and explore how college
libraries are changing, how college library directors are leading that change, and in what
ways change is shaped by the library’s mission and goals and by the campus’ mission and
goals. Those questions were pre-tested in a similar setting and with people in appropriate
positions. They were also given to and discussed extensively with three other library
directors and one provost who each received a copy of the research objectives and

	  
	  

	  

85	  

questions. All three sets of interview questions were then re-written to connect them more
directly to the research questions.
Morgan (1997), Klenke (2008), and Clandinin and Connelly (2000) address how
the researcher, as an individual interviewer or leader of a group interviewer, affects the
accuracy of a participant’s story. After thirty-one hours of interviews (two pre-test
interviews and twelve case study interviews), this researcher feels her interviewing skills
have improved. However, before starting the interviews she practiced asking questions
and got feedback from a professional in human resources with extensive training. The
researcher listened carefully to what was being said as well as implied and avoided,
paying attention to body language, voice tone, and pace. One particular habit identified in
the pretesting was to comment positively on what people were saying. Instead, she tried
to restrict herself to showing engaged body language and eye contact rather than
comments that might have influenced the speaker’s thoughts and direction inadvertently.
Validity
Webster and Mertova (2007) conclude that validity in narrative inquiry should be
concerned with generating data relevant to the research questions rather than generating
one ‘true’ reality. This research developed observations grounded in the lived experiences
of the participants. The body of data created out of the transcripts was examined with the
research questions in mind but without any pre-conceived terms or codes—they emerged
from the text and evolved as the researcher’s understanding evolved, particularly as it was
broadened by the different participants’ perspectives. High recall and intra-coder
reliability was ensured by iterative coding and by re-examining the transcript data from
the individual’s level, by cross-comparing codes that developed into broader themes, and,

	  
	  

	  

86	  

finally, by creating a timeline of critical events and significant decision points. The
transcripts and documentation were analyzed within the framework of the research
objectives and questions to create data from which themes evolved that explored the
change journeys of the participants and sited them in the broader context of academic
libraries and the college they serve.
Ethical Research Requirements
The ethical considerations in human-studies research are three-fold, to ensure
informed consent, to protect individual privacy and confidentiality, and to ensure accuracy
and honesty in data collection and analysis. The third consideration has been discussed in
the section above, “Data Quality and Reliability.” The first two considerations were
handled in several ways. The researcher completed the online training for working with
human subjects required by the Simmons College Institutional Review Board, which also
examined the research proposal to ensure compliance with ethical and legal requirements.
The researcher obtained permission from the participants to digitally record the interview
sessions and promised not to discuss with anyone with the exception of the dissertation
committee, the names, colleges, or identifying particulars of any of the participants. The
interview recordings will be kept secure for two years and then will be destroyed. The
transcripts and analyzed data will remain in the direct physical possession of the
researcher until the appropriate time for them to be destroyed.
Limitations
This study analyzes organizational change and change leadership at four American
college libraries classified at Carnegie 2.2 or 2.3 levels. The purpose of this study was to
probe how people thought about, engaged in, and experienced organizational change. The

	  
	  

	  

87	  

participants’ explanations of their change journeys provided the rich data that enabled the
researcher to describe the purposes, the processes, and the lessons learned for each
institution. However, qualitative research and, in particular, narrative inquiry, struggles
against the perception that findings lack transferability or generalizability. Riessman
(2008) observes, “as a general field, narrative inquiry is grounded in the study of the
particular” (p. 11). Yet this focus on the particular does not prevent generalization.
Narrative inquiry explores meaning in the context of a case study. As Flyvberg (2004)
believes, case studies are legitimate methods of learning, particularly in professional
schools, where students build expertise based on an accumulation of detailed, real-life
situations. Not only can case studies “uncover social practices that are taken for granted,”
narrative case studies focus attention on those particulars (Flyvberg, 2004, p. 430).
Through that attention, the research can glean insights from “the many-sided, complex,
and sometimes conflicting stories” of participants (Flyvberg, 2004, p. 430).
Interviewing is, by definition, a human process of interaction and can be prone to
error and omissions on the part of the interviewer and the interviewee (Seidman, 2006).
The researcher’s findings are dependent on her skill in developing interview questions that
elicit answers to the research objectives and interview questions. During the interview
process, the researcher may make errors by either failing to follow up fully or not
comprehending accurately or fully the participants’ answers. If the interview questions
are too narrow or if the interviewer does not follow up thoroughly, the data will not be as
rich and complete and may not fully reflect the participants’ experiences, meanings, and
outcomes. The interviewer added to each interview the final question, asking participants
what else they would like to discuss that the questions had not touched upon. Many

	  
	  

	  

88	  

participants took advantage of this opportunity to engage in further sense-making
explanations of the changes they experienced. The interviewer also noted follow-up
questions in advance for each interview and, over time, became more skilled at asking
them and recognizing when a follow-up was appropriate and would not break the
speaker’s train of thought.
Another limitation of a research study based on interviews is that participants may
be reluctant or unwilling to share relevant information with the interviewer or they may be
trying “to put the best face possible on their organization or their past actions” (Rubin &
Rubin, 2012, p.65). This is a significant issue in organizations where individuals are
being asked to speak about potentially sensitive issues while they continue to work in that
organization. Careful probing, building trust, and obtaining data from multiple
participants can mitigate incomplete or inaccurate responses due to lack of trust or
hesitancy on the part of the interviewee. Several times, the interviewer reassured
participants that they would have the opportunity to redact any comments they, upon
review of the transcript, did not wish to have included in the study. No one did.
And finally, the study is limited by the fact that it is relying on qualitative data as
assessed, understood, and analyzed by the researcher who, ultimately, makes a subjective
decision about what data to analyze and what findings to present. This is why, whenever
possible, the researcher grounded assessments and conclusions in the literature of
organizational change and change leadership.
References
Abduction. (2011, March 9). In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy. Retrieved from
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/abduction/
	  
	  

	  

89	  

Abductive reasoning. (2012, August 11). New world encyclopedia. Retrieved from
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Abductive_reasoning
Affinity Group. (n.d.). Mission. Retrieved from
http://www.loyola.edu/library/affinity/mission.htm
Albritton, R. L. (1998). A new paradigm of leader effectiveness for academic libraries: An
empirical study of the Bass (1985) model of transformational leadership. In T. F.
Mech, & G .B. McCabe, Leadership and academic libraries (pp. 66-82). Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
Andrade, R., & Zaghloul, R. (2010). Restructuring liaison librarian teams at the University
of Arizona Libraries, 2007-2009. New Library World, 111(7/8), 273-286.
Appleton, L., Stevenson, V., & Boden, D. (2011). Developing learning landscapes:
Academic libraries driving organizational change. Reference Services Review, 39(3),
343-361.
Argyris, C. (1999). On organizational learning (2nd ed.) Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2010). Value of academic libraries: A
comprehensive research review and report. Researched by M. Oakleaf. Chicago, IL:
Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.acrl.ala.org/value
Association of College & Research Libraries. (n.d.) Excellence in academic libraries
award: Award Background. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/awards/achievementawards/excellenceacademic

	  
	  

	  

90	  

Association of College & Research Libraries. (n.d.) Excellence in academic libraries
award: Award Guidelines. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/awards/achievementawards/excellenceguidelines
Association of College & Research Libraries. College Libraries Section (n.d.). Retrieved
from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl/directoryofleadership/sections/cls/clswebsite/clshomepa
ge
Austin, A. E. (2010, January 7). Leading organizational change in higher education:
Lessons from the research. Retrieved from
http://www.aplu.org/document.doc?id=2406
Baruchson-Arbib, S., & Bronstein, J. (2002). A view to the future of the library and
information science profession: A Delphi study. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 53(5), 397-408.
Bazeley, P., & Jackson, K. (2013). Qualitative data analysis with NVIVO (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Beauchamp, J. (2003). An exploration into the vision and visioning activity of leaders.
(Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, 2003). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/305074744/abstract/13CC4
2ADE2956218D4E/1?accountid=13870
Beer, M., & Nohria, N. (2000). Cracking the code of change. Harvard Business Review,
78(3), 133-141.
Bennis, W. G. (2008). Foreword. In R. J. Thomas, Crucibles of Leadership (pp. vii – x).
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.

	  
	  

	  

91	  

Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: The strategies for taking charge (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.
Bickman, L., & Rog, D. J. (2009). Applied research design: A practical approach. In L.
Bickman & D. J. Rog (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of applied social research methods
(2nd ed., pp. 3-43). Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.
Birnbaum, R. (2000). The life cycle of academic management fads. The Journal of Higher
Education, 71(1), 1-16.
Black, J. S., & Gregersen, H. B. (2002). Leading strategic change: Breaking through the
brain barrier. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education, Inc.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1984). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and
leadership. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Bolman, L. G., & Gallos, J. V. (2011). Reframing academic leadership. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bosk, C .L. (1979). Forgive and remember: Managing medical failure. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bridges, W. (2003). Managing transitions: Making the most of change (2nd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.
Budd, J. M. (2009). Academic library data from the Unites States: An examination of
trends. LIBRES: Library and Information Science Research Electronic Journal, 19(2),
1-21.
Byrnes, J. (2004, October 4). The challenges of paradigmatic change. Harvard Business
School: Working knowledge for business leaders: Archive. Retrieved from
http://hbswk.hbs.edu/archive/4405.html

	  
	  

	  

92	  

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (n.d.) The Carnegie classification
of institutions of higher education. Retrieved on June 23, 2013 from
http://classifications.carnegiefoundation.org/ No longer available see
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/faqs/happened-carnegie-classifications/
Carver, D .A. (1989). Transformational leadership: A bibliographic essay. Library
Administration and Management, 3(1), 30-34.
Castiglione, J. (2006). Organizational learning and transformational leadership in the
library environment. Library Management, 27(4/5), 289-299.
Central European University. Higher Education Research Group. (2011). LINK
conference: “The only disability in education is the reluctance to change: How do you
make change happen?” Retrieved from http://herg.ceu.hu/node/20530
Chaffee, E .E. (1984). Successful strategic management in small private colleges. Journal
of Higher Education, 55(2), 212-241.
Chaffee, E. E. (1985). Three models of strategy. Academy of Management Review, 10(1),
89-98.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chiware, E. R. T. (2010). Positioning the technological university library in higher
education and human resources development in Africa. Library Management, 31(6),
391-403.
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in
qualitative research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Clark, B. R. (1976). The benefits of disorder. Change, 8(9), 31-37.

	  
	  

	  

93	  

Clark, B. R. (1983). The contradictions of change in academic systems. Higher Education,
12(1), 101-116.
Clark, B. R. (1995). Leadership and innovation in universities: From theory to practice.
Tertiary Education and Management, 1(1), 7-11.
Clark, B. R. (1998). Creating entrepreneurial universities: Organizational pathways of
transformation. Howard House, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Cohen, M. D., & March, J. G. (1986). Leadership in an organized anarchy. In M. D.
Cohen, & J. G. March (Eds.), Leadership and ambiguity: The American college
president (2nd ed., pp. 195-230). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Collins, J. C., & Porras, J. I. (1991). Organizational vision and visionary organizations.
California Management Review, 34(1), 30-52.
Coughlin, C. M., & Gertzog, A. (1997). Lyle's administration of the college library.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Cowan, R. B. (1993). Prescription for small-college turnaround. Change, 25(1), 30-39.
Crawford, G. A. (2015). The academic library and student retention and graduation: An
exploratory study. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 15(1), 41-57.
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Crowe, J. T. (1995). A study of effective practices in forming and articulating
organizational vision in higher education institutions. (Dissertation, University of La
Verne, 1995). Retrieved from ProQuest: http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304230413/abstract/13A9A
F653812DFFD07/1?accountid=13870

	  
	  

	  

94	  

Cuno, J. (2005). Telling stories: Rhetoric and leadership, a case study. Leadership, 1(2),
205-213.
Denna, E. (2014, March 24). The business model of higher education. EDUCAUSE
Review. Retrieved from http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/business-model-highereducation
Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind’s eye of the user: The sense-making qualitative
quantitative methodology. In J. D. Glazier, & R. R. Powell (Eds.) Qualitative
Research in Information Management (pp. 61-84). Englewood, CA: Libraries
Unlimited.
Dillon, D. (2004, December 10). College libraries: The long goodbye. The Chronicle of
Higher Education, 51(16), p. B5.
Dvir, T., Kass, N., & Shamir, B. (2004). The emotional bond: Vision and organizational
commitment among high-tech employees. Journal of Organizational Change
Management, 17(2), 126-143.
Elton, L. (1999). New ways of learning in higher education: Managing the change.
Tertiary Education and Management, 5(3), 207-225.
Flamholtz, E. G., & Randle, Y. (1998). Changing the game: Organizational
transformations of the first, second and third kinds. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Flick, U. (1998). An introduction to qualitative research (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.

	  
	  

	  

95	  

Flyvbjerg, G. (2004). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. In C. Seal, G.
Bobo, J.F. Gubrium, & D. Silverman (Eds.), Qualitative research practice (pp. 420434). London: Sage.
Fore, J. S., Knight, R. C., & Russell, C. (1993). Leadership for user services in the
academic library. Journal of Library Administration, 19(3/4), 97-110.
Francis, D., Bessant, J., & Hobday, M. (2003). Managing radical organisational
transformation. Management Decision, 41(1/2), 18-31.
Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (2004). Transition to the learning organization. Library
Trends, 53(1), 54-67.
Gilstrap, D. L. (2009). A complex systems framework for research on leadership and
organizational dynamics in academic libraries. portal: Libraries and the Academy,
9(1), 57-77.
Gioia, D. A., & Chittipeddi, K. (1991). Sensemaking and sensegiving in strategic change
initiation. Strategic Management Journal, 12(6), 433-447.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A .L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine.
Gordon, A., & Yukl, G. (2004). The future of leadership research: Challenges and
opportunities. Zeitschrift fur Personalforschung, 18(3), 359-365.
Graetz, F., & Smith, S. (2005). Organizing forms in change management: The role of
structures, processes and boundaries in a longitudinal case analysis. Journal of Change
Management, 5(3), 311-328.
Hannegan, Jr., D. W. (1991). The enrolling behavior of visionary leaders. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Denver, 1991). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0-

	  
	  

	  

96	  
search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/303944486/abstract/13CC46
BFB193C55EDC9/1?accountid=13870

Herscovitch, L., & Meyer, J. P. (2002). Commitment to organizational change: Extension
of a three-component model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3), 474-487.
Hiller, S. (2001). Assessing user needs, satisfaction and library performance at the
University of Washington libraries. Library Trends, 49(4), 605-625.
Hiller, S., & Self, J. (2004). From measurement to management: Using data wisely for
planning and decision-making. Library Trends, 53(1), 129-155.
Holley, K.A. (2009). Interdisciplinary strategies as transformative change in higher
education. Innovative Higher Education, 34(5), 331-344.
Holsti, O. R. (1969). Content analysis for the social sciences and humanities. Menlo Park,
CA: Addison-Wesley.
Hunter, M. G., Evans, N., & Price, J. (2011). Internal intellectual assets: A management
interpretation. Journal of Information, Information Technology, and Organizations, 6,
2-12.
Kantabutra, S., & Avery, G. C. (2010). The power of vision: Statements that resonate.
Journal of Business Strategy, 31(1), 37-45.
Kaufman, P. (2007). It’s not your parents’ library any more: Challenges and opportunities
in the new webs of complexity. Journal of Library Administration, 46(1), 5-26.
Keller, G. (1997). Examining what works in strategic planning. In M.W. Peterson, D.D.
Dill, & L.A. Mets, Planning and management for a changing environment: A
handbook on redesigning postsecondary institutions (pp. 158-170). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.

	  
	  

	  

97	  

Kezar, A.J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kezar, A. J., & Eckel, P. D. (2002a). The effect of institutional culture on change
strategies in higher education: Universal principles or culturally responsive concepts?
The Journal of Higher Education, 73(4), 435-460.
Kirschner, A. (2012, April 8). Innovations in higher education? Hah! The Chronicle of
Higher Education: The Chronicle Review. Retrieved from
http://chronicle.com/article/Innovations-in-Higher/131424/
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group Publishing Ltd.
Kopp, M. G. (2015). Academic libraries, institutional missions, and new student
recruitment: A case study. Reference Services Review, 41(2), 192-200.
Kotter, J. P. (1990). A force for change: How leadership differs from management. New
York: Free Press.
Kotter, J. P. (2007). Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harvard Business
Review, 85(1), 96-103.
Kotter International. (2015). The 8-step process for leading change. Retrieved from
http://ww.kotterinernational.com/the-8-step-process-for-leading-change/
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lant, T. K., & Mezias, S. J. (1990). Managing discontinuous change: A simulation study
of organizational learning and entrepreneurship. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5),
147-179.

	  
	  

	  

98	  

Latta, G. F. (2009). A process model of organizational change in cultural context (OC3
Model): The impact of organizational culture on leading change. Journal of
Leadership and Organizational Studies, 16(1), 19-37.
LeBlanc, P. (2010, October 1). Reinventing the academy: Transforming for new learners,
digital technologies, and student success. Retrieved from the New England Board of
Higher Education http://www.nebhe.org/info/pdf/reinventing/Paul_LeBlanc_10-410.pdf
Lee, S. (1993). Organizational change in research libraries. Journal of Library
Administration, 18(3/4), 129-143.
Lipton, M. (1996). Demystifying the development of an organizational vision. Sloan
Management Review, 37(4), 83-92.
Lombard, E. (2012). The role of the academic library in college choice. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 38(4), 237-241.
Ludwig, L., & Starr, S. (2002). Library as place: Results of a Delphi study. Journal of the
Medical Library Association, 93(3), 315-326.
Marshak, R. J., & Grant, D. (2008). Organizational discourse and new organization
development practices. British Journal of Management, Supplement, 1(19), S7-S19.
Matelic, C. T. (2007). Organizational change in history museums. (Doctoral dissertation,
University at Albany, State University of New York, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest
http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304747730/141616EA2816
474388B/1?accountid=13870.

	  
	  

	  

99	  

Mattingly, C. (1998). Healing dramas and clinical plots: The narrative structure of
experience. New York: Cambridge University Press.
McFarland, M. R. (1993). The process of vision development described by six college and
university presidents. (Dissertation, Gonzaga University, 1993). Retrieved from
ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304098171/abstract/13CCE
A166E148E5F6DF/1?accountid=13870
McNicol, S. (2005). The challenges of strategic planning in academic libraries. New
Library World, 106(11/12), 496-509.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. H. (1980). Momentum and revolution in organizational
adaptation. Academy of Management Journal, 23(4), 591-614.
Mintzberg, H., & Waters, J. A. (1985). Of strategies, deliberate and emergent. Strategic
Management Journal, 6(3), 257-271.
Morgan, D. L. (1997). Focus groups as qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morrill, R. L. (2007). Strategic leadership: Integrating strategy and leadership in colleges
and universities. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Murray-Rust, C. (2010). The opportunity of invisibility. Leaders look toward the future: A
companion website to C. A. Alire & E. G. Evans, Academic librarianship. New York:
Neal-Schuman Publishers. Retrieved from http://www.nealschuman.com/academic/Murray-Rust2010.pdf
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1989). Organizational frame bending: Principles for
managing reorientation. The Academy of Management Executive, 3(3), 194-203.

	  
	  

	  

100	  

Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1995). Types of organizational change: From
incremental improvement to discontinuous transformation. In D.A. Nadler, R.B. Shaw,
A. E. Walton, & Associates (Eds.), Discontinuous change: Leading organizational
transformation (pp. 15-34). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nanus, B. (1992). Visionary leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nelson, B. E. (2014). The academic library administrator's field guide. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.
Noble, C. H. (1999). The eclectic roots of strategy implementation research. Journal of
Business Research, 45(2), 119-134.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Nutefall, J. E., & Chadwell, F. A. (2011). Preparing for the 21st century: Academic library
realignment. New Library World, 113(3/4), 162-173.
The Oberlin Group. (n.d.). A consortium of liberal arts college libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.oberlingroup.org/
O’Connell, D., Hickerson, K., & Pillutla, A. (2011). Organizational visioning: An
integrative review. Group & Organization Management, 36(1), 103-125.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Parry, K. W., & Hansen, H. (2007). The organizational story as leadership. Leadership,
3(3), 281-300.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1990). Longitudinal field research on change: Theory and practice.
Organization Science, 1(3), 267-292.

	  
	  

	  

101	  

Phipps, S. E. (1993). Transforming libraries into learning organizations—the challenge for
leadership. Journal of Library Administration, 18(3/4), 19-37.
Pounder, J. S. (2001). “New leadership” and university organisational effectiveness:
Exploring the relationship. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 22(5/6),
281-290.
Pugh, L. (2007). Change management in information services (2nd ed.). Abingdon, UK:
Ashgate Publishing Group.
Quinn, R. E. (1996). Deep change: Discovering the leader within. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Inc.
Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G. M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic change: A multilens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy of Management Review,
22(1), 48-79.
Richards, L., & Morse, J. M. (2007). Read me first for a user’s guide to qualitative
methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Riggs, D. E., & Sykes, V. M. (1993). The time for transformational leadership is now.
Journal of Library Administration, 18, 55-68.
Rogers, S.A. (2007). Assessing trends to cultivate new thinking in libraries. Library
Management, 28(6/7), 366-378.
Romanelli, E., & Tushman, M. L. (1994). Organizational transformation as punctuated
equilibrium: An empirical test. Academy of Management Journal, 37(5), 1141-1166.

	  
	  

	  

102	  

Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2012). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data (3rd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sarros, J. C., Cooper, B. K, & Santora, J. C. (2010). Leadership vision, organizational
culture, and support for innovation in not-for-profit and for-profit organizations.
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 32(3), 291-309.
Sashkin, M. (1988). The visionary leader. In J.A. Conger, R.N. Kanungo and associates,
Charismatic leadership: The elusive factor in organizational effectiveness (pp.122160). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Saw, G., Lui, W.W., & Yu, F. (2008). 2010: A library odyssey. Library Management,
29(1/2), 51-66.
Schaffler, H. (2004). How to organize the digital library: Reengineering and change
management in the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich. Library Hi Tech, 22(4), 340346.
Schramm, W. (1971, December). Notes on case studies of instructional media projects.
Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED092145. (ED092145).
Schulenburger, D. (2011, February). The future of the US research university. Research
Library Issues, no. 274. Retrieved from http://publications.arl.org/rli274/2
Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
education and the social sciences (3rd ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Senge, P. M., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R., Roth, G., & Smith B. (1999). The dance
of change: The challenges to sustaining momentum in learning organizations. New
York: Doubleday.

	  
	  

	  

103	  

Shuler, J. A. (2005). Creative destruction: Academic libraries and the burden of change.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(6), 593-597.
Sidorko, P. E. (2007). Transforming library and higher education support services: Can
change models help? Library Management, 29(4/5), 307-318.
Sidorko, P. E., & Yang, T. T. (2009). Refocusing for the future: Meeting user expectations
in a digital age. Library Management, 30(1/2), 6-24.
Sim, Y. S. (1997). Identifying the future roles of the library at the community college: A
Delphi study. (Doctoral dissertation, Nova University, 1997). Available from
University Microfilms International.
Smith, B. D. (2009). Maybe I will, maybe I won’t: What the connected perspectives of
motivation theory and organisational commitment may contribute to our understanding
of strategy implementation. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 17(6), 473-485.
Somerville, M. M., Schader, B., & Huston, M. E. (2005). Rethinking what we do and how
we do it: Systems thinking strategies for library leadership. Australian Academic &
Research Libraries, 36(4), 214-227.
Souza, J. M. (2007). Factors contributing to the successful implementation of planned
change at a small, private, four-year institution in the Mid-Atlantic area. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304842805/abstract/13B96C
133267D9791B7/1?accountid=13870
Steane, P. D. (1997). Oils ain’t oils! Strategy across sectors. The International Journal of
Public Sector Management, 10(6), 461-470.

	  
	  

	  

104	  

Stephan, E. (2010). Strategic planning on the fast track. Library Leadership &
Management, 24(4), 189-198.
Stoffle, C., Leeder, K., & Sykes-Casavant, G. (2008). Bridging the gap: Wherever you are,
the library. Journal of Library Administration, 48(1), 3-30.
Stoffle, C., & Phipps, S. (2003). Creating a culture of assessment: The University of
Arizona experience. ARL Bimonthly Report, 230/231, 26-27.
Strauss, A. L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory
procedures and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Sturdy, A., & Grey, C. (2003). Beneath and beyond organizational change management:
Exploring alternatives. Organization, 10(4), 561-662.
Thomas, R. J. (2008). Crucibles of leadership. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Publishing Corporation.
Thornton, G. (2010). Academic libraries: A poly-faced future. In Leaders look toward the
future: A companion website to C.A. Alire & E.G. Evans, Academic librarianship.
New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers. Retrieved from http://www.nealschuman.com/academic/Thornton2010.pdf
Troll, D. A. (2002). How and why libraries are changing: What we know and what we
need to know. portal: Libraries and the academy, 2(1), 99-123.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (1995). Explaining development and change in
organizations. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 510-540.

	  
	  

	  

105	  

Van de Ven, A. H., & Sun, K. (2011). Breakdowns in implementing models of
organizational change. Academy of Management Perspectives, 25(3), 58-74.
Van Vught, F. (1999). Innovative universities. Tertiary Education and Management (5(4),
347-355.
Webster, L., & Mertova, P. (2007). Using narrative inquiry as a research method: An
introduction to using critical event narrative analysis in research on learning and
teaching. New York: Routledge.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wells, A. (2007). A prototype twenty-first century university library: A case study of
change at the University of New South Wales library. Library Management, 28(8/9),
450-459.
Wilson, L. A. (2012). Creating sustainable futures for academic libraries. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 78-93.
Wilson, L. A. (2013). Quoted by J. Jones in The library in 2020. ACRL-CHOICE
Webinar, May 22, 2013. Retrieved from https://connect.iu.edu/p7gc1l8dn7k/
Winters, L. S. (2004). California community college libraries in the 21st century. (Doctoral
dissertation, Pepperdine University, 2004). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/305034068/abstract/13CCE
E97D8E3F648251/1?accountid=13870
Wood, E .J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

	  
	  

	  

106	  

Woodward, J. A. (2013). The age of high anxiety: Threats that fuel library nightmares. In
J.A. Woodward, The transformed library: E-books, expertise, and evolution (pp. 3143). Chicago: American Library Association.
Wright, L. (2010). The leadership of the future. In S. McKnight, Envisioning future
academic library services: Initiatives, ideas and challenges (pp. 169-195). London:
Facet Publishing.
Yi, Z. (2010). The management of change in the information age: Approaches of
academic library directors in the United States. (Doctoral dissertation, Texas
Woman’s University, 2010). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/597657499/abstract/13B968
C9F5477CAB790/1?accountid=13870
Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Zhang, C., & Strange, C. C. (1992). Shaping institutional vision: The risk of presidential
leadership in small colleges. A preliminary report (ED352921). ASHE Annual
Meeting Paper.

	  
	  

	  

107	  
Chapter Three
OVERVIEW OF CASE STUDIES AND THEMATIC DEVELOPMENT

Colleges and Libraries Studied
The libraries and colleges studied are private, liberal arts institutions engaged in
substantial change during the first part of the twenty-first century. They share some
characteristics at the college and the library levels. All were founded in the 19th century
and have had a tradition of a liberal arts core curriculum. They have an undergraduate
population of between two to three thousand with two institutions also serving graduate
and continuing education populations of between two and six hundred. There were a
variety of names used for the institutions and the people in them. The institutions used
either college or university in their names. The people leading the library each had a
unique title, “college librarian,” “university librarian," “library dean,” and “library
director.” They reported to individuals who held titles of academic dean, provost, chief
academic officer, or vice president. However, for clarity and privacy, this researcher will
use the terms “college,” “provost,” and “library director.”
At all four institutions, the library directors had been hired with the expectation
that they would create change. Senior management at each institution recognized that
teaching and learning were changing, and that the faculty, the students, and the libraries
had to learn and use technology-based tools, media, and resources. However, as Lyle
(1974) advises in his treatise on college library management, while “all colleges are
products of the same general components, … no two colleges combine components in
equal propositions. The particular mixture, however, is what determines the institution’s

	  
	  

	  

108	  

character and renders it unique (p. 47).” At each college, campus values, culture, and
organizational challenges were integrated with the skills, passions, and values of the
library directors and their staff to create unique change journeys. To set those change
journeys in context, the next section will give a brief overview of each case study site.
Case study: College Library A
College A, now classified as Carnegie Baccalaureate/Diverse2, was founded in the
later 19th century and is the exception to most colleges of the time, which were religiously
affiliated. Foreshadowing its more modern history, it was founded as a business school. In
the last decade of the twentieth century, it evolved quite rapidly from a two-year, careeroriented college to a four-year liberal arts institution with graduate and continuing
education programs. The total undergraduate student FTE is approximately 2,000 and
post-baccalaureate degrees and programs enroll another 600 FTE. The college
characterizes itself as entrepreneurial, skilled at change, and collaborative, with few
formal boundaries between schools and departments. The campus invested in a new
library building at the end of the twentieth century and hired a new university librarian in
2003. At that time, administrators and faculty felt that the library had not kept up with the
direction and pace of the campus’ changes and the new university librarian was charged
with changing the library so that it was engaged in “the academic life of the campus.”
This library and institution were chosen because the college underwent three major
changes that affected the library in substantial ways. The first change was college-wide in
the last few years of the twentieth century. The college changed from a two-year to a fouryear institution and developed a small number of professional programs. Between 2005
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
2

These colleges were identified by their Carnegie Classification level from the Carnegie Foundation’s
website as of September 2012. Since that date, the classifications are no longer available. They will be
available in 2015 from Indiana University Bloomington’s Center for Postsecondary Research.

	  
	  

	  

109	  

and 2006, the college developed and implemented a new core curriculum focusing on the
liberal arts taught as inquiry-based learning. In 2011, faculty again substantially redesigned that curriculum.
The first change in degrees and programs created a radically different institution,
which included being one of the first in the country to offer online education. The campus
administration defined the library as an integral part of the change, and built a new, larger
library. The then-President envisioned this new library as “this big information commons
[with] lots and lots of online resources” rather than “a traditional library with lots of
books.” The small staff and collections moved into the new space, but, for several years,
there was little change in how the library interacted and connected with the teaching and
learning activities of the campus. In 2007 the campus hired a new college library director,
who was charged with an “open mandate to really help the library get engaged in the
academic life of the campus.”
By the time the college implemented the second change in the core curriculum, the
library director had begun the process of helping the library staff change. Recognizing
that the curriculum’s new focus on the liberal arts included a fundamental expectation that
students would learn critical thinking skills, the library director and staff saw this as an
opportunity to begin an information literacy program embedded in the four years of core
classes. They included assessment and built, over the next several years, a solid set of
data tracking students’ growing mastery of information literacy competencies.
The final substantial change was in 2012 when the core shifted “from a model
where every student took the same core courses and sequence” to a “curriculum that
included student choice” beginning in the second year. At first, faculty and librarians

	  
	  

	  

110	  

were involved in the original design teams but a team of faculty made the final decisions.
This redesign required a substantial increase in information literacy instruction and
eliminated the common assignments and rubrics on which the library’s information
literacy outcomes were built. Librarians lost the capacity for comparative assessment and
felt overwhelmed by the increased workload.
However, with the library director’s leadership, the librarians took this final crisis
as a challenge. They changed their pedagogy in radical ways and became leaders on
campus in hybrid learning.
Case study: College Library B
College B, a Carnegie Classification Baccalaureate/Arts & Sciences, was founded
in the early 19th century starting out, like many other colleges at that time, with a religious
focus, teaching undergraduates and preparing students for the ministry. It is now a nondenominational, co-educational four-year liberal arts college with approximately 3,000
FTE undergraduates and a small Masters-level graduate program in education with less
than a dozen students yearly. The institution draws students from across the United States
and has a significant international student population. Describing its students as “high
achievers,” the institutional website notes that many undergraduates study abroad and
95% go on to graduate studies.
College Library B was selected as an example of a library that initiated significant
change, which permeated the campus and significantly influenced campus strategic
priorities, learning objectives, and faculty pedagogical approaches. In 1999 the chief
information officer and the library director developed “an early vision for re-inventing
library services based on changing information technologies” to support faculty to

	  
	  

	  

111	  

incorporate information literacy and the use of technology in the classroom. The campus
adopted this vision of a coordinated and integrated library/technology support service in
2002 and by 2007 opened a renovated and expanded library building that would contain
library services and information technology services.
The new library director, who began in 2006, undertook an eight-year change
effort to “transform librarians’ skills in delivering information fluency across formats and
digital platforms.” She and the head of information technology established an innovative
digital teaching support center. That center had such impact in helping faculty incorporate
multiple types of information literacies into teaching and learning, that faculty expertise in
this new pedagogy became part of the latest college strategic plan.
Case study: College Library C
College C, currently a Carnegie Masters/Medium, was also founded in the early
19th century, incorporating, over time, several other religiously affiliated institutions. It is
“historically connected” to its denominational roots but is now a co-educational,
independent liberal arts college with around 2,700 FTE undergraduates and four masterslevel graduate programs serving approximately 200 students. It is a “community united in
a quest for excellence in liberal arts education” with a high-achieving, generally very
wealthy student population. At the start of the twenty-first century, campus administration
felt the library was directionless and resistant to change. Relations between the then
library director and the campus administration were fundamentally negative. When that
director retired, the provost hired a new library director who began in 2001 with a “carte
blanche” to get the librarians engaged in a conversation “to create innovation, [and] new

	  
	  

	  

112	  

ideas.” Beyond a general change mandate, there was very little guidance or direction from
campus administrators, faculty, or the provost.
College Library C was chosen as an example of a library that implemented a
significant change that affected the entire campus. The library director’s change leadership
began with what was, at that time, radical changes in the building, collections, and
services. Implementing those changes successfully required a multi-year process of redefining the library’s purpose, re-aligning its services and staff, and changing the internal
culture.
In 2006 the campus invited all types of stakeholders—faculty, staff, students,
alumni—to present proposals for a new strategic initiative. Under the leadership of the
library director, the re-invented library staff developed a bold, comprehensive proposal to
change information literacy instruction and learning outcomes assessment across the
curriculum. The proposal competed against many others and was ultimately adopted
campus-wide.
Case study: College Library D
College D is a private, co-educational liberal arts institution with a little over 2,000
FTE undergraduate students. It is classified at the Carnegie Baccalaureate/Arts &
Sciences level. Founded in the last decades of the nineteenth century, it differed from
many other liberal arts colleges of its time by having men and women in the first entering
class and having a strong tradition of supporting minority rights. By the mid twentieth
century, the college’s mission statement identified equity as a value and a college and
societal aspiration. The college characterizes its student body as gifted and highly diverse
and one of its current goals is to have all students engage in undergraduate research.

	  
	  

	  

113	  
College Library D was chosen as an example of an institution where the college

created change that affected the library. In 2006 campus administration brought the
library and the information technology (IT) departments together into a merged structure,
reporting to the same campus administrator, a provost for this analysis). In 2008, a new
library director was hired who felt strongly that the library’s services were not adequate to
meet future faculty needs. In 2009 the library director and provost started thinking about
how to meet twenty-first century academic challenges and opportunities.
As a first experiment they also created a new center providing digital support of
new technologically focused learning and scholarship and moved some IT staff and
librarians into the unit. Soon, they added postdoctoral subject experts. As this center’s
services developed, the library director and provost began to envision an expanded service
with even more subject experts and technologists. Meanwhile, the library director also
engaged library staff in brainstorming what a twenty-first century library should be.
Discussion and experimentation continued for about two years.
In 2011 the president gave the provost and library director an ultimatum. Enact the
organizational changes they had been describing to him or no positions currently open
would be allowed to be filled. Library and IT staff were presented with a radically revised
organizational chart, new job descriptions and the fact of librarian layoffs all on the same
day. This top-down change created the structure of the new organization more quickly,
but left the library director, the provost and staff struggling to overcome the effects of the
abrupt change.
Unfortunately, the president then froze all hiring and the library director and
provost were then unable to realize the original vision of blended services supporting new

	  
	  

	  

114	  

“technologically inflected” modes of learning, teaching, and scholarship. The new center
and the other planned staffing changes remain incomplete.
Coding and Thematic Development
As mentioned in the methodology section, the researcher read through all the
transcripts initially without assigning any codes. In the second round of transcript analysis,
this researcher kept a list of the research objectives to refer to as she began to assign
codes. She also compiled a merged list developed to study organizational change. Strauss
and Corbin (1990. p. 77) suggest seven basic questions to interrogate a text: what, who,
how, when/where, how much, what for, and means/tactics. While these questions can
help create a detailed description of actors, actions, and processes, examining the texts
from the broader perspective of content, context, process, and outcome helps capture the
complexities of organizational change at a more holistic level (Armenakis & Bedeian,
1999). As the transcripts were coded, the researcher used a merged list of Strauss and
Corbin’s (1990) and Armenakis and Bedeian’s (1999) elements as a reference tool.
Because the researcher was interested in how change happens over time, and what
opportunities, pressures, events, and experiences can influence the change journey, Strauss
and Corbin’s (1990) element, “when,” became the first code assigned, the phrase “College
A (B, C, or D) Timeline.” This code was applied when a speaker mentioned a specific date
or when a situation was being described that influenced or changed an intended action.
When these coded statements were abstracted from the library director, senior
management team and provost transcripts for a particular college, the dates and events
described became the basis of a chronology. They helped illuminate when change goals
were achieved or when change actions provoked reactions requiring abrupt shifts in

	  
	  

	  

115	  

strategy and were particularly valuable when examining the critical events identified by
each library director.
Organizational Change and Change Outcomes
Another early code identified from the library directors’ transcripts,
Organizational Change, was also central to the research objectives. At first, the concept
of organizational change was applied fairly broadly to specific changes in personnel, job
duties, and reporting structures and to the directors’ comments about the organizational
changes that took place. However, once the researcher began to examine the senior
management teams’ discussions of their experiences, it became clear that the original
concept needed to be more nuanced. The researcher began assigning two codes, Negative
Change Outcomes and Positive Change Outcomes to participant comments that
specifically identified consequences of changes. Outcome discussions were more frequent
in the senior management team discussions. Both negative and positive outcomes were
frequently associated with the effects of change on individuals. The provosts interviewed
rarely discussed negative change outcomes, focusing instead on positive results the library
directors had achieved.
Change Goals, Change Strategy, and Vision
In their interviews, the library directors discussed extensively their Change Goals
and their Change Strategy. At first, in assigning these codes, the researcher was
somewhat inconsistent. Partly because individuals rarely labeled their actions or
intentions as either one or the other, goals and strategies were often blended in their
narratives. The senior management team transcripts provided confirmation of the
strategies taken and the goals achieved by the library directors. Provosts rarely

	  
	  

	  

116	  

commented on specific goals or strategic actions but more broadly on the strategic
approaches their library directors took, for example, seizing opportunities, taking risks,
asking hard questions, and partnering.
After coding all transcripts for Change Goals and Change Strategy, the researcher
printed out a complete list of the references assigned to each code and reviewed them for
consistency. Since the researcher’s knowledge of the change actions and the purposes
behind the codes had evolved, she re-coded many of the text passages. Change Goals was
applied when a discrete outcome was intended and Change Strategy was used for either
planned or opportunistic actions, approaches, or techniques. During this review, she
realized that there was a major oversight in that Change Goals had also been used for
what was actually Change Vision. She created a new code and then applied it first to the
printout of all text assigned to Change Goals. She then reread all the original transcripts
to find other mentions of Change Vision that might not have been originally coded to
goals.
Many researchers and organizational change consultants have tried to define what
makes a particular statement a vision—and what characteristics a good vision statement
should have (Kotter, 1990, Nanus, 1992, Palmer, et al., 2009). Because the researcher’s
approach was through grounded theory, she did not use external definitions to identify
vision statements. However, the participants also rarely defined their vision in clear or
traditional “vision statement” terms. Text segments were coded to Change Vision when
the participant made a statement about what the library should become or needed to be,
often expressed at a relatively broad level. These were often expressed in adjectives such

	  
	  

	  

117	  

as “engaged,” “central,” “integrated” that referred to the relationship between the campus
and the library.
Out of the broad category of Organizational Change and the categories of Change
Vision, Change Goals, and Change Strategy, three sub-codes emerged. First, was the subconcept of Reasons for Change, which was applied to participants’ descriptions of the
initial state of the library and its staff and to statements about the campuses’ changing
needs. This sub-code of Reasons for Change helped illuminate the texts that specifically
addressed research objectives one and two: the history and context of campus level and
library level change drivers.
A second sub-code, Change Barriers and Problems, was used to identify just what
the term describes—barriers and problems that those engaged in change encountered. One
of the study’s objectives was to identify how the directors defined themselves as change
leaders how they characterized the changes they were leading. Barriers were often
structural or cultural and problems often more people-centric.
As part of answering research objective five, the conceptual and process
approaches to change, a third sub-code was created, Type of Change. This was used to
identify how the participants thought about and experienced change. Often the text labeled
with this code included adjectives such as “rapid,” “incremental,” “strategic,” “realistic,”
and “transformational.”
Institutional Context and Library/Campus Alignment
After the first round of coding the library directors’ transcripts, the researcher
began to code the provosts’ transcripts. Provosts often answered research objective three
very specifically—examining the ways in which library change and campus change

	  
	  

	  

118	  

aligned with or influenced each other as well as the sub-question in objective seven that
explored whether the library’s outcomes contributed in new and/or non-traditional ways to
the campus’ broader needs and issues. The provosts were, of course, very fluent in
describing their campus’ value propositions, the challenges they face, and the college’s
strategic priorities. From these transcripts, the researcher identified two new codes,
College Vision/Mission and Library/Campus Alignment. Library directors discussed
alignment of the library with the college in less explicit terms than the provosts used.
Senior management team members referred to alignment as “being relevant” or as
successfully meeting changing student and faculty needs.
Leadership
A code the researcher began using when first coding the library directors’
transcripts was Leader/Staff Relations. Originally, this was assigned when a director
discussed relationship issues in the context of her staff. It then expanded to include
relationships outside of the library such as between the library director and the provost, the
director and faculty, or with others in the college power structure, such as presidents or
chief technology officers. It covered a number of themes such as positive and negative
relations, collaboration, risk-taking, trust or distrust, and support or betrayal. Early in the
analytical process, the researcher recognized that this code was too broad. However, she
wanted to completely code all transcripts once through, concentrating on broad topic of
organizational change—timelines, goals, strategies, and so she applied it in all twelve
transcripts as a placeholder to cover interpersonal relations among a broad spectrum of
actors and stakeholders.

	  
	  

	  

119	  
During the second round of coding transcripts, the researcher identified more

codes and sub-codes. Two, in particular, Critical Events and Change Initiators, directly
relate to the experiences of library directors as change agents. The first sub-code was
developed to answer part of research four, how the library director led change by asking
her about Critical Events that she experienced as a leader of the change process. In
narrative inquiry, one way to understand the meaning of past events is to ask participants
about the critical moments—negative and positive—that shaped their understandings or
significantly influenced subsequent actions or choices. As Riessman notes, one of the key
elements of a “fully formed” narrative is the “complicating action (the event sequence, or
plot, usually with a crisis or turning point)” (2008, p. 84).
The second code was Change Initiators, applied primarily within library directors’
and provosts’ transcripts to identify Strauss and Corbin’s (1990) “Who?” and “What?”
questions. Who were the prime actors making change decisions and shaping change
outcomes? In what ways did they use power and to what ends? Many writers have
challenged the myth of the one heroic leader driving top-down organizational change
(Heifetz, 1994; Kellerman, 2004; Senge, et al., 1999). They argue that focusing on just
the leader is incomplete—successful organizational change requires buy-in from many
levels of stakeholders. It is also a messy process, often influenced by the power wielded
by individuals other than the library director who may have competing agendas. This
code was assigned to text describing when a director took a significant change action and,
also, when someone, usually above or on the same level as the director, took an action that
initiated or influenced significantly the directors’ change goals or strategies in positive,
negative, and sometimes quite unexpected ways.

	  
	  

	  

120	  

Change Leadership—Conditions and Effects
The concepts of leadership and of change have been defined extensively in the
academic and the popular literature. Northouse observes that over “sixty-five different
classification systems have been developed to define the dimensions of leadership” (2013,
p. 4). He then offers this definition as encompassing the central components “Leadership
is a process whereby an individual influences a group of individuals to achieve a common
goal,” reducing the concept to its three most critical elements—leaders, followers, and
goals (Northouse, 2013, p. 5). In the process of analyzing the transcripts and the
summaries of codes developed, especially Leader/Staff Relations, three themes emerged
which can be seen as necessary conditions for successful change, Change Culture, RiskTaking, and Trust. These themes were strongly represented in the senior management
team transcripts. Trust and Risk-Taking were significant themes for library directors,
particularly in the context of Critical Events.
Change Culture was used to characterize how individuals viewed the environment
in which they worked and their role in it. This code was assigned when speakers
characterized either their approach to change—their actions or behaviors, or their
perceived capacity to influence their environment—empowerment or change initiation, or
their feelings about change—acceptance, normalcy, and pride. Change Culture was also
assigned, often with the additional concept of Leadership, to comments provosts made
about their library directors’ commitment to change. It was not used for references to
either the state of higher education or academic libraries or to broader social or
environmental conditions; those were typically captured in Reasons for Change. It was
also not applied to the negative condition—the absence of a culture supporting change.

	  
	  

	  

121	  

Comments reflecting a lack of or unwillingness to change were coded to Change Barriers
and Problems.
Risk-Taking was a term used by the senior management team members and the
library directors. It could have been subsumed within Change Culture but the researcher
chose to call it out directly because of its frequent and explicit use by participants. Often
when discussing this concept, senior management team participants contrasted their
current approach to Risk-Taking with past negative experiences. Library directors
discussed Risk-Taking as something they wanted staff to embrace and as a requirement in
their role as change leaders.
Trust, as an element of the relationships between individuals, emerged in all the
transcripts analyzed. Provosts expressed trust somewhat indirectly when discussing their
library directors. Library directors and senior management team members more frequently
discussed trust in explicit ways and often in the context of relationships with their provosts
and their staff.
Values
The final code developed was that of Values. It evolved partly out of the texts
coded to Leader/Staff Relations because values were often expressed in terms of the ways
people characterized themselves and their work. It also surfaced in many other themes—
College Vision/Mission, Library/Campus Alignment, Change Goals, Change Vision,
Leadership, Risk-Taking and Trust. Values can be defined as “important and lasting
beliefs or ideals shared by the members of a culture about what is good or bad and
desirable or undesirable … [values] have a major influence on a person’s behavior and
attitude and serve as broad guidelines in all situations" (Values, 2014). As such, values

	  
	  

	  

122	  

help explain why individuals operate the way they do in organizations. This code was
assigned when participants described ways either they or their organizations behaved or, at
times, should behave. Many Values were expressed as positive adjectives, “reflective,”
“authentic,” “professional honesty,” “fundamentally positive,” “resilience,” but some were
described through their opposite, “first, do no harm,” “avoiding stereotyping,” and “to not
be scared.”
Conclusion
The codes developed in the textual analysis can be grouped into themes that
address the study’s research objectives. Documenting each organization’s timelines and
concrete changes provide a foundation for analyzing the broader aspects of their change
journeys. The next four chapters will explore these codes and sub-codes within the
broader themes of change leadership, change strategy and process, change culture, and the
nature of academic library change. See Appendix, Figure Three for the conceptual
clusters of themes.
References
Armenakis, A. A., & Bedeian, A. G. (1999). Organizational change: A review of theory
and research in the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25(3), 293-315.
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (n.d.) The Carnegie classification
of institutions of higher education. Retrieved on June 23, 2013 from
http://classifications.carnegiefoundation.org/ No longer available see
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/faqs/happened-carnegie-classifications/
Heifetz, R. A. (1994). Leadership without easy answers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.

	  
	  

	  

123	  

Kellerman, B. (2004). Bad leadership: What it is, how it happens, why it matters.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Kotter, J. P. (1990). A force for change: How leadership differs from management. New
York: Free Press.
Lyle, G. R. (1974). The administration of the college library (4th ed.). New York: Wilson.
Nanus, B. (1992). Visionary leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice. 6th ed. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Senge, P. M., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R., Roth, G., & Smith B. (1999). The dance
of change: The challenges to sustaining momentum in learning organizations. New
York: Doubleday.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory
procedures and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Values. (2014). BusinessDictionary.com. Retrieved from
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/values.html

	  
	  

	  

124	  
Chapter Four
LIBRARY AND CAMPUS ALIGNMENT

During the past ten years, higher education institutions have faced increasing
challenges on a variety of fronts—societal, technological, economic, and political. During
this same period, a number of writers in the field of academic librarianship have argued
that because higher education is changing – often radically in response to these challenges
– academic libraries need to change also to continue to be a relevant part of the academic
enterprise (Campbell, 2006; Stoffle, Renaud, & Veldof, 1996; Wood et al., 2007). Many
writers advise a closer alignment between the library and the college’s mission, vision,
strategic plans, and priorities. For example, describing strategic and organizational
changes made by the University of Connecticut libraries, Franklin (2012) observes that a
close alignment with the university’s academic plan “can help demonstrate the value of
the academic research library in providing quality services that advance the university’s
primary missions and overarching institutional outcomes” (p. 106).
The period under study is a decade of rapid change in higher education and of
robust discussion in the academic library literature about library change. One important
influence on library change is the institution in which it operates. Romanelli and
Tushman’s (1994) and Nadler and Tushman’s (1995) change model categorized the rate
and scope of change based on the intensity of the environmental pressures an organization
is experiencing. Exploring how the environmental pressures experienced by the colleges
and their libraries influenced the library’s change goals and processes, can help understand
the context of the changes that took place. Examining the change journeys of college

	  
	  

	  

125	  

libraries is, in itself, a valuable exercise but understanding the motivation for those change
journeys provides a depth of insight into the change choices and change process that
would not otherwise be illuminated.
Higher Education Challenges Facing the Colleges Studied
As outlined in chapter one, during the past ten years higher education institutions
have faced increasing challenges. The four college provosts in this study were the most
focused and articulate when discussing the challenges facing their institutions and the
strategic ways in which they were responding within the context of those challenges. This
may have been due to their responsibilities for leading the academic enterprise within the
college. Those strategic responsibilities require them to be aware of external pressures
and changing patterns in higher education so that they can help their organizations
respond. During the period these provosts were discussing, the beginning of the twentyfirst century, for the most part, their colleges’ responses were neither radical nor disruptive
but rather incremental and targeted. Those changes often focused on maintaining or
increasing student enrollment through new undergraduate or graduate degree programs,
satellite campuses, or online distance learning offerings.
This incremental approach mirrors research findings on what creates effective
academic organizational change (Chaffee, 1984; Kezar, 2001; Steane, 1997). For
example, Kezar (2001) observed that, while radical change in academia is rarely
successful, when it succeeds, it is grounded in the college’s mission and values. She
states, “in general, continuity has been identified as a critical factor within the change
models of nonprofit organizations … [and] … that maintaining a stable pattern of
relationships is important for survival and tends to lead to growth and renewal” (p. 60).

	  
	  

	  

126	  
College A was an exception to the incremental, evolutionary approach to change.

It’s provost described “transformational” changes in the curriculum that began in the
1990’s including expanding from a two-year to a four-year institution and becoming one
of the first colleges in the nation to offer online education. College A also began a
relatively aggressive program of opening satellite campuses in other countries. At the
time of the site visit, the college had also begun developing internationally marketed
graduate programs that would be completely online. The willingness of College A
faculty, administrators, and staff, to engage in transformational-level change fits with
Kezar’s (2001) observation that academic change is successful when it is framed in a way
that is consistent with the college’s culture and academic purpose. Part of College A’s
culture—and a point of pride—was its promise to offer students a “radically pragmatic”
education. That institutional goal led the college to define itself as having a culture that
could quickly change, when needed, to sustain that commitment to radical pragmatism.
The other three provosts identified a number of changes that were either currently
impacting or that they anticipated would impact their colleges, including affordability, a
smaller overall pool of potential students, increased costs of doing business, and
decreasing popularity of a residential liberal arts model of education. However, these
provosts did not identify specific ways in which the library would help them with most of
these challenges. Instead, they focused on the library’s support of the college’s core
work—teaching and learning—and how the library could help address the ways in which
technology was impacting those core activities.
This teaching and learning focus was mirrored in the interviews with the library
directors and the senior management team members. During the time period studied, the

	  
	  

	  

127	  

first decade of the twenty-first century, higher education was experiencing technological
changes that were fundamentally altering the ways faculty taught, students learned, and
libraries defined their collections and their purposes. Simultaneous changes in electronic
publishing, the capacity to share and deliver information across time and distance, and
increasing access to computer-enabled research and learning tools, were challenging and
changing many aspects of the academic enterprise. Colleges, their faculties, and their
libraries needed to adapt rapidly.
Alignment: Provosts’ Perspectives
All four provosts were keenly aware of changes in the academy—fueled in part by
the flood of internet-accessible academic resources and continuously evolving electronic
tools supporting new methods of teaching, learning, and research. However, they also
expressed their vision of what the library needed to be in words that would have resonated
with traditional, pre-twenty-first century statements about an academic library’s purpose
and value—“central to the college,” “part of the academic community,” and “the academic
core.”
College A. Provost A expected her new library director “to have the library be a
central part of the campus.” She then defined this centrality in two ways that reflected the
changing nature of the academic landscape. First, the provost envisioned the library
becoming “an information commons, not a traditional library with a lot of books.” Second,
she identified the librarians’ teaching role as a central part of the campus’ teaching and
learning activity, observing “part of our core curriculum is taught by the librarians and is
owned by the librarians as an integrated piece of our core curriculum.” The provost’s
assumption that the library would continue to change in support of the campus’ strategic

	  
	  

	  

128	  

priorities was included in her description of the campus’ new goal to expand international
programs and online graduate degrees. To support these curricular changes, the library
director and her staff were “figuring out a way to do online reference outside of the scope
of the normal hours” in order to “continue to offer really great service to people outside
the times and the norms” of traditional service hours. The provost expected that the
library would, “as part of the community … take the lead” in changing to meet the
campus’ changing needs.
College B. When asked about the alignment between the campus and the library,
College B’s provost stated, “there is a fundamental place for libraries here at College B
and in the academy.” The library was proactively engaged in change to ensure “being
relevant for this generation of faculty and students, not how it was 10 years ago.” That
change was partly characterized by the library shifting “itself from being a repository for
books to being a social intellectual center on campus.” The provost recognized that radical
changes in digital information, learning, and scholarship influenced the library staff’s
changes. “Librarians need to be nimble; they need to understand digital platforms as well
as hard paper platforms” and they are “fundamental” to “teaching students how to find and
use information and how to do research.” The provost praised the leadership role the
library had taken in developing a new service model to support individual faculty as they
transitioned to digital modes of instruction and student learning. The library created this
solution before the campus had fully recognized there was a need for it.
College C. College C’s provost hired the library director to explicitly create
change. The campus administration did not have a specific plan as to how the library
should change, but felt that it was in a “crisis” and there was “no vision for the future.”

	  
	  

	  

129	  

The provost perceived the new library director as being “similarly minded about how a
modern library should be and [so] we gave her… not literally of course, but something
like a carte blanche to … start new ideas.” The provost felt that “the library needs to meet
the needs of the students and the faculty but primarily the students. It’s not a research
library. … It’s a place to go to study. It’s a resource for what we teach.”
While the new library director’s initiatives were aligned with the campus
administration’s vision and the faculty wanted students to increase their library use,
faculty originally resisted the first changes the director made. Discussing faculty
resistance, the provost stated that “almost everything we’ve done like that has initially met
with a no. It was always no—not from anyone in particular, but from sort of a collective,
‘What? What are you doing now?’” Gradually, by working together, the provost and the
library director overcame faculty resistance and built a level of trust in and support for the
library. That improved faculty relationship enabled the library director and her staff to
obtain faculty support for a major campus-wide project that embedded information
literacy instruction and learning outcomes assessment throughout the curriculum and
resulted in a very positive reaccreditation of the college.
College D. The provost of College D who was interviewed was new. She came to
the campus almost four years after the organizational changes that radically affected the
library’s structure, services, and staff. In the interview, she declined to speak about those
changes, which had occurred under the previous provost. Instead, she spoke passionately
about the value of the library to the overall teaching and learning mission of the college
asserting that “in our quest to develop the analytical skills of our students, their thinking

	  
	  

	  

130	  

ability, their ability to write convincingly, to read effectively—and those are basically the
goals of an academic education—we need to have a very well-functioning library.”
From her perspective, an effective library helps legitimize the college’s intention
“to be a leading liberal arts college in this country.” Since she arrived at College D, the
provost has been engaged in ongoing discussions with the library director about further
organizational change and feels it “would be inappropriate for the library to decide to
change their focus … without talking to the leaders of the college.” The campus is still
planning to eventually create an academic commons. At the heart of the new commons,
according to the provost, will be the library as “the place where we’re going to display the
liberal arts in practice … [and a place to show visitors] what it means to be at a liberal arts
college.”
She felt strongly that the library’s mission, collections, and services should be
aligned with those of the campus. Reflecting this, she observed that this library was
serving “an undergraduate college and [library director D] … really gets it, a place that is
going to serve the community that it has” and a place that will “support the work of the
faculty and the students.” Defining the library as a “hub of information,” the provost
complimented the library director on not privileging paper over digital by “making sure
that we have access to all the electronic sources that we can afford. And we keep in the
stacks [only] the stock that we really need.”
Alignment: Library Directors’ Perspectives
College A. Upon arriving at College A, the new library director heard from the
administration and the faculty that the library “had not kept up with the pace of change in
the college.” She felt she was given an “open mandate to really help the library get

	  
	  

	  

131	  

engaged in the academic life of the campus.” Unlike some of the other library directors,
she was asked by the campus administration specifically to support “online and distance
learners and to engage the faculty.” The library director’s choices about the changes she
initiated were made within the context of the campus’ changing curriculum and the
administration’s strategic goals.
Upon first arriving at College A, the library director gathered all the official
documents she could find describing the college’s mission, vision, and strategic plans. She
interviewed key members of the campus administration to clarify her understanding of the
mission and vision and to identify if there were other goals and strategies that were
considered important but not reflected in the official documents. She took the campus’
vision statement and drafted a new library’s mission/vision statement, mapping the
library’s contributions and capabilities to the college’s. This helped her in “understanding
the institution’s goals and recognizing the library’s role in fostering them.” She then took
that rewritten statement and used it to begin conversations with library staff about their
current and future roles.
The library director saw herself as a change agent who operated within the
campus’ culture and values. She observed that “College A prides itself on being pretty
current technologically… so we took that part of the college culture … as a mandate” to
make the library’s technology and the library staff’s expertise more visible. Employing
this strategy of mirroring the broader campus characteristic of being technologically up-todate enabled the library staff not only to be seen as more aligned but also to help faculty
improve instruction in concrete ways.

	  
	  

	  

132	  
College A made two major changes, about seven years apart, in the curriculum that

created a leader/follower relationship between the faculty’s design of the core curriculum
and the librarians’ participation in teaching information literacy. The first time the core
was changed, faculty librarians worked with teaching faculty to develop standard
information literacy assignments in the required core classes. Because the classes and the
assignments were standardized, the librarians were able to collect comparative assessment
data throughout the four years of student progression through the core. The library
received a national award for its information literacy program.
The second curricular change was disruptive, characterized as “breaking the core”
by the librarians. If they maintained the instruction model of the past, they would not
have sufficient staff to teach information literacy to all students in a scaffolded way
throughout the four years. Taking a phrase—radically pragmatic—from the college’s
description of itself on its website, the librarians pragmatically broke their former
instructional model and developed a new hybrid instruction program that was recognized
across campus as innovative and very effective.
College B. The president and provost at College B gave the new library director
“a blank check” telling her “we want you to come and create the library of the 21st
century.” The campus had written a strategic plan, which had as its top goal “a new
library and technology center” in which librarians and information technologists would
partner to support teaching and learning. The original idea for this combined building
developed in a ‘bottoms up’ way from several years of brainstorming by a group of the
librarians and technologists about the ways in which a new facility housing both groups
could become a “dynamic interactive environment, teach[ing] students, faculty, and staff

	  
	  

	  

133	  

to manage information in all kinds of ways.” The campus adopted this vision and decided
to remodel the library into a new library and learning commons, which would be a
“futuristic knowledge center” that would help faculty and students “navigate the changing
landscape” of electronic resources. Arriving as the new center was opened, and staff and
collections had started to move into it, the library director was excited to have this
opportunity because she had advocated for just such a cutting-edge library at her last two
institutions—including writing an implementation plan at her previous college.
The library director recognized that the existing campus culture was very stovepiped and lacked a tradition of collaboration. The library’s organizational structure and
work patterns mirrored the campus’ culture in that they were “broken down into silos.”
The campus celebrated doing things “the [College B] way,” and library staff would often
invoke this tradition as a justification for a lack of change. In order to align the library
with the president’s and the provost’s—as well as the original library/technology—vision,
the director had to build staff’s skills, raise expectations, and change habits derived from
campus culture. She engaged in a series of changes, one of the most important was to reanimate a team comprised of librarians and information technologists to effectively
support innovative faculty digital teaching methods. This service became a campus-wide
model for cutting-edge support for digital teaching and learning. Eventually, the digital
skills they were supporting became a core part of the campus’ new strategic plan.
College C. The library director from College C was told during her interview that
“something” about the library needed to change because students were not using the
library. The director heard with dismay from one library critic that “you could fire a
Gatling gun in there and no one would be hurt” because there were so few students or

	  
	  

	  

134	  

faculty in the building itself. Aside from a general desire to have the library more heavily
used and, by implication, serving students and faculty better, there was no specific
guidance the library director received except to “create change.” In fact, after being told
in her interview that the library was under-used, she was asked, “What are you going to do
about that?” This fits with her provost’s statement that she gave the library director “carte
blanche” to be a change agent.
The library director summed up the consensus that change was needed but that the
details were going to be left to her when she said, “I think everybody had different ways to
make it happen in their heads but what everybody wanted was for the library to feel like a
vibrant campus center again … the heart of the campus.” She identified that she needed to
do two things, first, partner with faculty to help them “figure out” how to get students to
use the library and second, improve the library’s facilities and attractiveness so students,
once entering, would want to stay.
The first changes initiated by the library director were primarily physical and
attracted substantial numbers of students into the building. The library as “community
space” became an accepted part of the campus culture. The library director commented
that these changes “have been very successful [so] that people felt like [when] the library
says they are going to do something, then they are going to do it well—it’s going to come
out right.”
The library director also had as a core goal to engage the library staff more
effectively in the academic life of the college. She did this in part by helping them change
how they saw their work within the academic enterprise. An example was the challenge

	  
	  

	  

135	  

she gave the librarians as they undertook an extensive rewrite of the librarian promotion
and tenure standards document.
During this re-writing, the library director challenged the librarians to create a
document aligned with the campus’s mission and goals. She asked them, “What does
College C need us to be, [in order] to be really good and really effective?” She also asked,
“How do we describe that in this document so we were doing what the institution needs us
to be doing … instead of … ‘How do I make myself look as close to a traditional teaching
faculty as I possibly can so I am in the club?’” This rewritten document was approved by
the faculty senate and became a way for the director to shape library professional behavior
and campus expectations so that “over time, the faculty just thinks well, that’s the normal
way for librarians to act” as partners in the academic enterprise.
This changed relationship was critical in gaining faculty support for a college-wide
proposal the library developed that ultimately changed campus learning outcomes to
include information literacy and assessment at all levels of the curriculum. The
accreditation organization for College C’s region required the campus to propose and
implement a project that improved the college in a broad and significant way. The
library’s proposal, backed by data and championed by respected faculty, was selected over
a half-dozen others. Based on the success of this initiative, the library director observed
that “our library is a leadership kind of library” that created a “paradigm shift” in how
faculty approached learning outcomes and assessment. The library was seen as
“absolutely integral” to the curriculum and other “campus units … or programs” have
begun implementing the same process in developing their projects.

	  
	  

	  

136	  
College D. Before arriving at College D, the library director had given a talk in

which she told her audience of librarians “we’re not in the library business, we’re in the
higher education business.” Coming to College D in 2008, she focused on aligning the
library’s work with the broader needs of the college. During two-thirds of the period
studied, the library director reported to a provost who was in charge of the library and the
information technology departments (IT) and had as one of her top goals integrating the
library and the IT department more fully. Soon after the provost and the library director
came to campus, a new president arrived who was seen as “very mindful of the role of
libraries in curriculum transformation … and the change in libraries due to technology.”
The president “stated that one of his two top priorities was changing the library into an
academic commons.” It appeared they were all aligned toward the same goals—an
expanded building that brought together library services, technology support, and other
academic services to support the emerging new trends in teaching and learning.
The library director and the provost expected that the college “would be turning
over roughly 40% of the faculty in the next five to eight years” and forecasted that newer,
younger faculty would bring more technological skill and expect more sophisticated
support. To meet this anticipated demand, she and the provost created a small scholarship
technology center with librarians, IT staff, and a postdoctoral position specializing in
digital technology.
The library director was at first planning on taking an incremental approach to
organizational changes but she and the provost were suddenly told by the president to
make radical organizational changes immediately with both implied and explicit negative
consequences if they did not comply. In the library, individuals’ jobs were changed,

	  
	  

	  

137	  

sometimes radically, and positions were eliminated. Once they learned of the
reorganization faculty, students, and staff across the college objected to some of the
service and organizational changes and to the layoff of long-term professional staff. This
reaction did not influence the process.
Unfortunately complying with the president’s demand for immediate change did
not result in further hires to build out the scholarship technology center staff. Both the
provost and the library director were unaware that their plans for organizational change
did not align with another of the president’s strategic goals, which was to reduce labor
costs. This lack of alignment with the president’s priorities created an incomplete
organizational change process. Four years later, positions that had been originally planned
to fill out the new center were still vacant and the remodel to create the original vision of
an academic commons remained an unfunded priority.
Alignment: Senior Management Teams’ Perspectives
College A. The senior management team at College A was very aware of the “fast
pace of change” at their college and recognized that while it was something that made
people “weary” at times, it also created change opportunities for the library. One of the
newer members of the team, describing her initial impression, said she felt she was
“walking not only into a dynamic library but a fairly dynamic college as well where things
change all the time.” This “nimble” and “growth-oriented” culture became a core element
in the library’s approach to change.
Team members felt that because the library matched the campus culture of
willingness to change and experiment, the “faculty see us even more as real active partners
in the whole learning journey. ” Because of the new roles they had assumed, librarians

	  
	  

	  

138	  

were no longer “helpers, and servants … but also teaching librarians … involved with the
education business of the college.” Describing the impact of the librarians’ invention of a
hybrid-learning model to fit the second change in the core curriculum, one dean observed
to a team member, “I think you’re changing the culture for this college … of what blended
learning looks like.” The senior management team, as a result of their change journey,
saw themselves as active and influential partners in the college’s business of innovative
teaching and learning.
College B. College library B’s senior management team identified their primary
responsibility as being “here to educate the students and provide support.” They prided
themselves on how heavily their collections and services were used by faculty and
students and felt that “faculty have a high level of satisfaction with the research that their
students are doing because of the support we provide … we support their curricular
needs—that’s the bottom line.” Their work was important to the college’s mission
because, as they observed, “information literacy is critical to the education you expect in a
liberal arts institution.” The success they had achieved in including information literacy in
key areas of the curriculum and particularly in the digital literacy and technology initiative
the library/technology team supported, was somewhat of a two-edged sword.
This success has resulted in the library being considered critical to the college’s
mission but has created more scrutiny. Now, the college “administration is more
concerned about what exactly the library is doing and how it’s doing it and when it’s
doing it.” This attention means that the library’s strategic plans will “have to report on
how we’re contributing to student success more so than ever before.” They anticipate that
this attention also will drive an even greater “emphasis on data driven decision making

	  
	  

	  

139	  

and marketing.” They see two future challenges, first building a “strategic planning
mechanism … with clearly defined goals, objectives, and measures” and second the
probability of fiscal pressure on the library as part of a campus push to control tuition
costs.
College C. Similar to their counterparts in College A and B, the senior
management team members at College C identified their purpose as student-focused,
stating “we’re here to serve students and we do … organically … think about how we can
improve student learning on campus.” The campus-wide project that they initiated, which
secured the college re-accreditation, was not just about assessment; “it was about how to
teach better, to teach in a more intentional way, how to help students get to where you
want them to go.” Their model of linking information literacy instruction to learning
outcomes and assessment was a significant innovation because “at the time there was no
one else on campus doing this” so that “the library was ahead” of the teaching faculty.
Reflecting on the library’s changes with the new library director, the senior
management team member who’d been at College C the longest stated that “the library’s
role in fulfilling the education mission has been less defined but also much larger”
because there was “more emphasis on seeking opportunities where they lie and then doing
whatever you can to fill them,” and “interjecting ourselves into places where our expertise
as librarians would be needed and sometimes that means we go above our limitations as
professionals.” As the team thought about the future, with the major library-led campus
project winding down, they concluded that they were “in a time now of being flexible and
improvisational and not having a playbook or a set of protocols” as they identify new
academic needs that they could support.

	  
	  

	  

140	  
College D. As mentioned in chapter two, there was a wider variety of individuals

interviewed at College library D including professional and paraprofessional staff from
different levels within the organization. There was no senior management team structure,
so the library director identified individuals from the scholarly technology center and from
the library to be interviewed for this case study. Perspectives varied on whether the
library’s organizational changes aligned with the college’s mission, vision, and priorities.
Two senior managers in the new center were positive, stating that the changes
created a strong group serving emerging and anticipated college needs in the developing
areas of digital teaching and scholarship. They saw the center as a logical response to
“what we saw on the horizon” of higher education rather than to extensive faculty demand
for these services. As one of these two interviewees observed, “We’re part of the
education mission and we need to integrate ourselves with that, not stand aside from that
peering through the window saying, ‘Let us in, let us in.” They felt that the changes “built
a new organization that was not strictly library, was not strictly IT, that brought in PhD’s
and disciplinary specialist and began to create a hybrid space, a hybrid group.” They now
“worked with faculty and students at the intersection of scholarship and technology.”
Other interviewees were less enthusiastic although they identified some positive
values in the organizational changes that had been made stating “the emphasis on use has
been positive … [allowing us] to redefine some priorities where maybe we weren’t before,
and to rebrand in a way.” However, there was still a significant gap between the original
change goals and reality. As a result, “approximately sixty percent of the population”
across campus was not being served by the scholarship technology center. One
participant, commenting on the fact that the center has not been fully realized, warned that

	  
	  

	  

141	  

the library would have benefitted from a clearer political “understanding … [of] what the
administration is going to do realistically” before beginning such a radical change.
Conclusion
The digital revolution in information creation, management, and access during the
late twentieth and early twenty-first century created a need for librarians to become even
more technologically sophisticated and for libraries and information technology
departments to partner more closely. New software tools to support teaching, learning,
and research were being developed constantly and faculty and students needed training
and support to use these new tools and the e-content and data that were proliferating. At
three of the colleges, the library directors intentionally sought ways to provide support for,
and model the innovative use of, technology in higher education. College library A
created a successful hybrid learning environment that began to influence how faculty and
the administration thought of blended learning. The library director and head of
information technology at College B were highlighted in the new college president’s
inaugural address to faculty and staff as a model of innovative collaboration to improve
faculty pedagogy. Finally, at College library D, the scholarly technology center was a
radically different and ambitious approach to creating comprehensive technical support to
improve faculty teaching and support research.
Each library director aligned her change goals with the college’s essential mission.
All the study participants—provosts, library directors, and senior management teams
members—understood that the purpose of a liberal arts college was to teach students,
primarily undergraduates. Although some of the colleges had transformed themselves
beyond the ‘classic’ definition of a liberal arts college, they still held that liberal arts

	  
	  

	  

142	  

definition as a core part of their mission and vision—a residential college with an arts
curriculum that awarded a baccalaureate degree (Pfnister, 1984, p. 148). Phrases
reflecting this perspective, such as “it’s all about the students,” “we’re here to serve the
students,” or, “it’s about student learning,” were expressed by and deeply felt by provosts,
library directors, and senior management team members alike.
It is not surprising, given this singular focus, that each library’s transformation
involved supporting instruction through collaborating with faculty. Liberal arts colleges
typically require undergraduates to take a core curriculum, have smaller class sizes, and be
taught primarily by faculty rather than teaching assistants. Together these characteristics
are believed to support the students’ acquiring a broad, general education and skills in
analysis and expression (Ferrall, 2011; Nussbaum, 2010). One of the goals of a liberal
arts education is to develop students’ critical thinking skills—and the skills taught through
information literacy instruction support critical thinking learning outcomes (ACRL, 2000,
pp. 11-13). At Colleges A, B, and C, the library directors and the senior management
team members felt they shared a key role as teachers of information literacy skills and,
through that identification, were serving the mission of the college. In College D, the goal
of the scholarly technology center staffed by instruction librarians and post-doctoral
subject/technology experts was to help faculty include critical thinking and information
literacy skills directly into their teaching and to support faculty’s use of digital tools and
techniques in their classrooms.
One of the study’s original research objectives was to identify the ways in which
the colleges had changed since 2000 and then examine how those changes affected or
were affected by the libraries’ changes. The provosts and the library directors were asked

	  
	  

	  

143	  

about change at the broader campus level. While both groups mentioned some of the
challenges shared by private colleges in the twenty-first century, such as defending the
value of a liberal arts education, federal emphasis on assessment, high cost of tuition, and
increased competition for traditional undergraduates, these were not the strategic issues
either group identified as related to the libraries’ change journeys. Rather, the impetus for
change was firmly rooted in the assumption that libraries were critical to the college’s
primary activities—teaching and learning, and, to a lesser extent, research.
As the “information revolution” gained momentum through the late twentieth
century and into the twenty-first, many articles and books were written about how
academic libraries needed to change to avoid becoming irrelevant, or at least marginalized,
in the new information age. If they remained doing traditional activities, they would be
supplanted by new developments such as publishers’ resources marketed directly to
students and faculty, new online search tools, or for-profit companies organizing the
world’s information and making it available for little or no cost (Budd, 2005; Probst,
1996; Wood, Miller & Knapp, 2007). In his classic article, Campbell warned,
“Considering the extra-ordinary pace with which knowledge is moving to the web, it is
equally difficult to imagine what an academic library will do and be in another decade”
(2006, p. 30).
The provosts at these colleges had no such failure of imagination. They expected
the library to keep pace with the changes happening in the academic work of the
institution and for the physical building to play a central role in the social and intellectual
life of the campus. Each library director saw her role as a change leader—realigning the

	  
	  

	  

144	  

library’s collections, staffing, and services so that they again supported the institution’s
academic work and became a “center” of academic life.
References
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2000). Information literacy competency
standards for higher education. Chicago, IL: ACRL. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.html
Budd, J. M. (2009). Academic library data from the Unites States: An examination of
trends. LIBRES: Library and Information Science Research Electronic Journal, 19(2),
1-21.
Campbell, J. D. (2006). Changing a cultural icon: The academic library as a virtual
destination. EDUCAUSE Review, 41(1), 16-30.
Chaffee, E. E. (1985). Three models of strategy. Academy of Management Review, 10(1),
89-98.
Ferrall, Jr., V .E. (2011). Liberal arts at the brink. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Franklin, B. (2012). Surviving to thriving: Advancing the institutional mission. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 94-107.
Kezar, A .J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1995). Types of organizational change: From
incremental improvement to discontinuous transformation. In D.A. Nadler, R.B. Shaw,
A. E. Walton, & Associates (Eds.), Discontinuous change: Leading organizational
transformation (pp. 15-34). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

	  
	  

	  

145	  

Nussbaum, M. C. (2010). Not for profit: Why democracy needs the humanities. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Pfnister, A. O. (1984). The role of the liberal arts college: A historical overview of the
debates. Journal of Higher Education, 55(2), 145-170.
Probst, L. K. (1996). Libraries in an environment of change: Changing roles,
responsibilities, and perception in the information age. In J.J. Branin (Ed.), Managing
change in academic libraries (pp. 7-20). New York: Haworth Press.
Romanelli, E., & Tushman, M. L. (1994). Organizational transformation as punctuated
equilibrium: An empirical test. Academy of Management Journal, 37(5), 1141-1166.
Steane, P. D. (1997). Oils ain’t oils! Strategy across sectors. The International Journal of
Public Sector Management, 10(6), 461-470.
Stoffle, C., Renaud, R., & Veldof, J. R. (1996, 2015). Choosing our futures. College and
Research Libraries, 57(3), 213-225.
Wood, E. J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

	  
	  

	  

146	  
Chapter Five
LIBRARY DIRECTORS' CHANGE STRATEGIES

The first chapters of this dissertation have discussed the external forces that are
influencing academic institutions and their libraries and the internal forces and aspirations
that drove change in these four libraries. The focus of this chapter is the change
leadership and management process at each institution. Although many critics charge that
organizational change studies that focus on the “change leader” to the exclusion of other
players and internal stakeholders result in a limited understanding of change, this chapter
is going to focus on the strategies and actions of the library directors. In each of these
libraries, the library directors were specifically hired to lead change. As Palmer, et al.
(2009) note, “each person operates with an image or mental model of what he or she
thinks is achievable” and that mental model influences the approach to managing change
(p. 10). Examining each library director’s thoughts, strategies, actions, and experiences
provides a more complete understanding of each library director’s change journey.
College Library A: Inventing Within the Structure
Library director A considered her new position as “a dream opportunity” in which
she felt her vision was welcomed and supported. Her provost characterized library
director A’s vision as “an example of a library director who thinks big and looks at the
library as a part of the community.” Her goal was connecting the library to the academic
community and she started by changing the library into a “dynamic and vibrant …
gathering place.” She had a clear vision of the purpose of an academic library observing
“If you’re in an academic library, you serve teaching and learning and research. That’s

	  
	  

	  

147	  

what you do … all the rest may just be tactics.” While she believed the purpose of an
academic library was enduring, that manifestation at Library A had become almost
irrelevant to the campus’ mission.
College Library A was in need of significant shift in direction. The services,
collections, and staff had not kept up with changes that were happening in the college.
Many faculty members viewed librarians merely as purchasing agents. Students felt that
neither the building nor the staff was welcoming. Collections had fallen behind the past
decade’s rapid curricular changes. Overall, the library staff, which “felt disenfranchised,”
was not respected on campus.
Change Strategy: Taking the Slow Road
In analyzing her change leadership, the director said that for the first three years,
2003-2005, she was “conscious that the rate of change was going to have to be slower”
than she desired. She deliberately “stayed under the radar” initially because she had a lot
of work to do with her staff, whom she characterized as “an unconfident group that felt
unneeded in this beautiful building.” They were so hesitant to engage that, at first, a staff
member asked her if it was truly the library’s role to tell someone over the phone whether
a book was in the collection. She needed to build staff confidence and capacity and to
demonstrate value to the faculty.
She began with small changes such as taking down the library’s no food signs and
holding events and student-focused displays in the library. When asked what advice she
would give others wanting to create organizational change, her first rule was “do no
harm.” In her judgment, successful change needed to fit the campus culture and so she
was thoughtful and slow at first, explaining that:

	  
	  

	  

148	  
Our campus culture very rightly values people … you wouldn’t want to
come in and clean house. You would risk so much doing that, any gains
you made would be a wash—at best a wash. Similarly, with a somewhat
traditional staff and really only one new hire right away, to come in and
have that change happening at the rate which I knew it could—I know how
to do it—but the degree of alienation within the library and therefore on the
campus—I wouldn’t be seen as a leader. No, I would have been somebody
coming in from the outside making a mess.

Speaking about the first three years of quiet capacity building, she reflected “all through
that period we were getting such credibility with the faculty.”
She also changed librarians’ status. Working with her provost and the faculty
governance committee she got faculty status for the librarians. While faculty at College A
are ranked and have codified promotion requirements, they do not have tenure and so
including librarians in the process of academic governance was not as controversial as it
might have been elsewhere. By serving with teaching faculty on committees governing
new courses and programs, librarians gained self-confidence and were more connected to
curricular changes. One result was that they created a rapid cycle of collection
development tightly aligned to the campus’ rapid cycle of curricular development.
Change Strategy: Empowerment
The years from 2005 to 2007 were a time of significant change for the campus and
more active change for the library. A new president arrived in 2005 and a new provost in
2007. In 2005/6 the campus re-designed its core curriculum and implemented that new
core in 2007.

	  
	  

	  

149	  
Taking advantage of the opportunity the new core presented was a critical turning

point for the librarians. The director “gently challenged” them to develop an inquiry-based
information literacy instruction program to mirror the core’s “discussion-inquiry based”
pedagogy. She encouraged the librarians to develop a deeply embedded program warning,
“This is our one chance so let’s take advantage of it. [Let’s] … try to reach every student
… not just in the first year but all through” and try to build in assessment.
The director wanted to help the librarians create this new curriculum. Yet they
wanted to develop it on their own. However, they asked her to agree to do instruction as
well since this new program was going to increase the librarians’ workload. The library
director discussed this with the associate director for instruction who then told the group
“if you want her to teach, you’re going to have to let her [participate] in the design
process.” The librarians responded “No thanks, we actually sort of like doing this
ourselves.”
This choice to lead change “became catalyzing” because it forced the librarians to
see themselves as teachers and challenged them to learn new teaching methods. Within a
year and a half they were “calling themselves teaching librarians” and “had become not
only a reflective group but a group that trusted each other.” Ultimately, the library won a
national award for this information literacy program.
Six years later, the faculty made another sweeping change in the core curriculum
that challenged the librarians. In order to allow more freedom in course design and student
choice, the number of courses satisfying the core was expanded. With more courses and
less standardized requirements, the librarians had a dilemma because they did not have

	  
	  

	  

150	  

sufficient staff to teach in all the courses students could now take and to expand
information literacy instruction to the additional faculty now included in the core.
Feeling their award-winning program “had been broken,” the librarians struggled
to adjust. The librarians took a radical risk—stopping instruction for one year and
spending the time reflecting, talking, and brainstorming. Eventually, they developed a
combination of face-to-face and online instruction that allowed them to once again embed
information literacy instruction in all appropriate classes throughout the four
undergraduate years.
Discussing how they reacted to what they at first saw as a negative campus change,
the librarians felt that they “found a way to push themselves out of their comfort zone”
and that they were “actually far better off as a result.” Surmounting that challenge made
them “feel like we’re better teachers and, all of that combined, we also have a really great
story to tell the rest of campus that online learning can be incredibly rich.” They began to
share with faculty their new assessment data showing “that student interaction in an online
environment was incredibly rich and plentiful.” At one meeting a senior management
team member was attending, he was told by a dean of one of the schools, "I think you're
changing the culture of the college" referring to the librarians' new blended learning
approach to information literacy instruction. The senior team member concluded this
story with the statement "I think we lead in a lot of ways ... because we're trying all these
different things out and when they work we try and spread the word ... 'look at what we're
doing!'"

	  
	  

	  

151	  

Cultural Change: Intergenerational Respect
When library director A began, she managed a traditionally organized staff, which
had worked together for a relatively long time. During her first five years, she had little
turnover. Then, from 2007 through 2013, she replaced four retiring staff and hired three
new positions. When hiring new staff, she deliberately chose recently graduated,
relatively inexperienced librarians whose skills and approaches contrasted with existing
staff. Because she was bringing in generational diversity, she took an active role in
managing the interpersonal dynamics so that both groups recognized they “brought
complementary skill sets.” New librarians “brought technological skills … and … a little
different approach to outreach, closer in age to the students, more informal, a little more
gung-ho.” However, the director also communicated her respect for those librarians “who
have more longevity with a little more traditional approach” because they have “a
wonderful understanding of the college, the students, the collection … [and were]
experienced instructors with, in one case, a very strong and appropriate grasp of
interacting with the faculty to develop a collection.”
She brought these two groups together as an effective team by setting the
expectation that each would learn from the other, explaining it as “mutual coaching.”
Achieving a balance between ‘more traditional librarians … with people coming fresh out
of library school [was] really tough, … and took a little time.” Ultimately, it was
successful.
Reflecting on her strategy of proceeding slowly, respecting the campus’s cultural
values, and mirroring them in the library, and building her people’s capacity and
experience in trusting each other, she concluded “there’s been more than one tipping

	  
	  

	  

152	  

point,” but I could feel the library’s culture and the way people worked together really
start to change in 2007. In 2014, her staff is now a team and talks “openly about
uncertainty, … autonomy, teamwork.” They are taking a self-directed role in asking
together “what kind of a team do we want to be?”
College Library B: Crises Build Credibility
As mentioned in chapter four, College B’s library director was enthusiastic about
her opportunity to create change. Before she had arrived, the college had already taken
two steps to make changes in the library and technology areas. First, they had applied for
and received a Mellon grant to hire new technology staff to support academic needs such
as implementing Blackboard. Second, they had raised the funds and begun the remodel
and expansion of the existing library into a library/technology center supporting digital
teaching and scholarship.
The changes the director made during the first few years of her leadership were
shaped—and in some ways enabled—by three crises. She used those crises to establish her
own credibility, rebuild her staff’s confidence, and create an innovative service that began
to change the way teaching faculty approached their pedagogy. The outcomes of this
service were ultimately incorporated into the campus’ new 2012 strategic plan.
A Wounded Staff
Upon her arrival, she discovered that her change leadership plans had to wait until
she addressed the first crisis she found. The library staff “was wounded” as a result of the
way the remodeling project had been managed before she arrived. The partial demolition
and expansion had begun a year and a half before. During that time, professional and
paraprofessional staff had been living in a construction zone and expected to physically

	  
	  

	  

153	  

transfer a half-million volumes to the new automated storage system by themselves.
Although the vice president for administration, who was managing the building project,
had received a recommendation to create a temporary library location and to hire a
professional moving company, the campus administration had refused.
With over a half-million volumes in the collection, all library staff helped move
materials into off site storage and then back into the automated storage facility. However,
because the librarians were salaried, they ended up working twelve-hour days for many
months, physically moving books. Everyone was deeply demoralized and, in some cases,
seriously physically harmed.
The library director felt her “first order of business was to rebuild them” by
helping library staff purge their “anger and negativity at the institution.” The staff felt it
would help to tell their story to the president, so the director took the initiative to do just
that, despite opposition by her provost, who did not want the president “bothered” by the
negative situation in the library.
The director personally asked the president to meet with library staff. The
president agreed to meet, and asked the provost to join her. The stories staff recounted
were so dismaying that the president “became ashen” as she listened. However, the result
was positive. Library staff received a written apology from the president. The provost
recognized the severity of the problem and forgave the library director her
insubordination. Library staff began to heal.
A Firing Offense
A second crisis again put the library director into another negative situation with
her provost. After the meeting with the president, some library staff and services were

	  
	  

	  

154	  

relocated for the remainder of the construction. However, staff had to manage two service
points along with all the work to finish populating the automated storage and retrieval
system. Staff told the library director “there’s no way we can cover everything” without
more help.
The Library director communicated this problem frequently and urgently to her
provost, but was ignored. Finally, she warned that she would have to cut hours if she
could not increase staff. At the start of fall semester, with no response still from the
provost, she cut evening hours from 2am to 11pm nightly. The uproar began soon after the
student newspaper's first edition of the school year led with “this big banner headline,
‘Missing College B Librarians’ and an article discussing the shortened hours.”
Parents complained and the provost called the library director into her office. The
director knew the provost was “really upset … but I thought I had to do this to gain the
confidence of my staff because if I didn’t … I have lost everything.” When the provost
told the library director she was thinking of firing her, the director responded, “I’d rather
have you fire me than lose the confidence of my staff." She then explained that she had
tried to solicit the provost's attention and help, documenting her extensive paper trail. The
provost backed down, apologized, and promised to be more responsive in the future.
Six months later, the provost asked the director to suggest some management and
leadership books that the provost should read. The director took this as a sign that the
provost was interested in improving her leadership skills, and that they would be able to
work together more successfully.

	  
	  

	  

155	  

A Faculty Crisis
A third crisis gave the library director an opportunity to empower faculty and
librarians to work together to improve the library’s services and collections. Although
librarians also had faculty status, they felt “hybrid,” not equal in power to teaching faculty.
Librarians were “afraid of faculty” and so would not weed the collection or make any
changes that they feared might upset “real” faculty.
In her first year, the library director was called to an all-faculty meeting along with
the college president, provost, and vice president for administration. In that meeting,
“faculty ... were really angry” and they “stood and they were yelling” at the library
director and the vice president for administration. The cause of their anger was the
promise made by the previous library director who had assured faculty they would have
“enhanced services” during the construction period, not telling them that, for almost two
years, “half the collection would be in an offsite inaccessible storage and that there would
be this very diminished, distributed library.”
Months before, Library Director B had asked her provost and the president if she
could form a library faculty advisory committee but they had been very reluctant. She
now seized the opportunity in this meeting, by asking the faculty directly to form a
committee. They agreed and those faculty “who were angriest were appointed … and
became major advocates for the library.” Having faculty in a formal advisory role
liberated the librarians. It was “a huge change [that] … empowered the library to do what
we needed to do.” Her librarians developed a collaborative and successful partnership
with their faculty liaisons and together they began to weed and develop the collections in
new directions.

	  
	  

	  

156	  
Reflecting on her first year of crises, the library director said that while a major

part of her job was “supporting my organization and people,” this experience “was really a
baptism by fire.” However, library staff responded positively to her commitment to them,
developing a trust relationship that she used to create further change.
Realizing the Vision
Six months after her arrival, the library director and her staff moved back into the
renovated and expanded building, which housed the library staff and the Information
Technology (IT) staff supporting academic technology. Because the library director was
dealing with the series of initial crises, she did not, during her first year, choose to address
the fact that the librarians and IT staff, who had initiated the idea of a new collaborative
digital service supporting teaching and learning continued to meet but were not producing
any concrete plans or projects.
Subsequently during her second year, she engaged the head of Information
Technology, asking him to support her in setting new expectations for this group.
Arguing that it was the Library and IT that had birthed the vision that the campus
adopted—a learning and technology center that supports faculty in new ways—she said it
was now their leadership responsibility to implement that vision. They communicated
their expectation to the group that at least one project had to be developed within a short
time or the group would be disbanded. They also sponsored a two-day retreat for the
group to work intensively together. At that retreat, they gave mini-workshops focused on
project management and teamwork processes to empower the group with practical
expertise that would help them work together more successfully. Both directors
committed their support for the team to take on this risk.

	  
	  

	  

157	  
This approach was successful. The team identified faculty members for whom

“the traditional research paper was not meeting their learning objectives” and they began
pilot projects with each instructor. In one of the pilot projects developed by the team, the
instructor required her students to write a paper, do a podcast, and create a video on their
topics. Students in her class evaluated it as "the most positive experience I’ve had at
[College B].” The results were so transformative, that the team was invited to discuss
these pilots at an all-college faculty retreat.
Faculty and students who took part in the projects spoke. One instructor told her
colleagues that the students’ digital projects resulted in far more discussion and active
learning than had happened in her classroom with more traditional methods. A Rwandan
student speaking about the podcast and video he made said, “This is the most powerful
thing I’ve done at [College B] and … [I’m] making change in the world for the people of
Darfur.”
Inspired by their pioneering colleagues, other faculty began to work with the
center’s team. In three years, the number of projects grew from two to twenty-nine.
Campus-wide Impact
The library/IT collaboration was so successful that, when a new president and
provost arrived in 2010, the president announced at his fall inauguration that his first
presidential initiative would be a campus-wide meeting at which the library and IT
directors would present the results of their digital scholarship collaboration to faculty and
the Board of Trustees. At that meeting, one faculty confessed that although he had
initially been reluctant to do a center-supported project, “it was among the most effective
things I’ve ever done.”

	  
	  

	  

158	  
The joint presentation by the library and IT directors at this event produced

college-wide consequences. Faculty and trustees on the academic sub-committee of the
college’s 2012 strategic planning effort added a college-wide digital teaching and
scholarship goal. The library/IT collaboration changed the campus’s future academic
strategy.
Library director B created other positive changes during her period of leadership.
She worked with the librarians to develop and then commit to a set of “Common
Expectations of Library Faculty.” Over time, these expectations changed the way they
worked with each other in positive ways. She also established cross-functional affinity
groups within the library charged with improving process and services and initiating new
projects. With her librarians’ cooperation, she radically revised over fifty percent of their
job descriptions, shifting them from traditional to more innovative responsibilities such as
managing a learning commons, establishing an institutional repository, and creating highimpact services focused on information literacy instruction and digital data curation. She
developed legitimacy and respect through her honesty, willingness to take principled risks,
and her commitment to aligning the library with the campus’ strategic plans and vision.
College Library C: Change through Partnership
The new library director at College C was eager to create changes that brought
students back into the library. She also wanted to position the librarians and the library to
be a more active force in the academic enterprise. To be successful, she needed to work
effectively with three existing sources of power on campus. Each group or powerful
individual had different perspectives on change. First, her provost was a person who
embraced change, experimentation, and risk. The second group was the faculty who

	  
	  

	  

159	  

insisted that the library needed to become more relevant and appealing to students, yet
initially resisted many of her changes. The third group consisted of the librarians and
library staff. Librarians were mixed in their comfort with, and interest in, change. Many
library staff simply hoped for the status quo to continue.
Provost as Change-Enabler
Even before the new library director started, the provost had wanted to help the
librarians’ morale. Librarians had faculty status, but had not been very successful at
getting tenure or promotions to associate or full status because they did not fit well into
standard expectations.
After library director C arrived, the provost proposed that all librarians be changed
to staff. The provost assumed teaching and research faculty would welcome this change
because the tenure committee had so frequently denied librarians promotions. The
provost’s proposal put non-library faculty “up in arms.” They saw it as a “slippery slope”
that threatened their own tenure status. As a result, the provost was forced to withdraw
her proposal. This incident empowered the library director to capitalize on faculty
reaction and, as discussed below, she created a positive change opportunity.
The provost was an “ambitious” person, with a lot of ideas and vision and wanted
to exert a high degree of influence on academic activities on campus. That motivation,
and the energy it engendered, was focused on improving campus services. She saw her
role in supporting the library director as one of “eliminating obstacles and getting
resources.” One of the critical roles she played was to identify “opinion leaders on the
faculty” and then help them become strong library supporters.

	  
	  

	  

160	  
The provost identified herself as the campus’ “vice president for innovation,”

helping to create “new opportunities and new ways of doing business.” For the most part,
this was an approach that was consistent with the library director’s approach to change
leadership. When the library director wanted to reach out to faculty about their negative
reactions to the initial changes she was making, the provost accompanied her to many
departmental meetings—supporting her completely. Additionally, when the library
director wanted to start a campaign among faculty at College C to adopt open access
publishing, the provost identified influential faculty to bring together to a campus meeting.
The provost also paid for a national figure in the open access movement to come give that
group a presentation. Finally, when faculty agreed to study the issue, the provost
formalized this progress by appointing a committee and working closely with its chair and
the library director.
College C’s faculty governing body ultimately adopted an open access statement,
one of the first colleges in the country to do so.
Redefining Librarians’ Roles
The provost’s withdrawal of the proposal to remove librarian faculty status created
an opportunity for library director C to propose that librarians write a separate promotion
and tenure document which better matched their functions and responsibilities. To help
ensure success, the library director partnered with the most senior member of her staff, a
person who had applied for the position of director at the same time she did. He pledged
his support to her when she was the one hired. Given his support, she asked him to lead
the re-design of the promotion and tenure requirements. Because the librarians trusted

	  
	  

	  

161	  

him, they accepted his leadership. A group of tenured librarians worked together to define
a less traditional role for themselves in the academic work of the college.
The library director observed that this senior team and its leader “did an amazing
job.” The new criteria was accepted by the faculty senate and a number of the more senior
librarians who had been “glass ceilinged” by the old promotion rules were quickly
promoted under the new criteria, often to full librarian. The success of these new criteria
motivated the librarians’ acceptance of new roles and responsibilities. They became
active, engaged participants in faculty’s instruction and research and took on visible
leadership roles on campus.
The year after these new criteria were approved, the library director faced a
difficult challenge. To address this problem, she again engaged her most senior librarian.
Two librarians were coming up for tenure, and their accomplishments no longer fit the
new criteria. The director asked this senior team member to lead a discussion with his
tenured colleagues about the likelihood that these junior librarians would be denied tenure
if the tenure and promotion committee applied the new criteria.
The tenured team of librarians found the experience traumatic. However, after a
series of difficult conversations, they agreed that they needed to take the lead in helping
their junior colleagues understand the situation and to give them coaching and support.
They also came to terms with the hard decision that their own letter to the tenure
committee would need to state that these two librarians did not meet the tenure criteria.
With her senior management team’s support, the director approached each of the
junior librarians who were coming up for tenure saying “look, these are the criteria now
… and that’s not where your strengths are. You are generating fabulous articles for

	  
	  

	  

162	  

College & Research Libraries … meanwhile you literally hyperventilate when you have
to talk to a class.”
The tenured librarians then followed up by also engaging in honest but hard
conversations with their non-tenured colleagues. These two junior colleagues came to
realize that “the job wasn’t a good fit anymore.” Both found more appropriate positions
elsewhere and avoided the stigma of being denied tenure.
The library director would not have been able to make such radical changes
without her partnership with the senior librarian on her team. Besides leading the
conversation to re-design the promotion and tenure criteria, he also was instrumental in
helping the library faculty take responsibility for treating their junior colleagues with
honesty and respect. Partnering with this senior librarian allowed the library director to
make changes that could have been damaging to the group. Instead, this partnership
resulted in a stronger team culture, characterized by responsibility, trust, and caring.
With the two replacement hires, the library director made certain that they were
strongly committed to information literacy instruction and enthusiastic about engaging in
the academic life of the college. She encouraged and supported innovative ideas such as a
café, a deep weeding of the reference collection, an information commons, and annual
events that engaged the whole college with the library. With her support and incremental
successes, the librarians became a confident, collaborative team, eager to engage the
campus in library activities, events and services. With this change, faculty no longer
complained that the building was so unused that a “Gatling gun” could be fired in the
library without harming anyone.

	  
	  

	  

163	  

Engaging Faculty in Change
Two of the major changes the library director wanted to accomplish, faculty
endorsement of an open access mandate and an information literacy instruction program
that was integrated into the curriculum, required the partnership and support of faculty.
With her provost’s support, she successfully developed strong relations with faculty.
For example, the director deliberately opened up channels of communication with
faculty by holding lunch meetings in the library to discover what faculty wanted to
accomplish in their classrooms. She also visited every department “to listen to people.”
As her provost observed, the library director’s “openness and willingness to talk to
faculty” began to give them confidence in her leadership.
The director also took advantage of data and information about what “rival”
campuses were doing to forward her goals. For example, the consortium of colleges to
whom College C belonged did an annual survey of incoming first year students. The
results showed that College C students ranked lowest in research skills compared with its
sister colleges. Calling this a “gift,” she used it to convince faculty that information
literacy needed to be embedded in research and writing courses.
When the library began to plan the information literacy project that was adopted by
the entire college to satisfy their regional accreditation body, the library director and her
staff used the learning outcomes data they had been able to collect from their existing
instruction activities to build a proposal for incorporating instruction throughout the
curriculum. They engaged stakeholders widely but particularly focused on faculty
participation. A faculty committee was formed that established the information literacy
learning outcomes for the project.

	  
	  

	  

164	  
Although the library had initiated the project and spent over a year planning and

leading it from behind, the library director chose faculty as the “people in front.” Two
“really well liked, highly regarded faculty members” co-chaired the proposal committee.
Six proposals were presented to stakeholders across the college—administrators, faculty,
staff, alumni, and students. The library’s project won and became the top campus
strategic initiative for the next three years. These two original co-chairs also ended up cochairing the campus implementation committee.
This successful project, and the strategies of collaboration that led up to it, resulted
in a high level of faculty trust in the library director which culminated in her being elected
as chair of the faculty senate—the first time in the college’s history a librarian was elected
to this prestigious leadership position.
College Library D: Bold Vision, Incomplete Implementation
Both the library director and the provost were hired to create change at College D,
specifically, to continue an implementation already underway to merge the Library and the
Information Technology (IT) departments into one Information Resources organization.
To understand how to best bring the two departments together, the provost, upon her
arrival at College D, had met with many library and IT staff to understand their jobs, their
skills, and their potential. The library director, coming on board about a half year after the
provost, conducted similar conversations with the library staff. These conversations, and
her subsequent experiences working with staff, led the library director to conclude that, for
the most part, the library staff was extremely comfortable with a traditional approach to
collections and services and was lacking initiative and vision to adapt the organization to
meet new needs and challenges.

	  
	  

	  

165	  
The library director’s approach to change was driven by her belief that the College

library D tradition of “generalist librarians” was ineffective, despite the fact that this
staffing approach was common in college libraries at that time. In the interview with
library director C, she specifically addressed the generalist/specialist issue when talking
about the relationship between teaching faculty and librarians saying “we are generalists
and I believe it serves our students and faculty better.” However, library director D
strongly disagreed with this common assumption among the college library community
that all college librarians could adequately provide general reference, instruction, and
collection development for all subjects and could learn a sufficient amount about specific
disciplines to provide specialized service to those faculty and students.
The library director also firmly believed that most library instruction programs,
which were comprised often of “one-hour stand” lectures delivered by librarians who were
neither subject specialists nor experts in pedagogical techniques, were superficial and
ineffective. She wanted to embed information literacy more deeply into the curriculum,
but this goal depended on faculty acceptance of the information literacy expertise of
library staff. She believed that faculty would be more willing to partner with library
representatives who were conversant with the subject the faculty was teaching. Because
individuals with academic training could more readily understand what an individual
faculty was trying to teach and the tools and techniques of the field, those support staff
would be more readily seen as partners by faculty. Thus, they would be in a better
position to persuade faculty to integrate informational literacy into their teaching.

	  
	  

	  

166	  

Twenty-first Century Digital Services
According to the library director, “the big breakthrough” in thinking, "the seismic
shift” in vision came in early 2009 when she and the provost realized they needed to
invent a new service to be provided by staff with different academic training and new
digital skills. The provost was an “activist” and “pushy” about technology’s value to the
college. She envisioned new ways technology would become, over the next few years,
central to the work of faculty and students.
In thinking about the technology needs of the college, the provost had listed on her
white board 500 potential activities and services. One set of these activities clustered
around providing support to faculty who wanted to become more digitally literate—
incorporating technology more pro-actively into teaching, research, and student learning.
As the library director and the provost looked at the white board, “we circled one group of
those things and said, in effect, neither the library as it’s currently organized and staffed,
nor IT as it is currently organized and staffed, is going to get to these things.”
The provost and the library director decided to create a “scholarship technology”
center. This new unit would be populated with selected staff drawn from IT and the library
but also with postdoctoral fellows hired for their subject and technical expertise. Their
goal was to create a center with subject specialists who could “take [information literacy]
and combine that with other literacies or fluencies” that had been acquired in the course of
a field of study such as specialized techniques of data analysis. While radical at first, this
change was small and did not substantially affect the traditional library structure,
collections, or services. However, over the next two years, they began to experiment with

	  
	  

	  

167	  

additional changes that would incorporate within the center many library public service
functions.
When asked what motivated this change or who were the campus stakeholders
benefiting from it, the library director indicated that when the new center was created
there were only a few faculty asking for help with new digital and data-dependent
methods of teaching and research. However, they expected more new faculty would want
this support in the future. They had decided to implement these changes in what was at
first to be an experimental way and then to build faculty interest and engagement over
time.
Imagining a Twenty-first Century Library
The library director, provost, and the newly appointed director of the scholarly
technology center began to develop this new model and experiment with innovative
services and staffing. Simultaneously, the library director initiated a separate discussion
amongst the rest of the library staff, asking them to imagine what the library should do and
be in the twenty-first century. She brought in nationally known library change consultants
to work with the library staff. With this outside help, staff began almost two years of what
appeared to them to be a very general and seemingly unhurried brainstorming of new roles
and opportunities.
Over the next year, while the library staff discussed various future activities and
structures, the provost, library director, and center director created a detailed and more
radical plan for the new center. Their plan would substantially change the work of
professional librarians at College D and required eliminating some librarian positions in
order to hire individuals with subject doctorates for the new center.

	  
	  

	  

168	  
The work processes and responsibilities within the library would need to change to

accommodate the staffing reduction, and so the plan included implementing patron-driven
acquisitions and reference assistance by appointment only. This plan also proposed
having IT staff managing library’s systems and databases. Library procurement staff
would manage all purchasing, leases, and contracts for both departments.
The library director did not develop a concrete plan or timeline for this change
process. Instead, she intended to make changes “incrementally” by doing “a softer
version” of what was to happen. She preferred to avoid taking an active role in
eliminating staff and instead was hoping that, as librarians saw the center’s changes
unfold, those whom she had privately identified as not having the skills for the evolving
plan would self-realize “that they no longer fit with the changes that were starting and
[they] would find jobs elsewhere.” Contrary to her hope of this self-realization, it was not
clear to staff, particularly to the librarians, that the changes being planned might leave
them no place in the new structure. In fact, some staff felt they were being encouraged to
plan how they would contribute effectively. Commenting on this clash of perspectives,
the center’s director observed “as I look back on it, I feel that those of us who were closest
to the process saw how it was evolving and we thought that we were doing a good job of
articulating that and moving forward. But when we got to the point of announcing a
change, it was still a shock.”
Disruptive Implementation
At the beginning of the library director’s third year, the college president told the
provost that he wanted an immediate organizational change, including layoffs, or he
would not fill any of the vacant open positions in either IT or the Library. Since more

	  
	  

	  

169	  

than 25% of positions were unfilled, partly in anticipation of the re-organization, this
created a crisis. The change demanded by the president came as a surprise to the library
director. However, she suspected that there had been a private agreement made between
the provost and the president. She speculated that the provost had gotten agreement from
the president for some of the “more radical changes by saying, ‘We’ve got some staff who
are not the sort we need going forward.’” The library director did not, however, confront
the provost with this suspicion. Both the library director and the provost assumed that, if
they complied, those vacant positions would then be approved so that they could fill
needed positions in the revised library and IT functions and to expand the center's
services.
The director struggled with the situation since only librarians were going to be laid
off, no one in the IT department. She said this mandate “was hardest for me because I was
going to eliminate … people” and she knew “what it would mean to a couple of people
who are in their 50’s to leave jobs they’ve been in for 20 years or more.” However, she
reluctantly complied, explaining that it was kinder to make the changes swiftly because
she knew “in my heart of hearts … that these people were not going to rise to this
occasion.” These targeted librarians were never going to be successful in the new
positions that were being designed because the job skills and requirements were no longer
ones that these individuals possessed. She felt making the changes and then telling these
people “you can try to grow into [new jobs] … or make choices [to leave], … wasn’t
going to work.” She was also warned that if she did not comply with these terminations
she would lose her own job.

	  
	  

	  

170	  
The same day she met with the librarians to notify them they were being laid off,

she and the provost also met with the remainder of the library staff. In that meeting,
everyone received the new organizational chart and new job descriptions. Reactions
among the interviewees who experienced this were mixed. Those who already had new
jobs in the center were very positive. However, others were “devastated” by losing their
former positions and by losing valued colleagues. The laid off librarians were given the
option to continue working until the end of the fiscal year, approximately six months, to
allow them to complete their current projects and to find new jobs.
A Truncated Result
The library director’s and the provost’s vision of a new, hybrid center with subject
and digital/technical expertise was started, but never fully staffed and so the plan was
incompletely realized. Faculty had begun to use the new center's services. However,
when the plan was blocked from further growth by the president's refusal to allow the
hiring of more staff. The provost's colleagues in the campus' senior administration also
were not supportive because they felt her emphasis on technology was extreme and "not
needed at this time." The plan lacked advocates who could help persuade the president to
support its further development. This organizational change ultimately affected the
provost’s and the library director’s careers.
The provost felt “betrayed” by the president and left for a new position within a
year. The director of the new center was promoted to a vice president position reporting
directly to the provost. The library director’s position was reduced in scope and influence.
Because more staff could not be hired, and, because the reorganization left major
collection development and management needs un-addressed, the library director had to

	  
	  

	  

171	  

now do that work and was left supervising primarily support staff and one remaining
librarian, the archivist. She felt the outcome of her innovative and radical change
leadership left her “with a demotion.”
At the time library director D implemented this organizational change, it was
extremely radical and was viewed negatively in the profession once "rumor got out that
we were firing librarians in order to hire PhD's." This negative professional reaction
extended to library schools which "told their graduates not to apply" to Library D. It also
hampered the library director’s career advancement. Yet, despite the cost to her, the
library director still feels that the changes she and the provost made were the best strategy
to achieve their goal of supporting faculty as they teach and research in a new, digitally
inflected, world.
Conclusion
Based on their extensive studies of organizational change, particularly failed
change, Nadler and Tushman (1989) argue that changes which shift or bend an
organization over time are less likely to provoke resistance and more likely to be
successful. Disruptive, radical re-creation is the most likely to fail. Flamholtz and Randle
(1998) differ, to a degree, from Nadler and Tushman’s approach to achieving successful
change. While they concur that deep, transformational change is difficult, they argue that
it can be successful if change leadership is applied to the right problem. Change leaders
must understand that every organization has two elements. First, there is an underlying
concept or model, this is “the business an organization is in” and second, a strategy, which
is “how a firm operates” (p. 7). To be successful at transforming an organization, the
leader must determine which part of the organization must change, either what the

	  
	  

	  

172	  

organization is, also referred to as “the game we’re playing” or what the organization
does, also described as, “how we’ll play the game” (Flamholtz & Randle, 1998, p. 6).
They assert that many attempts at transformational change fail because the leader does not
recognize the type of change needed or does not thoroughly complete the organizational
re-configuration required.
In library change, the concept of service matters. Kezar (2001) observes, "an
institution that has a history of customer service will reflect responsiveness to students in
the strategies, reasons for, and outcomes of change" (p. 107). In discussing their change
journeys, the college library directors expressed the same goal. Their organizations’
fundamental purpose, the “business it was in,” was serving the information needs of
students and faculty as they engaged in teaching, learning, and research. Three directors,
A, B, and C, contextualized that support within their physical and virtual campus libraries.
Library directors A, B, and C focused on changing “how we’ll play the game,” often with
a judicious mix of frame-bending and frame-breaking strategies. College library director
D was also motivated by the goal of supporting teaching, learning, and research. However,
to achieve that goal as she envisioned it, she chose frame-breaking change, altering the
nature of “the game we’re playing.”
College library directors A, B, and C each had very clear ideas of how their
libraries’ services, collections, spaces, and staff should change to meet the changing needs
of students and faculty. Each director used specific change strategies (see Appendix,
Figure Four). Each also understood that, to be successful, she had to work within her
campus’ culture, respecting its values, power structures, and methods of getting things
done. Staff turnover occurred in each library and had the potential to be divisive and

	  
	  

	  

173	  

damaging to morale. However, directors A, B, and C managed the organizational changes
they created so that, while there might have been periods of stress or disruption, the
resulting staff morale was stronger and the teams more cohesive.
These three directors also recognized, and used, the power structures within their
campuses. Director A slowly built a strong information literacy service and seized the
opportunity to align with faculty by changing librarian status from staff to faculty, with the
same promotion requirements they required. Director B successfully maneuvered around
several roadblocks she faced with her provost and seized the opportunity to create
permanent and, ultimately, extremely successful collaboration with teaching faculty.
Director C ended up talking with almost every faculty member on campus to help sooth
their distress over library changes and she seized the opportunity of her provost’s failure
to take faculty status away from the librarians to substantially break the frame of what
librarians would be assessed against by the promotion and tenure committee.
College library director D’s goals and values were aligned with those of her
provost’s. Unfortunately, she lacked support from her fellow administrators and from the
president. The provost’s emphasis on the critical role technology should play in teaching,
learning, and research, was not received well by her fellow administrators. Describing the
provost’s goals and strategies for change, the library director commented “to say she was
an activist provost is to underplay the energy she brought to the college, much of it
resented or not well received by some faculty and other administrators” who felt “pushed”
by her single-minded emphasis on technology.
The library director also felt that the provost could not successfully influence the
president to keep his promise to allow new and replacement staff to be hired, particularly

	  
	  

	  

174	  

in the new center, because the president’s and the provost’s values and vision did not
align. Summarizing, the director said “it was a management style thing about who trusts
whom to do what.” The provost had a ‘just trust me” approach and felt the president
should give her funds assuming she would do what was professionally best for the college
without a lot of oversight. The president, on the other hand, was a “micromanager” who
wanted to “centralize all fiscal control and decision-making in his office.” The president
also “did not understand what staffing levels it took to keep a college going” and
automatically saw all requests for non-faculty staff as “bloat.” The president took the
salary savings from these unfilled positions to fund campus strategic plans. However,
because he did not trust the provost, those plans did not include fully funding staffing
needs of the merged library and IT departments or the new scholarly technology center.
After the president reneged on his promises, and the provost left the college,
library director D lacked a significant power base to support her in her efforts to complete
the organizational and service changes she and the provost had started. Five years later,
she has slowly built up sufficient faculty support that one of the scholarly technology
positions, the science specialist, has been hired. Others are still pending.
Library director D chose, in collaboration with her provost, a frame braking
approach to the changes she wanted to make. As will be discussed in chapters six and
seven, that approach can be successful, but will be more likely to be effective when other
elements of change management are combined with that radical vision and strategy.

	  
	  

	  

175	  
References

Flamholtz, E. G., & Randle, Y. (1998). Changing the game: Organizational
transformations of the first, second and third kinds. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Kezar, A. J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M .L. (1989). Organizational frame bending: Principles for
managing reorientation. The Academy of Management Executive, 3(3), 194-203.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.

	  
	  

	  

176	  
Chapter 6
Creating a Change Culture: Transforming the Team

Leadership is relation-based. No matter what style a leader employs—adaptive,
transactional, servant, or charismatic—the end-result of leadership, accomplishing a goal
or a project by working together in a group, is not realized without followers. As Burns
(1979) noted "one of the most serious failures in the study of leadership has been the
bifurcation between the literature on leadership and the literature on followership" (p. 3).
In part to reconcile that bifurcation, he developed the concept of transformational
leadership, defining it as a collective purpose requiring a "reciprocal process of
mobilizing, by persons with certain motives and values, various economic, political, and
other resources ... in order to realize goals independently or mutually held by both leaders
and followers" (p. 425).
Since Burns' seminal work, the characteristics of transformational leaders, the
actions they take, and the effects of those actions on followers, have been studied
extensively (Bass & Avolio, 1994; Bass & Riggio, 2006; Bennis & Nanus, 1997; Kouzes
& Posner, 2007; Northouse, 2013; Tichy & Devanna, 1986). Numerous lists of qualities
or of behaviors have been linked to transformational leaders. Yet, despite the many ways
the core elements of transformational leadership have been enumerated, a closer
examination of these lists shows a remarkable consistency in the more detailed actions or
outcomes they include.
One related example is the concept of trust, which is included in almost all lists of
transformational characteristics. In Bass and Avolio (1994), trust is described under

	  
	  

	  

177	  

“Idealized Influence” when referring to the fact that the leader "can be counted on to do
the right thing" and is "admired, respected and trusted" (p. 3). In Kouzes and Posner's
(2007) list of the five practices leaders employ, trust is found under “Enable Others to
Act,” when leaders "foster collaboration by building trust and facilitating relationships" (p.
26).
This chapter identifies the leadership behaviors and actions taken by the case study
library directors and analyzes their effects on their followers. While the primary focus will
be on their followers, the senior management team members, it will also examine the
effects on their provosts and their faculty. This analysis will use Kouzes and Posner’s
(2007) five practices and their accompanying commitments of exemplary transformational
leaders because it most closely describes transformational leadership in behavioral terms
and thus can be most directly applied to how the library directors described their own
actions and outcomes.
Transformational Leadership Practices and Commitments
To develop their list, Kouzes and Posner (2007) interviewed 1,300 managers in
public and private sector organizations asking them "to describe their 'personal best'
experiences as leaders" (Northouse, 2013, p. 198). After a content analysis of those
descriptions, they developed this model of transformational leadership, which is
summarized in Northouse (2013):
Model the Way
To model the way, leaders need to be clear about their own values and philosophy. They
need to find their own voice and express it to others. Exemplary leaders set a personal

	  
	  

	  

178	  

example for others by their own behaviors. They also follow through on their promises
and commitments and affirm the common values they share with others.
Inspire a Shared Vision
Effective leaders create compelling visions that can guide people's behavior. They are able
to visualize positive outcomes in the future and communicate them to others. Leaders also
listen to the dreams of others and show them how their dreams can be realized. Through
inspiring visions, leaders challenge others to transcend the status quo to do something for
others.
Challenge the Process
Challenging the process means being willing to change the status quo and step into the
unknown. It includes being willing to innovate, grow, and improve. Exemplary leaders
are like pioneers: They want to experiment and try new things. They are willing to take
risks to make things better. When exemplary leaders take risks, they do it one step at a
time, learning from their mistakes as they go.
Enable Others to Act
Outstanding leaders are effective at working with people. They build trust with others and
promote collaboration. Teamwork and cooperation are highly valued by these leaders.
They listen closely to diverse points of view and treat others with dignity and respect.
They also allow others to make choices, and they support the decisions that others make.
In short, they create environments where people can feel good about their work and how it
contributes to the greater community.
Encourage the Heart

	  
	  

	  

179	  

Leaders encourage the heart by rewarding others for their accomplishments. It is natural
for people to want support and to be recognized. Effective leaders are attentive to this
need and are willing to give praise to workers for jobs well done. They use authentic
celebrations and rituals to show appreciation and encouragement to others. The outcome
of this kind of support is greater collective identify and community spirit.
From Northouse: Kouzes & Posner, 2013, pp. 198-199.3
Directors' Transformational Leadership Behaviors
Model the Way
The elements of this category of transformational leadership reflect broader
qualities of authenticity, honesty, consistency, and self-confidence. By demonstrating
those qualities, a leader becomes a strong role model for followers to emulate (Bass &
Avolio, 1994).
The library directors in this study defined themselves clearly and communicated
their values to library staff, campus administrators, and faculty. They saw themselves as
change agents with a critical mandate—helping their libraries re-capture a central role on
campus supporting the intellectual life and work of the college. In each college, there
were library staff who did not, at first, value change nor see a critical need to change the
library's services and collections, the role of librarians, or the library's organizational
structure. To begin overcoming this change resistance leaders must build personal
credibility and shared acceptance of the need for change. The elements of modeling the
way set a foundation for that change readiness. College library B's director was
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
3	  See	  Appendix	  H	  for	  a	  full	  list	  of	  Kouzes	  &	  Posner's	  five	  practices	  and	  commitments.	  	  

	  
	  

	  

180	  

particularly effective in using the elements of modeling the way to initiate a desire to
change.
Faced with one librarian who refused to accept a planned change, library director
B met with the resistant librarian, who was the head of cataloging. The change violated
this librarian's philosophical allegiance to high quality cataloging. Acknowledging the
principled nature of her resistance, the director then stated her own values and philosophy
saying, "I was hired to be a change agent" and one of the needed changes was to
accommodate new digital information formats. She then invited the librarian to
collaborate on a solution that accommodated both their perspectives on how to deliver
quality service.
While library director B was firm about what she wanted to change, she also
"modeled the way" in which she was expecting her librarians to interact with one another.
Library faculty in College B had recently adopted a set of professional standards for how
they would work together. This list emphasized respect, professional behavior, and
collaboration. Library director B had the authority to change the duties of the position in
question. However, she instead chose to personally model the new behavioral standards
by recognizing and respecting the resistant librarian's professional concerns.
The director met her half way with a compromise they each could accept. The
director's willingness to compromise engendered respect, not only from this resistant
librarian, but also her from her other library faculty. The positive way she handled
conflict and enacted change was the opposite of how some influential librarians had been
behaving before she arrived. Her senior team members characterized her leadership, after

	  
	  

	  

181	  

that incident as “impressive.” Library director B felt this incident influenced her librarians'
behavior positively, helping them to become more respectful and open to others' ideas.
At College Library D, the director was equally clear on her philosophy and values,
but only persuaded a portion of her staff to adopt them. Library director D believed that
librarians with an M.L.S. degree were “generalists” who could not adequately help faculty
with their teaching and research needs. In her view, only another academician trained in
that specific field was knowledgeable enough to help the faculty member with information
resources and information literacy skills. The librarian who was put in charge of the new
scholarly technology center, staffed by subject specialists and librarians, agreed with
Library director D on the value of deep subject training over the M.L.S.
Other librarians disagreed with this view. Two prime examples were a librarian
working in the new center and one working in the remaining library organization. They
were proud of their professional M.L.S. training and felt it helped them provide effective
service to a broad spectrum of students and faculty working in diverse fields. Based on
that training, they believed they had the knowledge, skills, and dedication to provide
service equal to or better than the doctoral fellows. As an example, they cited the fact that
the doctoral fellows “just relied on the [information] tools they had used in college” and
never explored beyond those databases or journals to know what else to suggest to faculty
or students. They did not try to familiarize themselves with the broader landscape of
information resources and products available—an approach a generalist librarian was
trained to take.
Kouzes and Posner (2007) state that leaders model the way by setting an "example
by aligning actions with shared values" (p. 26). Library director D never achieved a fully

	  
	  

	  

182	  

realized set of shared values within her organization. This resulted in her imposing her
vision and values. Her values were opposed by a majority of the library organization and
a significant part of the population of students and faculty who had appreciated the high
level of service they had been receiving from the generalist librarians. By suddenly
forcing that vision through the organizational restructuring, she did not follow through on
her original commitment to develop a shared future with her staff.
Keeping promises and commitments reflects honesty, authenticity and, over time,
influences how effectively other parts of a transformational leader's behavior can be in
changing follower behavior. For example, if the leader cannot be trusted to keep her
promises, she will have a more difficult challenge when trying to "enable others to act."
Followers will not take risks to act since they do not see the director's actions as consistent
and thus trustworthy.
Library director D broke a covenant with her library staff. She had originally
invited them to engage with her in imagining a shared future—what their college library
should be and do given the changes on the horizon. These inclusive discussions took more
than a year and were aided by several different consultants. Staff was enthusiastic, feeling
they were engaged in a shared change journey. When the new organizational structure,
which had been developed primarily by the library director and the provost, was abruptly
announced, staff felt betrayed. Library director D had reneged on what they understood as
a commitment.
Transformational leaders engage in behavior that followers can admire and
potentially wish to emulate. They are authentic and work to develop shared ideals and
values. Followers are changed in positive ways by observing the leader in action and

	  
	  

	  

183	  

being influenced by the leader’s ability to define a "way," a future that followers want to
share. Library director D challenged the shared professional values of her staff in several
ways. They felt she discounted both them and their work. The perspectives of the director
and a majority of the library staff seemed in complete opposition to each other. Library
director D never succeeded in either reconciling the two value systems or persuading the
majority of her staff to adopt her values. In addition, when she suddenly implemented a
new organization, her actions were seen as a contradiction of her former commitment to
work together with staff in planning a future and thus dishonest. By engaging in behavior
that followers can trust and admire, transformational leaders influence those followers to
accompany them on a shared change journey. Four years after the abrupt organizational
change, many individuals still do not accept the "way" library director D modeled.
In contrast, library director B demonstrated transformational behaviors that had
positive effects on her followers. She was firm and honest but willing to find common
ground with the librarian supervisor. Her actions led library staff to be more willing to
buy into the professional behavioral standards she was modeling and her role as a change
leader.
Inspire a Shared Vision
Many studies of academic change have found that a shared vision is a sine qua non
of change success. Stakeholders must buy into a compelling, inspiring vision of the future
before they are willing to commit to the hard, often lengthy, work of change (Collins &
Porras, 1991; Cowan, 1993; Kantabutra & Avery, 2010; Nanus, 1992; Pounder, 2001;
Souza, 2007).

	  
	  

	  

184	  
In each of the libraries studied, leaders created a vision that genuinely transcended

the existing status quo. In three of the libraries, A, B, and C, those visions compelled a
level of commitment that transformed followers and won the support of other
stakeholders. In library D, commitment to a radically transformative vision was only
partly adopted by library and college stakeholders.
College library director A created a compelling vision that, eventually, became a
shared part of the "DNA" of her library staff. A key element in her vision of the future
was the library staff as a supportive, engaged team that made an impact on the academic
life of the college, particularly through teaching. To inspire them with her vision, and
engage them to make it a shared vision, she needed a tool.
Her first strategy was to help them become "forward looking" though the medium
of retreats and reflection (Kouzes & Posner, 2007, p. 31). Both Kouzes and Posner (2007)
and Grant (2007) support the value of reflective practice to "enable individuals to manage
and bring about change more effectively" (p. 164).
At twice-yearly off-site retreats, all professional and paraprofessional staff spent
“an entire day to do some reflections ... looking forward.” These exercises included
shared readings, individual writing, and planning for the next semester and the next year—
the future. The director described these retreats as “pivotal ... because it gave people
permission to brainstorm." Staff felt encouraged to begin thinking differently about the
future and their roles because these retreats allowed them "to spend two full days a year
being reflective and dreaming and visioning."
Library director A used specific readings that addressed elements of her vision.
After jointly reading Palmer's (1991) The Courage to Teach, librarians were inspired "to

	  
	  

	  

185	  

now see ourselves as a community of teachers." Other readings and reflection inspired
staff to align themselves with the college's self-definition as "radically pragmatic" and
they began discussing how to be nimble and entrepreneurial.
Another retreat experience helped build a shared core value to "keep the library
voice in the college experience." Through this reflective, shared learning, the library
director and her staff defined a shared ideal of an innovative campus library central to the
campus experience. They created a shared vision, a shared culture, and a shared
willingness to change.
Library directors B and C were able to transform the visions their faculty held of
the library and the role of librarians. By inviting angry faculty to become part of the first
library advisory committee, library director B transformed those faculty members from
opponents into "advocates and supporters" for the new ways she wanted the collections
and the librarians to serve the campus. Library director C inspired a shared vision in her
faculty. She let faculty "be out front" on all her initiatives, which resulted in them
championing the library's vision as their own. She also encouraged her librarians to
become actively engaged in governance committees, working alongside faculty to address
academic problems. The result was that faculty began pushing librarians out of their
traditional behaviors to take a stronger leadership role on campus.
When she arrived at College D, the library director had a vision of the future of
college libraries that radically challenged many of the traditional elements of an academic
library. One facet of her vision that was largely rejected by the library staff was how the
director viewed the collections. Challenging the tradition of ranking an academic library's
worth by the size of its book collection, she declared libraries were not "in the book

	  
	  

	  

186	  

business" but instead "in the higher education business." This initial vision inspired some
librarians who mentioned her statement during the case study interviews admiringly.
They saw that statement as the foundational impetus for the radical changes the library
began to undertake.
However, eight years after she first communicated this part of her vision, some
librarians still had not adopted it. Instead of seeing it as a positive move toward a library
that was more engaged in the campus' academic work, one interviewee mentioned that the
director wanted "to get rid of all the books." Another described the library director's
"vision" as a desire "to burn all the books."
A more controversial part of the director's vision was derived from the value she
placed on academic training over professional training, discussed above in "Modeling the
Way." Two of the library team members interviewed, both managers of the scholarly
technology center, were very positive about the director's vision of academically trained
support staff and the new center that evolved from it. Other staff members either did not
accept library director D's vision or were confused and uncertain because they "weren't
clear what that vision was."
A vision is not in and of itself transformative. Leaders must engage deeply and
cooperatively with followers to build their understanding of and commitment to that
vision. Library director A clearly communicated her own vision and established a
learning process that helped staff understand her vision in the context of current thinking
about teaching, service, and creativity. Library director B expressed a clear and appealing
vision out of the priority the college had established to create new support services for
digital learning and teaching. She then built change urgency with her staff and provided

	  
	  

	  

187	  

them the skills and support they needed to buy into her vision. Library director C's bold
vision—to incorporate information literacy instruction and assessment throughout the
college—also came to be enthusiastically shared by her librarians. Only in library director
D's case did the vision have to be imposed on many staff because of the director's lack of
success in achieving shared buy in. Speaking to the absence of genuine discussion about
library director D's vision, one senior team member observed, with an expression of
sadness, "It was really clear to me that a decision had already been made and nobody's
voice was important other than [her] own."
Challenge the Process
Each director began her new job as a risk-taker, willing to challenge the status quo.
All four directors recognized that a core part of that status quo was their staff's traditional
services and behaviors. In each library, staff had formed "communities of practice,"
which shared assumptions, work practices, relationships, and structures that had, over
time, created a shared identity that was the status quo (Wenger, 2008, p. 5). If the
directors were to be successful in transforming how their libraries met the needs of faculty
and students, they needed to change the way their library staff defined themselves and
their work.
The library directors engaged in a number of strategies that created the conditions
for library staff to change how they thought of themselves as a community and how they
practiced their profession together. Those strategies were a mix of long-range and shortrange. Directors communicated holistic, forward-thinking perspectives on the library's
future, a practice that supports challenges to the status quo (Riggs, 1998). Directors also
paid "heightened attention to innovation" by encouraging their staff to develop and try out

	  
	  

	  

188	  

new ideas (Jantz, 2011, p. 4). Complementing this encouragement, the directors provided
simple goals and "a clear sense of what a successful [workplace] outcome would be," an
approach to changing group commitment and behavior (Dalbello, 2005, p. 413). Finally,
they did not hesitate to challenge staff that resisted change.
College A's provost praised the director's success in empowering her staff to
"Challenge the Process" observing, "the library has been really good about re-thinking
everything." Library A staff felt this was because director A "does a good job of helping
us look at the big picture." Library C's senior management team describe library C's
director as "motivated to get out ahead and cause change." The consequence, they felt,
was that "she is a dynamic leader who wants to try new things and supports us in trying
new things."
Each library director encouraged staff to innovate, grow, and improve. This
encouragement sometimes was offered through reframing. For example, Library director
A encouraged staff to take risks by calling new projects "pilots" or "experiments." She
would also often suggest new ideas through a process of "gentle questioning." For
example, she asked the librarians if they thought they'd get more students to come to the
library and ask for help if they established regular reference desk hours—a question that
ultimately changed that service in very positive ways.
Interviews with each senior management team illuminated how that team thought
of change and how they challenged each other to think and work in new ways. Library
A's senior management team regularly sought new ideas through "true brainstorming ...
where people are just so encouraging." The foundation for this willingness to risk was the
fact that director A did not blame them for failures. Acknowledging that something

	  
	  

	  

189	  

expensive or that had high visibility would be planned carefully and strategically, they
offered examples of other projects that often were started with a "try fast, fail fast"
approach. If the effort did not work out, the typical response would be "Who knew? At
least you tried!"
Library B's senior management team saw the library as engaged in constant change
and felt they had a responsibility to "undertake deliberate change" and constantly ask
"what is our role?" when experiencing change from external sources. Library B's provost
commented on the changed way the library staff were thinking about their work more
broadly observing, "their annual reports always link their next year's goals to the campus'
strategic plan."
Library C's senior management team expressed great enthusiasm for organizational
change, observing that they were "open to the opportunities available to us as we are
moving through time." They described the librarians and paraprofessionals at library C as
"creative, energetic staff" always asking one another, "You have an idea? Let's try it!"
Director C welcomed new ideas from her staff but came up with many ideas herself. In
fact, she was so enthusiastic and creative, that her senior management team developed a
way of managing "upward" to temper some of director C's more extreme suggestions.
However, they felt that it was her leadership that had made them an "agile library."
Library D's director tried to encourage the library staff to develop innovative ideas
about how the library could serve Campus D in the twenty-first century and brought in
several consultants to help staff with this exercise. However, some interviewees felt this
brainstorming was "vague" and "seemed kind of flowery and not sustainable." The group
that became involved in the new scholarly technology center did define themselves as

	  
	  

	  

190	  

responsible for innovation, calling part of their center the "skunk works" where new
technologies were explored and assessed for value to faculty and students. A combination
of fear of losing their jobs and a lack of encouragement to innovate demotivated other
staff that felt that they needed to "just keep our heads down."
A final way in which three of the library directors, A, B, and C, challenged the
process was to hold individuals accountable who were resistant to or obstructing change.
Library director A first tried to change the staff dynamic by hiring just-graduated
librarians who would bring enthusiasm and new ideas to the group. This strategy worked
to a degree. However, she had to put a lot of energy into helping the "older" and "newer"
groups of librarians work together. At one point, she experienced a crisis—she was "worn
out" by the effort. With her provost's support, she attended off-site leadership training and
then used the services of a leadership coach. This developmental opportunity helped her
lead in new ways. With those new skills, Director A held honest, effective conversations
with problematic staff and, ultimately developed a cooperative, positive team.
Both library director B and director C had librarians who were "behaving badly"
and obstructing their efforts to encourage staff to challenge and change the status quo.
Each director addressed these individuals, setting expectations and boundaries and
offering support to help them act in new, and often more professional, ways. In some
cases, individuals changed their behaviors but in other situations the individuals were
offered economically attractive severance packages.
Enable Others to Act
By allowing and supporting others to act, the transformational leader is not
manifesting a laissez-faire style of leadership, accepting whatever followers wish to do, or

	  
	  

	  

191	  

waiting passively for them to ask for direction. Instead, transformational leaders
exhibiting this behavior encourage differing points of view, treat others with dignity and
respect, and support their followers to take risks and make choices. The purpose of this
behavior is to build a sustained community of practice characterized by trust, teamwork,
and collaboration contextualized by shared values and vision.
Library directors A and C were supported in their leadership success by provosts
who exhibited transformational behaviors by enabling their library directors to take action
at crucial moments. When library director A began feeling discouraged and burnt-out, her
provost committed a significant amount of resources to allow the director to expand her
leadership skills. Not only did she send her to training that amounted to over six weeks
away from work, she also paid for a leadership coach to help library director A use her
new skills and ideas effectively in the workplace.
Provost C described library director C as "the fastest person I ever knew, always
moving." To help director C maintain that momentum, Provost C described her job as
"removing obstacles" and helping director C identify and engage with influential faculty
on campus. Provost C saw her role as not just enabling director C to act, but also the
whole library. She personally banned badly behaving faculty from even entering the
library. She did not want the library staff's genuine commitment to service dis-respected
by arrogant behaviors.
Empowerment. The senior management teams in libraries A, B, and C each
expressed a feeling of empowerment. While recognizing the disparate status and power of
the director, they used phrases that showed they felt they were partners rather than
subordinates. A fairly new member of Library C's senior management team observed,

	  
	  

	  

192	  

"we manage from a bottoms-up approach." Another interviewee from College B stated
that director B "expects me to contribute my professional knowledge."
Each of these directors actively solicited her librarians' advice on major
organizational decisions. The librarians interviewed candidates for professional positions
at library A separately. They then gave director A the group's independent
recommendation on new hires. Library director B, who wished to establish more
organizational structure in an originally flat organization, empowered her librarians to
decide which positions should become associate directors. As discussed in chapter five,
library director C encouraged her librarians to re-write their promotion and tenure
requirements without any input from her, only challenging them to align the expectations
they were developing with the academic needs of the college.
When the senior managers from libraries A, B, and C were interviewed, they
frequently referred to themselves as a team and often referred to the entire library staff as a
team. They saw themselves as a group, frequently using phrases such as "we are," "we
engage," "we collaborate," and "we think." While this might have been influenced by the
fact that, except for one college, they were interviewed as a group, the examples they
offered resonated with this team approach to their work. Library C managers affirmed,
"We look for ways to contribute to each other's ideas." They also agreed that, as a group,
"we are flexible and improvisational" about the library's future. Library A's senior
managers characterized themselves as "as cohesive team" that tried to incorporate "fun all
the time" into the projects and services they developed. Library B's senior management
team planned to significantly reorganize the library's committees to build more "organic

	  
	  

	  

193	  

collaboration" into their work interactions so that they could "jump in and support each
other" as they "undertake deliberate change."
At library D, a shared, team approach to work did not emerge in the interviews.
Although library director D initially empowered all library staff to think creatively about
the future, she fairly quickly decided that some of them "would never be able to" meet her
expectations and standards for independent, innovative thinking. Deciding that some staff
"would never grow," she instead focused her efforts at re-envisioning the future with her
provost, a few of the librarians, and a doctoral fellow who had been hired on a grant to
help start the new service. Other staff recognized that they were not part of this smaller
innovation team and felt "disenfranchised." Library director D decided about staff's
capacities within her first year. In contrast, directors A, B, and C committed themselves to
a long effort of staff change and empowerment, averaging about eight years each.
When planning the case study at College D, the researcher asked the library
director to identify her "senior management team." The director replied that she had none.
While the manager and assistant manager of the scholarly technology center identified
themselves as a team, no library staff interviewed used the word to describe him or herself
or how they worked together. The environmental elements of a team potentially existed in
the scholarly technology center where the librarians and the doctoral fellows there were
ostensibly doing the same work. However, they had not built a community of practice.
These two sets of individuals did not naturally share the same values, priorities, and
academic backgrounds. Intentional leadership would have been required to bring them
together in a community characterized "by the sustained pursuit of a shared enterprise"
(Wenger, 1998, p. 45).

	  
	  

	  

194	  
Trust. Trust is an element of enabling others to act in Kouzes and Posner's (2007)

transformational leadership model. The significance of trust in leadership "has been
recognized for four decades" (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002, p. 611). In particular, trust has been
demonstrated to play a significant role in employee engagement and to moderate the
effects of transformational leadership behaviors (Wang & Hsieh, 2013; Kelloway, Turner,
Barling, & Loughlin, 2012). Mutuality is an important aspect of trust as Klaussner (2012)
has observed, "for a stable climate of trust to emerge, both leader and follower have to
perceive their counterpart's behaviour as fair and consistent over time" (p. 417).
Library directors A, B, and C discussed trusting their staff as a major turning point
in their leadership experience. That trust primarily emerged when a director felt her
librarians shared the director's vision and values. Library director A felt that "in the early
stages of change you're often feeling very alone ... very vulnerable." She identified the
exact moment when she began to trust her librarians. It occurred when her librarians told
her they wanted to design the information literacy program by themselves. She
remembered, "I wanted like crazy to have my hands on it because I had been waiting a
long time to have an opportunity to embed information literacy in a curriculum."
Recognizing the librarians' need to exert their own leadership she "took a deep breath and
stepped back and ... [she] said, 'Yeah, go for it!" The risk she took in not controlling this
nascent effort paid off. The librarians independently developed a program similar to what
she imagined. She recognized that embedded information literacy was now a shared
element in the library's vision of its mission.
Library directors B and C experienced a point similar to library director A where
each realized that their staff now shared the values and vision they were espousing. Those

	  
	  

	  

195	  

realizations also resulted in each director extending a deeper level of trust to her staff.
Senior management team members’ trust in their directors developed through their
observation of two important behaviors. Trust was given when followers felt the
director’s behaviors were consistent with the values she communicated. They also
explained their trust through examples of the director treating employees fairly.
In the case of library D, trust was damaged because library staff felt the
organization and the director had not treated individuals in a just, consistent way. They
had been thinking they were working together on the future but they had not genuinely
been part of the planning process. That understanding and betrayal of trust came as a
“shock, shock, shock.” Library director D described the sudden organizational change as
"painful." Staff experiencing it described it in even stronger terms. One librarian,
describing being handed a new and completely different job description said, "I loved my
old job and I was really sad ... I was devastated. And they did this in front of everyone
meeting together, which meant I cried. I cried in front of all my colleagues. I was so mad."
A second part of the feeling of injustice was that only the library lost staff. One
interviewee explained that laying off librarians was “not fair” because “there a case of a
known person [in IT] that basically everyone considered incompetent and that person did
not have their [sic] position eliminated.”
The staff that was retained did not feel that they were included as contributing
participants in any further change. Challenges to the decisions made or to the new
organization were not welcome. If comments or questions from staff implied criticism,
management would “cut those off, they didn’t want to hear anything negative about their
plan.”

	  
	  

	  

196	  
In libraries A, B, and C the library directors actively encouraged staff to take on

new roles and projects and supported experimentation and risk-taking. The staff
empowerment they encouraged help to develop, over time, a team spirit, a willingness to
collaborate, and shared trust. In library D, the staff’s experience was the opposite due to
this abrupt and unexpected management action. Summing up the experience, one
interviewee observed, “as much as you want people to embrace change, you can’t make
them fear for their jobs. And that’s what ended up happening.”
Encourage the Heart
The rewards and praise leaders give others help develop in followers a collective
identity and a community spirit. In libraries A, B, and C, the library directors and the
senior management teams referred frequently to experiences of recognition, group
celebrations, and milestones that mattered deeply to them. They often used words that
reflected their sense of shared identity and community.
Library director A’s semi-annual retreats also included time to reflect on and
celebrate the past semester’s accomplishments. At the fall retreat, she gave her staff a
token—for example a cup—with that year somehow reflected on the object. Her staff
looked forward to these tokens because they remind them “of something good that
happened” that year. College library B’s director encouraged her staff to apply for a
national award and led the application effort. This award highlighted the accomplishments
they had achieved—and was an important milestone recognizing the success of their
change journey. Several interviewees remembered the campus celebration enthusiastically
with one team member commenting that the celebration communicated the importance
and quality of their work to the entire campus community.

	  
	  

	  

197	  
Prior to library director C's arrival, librarians had been routinely turned down for

promotions, and some for tenure, under the faculty rules that focused on research and
teaching accomplishments. As one of her first initiatives, library director C encouraged
her librarians to re-write their promotion and tenure document, and she helped get it
accepted. Her eligible librarians, who were now performing under the re-written
standards, all quickly received positive promotion/tenure reviews. The director also
encouraged librarians to initiate their own events and celebrations, ones that included the
entire community. These celebrations have been so successful that the college president
looks forward to one event in which he gets to wear a “seriously authentic” costume and
play a main role in the annual event.
Library director D did not build a collective identity or a community spirit in her
library. Nor did she develop effective community relations with other parts of the campus
or important stakeholders. There was a significant portion of broader academic
community that did not feel there was a "real" library anymore. Four years after the
organizational change and the elimination of the reference desk, one interviewee fairly
frequently overheard students saying that their teachers told them "there aren't any
librarians anymore" to help the students with research.
Conclusion
One of the conditions in which a transformational style is successful is “when
leaders face an unstable, uncertain, turbulent environment” characterized “by complexity,
lack of the leaders’ familiarity with likely events, rapidity of change, and lack of visibility
of the future” (Bass & Riggio, 2006, p. 87). In this study, each library director faced
complex problems, uncertainty about the future, and significant institutional change that

	  
	  

	  

198	  

had not included the library. They were encouraged by their administrators and, in some
cases, their faculties, to be change agents—architects of even more uncertainty and
turbulence. The directors all had bold visions, communicated their values clearly, and
imagined and described positive future outcomes. They all were motivated by a shared
value of academic librarianship—of service to the academic lives of their colleges.
This analysis of the transformational behaviors of library leaders at Colleges A, B,
and C demonstrates that to be successful in creating organizational change the leader must
take an active—and an almost continuous—role in "understanding, assessing, and
managing the transformation process" (Bass & Avolio, 1994, p. 148). Directors A, B, and
C actively worked at leadership. While inspiring, encouraging, and empowering, they also
were willing to take on the hard tasks of leadership, such as committing to a lengthy
change process and holding staff to performance standards through frank and honest
discussions. They were willing to compromise and change strategies when doing so did
not conflict with their values and moved them toward their change goals.
When asked about how she developed change plans and processes, each director,
A, B and C, described actions she took, and events that happened, or results she achieved.
They were firm in their visions—the what that they wanted to achieve. Yet they were
vague about specific plans and strategies—the how, the process for achieving those
visions.
Certain high-impact projects or major goals were planned thoroughly, such as the
proposal that garnered Library C re-accreditation for the college. However, the primary
method they employed in the transformational process was "planful opportunism," a
"process of capitalizing on changing circumstances" and taking "advantage of windows of

	  
	  

	  

199	  

opportunity" (Tichy & Devanna, 1986, p.93). This nimble, opportunistic approach to the
how of change, to their short-term goals and strategies, was particularly effective for two
reasons. First, these directors were engaged in deep, sustained change. Success created
changed values and attitudes, modified behaviors, and altered structures, processes, and
cultures (Bass & Avolio, 1994, p. 148). As they created change, their followers, their
organizations, and their broader environments were then altered. This change process
meant that they also had to continually adjust their change strategies to accommodate the
new circumstances they had helped create.
Second, the directors were not isolated in the library but were part of a broader
campus that was also constantly changing and influencing each director and her library.
In addition, the directors' changes had significant impacts at times on key stakeholder
groups, on campus goals and strategies, and on campus cultures. A flexible, opportunistic
approach to strategy aided them in navigating that broader environment. To be successful,
the directors had to not only employ transformational leadership skills, but also political,
contextual, and emotional skills to be effective change leaders in that wider college
environment.
References
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J., Eds. (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: The strategies for taking charge (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.

	  
	  

	  

200	  

Burns, J. M. (1979). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Collins, J. C., & Porras, J. I. (1991). Organizational vision and visionary organizations.
California Management Review, 34(1), 30-52.
Cowan, R. B. (1993). Prescription for small-college turnaround. Change, 25(1), 30-39.
Dalbello, J. (2005). A phenomenological study of an emergent national digital library. Part
I: Theory and methodological framework. The Library Quarterly, 75, 391-420.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and
implications for research and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 611-628.
Grant, M. J. (2007). The role of reflection in the library and information sector: A
systematic review. Health Information and Libraries Journal, (24), 155-166.
Jantz, R. C. (2011). Innovation in academic libraries: An analysis of university librarians'
perspectives. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 3-12.
Kantabutra, S., & Avery, G. C. (2010). The power of vision: Statements that resonate.
Journal of Business Strategy, 31(1), 37-45.
Kelloway, E. K., Turner, N., Barling, J., & Loughlin, C. (2012). Transformational
leadership and employee well-being: The mediating role of employee trust in
leadership. Work & Stress, 26(1), 39-55.
Klaussner, S. (2012). Trust and leadership: Toward an interactive perspective. Journal of
Change Management, 12(4), 417-439.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco,
CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Nanus, B. (1992). Visionary leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

	  
	  

	  

201	  

Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Palmer, P. J. (1998). The courage to teach: Exploring the inner landscape of a teacher's
life. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Pounder, J. S. (2001). “New leadership” and university organisational effectiveness:
Exploring the relationship. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 22(5/6),
281-290.
Riggs, D. E. (1998). Visionary leadership. In T. Mech & G. McCabe (Eds.). Leadership
and academic libraries (pp. 55-65). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Souza, J. M. (2007). Factors contributing to the successful implementation of planned
change at a small, private, four-year institution in the Mid-Atlantic area. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304842805/abstract/13B96C
133267D9791B7/1?accountid=13870
Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. (1986). The transformational leader: The key to global
competitiveness. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wang, D-S., & Hsieh, C-C. (2013). The effect of authentic leadership on employee trust
and employee engagement. Social Behavior & Personality: An international journal,
41(4), 613-624.
Wenger, E. (2008). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New
York: Cambridge University Press.

	  
	  

	  

202	  
Chapter Seven
THEORETICAL MODELS AND ACADEMIC LIBRARY CHANGE

Chapter six highlights the effectiveness of transformational behaviors in creating
organizational change. To the extent that each director, A, B, C, and D, employed these
behaviors, each was able to build shared values, shared visions, and a team committed to
helping create a changed organization that embodied those values and visions. Yet while
transformational leadership skills are necessary, they are not sufficient to create "deep
change" (Quinn, 1996; Tichy & Devanna, 1986). Change leaders "confront futures
riddled with uncertainty, complexity, and potential for disruption" (Thomas, 2008, p. 214).
Each library director experienced forces of uncertainty, complexity, and disruption from
the broader organization within which they worked.
To navigate these broader forces effectively, the library directors in this study
required additional leadership skills beyond those of transformation. They also needed to
employ political, contextual, and emotional skills to manage themselves and their
environments. This chapter will use two organizational change models to analyze the
interactions between the case study directors' leadership actions and the broader college
environments in which they operated. These theoretical models characterize
organizational change in two ways—the what, or the type of change envisioned, and the
how, or the process of making that vision a reality. The library directors' change actions
and strategies will be analyzed using the change model of punctuated equilibrium (Nadler
& Tushman, 1989) (see Chapter 3, Figure 1), and then the multi-lens framework
(Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997) (see Chapter 3, Figure 2).

	  
	  

	  

203	  
Change Theories

Change Goals: the What
Chapter four examined the alignment between each college and its library. At
each college, the impetus for change was a misalignment between the changing needs of
students and faculty and the unchanging services and collections the library was
providing. The libraries could not overcome the "stasis" of past practice without an event
that punctuated the existing equilibrium—a "phase shift" that initiated discontinuous, nonlinear change (Akrivou, Boyatzis, & McLeod, 2006, p. 69). To create that change
opportunity, each college in this study chose to bring in a new library director who was
empowered to "puncture" that stasis.
As Mink, Owen, and Bright (1993) observed in their study of culture change in
organizations, the "world is littered with the corpses of organizations which were unable
or unwilling to apprehend a change in the set of assumptions they used to define what was
real, what was possible, and what was important" (p. 27). In this study, each incoming
library director had a transformative vision of what was "real," "possible," and "important"
in the library's role on campus. The directors shifted the conceptual framework—the
what—by redefining what the library should be and what librarians should do in support
of the academic life of the college.
Nadler and Tushman (1989) also apply the terms "reorientation" and "re-creation"
respectively to frame bending and frame breaking approaches (p. 196). They define
reorientation, or frame bending, as "strategic change, made with the luxury of time ...
[involving a] fundamental redirection of the organization" (p. 196). Re-organization is
considered bending because both the vision and justification for the changes "are

	  
	  

	  

204	  

frequently put in terms that emphasize continuity with the past (particularly values of the
past)" (p. 196). They define re-creation, or frame breaking, as a "strategic change
necessitated by external events, usually ones that threaten the very existence of the
organization ... [and requiring] a radical departure from the past and include shifts in
senior leadership, values, strategy, [and] culture" (p. 196). This model radically breaks
from the continuity and values of the organization's past (see Figure 4).

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  New	  Library	  Directors	  Hired	  	  

	  

	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  Directors’	  Change	  Strategies	  

	  

	  
Figure	  3.	  Frame	  Breaking	  and	  Frame	  Bending	  Strategies	  
	  
	  
Frame bending change strategy. While all four library directors disrupted the

	  

existing frameworks under which their libraries were operating, library directors A, B, and
C chose primarily frame bending strategies with smaller, focused, frame breaking
elements to achieve their visions. Library director D chose only a frame breaking
strategy.

	  
	  

	  

205	  
The library directors' choices of reorientation versus re-creation were reflected in

the change strategies they chose. College library A's director quickly realized that her
desire to make rapid and systemic changes would not work in her college's environment.
She recognized the need to take a less radical approach saying "I couldn't drag people into
change, that would be too destructive." Instead, she started "weaving it in" as she
encountered opportunities to reorient staff behaviors, approaches, and thinking.
College library director B defused resistance to her change plans by presenting
them as either aligned with the broader strategic goals of the college or with enduring
library values. She often said to staff "we have a mandate" from the campus to create
change. As a change leader she was "clear about enduring library values" of service and
how the library needed to change existing services and processes to stay true to its
"mission statement which said we support instruction."
In the 1980's College C undertook an aggressive program to raise its academic
reputation, which included having a more prestigious library. In that era, academic
libraries measured reputation by volume count. Library C "was very innovative in
growing the collection quickly ... from 300,000 volumes to 600,000 in ten years." At the
time of the study, library director C was faced with an aging book collection and a
constrained physical footprint into which she wanted to put more student-focused,
innovative services. To make space, she preferred to discard a large number of unused
titles and rely on interlibrary loan to provide them if ever needed. However, faculty would
have revolted; the campus' continued pride in the large collection would not allow that
option.

	  
	  

	  

206	  
Instead, she "bent" the ownership frame. Several hundred thousand titles were

moved to the remote storage facility of a nearby research one level library. That library
then owned the books but records for them also remained in library C's catalog. If
someone at College C needed a stored title, the research university library's storage facility
staff would give the loan request priority, one-day delivery.
Frame breaking change strategy. According to Nadler and Tushman (1989. p.
202), leaders such as library directors A, B, and C who use frame bending or reorientation
strategies are more successful at large scale, long term change. In contrast, they warn,
"Re-creations are the most risky and traumatic form of change." Because of this, they
assume "that managers would rather avoid the costs and risks associated with "recreations" (p. 197).
When she started at College D, the library director was presented with a change
goal—to integrate more completely the information technology and library departments.
Library director D identified an organizational change that would radically reshape the
services, staff, and structure of the library. Her decision to hire non-M.L.S. staff with
different skill sets than librarians was happening in other libraries. That approach has had
a long history of controversy in the academic library community that continues to the
present (Gremmels, 2013; Herold, 2015; Neal, 2006). By itself, her decision to hire nonlibrarians to perform what had been traditional librarian roles might have been simply
frame bending. However, by eliminating librarians to create the capacity to hire nonlibrarians, she was creating a radical break from the library organization's past. While the
president forced the abruptness of this change, the library director chose to break rather

	  
	  

	  

207	  

than bend a set of shared assumptions and values held by her staff, and shared by the
broader academic library profession.
Her strategic choice devalued the professional training a librarian received. She
assumed that faculty would be better served by scholars trained in their own disciplinary
fields rather than in librarianship. As such, her approach violated that "psychological
contract between individuals and their employers [that] exists in all organizations" (Neal,
2006, p. 43). That initial experience of devaluation was exacerbated by the fact that the
librarians working with these non-M.L.S. library staff felt that there was "a culture clash"
between the values held by the librarians and those held by the doctoral fellows.
Librarians viewed service as a foundational value and purpose of their profession.
They argued that the post-doctoral fellows did not value service to the same degree,
offering examples of choices the doctoral fellows would make that advanced their subject
interests and left the M.L.S. librarians with the routine, service work for which the center
was responsible. Without shared values and a shared agreement about work priorities,
they were not an integrated, fully effective team.
Part of a transformational leader's success involves developing a compelling vision
of the future that attracts followers so that they commit to the vision and then work
collaboratively to help implement it. One segment of the college's administration, staff,
and faculty accepted Library director D's vision. However, as long as four years after the
change, other members of the library staff and some faculty and students continued to
reject that vision, the what, she was trying to achieve. This rejection may have persisted
not just because all stakeholders did not accept the vision but also because of the how—

	  
	  

	  

208	  

the way the library director and other campus administrators attempted to manage the
change process.
Change Management—the How
However effective the transformational leadership skills were for the directors who
employed them, those skills alone were not sufficient to create change that was successful
and persistent either within the library, or in the broader college environment. To create
lasting change, directors also needed to undertake the how of change effectively. Leading
and managing change within the complex academic environments in which they worked
required additional leadership skills beyond those explicitly called out in lists of
transformational attributes or behaviors (Kezar, 2001).
In particular, the library directors' success also required contextual intelligence,
emotional intelligence, and resilience. Contextual intelligence is "the ability to recognize
and diagnose the plethora of contextual factors inherent in an event or circumstance, then
intentionally and intuitively adjust behavior in order to exert influence in that context"
(Kutz, 2008, p.18). Emotional intelligence is "the capacity for recognizing our own
feelings and those of others, for motivating ourselves, and for managing emotions well in
ourselves and in our relationships" (Goleman, 2000, p. 317). Resilience, which has been
linked to both transformational leadership and emotional intelligence, is "a sense of selfefficacy ... the ability to positively adapt to, and/or rebound from, significant adversity and
the stress it creates" (Everly & Strouse, 2010, p. 13).

	  
	  

	  

209	  
The scholarly and popular literature on leadership and organizational change offer

numerous lists of leader skills4 (Black & Gregersen, 2002; Hawkins & Dulewicz, 2007;
Higgs & Rowland, 2011; Kotter, 2005; Roberto & Levesque, 2005; Thomas, 2008). And,
in fact, contextual and emotional intelligences and the capacity for resilience are not the
only change management skills the library directors in this study exhibited. However,
these three skills, or the absence of them, were particularly significant in the change
leadership experiences of the four library directors.
The multi-lens framework. Rajagopalan and Spreitzer's (1997) multi-lens
framework incorporates three theories on creating change, the rational lens theory, in
which change is planned and sequential, the learning lens theory, in which change is an
evolving process influenced by the environment, and the cognitive lens theory in which
the leader's thought processes and assumptions influence the change process. Each theory
affects the change paths leaders take as they engage with their organizations, their
stakeholders, and their internal and external environments. Joining these three theories
into an integrated whole creates a framework that allows a more nuanced and interactive
understanding of how leaders undertake change.
In this study, no library director employed only one approach to change. College
library director C is an example. At times she managed change using a rational, step-bystep process, such as the planning and implementation of the library/IT digital teaching
and learning projects for which she required classic project management oversight. Other
times she experimented, learning through the process, such as when she wanted to
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
4

There is an extensive debate about the trait/skill definitions of leadership (see Northouse, 2013, pp. 19,

43.). This study examines leadership behaviors without drawing conclusions as to their origins.

	  
	  

	  

210	  

radically change a former cataloging job description. Other changes were initiated
because of a mental model she had of how change should take place, for example, the
affinity groups she created to formalize cross-organizational collaboration.
Because the directors used multiple approaches, applying this integrated model
helps identify the times they used change strategies that reflect one of the three theories. It
also helps deconstruct the complex contexts within which the library directors made their
strategy choices. One director might start to make what seemed a rational change only to
meet staff resistance. She then learned from that resistance some key information about
the possibilities and limits of the organization in which she is immersed. Based on that
contextual knowledge, she then re-defined the change, in the spirit of planned
opportunism, to achieve partial success and to leave open the possibility for future
cooperation on further change.
The left side of the multi-lens framework (see below) identifies two external
forces, environmental conditions and changes and organizational conditions and changes.
The environment and the organization can influence the change leader, the change
strategies, and the outcomes. In return, the environment and the organization can be
affected directly by the leader and indirectly by strategies. Placed in the framework's
center are managerial cognitions and managerial actions. Cognitions can, of course,
influence actions but actions can, through learning, affect how leaders think about change.
Managerial actions directly influence change strategy and content. Changes in strategy
and content have an indirect, learning influence on how leaders' thinking about change
possibilities evolves. The right side of the frame houses the organizational outcomes,
which are directly influenced by the managerial actions, the environment, and the

	  
	  

	  

211	  

organization. Outcomes can exert a learning influence on how the manager thinks about
change and thus influence her subsequent change actions.

Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G. M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic change: A multilens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy of Management Review, 22(1),
p. 70.
Figure 2. Multi-Lens Framework5
This framework illuminates the forces that affect change, affect the leader, and
affect the change goals and outcomes. How the directors understood those forces and how
successful they were in navigating them as they evolved their change leadership, depended
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
5

The numbers represent linkages between and among the separate theories that this model combines. For an
explanation, see Chapter Three, Figure 2.

	  
	  

	  

212	  

on the three key skills mentioned above, contextual intelligence, emotional intelligence,
and resilience.
Contextual Intelligence
Reflection in Action
In their change management textbook, Palmer, et al. (2009) assert that by using a
"multiple-perspectives framework" to teach how to lead change, they are "opening up
new, innovative, and different ways of seeing, thinking, conceptualizing and practicing
organizational change" (p. xi). Seeing change from multiple perspectives or frames is
important for academic change leaders. They cannot rely on "one best strategy" because
they are often leading change in an "organized anarchy" (Werkman, 2008, p. 664; Cohen
& March, 1986, p. 195). The ability to perceive their environment accurately helps
change leaders negotiate through "action and reflection strategies" (Van de Ven & Sun,
2011, p. 59). This reflection in action process allows leaders to "reconceptualize future
actions" more flexibly and accurately in the ambiguous and inconsistent environment of
academia.
Library director B used contextual skills to adjust her behavior and planned
strategies to better achieve her desired results. The first time she did this was discussed in
chapter six, when she wanted to change a vacant position radically. She experienced
resistance not only from the supervisor but also from other senior management team
members. Recognizing this organizational resistance, the library director re-framed the
change in two ways that helped her achieve her results.
She contextualized the change as needed to serve faculty and students more
effectively—a value all her librarians felt deeply. She also framed the discussion between

	  
	  

	  

213	  

her and the supervisor within the context of the new behavioral expectations the library
faculty had just adopted, which called for open, respectful dialog and for a willingness to
change. By using this contextual framework to help with the supervisor's dislike of
change, the director created "a win-win situation" that enabled change without violating
either the supervisor's need for control and discomfort with change or her senior staff's
concern that change not damage relationships.
A second situation in which library director B had to shift her strategy after
reflecting on unexpected organizational conditions was when she motivated a group of
librarians and information technologists (IT) to shift from discussion to action—to create
some pilot projects supporting digital learning and teaching. She had previously believed
"in the power of leading from behind, empowering your people." In her former
institution, she had been a successful leader who "was a silent partner" and let her "people
be the ones upfront who are actually bringing about the change." However, this
encouragement strategy was not producing any concrete results at library B.
After the remodel was completed and the library and IT staff had moved into the
new building, library director B waited a few months to give the library/IT group time to
develop concrete services and activities together. After four months passed with no
outcomes, she realized she had to change her thinking and actions "to move to leading
from the front." Such an active role was uncomfortable for her. When she realized she
would have to change "her heart sunk" and she thought "oh my ... I don't even know how
to do that, it's not me." Although this was difficult, she changed her preferred leadership
strategy. Her new, "from the front" approach got the group's attention and they changed.
Within one month, the group had started two innovative projects.

	  
	  

	  

214	  
Grant (2007) asserts, "It could be reasoned that reflection can improve professional

practice by facilitating understanding through self-discovery, and for this understanding to
enable individuals to manage and bring about change more effectively" (p. 164). Library
directors used analytical reflection to understand what they were seeing and
experiencing—their organizational and environmental contexts. By taking the time to
reflect, they were then better able to adjust their strategies and goals to move their change
agendas forward.
Political Acumen
In his field guide for academic library administrators, Nelson (2014) warns, "the
position of the academic library director is very political, and the director needs to
understand that and then think and act politically. That means always trying to understand
the institutional context within which the library operates" (p. 15). Library director C
understood the academic and interpersonal contexts within which she was leading change.
She exhibited effective political acumen with her faculty and her provost.
The teaching faculty wielded significant power at College C. During her
employment interview, the faculty members had told her that students weren't using the
library and asked her "what are you going to do about that?" Ironically, once she began
making changes that brought students into the library, faculty vociferously opposed those
changes. Surprised by their opposition, she altered her tactics and began to reach out into
the broader organizational environment to engage faculty as stakeholders. She initiated
lunch meetings in the library with key faculty who led the courses into which she wanted
to incorporate information literacy instruction. She ensured that she was invited, at least
once, to every department's faculty meeting to talk about her plans and goals.

	  
	  

	  

215	  

Understanding that the teaching faculty would "trust each other more readily," she saw to
it that powerful and respected teaching faculty chaired the committees involved in leading
her major initiatives such as open access and the campus instructional literacy project.
Provost C prided herself on being "the vice president for innovation" at College C.
She also was also very willing to take on additional leadership responsibilities in the
College, feeling that she could help create even further forward progress for the College.
Library director C actively communicated to her Provost the innovative changes—large
and small—that the library implemented. With key goals, such as open access, she
couched the issue in terms of competition with other sister institutions which helped
Provost C imagine herself as playing a decisive role that would "put the college ahead" of
other colleges in their comparator group. She also used the provost's deep commitment to
innovation to help her clear roadblocks when her changes and strategic goals met with
opposition or setbacks. Commenting on this relationship, library director C said she made
sure she was "aligned" with her provost's desire to innovate. She valued and depended on
his leadership and made certain that his role in major library changes was central and
acknowledged.
At College D, the library director was operating in a political context that did not
allow her sufficient freedom to act independently and to adjust to changed organizational
and environmental conditions. She had to work through her provost to create
organizational change. Her provost lacked political acumen. The provost "felt the
president should be out raising money" and not get involved at a detailed level in her part
of the organization. The president's style was just the opposite of the provost's. The
president wanted to engage at a very micro level.

	  
	  

	  

216	  
The provost refused to adjust her style or behavior to fit the president's

expectations. This mismatch of styles resulted in a lack of trust and an ineffective
working relationship that stopped the change process in mid-stream. During the three
years following the provost's departure, the library director was not successful in getting
the president to allow all the frozen positions to be filled. In that same three-year period,
faculty and students had successfully influenced the president to create or fill other
administrative/staff positions. Library director D did not engage these stakeholders as
advocates for her change goals because the relationship around the issue of staffing the
center and the library was still extremely negative due to the provost's lack of political
understanding and skill.
Emotional intelligence
Emotions play a strong role in the workplace, particularly influencing how
individuals conceive of, experience, and work through change (Black & Gregersen, 2002;
Bridges, 2003). The capacity to understand one's own and others' emotions and to manage
them helps leaders and followers to work through transformational workplace change
(Akrivou, Boyatzis, & McLeod, 2006; Hawkins & Dulewicz, 2007; Rubin, Munz, &
Bommer, 2005).
The skills of self-knowledge, reflection, and emotional intelligence helped library
director B in making the transition, described above, to "leading from the front." This was
a style that was not natural to her and was potentially troubling because it could become a
habit. Speaking about the times she had to make herself "lead from the front," she said
she was very careful to take that role only when faced with a crisis. The reason she would
step up only rarely was "because it is very seductive, because sometimes people get used

	  
	  

	  

217	  

to you doing that and you get used to it. Then you are bringing about change but maybe
people haven't bought into it." She wanted to build her staff's self-confidence and
empower them to act, rather than relying solely on her to be the change leader.
Library director C was emotionally self-aware and also sensitive to the library's
organizational environment. This enabled her to adjust her change strategies for
maximum success. Her librarian staff included a subset of long-term staff that had used
the style of "passive waiting" for faculty and students to ask for help. She recognized that
those librarians found her "energy" and "desire to be out ahead" threatening. When she
wanted to make radical changes, such as changing the librarian promotion and tenure
requirements or eliminating half of the print reference collection, she would ask the senior
member of her management team to lead the change discussions and implementation
because these long-term librarians respected and trusted him. Recognizing her own
competitive impulses that motivated her to want to lead the library's change initiatives,
library director C was able to put those emotions aside and choose a path to change that
was more emotionally comfortable for her followers and successful for the whole
organization.
Library director D observed that the organizational changes she made "were
painful" and that four years later there were "staff who are still thinking they were
painful." Recognizing the change announcement was done "abruptly," she felt that "it
was better to do it quickly and cleanly." She also explained that allowing the librarians
who were laid off to continue to work approximately another six months alongside their
colleagues, who were not laid off, was "humane" because the six months gave the
terminated librarians time to finish projects and search for other jobs. Library director D

	  
	  

	  

218	  

felt that the decision to let the terminated librarians continue did not affect the remaining
staff. She was proud of her remaining staff that, from her observation, behaved
professionally to her and to the new doctoral fellows who replaced the departed librarians.
According to several of the interviewees, the new doctoral fellows actually
experienced a high degree of resentment and negative behavior from the librarians,
paraprofessionals, and even the library's student staff during the first two years after the
change. One of the newest hires was treated so badly that she "cried every night after she
went home." She left the college within a year. Reflecting back on the change
experience, one interviewee said, "I think now I feel a lot less bad about it and I sort of get
the decisions ... but, still, I think, "What were you thinking doing that? How could you not
know that that was going to come across poorly?"
Library directors B, and C used emotional intelligence skills of "self-awareness,
self-management, social awareness, and relationship management" to manage themselves
and others in order to create opportunities for change (Goleman, 2001, p. 14). Library
director A's emotional intelligence will be discussed in the topic of resilience, below.
Library director D did not recount any experiences that reflected a high level of social
awareness or active relationship management.
Resilience
Library director A had a very specific critical event she experienced. If she had
not recognized the emotions it was creating and taken action, would have chosen to leave
College A before her change vision was fully implemented. At about the mid-point of her
change journey, she was experiencing a lot of stress as a result of managing the
relationships between the "new team" and the "old team" of librarians. She observed, that

	  
	  

	  

219	  

in "a leadership position, those human interactions and relationships are the most
rewarding but they can be the hardest. They can just drain the life out of you." She
admitted "a real part of the change process for me" was that she "felt at times very
precarious, very vulnerable, very hurt ... scared." Knowing she could not turn to her
librarian colleagues for support and feeling that if she did not do something she would
soon be "burnt out," she identified a leadership training program at a university in another
state.
She made four trips to the out-of-state university, each time taking a different
course in their program. The new perspective this program gave her on leadership and the
tools she brought back to use in the workplace made the experience "a lifesaver." The
program gave her "the concepts of a resonant leader, a leader who is a relational, personto-person leader, [and] emotional intelligence." She credited the learning she did there,
along with the gift of a period of time away without managerial responsibilities, with
helping her become a better leader. She became able to not only recognize and manage
her own emotions but to "read the individuals in a group ... to learn how to manage" them
better.
When asked about the leadership crises she encountered at College B, the library
director described her first two years as "a kind of baptism by fire." Through those
conflicts, she felt her responsibility as a change leader was "being brave enough to deliver
tough messages" not only to "people who report to you, your peers" but also, as a leader,
"it's about speaking truth to power," such as the time she invited the president, despite her
provost's prohibition, to meet with the library staff and hear their pain about the remodel
mismanagement. She took pride in her honesty, feeling that change leadership "is about

	  
	  

	  

220	  

being true to yourself and what you believe has to happen and has to be communicated."
Her "passionate" commitment to communicating her vision and working to fix problems
and change behaviors was "a way to cultivate trust. And as a change agent, in times of
change, you really need to be trusted."
Library director B coped with the stress and loneliness she experienced in her role
by staying in regular contact with colleagues she had met when attending the Frye
Leadership Institute. A smaller group of the Institute's cohort from that year has stayed in
touch for decades, even, at one point, holding a several day retreat together. She used this
group not only for support but also for advice about workplace problems and potential
strategies she might implement.
Library director D was very discouraged about how the organizational changes she
had led affected her own responsibilities. Creating a scholarly technology center that
concentrated services to students and faculty left the remaining library staff and director
responsible for mundane, transactional tasks and the physical management of the library
building. Hearing about the changes, colleagues at other institutions said to the director
that she "had given away all the fun stuff." In response to this "narrowed" job, director D
looked for other ways to engage in teaching and learning and to serve the college. She
partnered with the library's archivist to create a number of innovative programs and
develop collaborative relationships with archives at a variety of other non-profit
organizations—museums, libraries, and historical societies. These relationships created
the opportunity for a joint city-non-profit-library grant proposal that has been recently
submitted to a foundation. While this sphere is smaller than she would prefer, she has
experienced a sense of renewal and engagement from focusing her energies in this arena.

	  
	  

	  

221	  
Conclusion
The library directors in this study each had a vision of "what was real, what was

possible, and what was important" (Mink, Owen, & Bright, 1993, p. 27). At the macro
level, those visions were very similar. What was important to all was that the library
supported students and faculty as they teach, learn, and research. To make that mission
real, the directors needed to change what their staffs, librarians and paraprofessionals,
considered important and possible.
Each director chose a different path and strategy to reach that vision. The choices
were influenced by their principles and values but also by the organizational and
environmental conditions at their particular colleges (see Figure 5). On the whole, the
frame bending strategies of library directors A, B, and C were more successful than the
frame breaking approach of library director D. This is consistent with other studies
examining organizational change, particularly in academia (Cowan, 1993; Nadler &
Tushman, 1989; Souza, 2007; Zhang & Strange, 1992).

	  
	  

	  

222	  

	  
Figure	  4.	  Institutional	  and	  Environmental	  Influences	  on	  Change	  Leadership	  
Yet, it is not certain that library director D's choice of a frame-breaking strategy
was the fundamental cause of the only partly successful result. Library director D did not
employ the full range of transformational behaviors used by the other directors. In
addition, she did not observe nor interpret the organizational culture, power relationships,
or emotional needs of the people she worked with in ways that might have aided her in
leading and managing change successfully.
The skills discussed in this chapter, contextual intelligence, emotional intelligence,
and resilience, were fundamental to the successes achieved by library directors A, B, and
C. A more effective ability to employ those three skills might have helped library director
D implement her vision more fully with less organizational distress.
	  
	  

	  

223	  
As discussed in chapter six, one of the effects of transformational leadership

behavior of "modeling the way" is that "followers identify with the leaders and want to
emulate them" (Bass & Avolio, 1994, p. 3). Senior management team members from
libraries A, B, and C demonstrated this effect not only by buying into their leaders' visions
and working to help achieve them but also in demonstrating the contextual intelligence,
emotional intelligence, and resilience skills modeled by their directors.
All three senior management teams were aware of the broader college and higher
education contexts within which they worked. College A's senior team aligned itself with
the college's core value of entrepreneurialism, stating they had become risk-taking
entrepreneurs who were "constantly looking at [the college] ... and changing ourselves." In
reaction to changing patterns of electronic information access and use, College B's team
warned, "we're going to have to change [again] soon because the whole world has
changed." Working with faculty resistance to change, College B's senior managers were
politically practical, concluding, "we engaged with our detractors ... you give them
answers and try to be transparent." From their experience, "you'll never get 100%
agreement" to faculty acceptance of new library roles so "you just accept it and you move
on." Each team realized that, to be successful, they had to understand those broader forces
and perspectives and then change themselves by being "opportunistic in the best way."
Each senior management team expressed a nuanced understanding of how people
approach change. They recognized and accepted that people within the library and within
the campus had a diverse range of emotional reactions to change. Saying that change and
"growth is challenging and [brings] a lot of discomfort," a team member from College A
said they offer each other "trust and support" to help cope. One of College B's team

	  
	  

	  

224	  

members echoed this perspective, saying that change creates "troublesome moments,
sometimes good, [but] it's difficult." College C's team members saw being part of a team
as the best antidote to the stresses of "constant change" because each team member could
"offer different perspectives and different approaches" to help a colleague better cope with
problems and stress.
Probably because of the fact that a number of the researcher's questions focused on
change, the senior teams' examples of resilience generally were on that topic. College A
team members admitted to being, at times, "weary of change" and when they began, as a
group to recognize that, they encouraged each other with their group motto, "all fun all the
time." This slogan meant that they would stop what they were doing and try to approach it
from more light-hearted perspective. When external pressures and change stressed College
B’s team, they chose a proactive approach. Instead of deciding to "sit by the wayside and
shrink," they chose instead to "undertake deliberate change [so that] we're controlling
ourselves." College C's team supports each other during stressful times, crediting that
mutual support and encouragement with "keeping us alive and on our feet."
In their work on leading strategic change, Black and Gregersen (2002) cite
research that demonstrates "success lies in changing individuals first; then the organization
follows" (p. 2). They conclude, "what really matters in organizational transformations is
the change in people's behaviors and how systems either enhance or detract from that" (p.
92).
Library directors A, B, and C not only changed what their staffs felt was
"important and possible" but transformed their staffs into resilient, emotionally intelligent

	  
	  

	  

225	  

teams who understood the contexts within which they worked and, based on those
contexts, the need for constant adaptation and change.
References
Akrivou, K., Boyatzis, R.E., & McLeod, P.L. (2006). The evolving group: Towards a
prescriptive theory of intentional group development. Journal of Management
Development, 25(7), pp. 689-706.
Bass, B.M., & Avolio, B.J., Eds. (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Black, J.S., & Gregersen, H.B. (2002). Leading strategic change: Breaking through the
brain barrier. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education, Inc.
Bridges, W. (2003). Managing transitions: Making the most of change (2nd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.
Cohen, M. D., & March, J. G. (1986). Leadership in an organized anarchy. In M. D.
Cohen, & J. G. March (Eds.), Leadership and ambiguity: The American college
president (2nd ed., pp. 195-230). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Cowan, R.B. (1993). Prescription for small-college turnaround. Change, 25(1), 30-39.
Everly, G.S., & Strouse, D.A. (2010). The secrets of resilient leadership: When failure is
not an option: Six essential skills for leading through adversity. New York: Diamedica
Publishers.
Goleman, D. (2000). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
Goleman, D. (2001). Emotional intelligence: Issues in paradigm building. In C. Cherniss,
& D. Goleman (Eds.), The emotionally intelligent workplace (pp. 13-26). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

	  
	  

	  

226	  

Grant, M.J. (2007). The role of reflection in the library and information sector: A
systematic review. Health Information and Libraries Journal, (24), 155-166.
Gremmels, G.S. (2013). Staffing trends in college and university libraries. Reference
Services Review, 41(2), 233-252.
Hawkins, J., & Dulewicz, V. (2007). The relationship between performance as a leader
and emotional intelligence, intellectual and managerial competencies. Journal of
General Management, 33(2), 57-78.
Herold, I. (2015). Personal communication: Official campaign question asked of
candidates for Vice President/President Elect of the Association of College &
Research Libraries.
Higgs, M., & Rowland, D. (2011). What does it take to implement change successfully? A
study of the behaviors of successful change leaders. The Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, 47(3), 309-335.
Kezar, A. J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kotter, J.P. (2005, November). Leading change: Learning to do it right. Leadership
Excellence, 22(11), 5-6.
Kutz, M. (2008). Toward a conceptual model of contextual intelligence: A transferable
leadership construct. Leadership Review, 8, 18-31.
Mink, O., Owen, K., & Bright, S. Long-term thinking and cultural change. Asia Pacific
Journal of Quality Management, 2(2), 26-39.
Nadler, D.A., & Tushman, M.L. (1989). Organizational frame bending: Principles for
managing reorientation. The Academy of Management Executive, 3(3), 194-203.

	  
	  

	  

227	  

Neal, J.G. (2006). Raised by wolves: Integrating the new generation of feral professionals
into the academic library. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Nelson, B.E. (2014). The academic library administrator's field guide. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Quinn, R.E. (1996). Deep change: Discovering the leader within. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Inc.
Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G.M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic change: A multilens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy of Management Review,
22(1), 48-79.
Roberto, J.A., & Levesque, L.C. (2005). The art of making change initiatives stick. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 46(4), 53-60.
Rubin, R.S., Munz, D.C., & Bommer, W.H. Leading from within: The effects of emotion
recognition and personality on transformational leadership behavior. Academy of
Management Journal, 48(5), 845-858.
Souza, J.M. (2007). Factors contributing to the successful implementation of planned
change at a small, private, four-year institution in the Mid-Atlantic area. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304842805/abstract/13B96C
133267D9791B7/1?accountid=13870

	  
	  

	  

228	  

Thomas, R.J. (2008). Crucibles of leadership. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Publishing Corporation.
Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. (1986). The transformational leader: The key to global
competitiveness. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Van de Ven, A.H., & Sun, K. (2011). Breakdowns in implementing models of
organizational change. Academy of Management Perspectives, 25(3), 58-74.
Werkman, R.A. (2009). Understanding failure to change: A pluralistic approach and five
patterns. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 30(7), 664-684.
Zhang, C., & Strange, C.C. (1992). Shaping institutional vision: The risk of presidential
leadership in small colleges. A preliminary report (ED352921). ASHE Annual
Meeting Paper.

	  
	  

	  

229	  
Chapter Eight
CONCLUSION

The previous chapters explored how the libraries and their campuses were aligned
in their hopes and expectations for change, the change strategies library directors used,
library directors' transformational leadership skills, and academic library change within
the context of two theoretical change models. This chapter examines what lessons can be
learned from the change journeys studied, how the libraries' alignment with campus needs
and priorities fits current thinking about the value and future relevance of academic
libraries, and what additional research could be done to move our understanding of
academic library change leadership forward.
The Study's Research Objectives
This study examined the change journeys of four liberal arts college libraries to
understand library organizational change leadership and change management processes.
The methodology and interview questions were designed to explore four research
objectives:
1. How do academic library directors lead and create change?
2. In what way do the college’s mission, strategic priorities, and changes influence
library change? In what way does library change affect the college?
3. Did the change process fit Nadler and Tushman's (1989) and Rajagopalan and
Spreitzer’s (1997) theories of organizational change?
4. How do college administrators, library directors, and senior management team
members define the role of the academic library of the future?

	  
	  

	  

230	  
By exploring leaders' change visions and change strategies, stakeholder buy-in,

and change outcomes, this study illuminated the fact that leaders who used the full range
of transformational behaviors, coupled with contextual and emotional intelligence, were
the most successful at creating extensive and sustained change. These leaders also
required resilience. The directors' long, and often intense, change journeys averaged eight
years. During that time they encountered challenges and crises that, without resilience,
would have left them less effective change leaders (McCombs, 2013; Wicks & Buck,
2013).
Leading Change
Leadership: values and visions. There is a substantial literature discussing the
importance of having a compelling vision to attract followers and engage them in the hard
work of change. The literature on academic change emphasizes the criticality of leaders
creating that vision and engaging followers using a collaborative process to develop buyin and commitment (Cowan, 1993; Crowe, 1995; Gioia & Chittipeddi, 1991). Another
important characteristic of academic change leadership is that "institutional history and
traditions need to be understood by change agents and incorporated into the planning
process" (Kezar, 2001, p. 106). To be optimally successful, disruptive change must align
with values that followers already hold or are willing to adopt (Beauchamp, 2003; Dvir, et
al., 2004; Sarros, et al., 2010).
In this study, when vision intersected with the broader environmental conditions,
such as organizational traditions and values, the change leader’s capacity to achieve that
vision was affected. Organizational change is produced out of many intersecting and
interacting forces, as Rajagopalan and Spreitzer's (1997) multi-lens framework

	  
	  

	  

231	  

demonstrates. Central to that change process is a multiplicity of dialectics, between
leaders and followers, between the library and the college, and between all those groups
and external influences such as follower's professional identities and allegiances (Bolman
& Gallos, 2011, p. 7; Kezar, 2001, pp. 93-94). In this dialectical dance, the leader and her
followers are "shapers of and at the same time, being shaped by ...[their] environments"
(Pye, 2005, p. 34) (See Appendix, Figure Five).
With the exception of the IT staff at College D, many of the individuals the four
directors were trying to persuade were part of a profession with a shared culture, "a pattern
of shared basic assumptions ... that are taught to new members as the correct way to
perceive, think, and feel" (Schein, 1992, p. 17). Those assumptions include a shared
identity and shared values, both of which can be powerful mediators of organizational
change (Greenwood, Suddaby, & Hinings, 2002; He & Baruch, 2009; Jaskyte, 2002;
Kaarst-Brown, Nicholson, von Dran, & Stanton, 2004).
Academic librarianship defines itself as a profession with a core value of service to
teaching, learning, and research (ACRL, About, n.d.). Library directors' A, B, and C's
change visions appealed to their librarians as "a desirable end-state" because their visions
were congruent with staff's belief in the value of academic librarians and libraries to the
academic mission (Bolman & Gallos, 2011, p. 123). By framing their visions within the
shared identity and shared values of academic librarianship, library directors A, B, and C
were engaging in frame bending change that re-oriented the focus and goals of their
libraries.
One example of the success of this framing was that at College library B, the entire
library faculty supported a job description for a new professional position, the head of the

	  
	  

	  

232	  

learning commons, which did not mandate an M.L.S. but accepted other degrees in media
or information management. By framing this new position as a valuable student service
and retaining it within the library, library director B set up an opportunity in which she
could encourage and empower her librarians to begin bending that frame of academic
librarian exclusivity. They did, hiring a person with a Master's degree in media services.
Library director D's vision was also expressed as a desirable end-state—a better
service, helping faculty integrate many types of literacies into their teaching, learning, and
research. However, director D's vision broke the frame of a traditionally organized and
staffed library. With her provost, she "brainstormed a new vision" of a center that was
"neither library nor IT." Staffed in part by academics, it took over what had been librarybased services to students and faculty. As Riggs (1998) observed, "values in academic
libraries are deeply rooted and could be perceived as obstacles in the path of the new
vision" (p. 58). Although director D's vision was embraced by a subset of individuals,
whose support helped initiate the new center, her vision alienated other College D staff
and stakeholders by challenging the staff's core identity and the staff's and stakeholders'
shared values. Thus director D’s vision never received the broad level of acceptance that
occurred at the other three libraries studied.
Lissack and Roos (2001) observe "the popular media has elevated vision to the
status of [a] 'sacred concept'" (p. 55). Stating that the importance of a vision in itself has
been over emphasized, they argue instead that "situation and context take on determinative
roles" in how, and perhaps whether, the vision and ultimately, organizational change is
enacted (Lissack & Roos, 2001, p. 60). Organizational change is not successful or
unsuccessful solely based on whether a vision is frame bending or frame breaking. Change

	  
	  

	  

233	  

engages the organizational environment on many levels and, thus, is affected by many in
the organization who both wield power and "hold stakes" either in the status quo or in the
envisioned change.
Other key individuals in the colleges studied influenced—either negatively or
positively—each library director's change goals, strategies, and outcomes. The influences
affecting those strategies and outcomes will be examined in the next section.
Leadership in context. Reflecting the fact that higher education institutions have
"multiple power and authority structures," presidents, provost, and faculties all played
significant roles in this study (Kezar, 2001, p. 61). Environmental factors such as culture
and values also influenced the degree to which change visions were successful at each
college.
Examining the role that organizational dynamics, along with context and
environment, play in change success or failure provides a more complete understanding of
causality (Hanks, 2001; Kotter, 2007). This approach fits Mellahi and Wilkinson’s (2004)
conclusion from their review of the change literature. Only by analyzing the complex
organizational environment in which the leader is trying to effect change, will researchers
be able to identify the subtler, and often hidden reasons why a change initiative resulted in
a particular set of outcomes. In academic settings, organizational forces may include
presidents, provosts, and faculty, and environmental factors may include economic
resources and constraints, strategic priorities, and institutional cultures.
The support of an engaged "champion" or a "sponsor" is very important to the
success of sustained organizational change. Nadler and Heilpern (1998) warn, "without the
active personal involvement of the CEO in a central role, successful discontinuous change

	  
	  

	  

234	  

is simply impossible" (p. 9). Other studies have examined the critical role a change
champion, such as a key executive, plays in organizational change (Coakes & Smith,
2007; Macaulay, Yue, & Thurlow, 2010; Mourier & Smith, 2001).
As mentioned in Chapter four, disruptive library change at all four colleges started
with the realization by campus administrators and faculty that their libraries needed new
leadership. How those groups of powerful stakeholders subsequently lent assistance to or
created roadblocks to change, affected each director's change strategies and outcomes.
At College A, the provost consistently supported the changes library director A
was making. In her interview, she exhibited a thorough awareness of the innovative work
the library was doing and the influence those changes were having on the college. The
provost's strong advocacy, for example, allowed the library director to increase the
professional staff by twenty-five percent. The nature of the provost's support was critical,
giving the director an opportunity to more easily shift the library's culture.
Acknowledging the importance of her provost's support and that the provost would soon
be retiring, library director A described a strategy to build additional support among key
college administrators to maintain campus-level support for the library until a new provost
was hired.
Library director B had to actively seek engagement with her provost, her president,
and the faculty. A pattern of inaction, if not outright denial, was typical of the provost at
College B at first. Several times, director B had to take action to prompt change. Those
actions were often insubordinate to her provost. Each time, the provost backed down, for
example, by not firing the director at one point and, instead, acquiescing to her request for
more staff.

	  
	  

	  

235	  
While their relationship could have ended up negatively, it resulted in Library

director B having a transformational effect on her provost. In her regular meetings with
the provost she not only kept the provost informed of all the library's change successes,
she also made a point of discussing the readings she and her staff were doing on
leadership, management, and change. After the third crisis, the provost's assistant called
the library director. The provost requested some recommendations for management books
and articles. While this provost eventually became a champion for the library director
and her change plans, the provost and the president left two years later. The new president
and provost were extremely supportive of the library's digital teaching service for faculty,
featuring it publically, and, eventually, incorporating it into the campus' new academic
strategic plan.
Library director C had enthusiastic and consistent support from her provost, who
considered the library director a partner in the provost's passion for campus innovation.
While the provost helped her significantly in working with faculty, library director C was
also extremely successful working directly with faculty. She was very skilled at building
relationships—and using those relationships to further her change goals. Her leadership
style was consultative and she recognized when to "step back" and engage her provost or
faculty as leaders to further a change she wanted. Bolman and Gallos (2011) warn that
change leaders will not be successful if they "ignore constituent needs" (p. 78). Library
director C understood her constituents. The faculty expected to lead in circular matters.
She used that insight to engage them in a partnership to create institutional change.
At College D, the library director had a mix of support and opposition to library
change. As discussed in Chapter seven, the provost was a partner in the change process

	  
	  

	  

236	  

for the first three years she was at College D. Unfortunately, that provost's support
became problematic as the change process unfolded. Because the provost had lost the
trust of the president, even after the provost's departure, the president refused for four
more years to allow the combined library/IT departments to hire the number of staff he
had originally promised. This lack may have had its most severe effect on the ability of
the library director to obtain general, faculty-wide buy-in for her vision. Because of
reduced staffing, the center could not serve as large a number of the faculty as had
originally been intended and so an opportunity to build more faculty advocates was lost.
The negative effect of the provost’s relationship with the president continued after
her departure, a persistent effect that one study has identified as "the ghost in the
hallways." Library director D identified this lingering mistrust as the reason why she her
success in enrolling the college president in her vision was incomplete (Macaulay, Yue, &
Thurlow, 2010, p. 335). She also was only partially successful in enrolling staff, but for a
different reason. The lack of buy-in by some staff may have been due to another effect
Macaulay, et al. (2010) discovered when they studied disruptive change at a U.S.
community college system. While change actors' influences endure after their physical
departure, change stories also endure and continue to affect the way individuals make
sense of the change process.
Library director D was clear and passionate about her vision of a new center that
was no longer part of the library and staffed with people whose skill sets included
advanced academic training and digital competencies. At the time of the re-organization,
two M.L.S. librarians were transferred to the center. Both had Master's-level training in
an academic field as well as significant skills working with digital content and tools. The

	  
	  

	  

237	  

fact that these two librarians were successfully providing services to faculty in this new
organizational model lent support to a story that challenged the director's vision. A
number of interviewees felt that instead of moving user services out of the library and
hiring academics, the same goal could have been realized by changing the library's focus,
services, and staffing. In support, they pointed to other academic libraries where this had
been done successfully while preserving the central role of the library and librarians.
They continued to feel that the story of their experience was not one of successful change
but of a lost opportunity to innovate within the library.
Sensemaking is an important step in organizational change processes (Gioia &
Chittipeddi, 1991; Kezar & Eckel, 2002b). Individuals told contrasting stories in this
organization. It is not clear, since the stories are grounded in different value systems,
whether the library director would have been able to create a sufficiently compelling story
to persuade staff holding the oppositional one to abandon or alter it. Perhaps, again, if the
vision had been enacted more quickly, with a greater positive impact, that early success
would have moderated the power of the oppositional story.
Summary analysis. Organizational change is a "relational process unfolding over
time" (Den Hartog & Koopman, 2001, p. 182). Examining the organizational dynamics
and the environmental effects on change provides a more nuanced understanding of that
unfolding. For example, in College D, the continuing influence of the departed provost
and the effect of staff's oppositional story illuminate the degree to which an organization's
change journey can be influenced negatively by forces outside the leader's control. The
library directors' experiences in the other three case studies demonstrate the positive
effects change championship, either by presidents, provosts, or faculty, can have on a

	  
	  

	  

238	  

leader's change strategies and outcomes. As Gordon and Yukl (2004) conclude, when
examining change processes, "causality is not unidirectional" (p. 363). The directors who
understood both the what and the how of organizational change created transformative and
enduring change (see Figure 5).

Yellow	  =	  The	  What	  of	  Organizational	  Change	  
	  
Pink	  =	  The	  How	  of	  Organizational	  Change	  
	  

	  

	  
Figure	  5.	  Conceptual	  Framework	  
	  
Change Alignment	  
One of the study's research objectives was to explore how library change
influenced, if at all, the college, and how the college's broader mission, strategic priorities,
and changes may have influenced the library. Inspired by the current and extensive
discussions in the academic library literature about library relevancy, the researcher
	  
	  

	  

239	  

wanted to study libraries that were innovating in new ways (Broady-Preston & Swain,
2012; Herold, 2014; Jennings, 2013; Kim, 2014; Kopp, 2013; Kranich, Lotts, & Springs,
2014; Mathews, 2014). For example, in the emails sent to listservs, she asked subscribers
for examples of "college libraries that are partnering with their academic institutions to
help solve wider problems facing higher education in general, e.g., cost, relevancy,
retention, economic issues, and social challenges" (see Appendix A).
As a pool of innovative college libraries began to be identified, the researcher
learned that change in some libraries was proactive and in others it was reactive. Some
libraries had made a change that impacted their colleges and some colleges had made a
change that impacted their libraries. Four libraries were ultimately selected, two with
proactive change and two with reactive change.
The initial intent was to examine college library change that was self-initiated and
change that was initiated externally. The findings, however, did not show the source of
change to be as critical a factor as initially assumed. The framework within which change
was enacted, the leaders themselves, their key stakeholders, and the broader organization
and environment exerted much stronger influences on the libraries’ change journeys than
did the initial impetus for change.
College-initiated change. At Colleges A and D, as described in Chapter 4, the
colleges initiated changes that then prompted the libraries to change. At College A, the
teaching faculty changed the core curriculum twice, approximately seven years apart.
When the first change occurred, the library seized the opportunity to incorporate
information literacy instruction and assessment throughout all four years of the core
curriculum. The second change "broke" the library's established information literacy

	  
	  

	  

240	  

program and was originally seen as a disaster by the librarians. However, they quickly
responded with an innovative approach that enabled them to extend information literacy
instruction to even more courses. Their hybrid learning solution then began to create
campus change as faculty began to employ this new model in their classrooms.
College D combined the formerly separate IT and library departments under a
newly hired provost before library director D began at the college. Upon arriving at
College D, the library director was told to create organizational change that more fully
integrated the two departments. Her reactive change became proactive, going beyond the
college's initial goal, by creating a radically new service center that became a separate unit
that was longer part of the library organization. As described in Chapter four and
discussed further in Chapter seven, the change process was halted when the president later
withdrew his promised additional support for the organizational changes he had originally
mandated.
Library-initiated change. Libraries B and C each created programs that affected
their campuses widely. At College B, a group of librarians and IT staff developed a vision
of a new service supporting digital teaching and learning that would create, within the
library, a "futuristic learning center." The service began to change the way faculty was
teaching and students were learning. The college recognized the value of this digitally
enabled teaching to student learning. Enabling all faculty to engage in this pedagogy
became a core academic goal in the college's new strategic plan.
College C needed a college-wide project to improve student learning in advance of
a visit by the regional accreditation board. Library C's proposal, a partnership with
teaching faculty, was selected over five other finalists in a college-wide competition. The

	  
	  

	  

241	  

project enabled faculty to redesign their courses to include information literacy and critical
thinking skills into their learning outcomes and create assessment mechanisms. As an
outcome of this project, the faculty adopted college-wide, scaffolded, information literacy
learning outcomes.
Change paths. In this study, the researcher had planned to compare differences
between the two sets of libraries chosen but, as mentioned before, other forces shaped the
change goals and change strategies more strongly. Another possible reason for this lack of
difference could be due to the fact that disruptive change had been initially created at all
four institutions, each hired a new library director and charged her to implement change.
The administrations were motivated by the same general goals. Recognizing that the tools
and resources supporting teaching, learning, and research were evolving rapidly, campus
administrators and faculty wanted their libraries to evolve to support these changes.
The college provosts, presidents and faculty at these colleges were reacting to
external forces and changes documented in the academic library literature of the time.
That literature was replete with "calls for academic libraries to respond to 'unprecedented,'
'radical,' and revolutionary'" changes that were impacting libraries and the higher
education environment (Nicholson, 2015, p. 329). Writers warned that libraries needed to
develop new ways of doing business and new skill sets to better support the digital
revolution taking place in information creation, production, access, and use.
Another reason why the source of change did not radically affect the path of
change was that each of these library directors knew what was happening in the field of
college librarianship. They were aware of the academic literature that was calling for
change. They also conducted environmental scans and consulted with colleagues to learn

	  
	  

	  

242	  

how libraries at other campuses were responding to these broader environmental
challenges (Greenwood, Suddaby, & Hinings, 2002; Henczel, 2014). Although each
director pursued change strategies specific to her vision, values and campus cultures, they
all shared the same basic goal of improving support for the use of scholarly resources by
helping students become information literate and helping faculty and students become
more digitally skilled.
Even library director D's solution was grounded in the broader changes happening
in the field of academic librarianship, although her choice of strategies to achieve that
shared goal were aligned locally with her provost's values and goals. Hiring nonlibrarians for specialized services was also happening at other institutions at that time
(Neal, 2006; Neal, 2015). However, generally, the work these individuals performed, for
example, personnel management, digitization, anthropological analyses, did not replace
traditional library work nor was it funded by directly removing librarians. So, while those
personnel changes were controversially frame bending at other institutions, they did not
challenge the fundamental mission and purpose of academic librarianship.
Summary analysis. The critical strategic challenge facing these colleges when
their new directors took their positions was two-fold. Provosts, faculty, and presidents
wanted to re-establish "library as place," that is, re-invigorating the physical library space
to serve students and faculty better. They also wanted the library to move away from
focusing on traditional collections and the passive services that typically existed. Instead,
they envisioned a new, digital, "library as space." Part of this digital vision included
shifting from print-centric collections. However, it also assumed a central role for the
library, often in partnership with IT departments, in providing students and faculty with

	  
	  

	  

243	  

the tools and training they needed to find and effectively use digital resources for teaching
and learning. Information literacy was identified by three of the four provosts as a critical
work/life skill they wanted students to have upon graduation.
Recent articles in the academic library literature continue to describe radical
external changes threatening academic libraries such as the explosion in open and mass
learning, the rise of independent self-publishing and 3D-printing, and the ongoing efforts
of major information service providers to supplant libraries by serving faculty and
students directly (Neal, 2015). These specific changes highlight the economic, social, and
technological pressures on colleges that are forcing radical responses, such as the planned
closure of Sweet Briar College and the recent dismissal of several college library
directors. These pressures, and the drastic reactions to them, can be viewed as an ominous
challenge to the future of college libraries (Huffington Post, 2015; Straumsheim, 2014).
As new challenges prompt academic libraries, and in particular liberal arts college
libraries, to continue to change, the change journeys of library directors A, B, and C could
provide a model. These directors were able to create deep organizational change that
responded effectively to the new needs and expectations of their user communities and
aligned with their college's mission, strategic priorities, and cultures. The processes they
chose were radical within the time period in which they were implementing change. In the
course of their change journeys, they were successful in creating radically different
libraries.
Theoretical Change Frameworks
This study found that library directors were successful change leaders to the degree
that they employed transformational leadership skills, contextual and emotional

	  
	  

	  

244	  

intelligences, and displayed resilience. Because the library director who chose a framebreaking approach also employed fewer of the other leadership skills, no conclusion can
be drawn as to whether, had she used the full range of those transformational, contextual,
and emotional skills, she would have been more successful in enrolling others and
implementing her full vision.
The other three library directors, A, B, and C, used more of these skills and were
successful in creating deep change in their libraries and, to a great extent, in their colleges.
The library directors' transformational leadership skills enabled them to build high
performance teams with a shared vision of the future that they worked together to realize.
This is consistent with other studies of the value of transformational leadership behaviors
to evoke change (Atwater & Bass, 1994; Boga & Ensari, 2009; Day, 1998; Hicks &
Given, 2013; Katzenbach & Smith, 2003; Kouzes & Posner, 2007).
Transforming within the frame. While transformational leadership has been
studied extensively within the context of academic organizational change, Kezar (2001)
questions its reputation as a panacea. From an extensive analysis of the academic change
research she concludes "recent studies of intentional transformational change in higher
education illustrated relatively poor results" (p. 84). Defining deep transformational
change as "paradigm shifts" she asserts that they "are not typical and are extremely
difficult to facilitate" (p. 108). However, other research shows "higher education
institutions tend to incorporate and blend the old paradigm with the new paradigm. Thus
radical change is not really observable" (Kezar, 2001, p.108). To be successful, academic
change may require an "integration of old and new perspectives and processes" (Kezar,
2001, p. 108).

	  
	  

	  

245	  
The library directors A, B, and C transformed their libraries, creating new services,

new roles, and new approaches to supporting teaching and learning. Their success may
have been due to an integration of old and new perspectives and processes. The three
library directors linked their new visions to the academic library's traditional mission and
to the professional values of academic librarianship, innovating within an existing frame
of cultural values.
While the frame bending strategy was critical to gaining acceptance, the
transformational leadership behaviors these three directors employed created an
organizational environment in which their followers could develop in new ways. Bolman
and Gallos (2011) include many behaviors of transformational leadership in their work on
leading in academia. Although they warn that higher education leadership is "a lonely and
fractured job," their research finds that successful academic administrators engage in
many of the relational behaviors of transformational leaders—behaviors the three library
directors, A, B, and C also employed. Successful leaders develop compelling visions
through broad collaborative processes, conduct themselves ethically, respect individuals'
differences, coach, encourage others to develop, and take time to celebrate collectively the
missions and traditions of the institutions they lead (Bolman & Gallos, 2011, p. 148).
Multi-lens framework. As has been discussed in Chapter eight, the multi-lens
framework of Rajagopalan and Spreitzer (1997) captures the change process in action.
Multiple intelligences and leadership skills, such as contextual and emotional intelligence,
can be factored into the relationships shown within the framework. Non-leader generated
influences, represented by the left hand boxes (see Figure 2, Multi-Lens Framework), of
organizational dynamics and environmental forces provide a broader perspective on

	  
	  

	  

246	  

organizational change. Internal and external political, cultural, economic, and
environmental elements can impact—and be impacted by—the change process.
Directors A, B, C, and D, positioned themselves and their change leadership within
the political and cultural environments of their colleges. Library director A framed the
library's change outcomes in terms the campus used to describe itself—entrepreneurial and
radically pragmatic. Library director B aligned her leadership approach with her college's
prevailing self-description of managing "lean and mean" while succeeding in increasing
staffing and collection budgets significantly. Library director C benefitted from her
provost's desire to be innovative and ahead of other sister colleges to achieve a number of
significant changes that were described as "firsts." Library director D created an
innovative solution that supported her provost's goal of making the college technologically
"ready for the twenty-first century." Each director employed contextual skills to
understand what their organizations valued and then strategically placed their change
plans and outcomes within that cultural and organizational framework.
Summary analysis. The theories of punctuated equilibrium and the multi-lens
framework provide a useful way to understand the contexts of the library directors' change
choices. They also illuminate the many ways those change choices are influenced by a
variety of external factors. Change is, by its nature, dynamic and often unpredictable.
The change leader herself is engaged in a journey of learning. In that journey, external
actions and forces influence the ways she ultimately implements organizational change.
A richer understanding of how these frames fit the dynamic conditions college
libraries are experiencing could be developed through further research. One of the
limitations of this study is that the researcher interviewed the participants only one time.

	  
	  

	  

247	  

However, change happens across time, as does reflection about the meaning and impact of
that change. A longitudinal study of the change process as it unfolds would help identify
more clearly the impact of the context—the organization, the environment, and the
learning process on the change choices the leaders make and the change outcomes they
realize (Pettigrew, 1990; Pettigrew, Woodman, & Cameron, 2001). Interviewing
participants several times has also been shown to produce deeper insights as individuals
reflect further on events from the past (Webster & Mertova, p. 71). Together, these
approaches might provide an even more useful understanding of the experience and
impacts of change leadership.
The Future of Academic Libraries
Alignment is the value proposition. Both the college-driven changes and librarydriven changes described in this study were motivated by an assumption at each institution
that the work of the academic library was relevant and essential to the college's mission
and purpose. When asked what they imagined their library would be in the future,
interviewees described a very traditional role—the library should be the intellectual "hub"
or "center" of the campus' academic life. They also felt the library should be taking a
leadership role in addressing the continuing challenges they faced with rapidly evolving
digital formats and systems that were changing they way scholarship is created,
disseminated, and used. Additionally, they needed to meet new challenges such as serving
larger populations of remote, online learners.
Both library directors and their senior management teams were aware of the
developing trends and changes on the horizon that would affect the library's work. They
mentioned the challenge of providing reference support and expanding collections in a

	  
	  

	  

248	  

world that was increasingly 24/7. They saw students changing how they wanted to use the
library. Students were engaging in more collaborative studying and using electronic
resources more extensively. They were also beginning to rely on the library for new tools
to create new types of learning. Students were developing digital objects, podcasts,
videos, or physical objects using 3-D printers. The librarians recognized that collections
were becoming more standardized and that, to be unique, libraries needed to provide more
primary materials, often digitized, to support undergraduate research in the humanities and
social sciences.
For the most part, their vision of the future of the academic library was an
extension of what they were currently doing. Their ideas of the future were not radically
different from what they had described during the interviews as the original change
visions and goals. Each team, for example, wanted to have students "even more engaged"
and to have faculty "see us as co-educators" and "as active collaborators."
Library director B summed up the statements made by directors A and C saying, "I
believe that place-based library is still important." She then said her future library "will be
very similar to what we have now, dynamic and vibrant—both the people and the place."
Library director D, when asked this question, felt academic libraries would play a smaller
role in information literacy as faculty grew more adept at teaching it and a larger role in
archives and special collections. All four provosts wanted their libraries to continue to be
"a social and intellectual center on campus," the "living room of the college" and to
"proactively" engage in a "continuous dynamism" to meet evolving teaching, learning, and
research needs.

	  
	  

	  

249	  
The future of liberal arts colleges. The library directors and their senior

management teams were certain that in the future, academic libraries would continue to
"support the curriculum" and "serve students and faculty." However, they were less sure
about the future of higher education and about the future of the liberal arts colleges that
they served. Provosts, library directors, and the library senior management teams all
commented on the challenges they saw impacting their colleges. They saw the primary
challenges as the cost of higher education, increasing student debt, the declining collegeage population, and the increasing "businessification" of academia. They also all
mentioned the rising cost of scholarly resources and the difficulty of sustaining a
continuously increasing library materials budget.
The financial model of a private, residential liberal arts college was, by far, the
most worrisome future issue seen by the library directors and their senior management
team members. Provosts only spoke to the future of their campus library and, if they
discussed a broader context, they most often mentioned the increasing cost of scholarly
materials. Library director C stated her worry about the future of higher education,
observing, "What we're up against is that the finances of higher education are becoming
completely unsustainable." As chair of the academic senate she tried to get faculty to
discuss the fact that "with the economic inequality in this country we can no longer rely on
the one percent sending their children to our institutions and paying the bills, we cannot do
that anymore." Library director C anticipated "a period of huge change in higher
education and [she doesn't] know where libraries are going to come out on that. I do, in
my private moments, worry."

	  
	  

	  

250	  
Several interviewees stated that faculty, in particular, did not feel a sense of threat

or urgency about the challenges facing academic institutions. To survive, colleges—
administrators, faculty, and librarians—must "stare these issues in the face" and become
"really transformational." Library director C felt that "the library could be absolutely right
in there" helping the college transform.
Summary analysis. In the early twenty-first century, the four college libraries
studied added value by helping their institutions meet critical challenges. That value was
expressed in both innovative and traditional ways. As one senior management team
member noted "academic libraries are uniquely positioned to be a privileged place where
tradition is looked after, but also where innovation can be fostered." Assuming the
colleges they serve do survive, the directors and library staff were sure libraries would
survive also. Library director B explained, "the things that we call 'library' are a
foundation without which you would have a hard time doing the rest of what goes on
here."
In the second decade of the twenty-first century colleges face a new and possibly
more challenging set of problems. These problems include declining student enrollment,
retention, and graduation, the high cost of tuition, and competition from alternate
educational delivery systems. Academic libraries not only have "a strong record of
reflecting about the future" but a strong history of innovation and change to meet that
future (Walter, 2014, p.614). In the past two years, the academic library literature has had
an increasing number of articles discussing the ways libraries are already engaging to
address some of these challenges (Ellis, Rosenblum, Stratton, & Ames-Stratton, 2014;
Kingma, & McClure, 2015; Kopp, 2013; Kuh & Gonyea, 2015; Mezick, 2015). Many of

	  
	  

	  

251	  

the librarians in this study were able to redefine themselves, moving from passive curators
with a focus on internal operations to dynamically engaged co-educators and cocollaborators with faculty in the academic life of the college. As academic librarians face
these new challenges they will need to continue to stretch their definitions of service,
support, professional roles, and skills.
Further Research
As human beings strive to make sense of the world around them and "assign
meaning to experience," there is a prevailing impulse to reductionism (Klenke, 2008,
p.243). In the study of change leadership, the idea of the one "right" way to enact and
sustain change is appealing. The strength of this desire to simplify is reflected in the
plethora of processural models emanating from the rational lens organizational change
framework (Palmer, et al., 2009, pp. 222-223; Rajagopalan & Spreitzer, 1997, p. 50). At
the start of this study, the notion of simplicity was an underlying question in the
researcher's mind—a desire for what Dewey (1929) called "the quest for certainty" (p. 1).
Was there one best change leadership style or set of strategies that could be identified?
In this study, some styles, such as transformational leadership, and some skill sets,
such as contextual and emotional intelligences, had a positive effect on leaders' success in
enacting change. But as an exploratory study, this dissertation reflects only one group of
libraries, private academic libraries serving relatively small liberal arts institutions.
Exploring the change visions, change strategies, and change outcomes of other academic
libraries of varying sizes and types would enrich the field's understanding of library
change leadership. Narrative inquiry develops findings out of the particular as "a way of
ordering the landscape of events." Because time, local context, and individual learning and

	  
	  

	  

252	  

reflection affect that landscape, a more varied set of change stories would situate these
findings in a broader context.
Leadership Styles
There is a large body of writing about transformational leadership in academic
libraries. Judging by the number of articles that discuss the need for transformational skills
to create library change, it is an accepted and extremely popular leadership style in the
field (Carver, 1989; Castiglione, 2006; Day, 1998; Hicks & Given, 2013; Riggs & Sykes,
1993; Shaughnessy, 1996; Troll, 2002). Academic library literature also contains many
examples of transformational leadership skills being employed to create organizational
change (Ellis, et al., 2014; Gilstrap, 2009; Lee, 1993; Nussbaumer & Merkley, 2010;
Sucozhanay, Siguenza-Guzman, Zhimnay, Cattrysse, & Wyseure, 2014).
Further research might examine transformational leadership styles more explicitly
within the context of different levels of change, for example, in the context of change that
reorients or that recreates the library organization—using Nadler and Tushman's (1989)
frame bending and frame breaking approaches. Although transformational leadership is
widely accepted as a valuable set of skills to create organizational change (Northouse,
2013), it would be interesting to examine libraries that have undertaken substantive
change to understand if, and to what degree, additional leadership skills also play a role in
change success. It would also be interesting to examine specific instances of library
change to see what roles, if any, contextual and emotional intelligence play and the effect
of other library leadership styles such as everyday leadership and adaptive leadership
(Casey, 2011; De Long, 2012).

	  
	  

	  

253	  

Does Size or Type Matter?
Because this study was limited to relatively small library organizations, ranging
from 15-30 staff, serving liberal arts institutions, the questions of type of library and size
of academic library arise. As discussed in Chapter two, the majority of what is known
about academic library change comes from accounts by larger research libraries. Since
large libraries have relatively more resources than smaller ones, their capacity for
experimentation and change is seen as greater. They often are held up as the places where
innovative change is developed which can then filter "down" to other libraries (Neal,
2011; Wood, et al., 2007). However, smaller colleges and universities and their libraries
can, by their very size, be more nimble than larger institutions. In such environments, it is
sometimes possible to implement ideas and changes more quickly. An example of this is
College A. The college’s smaller size and shared culture of radical entrepreneurialism
created an organization that accepted constant change as a value.
Further research is needed to determine whether size and type of library promote
or inhibit transformational organizational change. Another question this study evokes is
whether transformational leadership styles work equally effectively in different types and
sizes of libraries. With their greater numbers of middle managers, how do
transformational leaders in larger libraries affect followers and to what extent?

	  
	  

	  

254	  

Theoretical Models
As mentioned in Chapter two, the field of organizational change offers a large
number of theoretical change models, all of which purport to be effective. Kezar's (2001)
and Kezar and Eckel's (2002a, 2002b) work on change models in academia conclude that
leaders need interrelated strategies to create successful change. Researchers might
examine academic library change in the light of these change models to see which are
most effective given the "contested and ambiguous terrain" of academia and the
traditionally bureaucratic and process-oriented nature of academic libraries (Bolman &
Gallos, 2011, p.112). In addition, a better understanding of the antecedents and
consequences of library change would be furthered by examining punctuated equilibrium,
particularly frame bending and frame breaking in different contexts and by applying the
multi-lens framework in more explicit detail to change journeys.
Stakeholders
This study explored the multiple influences of stakeholders either outside the
library or within the library on the change choices and change outcomes of library
directors. Further research might examine more specifically the influences stakeholders
have, particularly faculty, on library change. Further studies might also examine the effect
of stakeholder value systems and mental models on the course of academic library change.
The leader/follower relationship is an important focus in transformational
leadership. However, that dynamic relationship is an under-examined aspect of change
success or failure. While there is a body of literature on followers in the broader field of
organizational change, the primary discussions of follower change engagement in
academic library literature are articles describing either a process of enrolling library staff

	  
	  

	  

255	  

in a re-visioning the library's future or professional development activities designed to
create a learning organization (Giesecke & McNeil, 2004; Somerville, Schader, & Huston,
2005). Further research might examine in particular how empowerment, trust, and risk
taking in library teams affect the organizational change process.
Conclusion
This study examines the change journeys of four academic libraries in liberal arts
colleges. One of the conclusions from their experiences is that change is, indeed, a
journey, not a goal (Mattingly, 1998). Each library director described herself as involved
in continuous change. The change strategies she used and the change outcomes achieved
were not ends but intermediate stepping-stones toward further successful change. One of
the findings this study illuminates was the length of commitment required to effect
successful change in these libraries. Three library directors committed to a lengthy
process of, at times, small incremental changes. Deep change was revealed in specific
events or surprise moments—the receipt of a national award, or a strategic plan drafted
independently by librarians that mirrored the change vision of the library director.
Pausing to celebrate progress and positive events was a valuable tool for these directors.
Library director A did this most systematically but each of the three directors with the
most transformational skills engaged in celebrations that identified and valued change
progress.
To the degree that each library director employed a full range of transformational
leadership skills, her change leadership was more effectively realized. Causation does not
imply correlation. However, in these libraries, those strong transformational leadership
behaviors created the opportunity for the senior managers at each institution to evolve into

	  
	  

	  

256	  

teams that were willing to change and risk, committed to active engagement in the
academic life of the college, and deeply trusting of each other and their library director.
Bennis and Nanus (1997) introduce a concept that seems to apply to the dynamic
between the library directors and their senior management teams at Colleges A, B, and C.
Leaders "empower others to translate intention into reality and sustain it" (p. 74). In all
three of these libraries, the leader handed over power to her staff; in library A to design
the information literacy program, in library B to determine whether a new position would
require an M.L.S. or not, and in library C to engage in career mentoring of librarians who
would not successfully achieve tenure. Those librarians created new programs, bent
traditional frames, and conducted difficult conversations with colleagues—all activities
that might normally be expected to be the leader's job. In this case, the sharing of power,
the reciprocity, created engaged leadership throughout the organization and made lasting
positive changes.
The productive results of the directors' willingness to empower staff highlights an
important aspect of change leadership identified in these four college libraries—the value
of trust. In the libraries where the library directors and their stakeholders trusted each
other, those stakeholders supported change. At each college, the library directors, the
provosts, and the library senior management teams mentioned trust. The idea of trust, and
the giving or withholding of trust, was often discussed within two frames. First, a belief
that the individuals held shared values, and so trust was less risky. Second, the receipt of
empowerment generated reciprocal trust. By sharing trust, library directors received trust
back and so could continue to be effective change leaders (Dirks & Ferrin, 2002;
Kelloway, Turner, Barling, & Loughlin, 2012; Klaussner, 2012).

	  
	  

	  

257	  
Another conclusion from this study is that while transformational leadership was

critical to change leadership success, other skills were required to lead successful
organizational change. Contextual and emotional intelligence enabled library directors to
navigate change within complex academic environments. As mentioned previously, those
environments are more complex and less amenable to change than the environments
change leaders are faced with in for-profit companies. Each director understood the
specific characteristics of her academic environment, including the college's mission,
values, and culture and the relative power and importance of key stakeholders. Three of
those directors were able to work effectively within those environments to create change.
Library director D's lack of complete success was due, in part, to her inability to
change the context within which the president viewed the library and its needs. There was
a shift in the original context within which the library director had developed her change
vision and strategy. To be successful, she would have had to shift her strategy. The
library was no longer a top presidential priority. That devaluing of the library's change
goals, coupled with lack of trust from the president and from a number of the library staff,
resulted in library director D having little ability to influence key stakeholders, engage
them in her vision, and develop support for its outcomes.
By studying these four college libraries, the researcher has identified a set of skills,
behaviors, and strategies that were successful in creating and sustaining transformational
change. Those changes moved these libraries from a place of passivity and reactivity to
one of active, inquisitive engagement in the academic work of their colleges. As
mentioned in Chapter one, the library literature has been characterized for decades by
articles calling for academic libraries to advance "from incremental to radical change"

	  
	  

	  

258	  

(Neal, 2001). The directors in this study who most comprehensively achieved their
change visions and goals used a combination of frame bending and frame breaking
changes—both incremental and radical strategies—to create, what became over time, deep
transformational change.
As academic libraries continue to be challenged by many of the same social,
environmental, technological, and economic forces that challenge their parent institutions,
library leaders and followers will be challenged to engage in conscious, intentional change
journeys to ensure their libraries can continue to play a meaningful role in supporting the
mission of their colleges—teaching, learning, and research.
References
Association of College & Research Libraries (n.d.). About ACRL. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl
Atwater, D. C., & Bass, B. M. (1994). Transformational leadership in teams. In B.J. Bass
& B. J. Avolio (Eds.). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership (pp. 48-83). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Beauchamp, J. (2003). An exploration into the vision and visioning activity of leaders.
(Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, 2003). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/305074744/abstract/13CC4
2ADE2956218D4E/1?accountid=13870
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: The strategies for taking charge (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.

	  
	  

	  

259	  

Boga, I., & Ensari, N. (2009). The role of transformational leadership and organizational
change on perceived organizational success. The Psychologist-Manager Journal, 12,
235-251.
Bolman, L. G., & Gallos, J. V. (2011). Reframing academic leadership. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Broady-Preston, J., & Swain, W. (2012). What business are we in? Value added services,
core business and national library performance. Performance Measurement and
Metrics, 13(2), 107-120.
Carver, D. A. (1989). Transformational leadership: A bibliographic essay. Library
Administration and Management, 3(1), 30-34.
Casey, A. M. (2011). Strategic priorities and change in academic libraries. (Doctoral
dissertation, Simmons College, 2011). Retrieved from ProQuest
http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.simmons.edu:2048/pqdtft/docview/883918467/B0
DFF66EFEC541BEPQ/1?accountid=13870
Castiglione, J. (2006). Organizational learning and transformational leadership in the
library environment. Library Management, 27(4/5), 289-299.
Coakes, E., & Smith, P. (2007). Developing communities of innovation by identifying
innovation champions. The Learning Organization: The International Journal of
Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management, 14(1), 74-85.
Cowan, R. B. (1993). Prescription for small-college turnaround. Change, 25(1), 30-39.
Crowe, J. T. (1995). A study of effective practices in forming and articulating
organizational vision in higher education institutions. (Dissertation, University of La
Verne, 1995). Retrieved from ProQuest: http://0-

	  
	  

	  

260	  
search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304230413/abstract/13A9A
F653812DFFD07/1?accountid=13870

Day, M. T. (1998). Transformational discourse: Ideologies of organizational change in the
academic library and information science literature. Library Trends, 46(4), 635-667.
De Long, K. (2012). True north: Journeys in leadership of women library directors in
Canadian academic libraries. (Doctoral dissertation, Simmons College, 2012).
Available from author.
Den Hartog, D. N., & Koopman, P. I. (2001). Leadership in organizations. In N.
Anderson, D.S. Ones, H.K. Sinangil, & C. Viswesvaran (Eds.). Handbook of
industrial, work, & organizational psychology: Organizational psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
166-187). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Dewey, J. (1929). The quest for certainty: A study of the relation of knowledge and action.
New York: Paragon Books.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and
implications for research and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 611-628.
Dvir, T., Kass, N., & Shamir, B. (2004). The emotional bond: Vision and organizational
commitment among high-tech employees. Journal of Organizational Change
Management, 17(2), 126-143.
Ellis, E. L., Rosenblum, B., Stratton, J., & Ames-Stratton, K. (2014). Positioning
academic libraries for the future: A process and strategy for organizational
transformation. IATUL Annual Conference Proceedings, 35, 1-10.
Elteto, S., & Frank, D. G. (2003). The politics of survival in the postmodern library.
portal: Libraries and the Academy, 3(3), 495-501.

	  
	  

	  

261	  

Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (2004). Transition to the learning organization. Library
Trends, 53(1), 54-67.
Gilstrap, D. L. (2009). A complex systems framework for research on leadership and
organizational dynamics in academic libraries. portal: Libraries and the Academy,
9(1), 57-77.
Gioia, D. A., & Chittipeddi, K. (1991). Sensemaking and sensegiving in strategic change
initiation. Strategic Management Journal, 12(6), 433-447.
Gordon, A., & Yukl, G. (2004). The future of leadership research: Challenges and
opportunities. Zeitschrift fur Personalforschung, 18(3), 359-365.
Greenwood, R., Suddaby, R., & Hinings, C. R. (2002). Theorizing change: The role of
professional association in the transformation of institutionalized fields. Academy of
Management Journal, 45(1), 58-80.
Hanks, S. H. (2001). The dynamics of change: A recent review of the literature. People &
Strategy, 34(4), 12, 67.
He, H., & Baruch, Y. Transforming organizational identify under institutional change.
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 22(6), 575-599.
Henczel, S. (2014). The impact of library associations: Preliminary findings of a
qualitative study. Performance Measurement & Metrics, 15(3), 122-144.
Herold, I. (2014). Capacity building: Academic libraries as campus partners. Library
Issues, 34(6), 1-5.
Hicks, D., & Given, L. M. (2013). Principled, transformational leadership: Analyzing the
discourse of leadership in the development of librarianship's core competencies. The
Library Quarterly, 83(1), 7-25.

	  
	  

	  

262	  

Huffington Post. (2015, April 12). Sweet Briar College is closing. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/04/sweet-briar-college_n_6800208.html
Jaskyte, K. (2002). Organizational culture and innovation in nonprofit human service
organizations. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Alabama). Retrieved from
ProQuest http://search.proquest.com.stmarysca.idm.oclc.org/pqdtglobal/docview/304797931/fulltextPDF/2F0330E7A19F48BFPQ/
1?accountid=25334
Jennings, E. (2013). The relevance of academic libraries in the twenty-first century.
College & Undergraduate Libraries, 20, 107-116.
Kaarst-Brown, M. L., Nicholson, S., von Dran, G. M., & Stanton, J. M. (2004).
Organizational cultures of libraries as a strategic resource. Library Trends, 53(1), 3353.
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. (2003). The wisdom of teams: Creating the highperformance organization. New York: HarperCollins.
Kelloway, E. K., Turner, N., Barling, J., & Loughlin, C. (2012). Transformational
leadership and employee well-being: The mediating role of employee trust in
Kezar, A. J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kezar, A. J., & Eckel, P. D. (2002a). The effect of institutional culture on change
strategies in higher education: Universal principles or culturally responsive concepts?
The Journal of Higher Education, 73(4), 435-460.

	  
	  

	  

263	  

Kezar, A., & Eckel, P. (2002b). Examining the institutional transformation process: The
importance of sensemaking, interrelated strategies, and balance. Research in Higher
Education, 43(3), 295-328.
Kim, J. (2014, December 10). An academic library story. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/techology-and-learning/academic-librarystory?width=775%height=500&iframe=true
Kingma, B., & McClure, K. (2015). Lib-Value: Values, outcomes and return on
investment of academic libraries, Phase III: ROI of the Syracuse University Library.
College & Research Libraries, 76(1), 63-80.
Klaussner, S. (2012). Trust and leadership: Toward an interactive perspective. Journal of
Change Management, 12(4), 417-439.
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group Publishing Ltd.
Kopp, M. G. (2013). Academic libraries, institutional missions, and new student
recruitment: A case study. Reference Services Review, 41(2), 192-200.
Kotter, J. P. (2007). Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harvard Business
Review, 85(1), 96-103.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco,
CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Kranich, N., Lotts, M., & Springs, G. (2014, April). The promise of academic libraries:
Turning outward to transform campus communities. C&RL News, 75(4), 182-186.
Kuh, G. D., Gonyea, R. M. (2015). The role of the academic library in promoting student
engagement in learning. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 359-385.

	  
	  

	  

264	  

Lee, S. (1993). Organizational change in research libraries. Journal of Library
Administration, 18(3/4), 129-143.
Lissack, M., & Roos, J. (2001). Be coherent, not visionary. Long Range Planning, 34(1),
53-70.
Macaulay, K. D., Yue, A. R., & Thurlow, A. B. (2010). Ghosts in the hallways: Unseen
actors and organizational change. Journal of Change Management, 10(4), 335-346.
Mathews, B. (2014). Flip the model: Strategies for creating and delivering value. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(1), 16-24.
Mattingly, C. (1998). Healing dramas and clinical plots: The narrative structure of
experience. New York: Cambridge University Press.
McCombs, G. M. (2013). Abraham Lincoln, management guru! Lessons for library
leadership on resilience, true grit, and bouncing forward. portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 13(3), 227-231.
Mellahi, K., & Wilkinson, A. (2004). Organizational failure: A critique of recent research
and a proposed integrative framework. International Journal of Management Reviews,
5/6(1), 21-41.
Mezick, E. M. (2015). Relationship of library assessment to student retention. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 41(1), 31-36.
Miller, W. (2013). Libraries and student success. Library Issues, 34(2), 1-4.
Mourier, P., & Smith, M. R. (2001). Why change fails or succeeds. In P. Mourier & M.R.
Smith, Conquering organizational change: How to succeed where most companies fail
(pp. 17-28). Atlanta, GA: CEP Press.

	  
	  

	  

265	  

Nadler, D. A., & Heilpern, J. D. (1998). The CEO in the context of discontinuous change.
In D.C. Hambrick, D.A. Nadler, & M.L. Tushman, Navigating change: How CEOs,
top teams, and boards steer transformation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1989). Organizational frame bending: Principles for
managing reorientation. The Academy of Management Executive, 3(3), 194-203.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1(1), 1-13.
Neal, J. G. (2006). Raised by wolves: Integrating the new generation of feral professionals
into the academic library. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Neal, J. G. (2011). Prospects for systemic change across academic libraries. Educause
Review, 46(2), 10-11.
Neal, J. G. (2015). Still "choosing our futures": How many apples in the seed? College &
Research Libraries, 76(3), 310-315.
Nicholson, K. P., (2015). The McDonaldization of academic libraries and the values of
transformational change. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 328-338.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Nussbaumer, A., & Merkley, W. (2010). The path of transformational change. Library
Management, 31(8/9), 678-689.
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.

	  
	  

	  

266	  

Pettigrew, A. M. (1990). Longitudinal field research on change theory and practice.
Organization Science, 13, 267-292.
Pettigrew, A. M., Woodman, R. W., & Cameron, K. S. (2001). Studying organizational
change and development: Challenges for future research. Academy of Management
Journal, 444, 697-713.
Pye, A. (2005). Leadership and organizing: Sensemaking in action. Leadership, 1(1), 3150.
Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G. M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic change: A multilens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy of Management Review,
22(1), 48-79.
Riggs, D. E. (1998). Visionary leadership. In T. Mech & G. McCabe (Eds.). Leadership
and academic libraries (pp. 55-65). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Riggs, D. E., & Sykes, V. M. (1993). The time for transformational leadership is now.
Journal of Library Administration, 18, 55-68.
Schein, E.H. (1992). Organizational culture and leadership (2nd ed.). San Francisco: CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Shaughnessy, T. W. (1996). The library director as change agent. Journal of Library
Administration, 22(2/3),43-56.
Somerville, M. M., Schader, B., & Huston, M. E. (2005). Rethinking what we do and how
we do it: Systems thinking strategies for library leadership. Australian Academic &
Research Libraries, 36(4), 214-227.

	  
	  

	  

267	  

Straumsheim, C. (2014, December 10). Clash in the stacks. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/12/10/rethinking-library-provesdivisive-topic-many-liberal-arts-institutions
Sucozhanay, D., Siguenza-Guzman, L., Zhimnay, C., Cattrysse, D., & Wyseure, G.
(2014). Transformational leadership and stakeholder management in library change.
Liber Quarterly, 24(2), 55-83.
Troll, D. A. (2002). How and why libraries are changing: What we know and what we
need to know. portal: Libraries and the academy, 2(1), 99-123.
Walter, S. (2014). Guest editorial: A new age of reason for academic libraries. College &
Research Libraries, 75(5), 612-615.
Webster, L., & Mertova, P. (2007). Using narrative inquiry as a research method: An
introduction to using critical event narrative analysis in research on learning and
teaching. New York: Routledge.
Wicks, R. J., & Buck, T. C. (2013). Riding the dragon: Enhancing resilient leadership and
sensible self-care in the healthcare executive. Frontiers of Health Services
Management, 30(2), 3-13.
Wood, E. J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

	  
	  

	  

268	  
Bibliography

Abduction. (2011, March 9). In Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/abduction/
Abductive reasoning. (2012, August 11). New world encyclopedia. Retrieved from
http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Abductive_reasoning
Affinity Group. (n.d.). Mission. Retrieved from
http://www.loyola.edu/library/affinity/mission.htm
Akrivou, K., Boyatzis, R. E., & McLeod, P. L. (2006). The evolving group: Towards a
prescriptive theory of intentional group development. Journal of Management
Development, 25(7), pp. 689-706.
Albritton, R. L. (1998). A new paradigm of leader effectiveness for academic libraries: An
empirical study of the Bass (1985) model of transformational leadership. In T. F.
Mech, & G. B. McCabe, Leadership and academic libraries (pp. 66-82). Westport,
CT: Greenwood Press.
American Association of Colleges and Universities. (n.d.). Strategic plan 2013-17: Big
questions, urgent challenges: Liberal education and Americans’ global future.
Washington, DC: AAC&U. Retrieved from
http://www.aacu.org/About/strategic_plan.cfm
American Federation of Teachers: Higher Education. (2011, January 5). Student success
2010: The year in review. What Should Count? Frontline Perspectives on Student
Success and College Accountability. Retrieved from
http://www.whatshouldcount.org/?p=817

	  
	  

	  

269	  

American Library Association. (2013). The state of America’s libraries report 2013.
Academic Libraries. American Libraries, Special issue. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/news/sites/ala.org.news/files/content/2013-State-of-AmericasLibraries-Report.pdf
Andrade, R., & Zaghloul, R. (2010). Restructuring liaison librarian teams at the University
of Arizona Libraries, 2007-2009. New Library World, 111(7/8), 273-286.
Appleton, L., Stevenson, V., & Boden, D. (2011). Developing learning landscapes:
Academic libraries driving organizational change. Reference Services Review, 39(3),
343-361.
Argyris, C. (1999). On organizational learning (2nd ed.) Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.
Armenakis, A. A., & Bedeian, A. G. (1999). Organizational change: A review of theory
and research in the 1990s. Journal of Management, 25(3), 293-315.
Association of College & Research Libraries (n.d.). About ACRL. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2010). Value of academic libraries: A
comprehensive research review and report. Researched by M. Oakleaf. Chicago, IL:
Association of College and Research Libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.acrl.ala.org/value
Association of College & Research Libraries. (n.d.) Excellence in academic libraries
award: Award Background. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/awards/achievementawards/excellenceacademic

	  
	  

	  

270	  

Association of College & Research Libraries. (n.d.) Excellence in academic libraries
award: Award Guidelines. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/awards/achievementawards/excellenceguidelines
Association of College & Research Libraries. (2000). Information literacy competency
standards for higher education. Chicago, IL: ACRL. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/ilcomstan.html
Association of College & Research Libraries. College Libraries Section (n.d.). Retrieved
from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/aboutacrl/directoryofleadership/sections/cls/clswebsite/clshom
epage.
Atwater, D. C., & Bass, B. M. (1994). Transformational leadership in teams. In B. J. Bass
& B. J. Avolio (Eds.). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership (pp. 48-83). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Austin, A. E. (2010, January 7). Leading organizational change in higher education:
Lessons from the research. Retrieved from
http://www.aplu.org/document.doc?id=2406
Baldwin, R. G., & Baker, V. L. (2009, July 9). The case of the disappearing liberal arts
college. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/views/2009/07/09/baldwin
Baruchson-Arbib, S., & Bronstein, J. (2002). A view to the future of the library and
information science profession: A Delphi study. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 53(5), 397-408.

	  
	  

	  

271	  

Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J., Eds. (1994). Improving organizational effectiveness through
transformational leadership. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ:
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Publishers.
Baum, S., & McPherson, M. (2011, January 18). Is education a public good or a private
good? The Chronicle of Higher Education: Blogs: Innovations. Retrieved from
http://chronicle.com.vezproxy.stmarys-ca.edu:2048/blogs/innovations/is-education-apublic-good-or-a-private-good/28329
Bazeley, P., & Jackson, K. (2013). Qualitative data analysis with NVIVO (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Beauchamp, J. (2003). An exploration into the vision and visioning activity of leaders.
(Doctoral dissertation, McGill University, 2003). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/305074744/abstract/13CC4
2ADE2956218D4E/1?accountid=13870
Beer, M., & Nohria, N. (2000). Cracking the code of change. Harvard Business Review,
78(3), 133-141.
Bennis, W.G. (2008). Foreword. In R.J. Thomas, Crucibles of Leadership (pp. vii – x).
Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing Corporation.
Bennis, W. G., & Nanus, B. (1997). Leaders: The strategies for taking charge (2nd ed.).
New York: Harper & Row.
Bickman, L., & Rog, D. J. (2009). Applied research design: A practical approach. In L.
Bickman & D.J. Rog (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of applied social research methods
(2nd ed., pp. 3-43). Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.

	  
	  

	  

272	  

Birnbaum, R. (2000). The life cycle of academic management fads. The Journal of Higher
Education, 71(1), 1-16.
Black, J. S., & Gregersen, H. B. (2002). Leading strategic change: Breaking through the
brain barrier. Upper Saddle River, N.J.: Pearson Education, Inc.
Boga, I., & Ensari, N. (2009). The role of transformational leadership and organizational
change on perceived organizational success. The Psychologist-Manager Journal, 12,
235-251.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1984). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and
leadership. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Bolman, L. G., & Gallos, J. V. (2011). Reframing academic leadership. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bosk, C. L. (1979). Forgive and remember: Managing medical failure. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Brewer, J. M., Hook, S. J., Simmons-Welburn, J., & Williams, K. (2004). Libraries
dealing with the future now. ARL: A Bimonthly Report on Research Library Issues and
Actions from ARL, CNI, and SPARC, no. 234.
Bridges, W. (2003). Managing transitions: Making the most of change (2nd ed.).
Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press.
Broady-Preston, J., & Swain, W. (2012). What business are we in? Value added services,
core business and national library performance. Performance Measurement and
Metrics, 13(2), 107-120.

	  
	  

	  

273	  

Budd, J. M. (2009). Academic library data from the Unites States: An examination of
trends. LIBRES: Library and Information Science Research Electronic Journal, 19(2),
1-21.
Burns, J. M. (1979). Leadership. New York: Harper & Row.
Butler, B. (2012, October 22). Massive open online courses: Legal and policy issues.
Association of Research Libraries Issue Brief. Retrieved from
http://www.arl.org/bm~doc/issuebrief-mooc-22oct12.pdf.
Byrnes, J. (2004, October 4). The challenges of paradigmatic change. Harvard Business
School: Working knowledge for business leaders: Archive. Retrieved from
http://hbswk.hbs.edu/archive/4405.html
Campbell, J. D. (2006). Changing a cultural icon: The academic library as a virtual
destination. EDUCAUSE Review, 41(1), 16-30.
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (n.d.) The Carnegie classification
of institutions of higher education. Retrieved on June 23, 2013 from
http://classifications.carnegiefoundation.org/ No longer available see
http://www.carnegiefoundation.org/faqs/happened-carnegie-classifications/
Carver, D. A. (1989). Transformational leadership: A bibliographic essay. Library
Administration and Management, 3(1), 30-34.
Casey, A. M. (2011). Strategic priorities and change in academic libraries. (Doctoral
dissertation, Simmons College, 2011). Retrieved from ProQuest
http://search.proquest.com.ezproxy.simmons.edu:2048/pqdtft/docview/883918467/B0
DFF66EFEC541BEPQ/1?accountid=13870

	  
	  

	  

274	  

Castiglione, J. (2006). Organizational learning and transformational leadership in the
library environment. Library Management, 27(4/5), 289-299.
Central European University. Higher Education Research Group. (2011). LINK
conference: “The only disability in education is the reluctance to change: How do you
make change happen?” Retrieved from http://herg.ceu.hu/node/20530.
Chaffee, E. E. (1984). Successful strategic management in small private colleges. Journal
of Higher Education, 55(2), 212-241.
Chaffee, E.E . (1985). Three models of strategy. Academy of Management Review, 10(1),
89-98.
The Chancellor’s desk: New challenges to higher education. (2013, March 12). CUNY
Matters, The University. Retrieved from
http://www1.cuny.edu/mu/forum/2013/03/12/the-chancellors-desk-new-challenges-tohigher-education/
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Chiware, E. R. T. (2010). Positioning the technological university library in higher
education and human resources development in Africa. Library Management, 31(6),
391-403.
Chu, W. (2014). At a tipping point: U.S. academic libraries and the change agents in their
environment. Chinese Librarianship: An International Electronic Journal, 38.
Retrieved from http://www.iclc.us/cliej/cl38chu.pdf
Clandinin, D. J., & Connelly, F. M. (2000). Narrative inquiry: Experience and story in
qualitative research. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Clark, B. R. (1976). The benefits of disorder. Change, 8(9), 31-37.

	  
	  

	  

275	  

Clark, B. R. (1983). The contradictions of change in academic systems. Higher Education,
12(1), 101-116.
Clark, B. R. (1995). Leadership and innovation in universities: From theory to practice.
Tertiary Education and Management, 1(1), 7-11.
Clark, B. R. (1998). Creating entrepreneurial universities: Organizational pathways of
transformation. Howard House, Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Limited.
Coakes, E., & Smith, P. (2007). Developing communities of innovation by identifying
innovation champions. The Learning Organization: The International Journal of
Knowledge and Organizational Learning Management, 14(1), 74-85.
Cohen, M. D., & March, J. G. (1986). Leadership in an organized anarchy. In M. D.
Cohen, & J. G. March (Eds.), Leadership and ambiguity: The American college
president (2nd ed., pp. 195-230). Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Collins, J. C., & Porras, J. I. (1991). Organizational vision and visionary organizations.
California Management Review, 34(1), 30-52.
Coughlin, C. M., & Gertzog, A. (1997). Lyle's administration of the college library.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press.
Council for Higher Education Accreditation. (2013, April 13). Presidents FY 2014 budget
proposal contains funding for initiative to encourage new quality validation systems.
CHEA Federal Update, no. 31. Retrieved from
http://www.chea.org/Government/FedUpdate/CHEA_FU31.html
Cowan, R. B. (1993). Prescription for small-college turnaround. Change, 25(1), 30-39.
Crawford, G. A. (2015). The academic library and student retention and graduation: An
exploratory study. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 15(1), 41-57.

	  
	  

	  

276	  

Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Crowe, J. T. (1995). A study of effective practices in forming and articulating
organizational vision in higher education institutions. (Dissertation, University of La
Verne, 1995). Retrieved from ProQuest: http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304230413/abstract/13A9A
F653812DFFD07/1?accountid=13870
Cuno, J. (2005). Telling stories: Rhetoric and leadership, a case study. Leadership, 1(2),
205-213.
Curzon, S. C. (2010). “Ain’t what it used to be”: The future of academic libraries. In
Leaders Look Toward the Future a companion website to C.A. Alire & E.G. Evans,
Academic Librarianship. Chicago: Neal-Schuman, 2010. Retrieved from
http://www.neal-schuman.com/academic/
Dalbello, J. (2005). A phenomenological study of an emergent national digital library. Part
I: Theory and methodological framework. The Library Quarterly, 75, 391-420.
Davies, J., Hides, M. T., & Casey, S. (2001). Leadership in higher education. Total
Quality Management, 12(7/8), 1025-1030.
Day, M. T. (1998). Transformational discourse: Ideologies of organizational change in the
academic library and information science literature. Library Trends, 46(4), 635-667.
De Long, K. (2012). True north: Journeys in leadership of women library directors in
Canadian academic libraries. (Doctoral dissertation, Simmons College, 2012).
Available from author.

	  
	  

	  

277	  

Den Hartog, D. N., & Koopman, P. I. (2001). Leadership in organizations. In N.
Anderson, D. S. Ones, H. K. Sinangil, & C. Viswesvaran (Eds.). Handbook of
industrial, work, & organizational psychology: Organizational psychology (Vol. 2, pp.
166-187). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denna, E. (2014, March 24). The business model of higher education. EDUCAUSE
Review. Retrieved from http://www.educause.edu/ero/article/business-model-highereducation
Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind’s eye of the user: The sense-making qualitative
quantitative methodology. In J.D. Glazier, & R.R. Powell (Eds.), Qualitative Research
in Information Management (pp. 61-84). Englewood, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Dewey, J. (1929). The quest for certainty: A study of the relation of knowledge and action.
New York: Paragon Books.
Dillon, D. (2004, December 10). College libraries: The long goodbye. The Chronicle of
Higher Education, 51(16), p. B5.
Dirks, K. T., & Ferrin, D. L. (2002). Trust in leadership: Meta-analytic findings and
implications for research and practice. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 611-628.
Duderstadt, J. J. (2003a, February 6). Higher education in the new century: Themes,
challenges, and options. Paper presented at the University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA. Retrieved from
http://milproj.dc.umich.edu/publications/challenges_options/
Duderstadt, J. J. (2003b, June 23). Higher education in the new century: Themes,
challenges, and opportunities. PowerPoint presented at University of Nagoya, Japan.
Retrieved from http://milproj.ummu.umich.edu/publicaitons/nagoya/index.html

	  
	  

	  

278	  

Duderstadt, J. J. (2011, March 17). The future of the American research university. Paper
presented at the University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign. Retrieved from
http://milproj.dc.umich.edu/pdfs/2011/2011-UIUC_Address.pdf
Dvir, T., Kass, N., & Shamir, B. (2004). The emotional bond: Vision and organizational
commitment among high-tech employees. Journal of Organizational Change
Management, 17(2), 126-143.
Ellis, E. L., Rosenblum, B., Stratton, J., & Ames-Stratton, K. (2014). Positioning
academic libraries for the future: A process and strategy for organizational
transformation. IATUL Annual Conference Proceedings, 35, 1-10.
Elteto, S., & Frank, D. G. (2003). The politics of survival in the postmodern library.
portal: Libraries and the Academy, 3(3), 495-501.
Elton, L. (1999). New ways of learning in higher education: Managing the change.
Tertiary Education and Management, 5(3), 207-225.
Everly, G. S., & Strouse, D. A. (2010). The secrets of resilient leadership: When failure is
not an option: Six essential skills for leading through adversity. New York: Diamedica
Publishers.
Faust, D. (2012, January 20). Challenges of higher education. Harvard University, Office
of the President, as delivered, University of Mumbai. Retrieved from
http://www.harvard.edu/president/challenges-higher-education
Ferrall, Jr., V. E. (2008, February 11). Can liberal arts colleges be saved? Inside Higher
Ed. Retrieved from https://www.insidehighered.com/views/2008/02/11/ferrall
Ferrall, Jr., V. E. (2011). Liberal arts at the brink. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.

	  
	  

	  

279	  

Flamholtz, E. G., & Randle, Y. (1998). Changing the game: Organizational
transformations of the first, second and third kinds. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Flick, U. (1998). An introduction to qualitative research (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.
Flyvbjerg, G. (2004). Five misunderstandings about case-study research. In C. Seal, G.
Bobo, J.F. Gubrium, & D. Silverman (Eds.), Qualitative research practice (pp. 420434). London: Sage.
Fore, J. S., Knight, R. C., & Russell, C. (1993). Leadership for user services in the
academic library. Journal of Library Administration, 19(3/4), 97-110.
Francis, D., Bessant, J., & Hobday, M. (2003). Managing radical organisational
transformation. Management Decision, 41(1/2), 18-31.
Franklin, B. (2012). Surviving to thriving: Advancing the institutional mission. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 94-107.
Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (2004). Transition to the learning organization. Library
Trends, 53(1), 54-67.
Gilstrap, D. L. (2009). A complex systems framework for research on leadership and
organizational dynamics in academic libraries. portal: Libraries and the Academy,
9(1), 57-77.
Gioia, D. A., & Chittipeddi, K. (1991). Sensemaking and sensegiving in strategic change
initiation. Strategic Management Journal, 12(6), 433-447.
Glaser, B. G., & Strauss, A. L. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. Chicago: Aldine.

	  
	  

	  

280	  

Goleman, D. (2000). Working with emotional intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
Goleman, D. (2001). Emotional intelligence: Issues in paradigm building. In C. Cherniss,
& D. Goleman (Eds.), The emotionally intelligent workplace (pp. 13-26). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Gordon, A., & Yukl, G. (2004). The future of leadership research: Challenges and
opportunities. Zeitschrift fur Personalforschung, 18(3), 359-365.
Graetz, F., & Smith, S. (2005). Organizing forms in change management: The role of
structures, processes and boundaries in a longitudinal case analysis. Journal of Change
Management, 5(3), 311-328.
Grant, M. J. (2007). The role of reflection in the library and information sector: A
systematic review. Health Information and Libraries Journal, (24), 155-166.
Greenwood, R., Suddaby, R., & Hinings, C. R. (2002). Theorizing change: The role of
professional association in the transformation of institutionalized fields. Academy of
Management Journal, 45(1), 58-80.
Gremmels, G. S. (2013). Staffing trends in college and university libraries. Reference
Services Review, 41(2), 233-252.
Hanks, S. H. (2001). The dynamics of change: A recent review of the literature. People &
Strategy, 34(4), 12, 67.
Hannegan, Jr., D. W. (1991). The enrolling behavior of visionary leaders. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Denver, 1991). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/303944486/abstract/13CC46
BFB193C55EDC9/1?accountid=13870

	  
	  

	  

281	  

Hardesty, L. (2002). Future of academic/research librarians: A period of transition—to
what? portal: Libraries and the Academy, 2(1), 79-97.
Hawkins, J., & Dulewicz, V. (2007). The relationship between performance as a leader
and emotional intelligence, intellectual and managerial competencies. Journal of
General Management, 33(2), 57-78.
He, H., & Baruch, Y. Transforming organizational identify under institutional change.
Journal of Organizational Change Management, 22(6), 575-599.
Heifetz, R. A. (1994). Leadership without easy answers. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Henczel, S. (2014). The impact of library associations: Preliminary findings of a
qualitative study. Performance Measurement & Metrics, 15(3), 122-144.
Herold, I. (2014). Capacity building: Academic libraries as campus partners. Library
Issues, 34(6), 1-5.
Herold, I. (2015). Personal communication: Official campaign question asked of
candidates for Vice President/President Elect of the Association of College &
Research Libraries.
Herscovitch, L., & Meyer, J. P. (2002). Commitment to organizational change: Extension
of a three-component model. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(3), 474-487.
Hickerson, H. T. (2011, December). Rebalancing the investment in collections. Research
Library Issues, no. 277, 2-9.
Hicks, D., & Given, L. M. (2013). Principled, transformational leadership: Analyzing the
discourse of leadership in the development of librarianship's core competencies. The
Library Quarterly, 83(1), 7-25.

	  
	  

	  

282	  

Higgs, M., & Rowland, D. (2011). What does it take to implement change successfully? A
study of the behaviors of successful change leaders. The Journal of Applied
Behavioral Science, 47(3), 309-335.
Hiller, S. (2001). Assessing user needs, satisfaction and library performance at the
University of Washington libraries. Library Trends, 49(4), 605-625.
Hiller, S., & Self, J. (2004). From measurement to management: Using data wisely for
planning and decision-making. Library Trends, 53(1), 129-155.
Holley, K. A. (2009). Interdisciplinary strategies as transformative change in higher
education. Innovative Higher Education, 34(5), 331-344.
Holsti, O. R. (1969). Content analysis for the social sciences and humanities. Menlo Park,
CA: Addison-Wesley.
Housewright, R. (2009). Themes of change in corporate libraries: Considerations for
academic libraries. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 9(2), 253-271.
Huffington Post. (2015, April 12). Sweet Briar College is closing. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/03/04/sweet-briar-college_n_6800208.html
Hunter, M. G., Evans, N., & Price, J. (2011). Internal intellectual assets: A management
interpretation. Journal of Information, Information Technology, and Organizations, 6,
2-12.
Immerwahr, J., Johnson, J., & Gasbarra, P. (2008, October). The iron triangle: College
presidents talk about costs, access, and quality. The National Center for Public Policy
and Higher Education (Report #08-2). Retrieved from
http://www.highereducation.org/reports/iron_triangle/index.shtml

	  
	  

	  

283	  

Jantz, R. C. (2011). Innovation in academic libraries: An analysis of university librarians'
perspectives. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 3-12.
Jaskyte, K. (2002). Organizational culture and innovation in nonprofit human service
organizations. (Doctoral dissertation, University of Alabama). Retrieved from
ProQuest http://search.proquest.com.stmarysca.idm.oclc.org/pqdtglobal/docview/304797931/fulltextPDF/2F0330E7A19F48BFPQ/
1?accountid=25334
Jennings, E. (2013). The relevance of academic libraries in the twenty-first century.
College & Undergraduate Libraries, 20, 107-116.
Jones, R. A. (2011, May). “Outcome funding:” Tennessee experiments with a
performance-based approach to college appropriations. National Crosstalk, 19(1).
Retrieved from http://www.highereducation.org/crosstalk/ct0511/news0511-tenn.shtml
Jones, S. (2002, September 15). The Internet goes to college: How students are living in
the future with today’s technology. Washington, D.C.: Pew Internet & American Life
Project. Retrieved from
www.pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/.../PIP_College_Report.pdf.pdf
Kaarst-Brown, M. L., Nicholson, S., von Dran, G. M., & Stanton, J. M. (2004).
Organizational cultures of libraries as a strategic resource. Library Trends, 53(1), 3353.
Kantabutra, S., & Avery, G. C. (2010). The power of vision: Statements that resonate.
Journal of Business Strategy, 31(1), 37-45.
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. (2003). The wisdom of teams: Creating the highperformance organization. New York: HarperCollins.

	  
	  

	  

284	  

Kaufman, P. (2007). It’s not your parents’ library any more: Challenges and opportunities
in the new webs of complexity. Journal of Library Administration, 46(1), 5-26.
Kelderman, E. (2013, April 29). Oregon considers recasting governance of higher
education. The Chronicle of Higher Education: Government.
Retrieved from http://wiredcampus.chronicle.com/article/Oregon-Considers-BigChanges/138867/
Keller, G. (1997). Examining what works in strategic planning. In M.W. Peterson, D.D.
Dill, & L.A. Mets, Planning and management for a changing environment: A
handbook on redesigning postsecondary institutions (pp. 158-170). San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kellerman, B. (2004). Bad leadership: What it is, how it happens, why it matters.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Kelloway, E. K., Turner, N., Barling, J., & Loughlin, C. (2012). Transformational
leadership and employee well-being: The mediating role of employee trust in
Kezar, A. J. (2001). Understanding and facilitating organizational change in the 21st
century: Recent research and conceptualizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Kezar, A. J., & Eckel, P. D. (2002a). The effect of institutional culture on change
strategies in higher education: Universal principles or culturally responsive concepts?
The Journal of Higher Education, 73(4), 435-460.
Kezar, A. J., & Eckel, P. D. (2002b). Examining the institutional transformation process:
The importance of sensemaking, interrelated strategies, and balance. Research in
Higher Education, 43(3), 295-328.

	  
	  

	  

285	  

Kiley, K. (2011, October 10). News: Starting to worry. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved from
http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2011/10/10/decisions_at_smith_other_liberal_ar
ts_colleges_raise_questions_about_financial_model_s_sustainability
Kim, J. (2014, December 10). An academic library story. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/blogs/techology-and-learning/academic-librarystory?width=775%height=500&iframe=true
Kingma, B., & McClure, K. (2015). Lib-Value: Values, outcomes and return on
investment of academic libraries, Phase III: ROI of the Syracuse University Library.
College & Research Libraries, 76(1), 63-80.
Kirschner, A. (2012, April 8). Innovations in higher education? Hah! The Chronicle of
Higher Education: The Chronicle Review. Retrieved from
http://chronicle.com/article/Innovations-in-Higher/131424/
Klaussner, S. (2012). Trust and leadership: Toward an interactive perspective. Journal of
Change Management, 12(4), 417-439.
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald
Group Publishing Ltd.
Kopp, M. G. (2015). Academic libraries, institutional missions, and new student
recruitment: A case study. Reference Services Review, 41(2), 192-200.
Kotter, J. P. (1990). A force for change: How leadership differs from management. New
York: Free Press.
Kotter, J. P. (2005, November). Leading change: Learning to do it right. Leadership
Excellence, 22(11), 5-6.

	  
	  

	  

286	  

Kotter, J. P. (2007). Leading change: Why transformation efforts fail. Harvard Business
Review, 85(1), 96-103.
Kotter International. (2015). The 8-step process for leading change. Retrieved from
http://ww.kotterinernational.com/the-8-step-process-for-leading-change/
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco,
CA: John Wiley & Sons.
Kranich, N., Lotts, M., & Springs, G. (2014, April). The promise of academic libraries:
Turning outward to transform campus communities. C&RL News, 75(4), 182-186.
Krippendorff, K. (2004). Content analysis: An introduction to its methodology (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Kuh, G. D., Gonyea, R. M. (2015). The role of the academic library in promoting student
engagement in learning. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 359-385.
Kutz, M. (2008). Toward a conceptual model of contextual intelligence: A transferable
leadership construct. Leadership Review, 8, 18-31.
Lant, T. K., & Mezias, S. J. (1990). Managing discontinuous change: A simulation study
of organizational learning and entrepreneurship. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5),
147-179.
Latta, G. F. (2009). A process model of organizational change in cultural context (OC3
Model): The impact of organizational culture on leading change. Journal of
Leadership and Organizational Studies, 16(1), 19-37.
LeBlanc, P. (2010, October 1). Reinventing the academy: Transforming for new learners,
digital technologies, and student success. Retrieved from the New England Board of

	  
	  

	  

287	  
Higher Education http://www.nebhe.org/info/pdf/reinventing/Paul_LeBlanc_10-410.pdf

Lee, S. (1993). Organizational change in research libraries. Journal of Library
Administration, 18(3/4), 129-143.
Lewis, D. W. (2007). A strategy for academic libraries in the first quarter of the 21st
century. College & Research Libraries, 68(5), 418-434.
Lippincott, J. (2005). Net generation students and libraries. In Educating the net
generation (13). EDUCAUSE. Retrieved from http://www.educause.edu/research-andpublications/books/educating-net-generation/net-generation-students-and-libraries
Lipton, M. (1996). Demystifying the development of an organizational vision. Sloan
Management Review, 37(4), 83-92.
Lissack, M., & Roos, J. (2001). Be coherent, not visionary. Long Range Planning, 34(1),
53-70.
Lombard, E. (2012). The role of the academic library in college choice. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 38(4), 237-241.
Ludwig, L., & Starr, S. (2002). Library as place: Results of a Delphi study. Journal of the
Medical Library Association, 93(3), 315-326.
Lyle, G. R. (1974). The administration of the college library (4th ed.). New York: Wilson.
Macaulay, K. D., Yue, A. R., & Thurlow, A. B. (2010). Ghosts in the hallways: Unseen
actors and organizational change. Journal of Change Management, 10(4), 335-346.
Marshak, R.J., & Grant, D. (2008). Organizational discourse and new organization
development practices. British Journal of Management, Supplement, 1(19), S7-S19.

	  
	  

	  

288	  

Matelic, C. T. (2007). Organizational change in history museums. (Doctoral dissertation,
University at Albany, State University of New York, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest
http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304747730/141616EA2816
474388B/1?accountid=13870
Mathews, B. (2014). Flip the model: Strategies for creating and delivering value. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(1), 16-24.
Mattingly, C. (1998). Healing dramas and clinical plots: The narrative structure of
experience. New York: Cambridge University Press.
McCombs, G. M. (2013). Abraham Lincoln, management guru! Lessons for library
leadership on resilience, true grit, and bouncing forward. portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 13(3), 227-231.
McElrath, R. (2002). Challenges that academic library directors are experiencing as
perceived by them and their supervisors. College & Research Libraries, 63(4), 304321.
McFarland, M. R. (1993). The process of vision development described by six college and
university presidents. (Doctoral dissertation, Gonzaga University, 1993). Retrieved
from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304098171/abstract/13CCE
A166E148E5F6DF/1?accountid=13870
McNicol, S. (2005). The challenges of strategic planning in academic libraries. New
Library World, 106(11/12), 496-509.

	  
	  

	  

289	  

Mellahi, K., & Wilkinson, A. (2004). Organizational failure: A critique of recent research
and a proposed integrative framework. International Journal of Management Reviews,
5/6(1), 21-41.
Mezick, E. M. (2015). Relationship of library assessment to student retention. Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 41(1), 31-36.
Miller, D., & Friesen, P. H. (1980). Momentum and revolution in organizational
adaptation. Academy of Management Journal, 23(4), 591-614.
Miller, R. (2012). Damn the recession, full speed ahead. Journal of Library
Administration, 52(1), 3-17.
Miller, W. (2013). Libraries and student success. Library Issues, 34(2), 1-4.
Mink, O., Owen, K., & Bright, S. Long-term thinking and cultural change. Asia Pacific
Journal of Quality Management, 2(2), 26-39.
Mintzberg, H., & Waters, J.A. (1985). Of strategies, deliberate and emergent. Strategic
Management Journal, 6(3), 257-271.
Morgan, D. L. (1997). Focus groups as qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Morrill, R. L. (2007). Strategic leadership: Integrating strategy and leadership in colleges
and universities. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Mourier, P., & Smith, M. R. (2001). Why change fails or succeeds. In P. Mourier & M.R.
Smith, Conquering organizational change: How to succeed where most companies fail
(pp. 17-28). Atlanta, GA: CEP Press.
Murray-Rust, C. (2010). The opportunity of invisibility. Leaders look toward the future: A
companion website to C.A. Alire & E.G. Evans, Academic librarianship. New York:

	  
	  

	  

290	  
Neal-Schuman Publishers. Retrieved from http://www.nealschuman.com/academic/Murray-Rust2010.pdf

Nadler, D. A., & Heilpern, J. D. (1998). The CEO in the context of discontinuous change.
In D.C. Hambrick, D.A. Nadler, & M.L. Tushman, Navigating change: How CEOs,
top teams, and boards steer transformation. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Press.
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1989). Organizational frame bending: Principles for
managing reorientation. The Academy of Management Executive, 3(3), 194-203.
Nadler, D. A., & Tushman, M. L. (1995). Types of organizational change: From
incremental improvement to discontinuous transformation. In D. A. Nadler, R. B.
Shaw, A. E. Walton, & Associates (Eds.), Discontinuous change: Leading
organizational transformation (pp. 15-34). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Nanus, B. (1992). Visionary leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1(1), 1-13.
Neal, J. G. (2006). Raised by wolves: Integrating the new generation of feral professionals
into the academic library. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Neal, J. G. (2011). Prospects for systemic change across academic libraries. Educause
Review, 46(2), 10-11.
Neal, J. G. (2015). Still "choosing our futures": How many apples in the seed? College &
Research Libraries, 76(3), 310-315.
Nelson, B. E. (2014). The academic library administrator's field guide. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.

	  
	  

	  

291	  

Nicholson, K. P. (2015). The McDonaldization of academic libraries and the values of
transformational change. College & Research Libraries, 76(3), 328-338.
Noble, C. H. (1999). The eclectic roots of strategy implementation research. Journal of
Business Research, 45(2), 119-134.
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice (6th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Nussbaum, M. C. (2010). Not for profit: Why democracy needs the humanities. Princeton,
N.J.: Princeton University Press.
Nussbaumer, A., & Merkley, W. (2010). The path of transformational change. Library
Management, 31(8/9), 678-689.
Nutefall, J. E., & Chadwell, F. A. (2011). Preparing for the 21st century: Academic library
realignment. New Library World, 113(3/4), 162-173.
The Oberlin Group. (n.d.). A consortium of liberal arts college libraries. Retrieved from
http://www.oberlingroup.org/
O’Connell, D., Hickerson, K., & Pillutla, A. (2011). Organizational visioning: An
integrative review. Group & Organization Management, 36(1), 103-125.
OhioLINK. (2006, Fall). Reinventing OhioLINK: New vision needed for a changed world.
OhioLINK Update, 12(2), 2. Retrieved from
http://www.ohiolink.edu/about/update/fall2006/fall06.pdf
Palmer, I., Dunford, R., & Akin, G. (2009). Managing organizational change: A multiple
perspectives approach (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Parry, K. W., & Hansen, H. (2007). The organizational story as leadership. Leadership,
3(3), 281-300.

	  
	  

	  

292	  

Pettigrew, A. M. (1990). Longitudinal field research on change: Theory and practice.
Organization Science, 1(3), 267-292.
Pettigrew, A. M., Woodman, R. W., & Cameron, K. S. (2001). Studying organizational
change and development: Challenges for future research. Academy of Management
Journal, 444, 697-713.
Pfnister, A. O. (1984). The role of the liberal arts college: A historical overview of the
debates. Journal of Higher Education, 55(2), 145-170.
Phipps, S. E. (1993). Transforming libraries into learning organizations—the challenge for
leadership. Journal of Library Administration, 18(3/4), 19-37.
Pounder, J. S. (2001). “New leadership” and university organisational effectiveness:
Exploring the relationship. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 22(5/6),
281-290.
Probst, L. K. (1996). Libraries in an environment of change: Changing roles,
responsibilities, and perception in the information age. In J. J. Branin (Ed.), Managing
change in academic libraries (pp. 7-20). New York: Haworth Press.
Pugh, L. (2007). Change management in information services (2nd ed.). Abingdon, UK:
Ashgate Publishing Group.
Pye, A. (2005). Leadership and organizing: Sensemaking in action. Leadership, 1(1), 3150.
Quinn, R. E. (1996). Deep change: Discovering the leader within. San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass Inc.

	  
	  

	  

293	  

Rajagopalan, N., & Spreitzer, G. M. (1997). Toward a theory of strategic change: A multilens perspective and integrative framework. The Academy of Management Review,
22(1), 48-79.
Reuteman, R. (7 March 2011). Is the four-year, liberal-arts education model dead?
Education and You 2011 CNBC.com. Retrieved from
http://www.cnbc.com/id/41626661#
Reyes, V. (2006). The future role of the academic librarians in higher education. portal:
Libraries and the Academy, 6(3), 301-309.
Richards, L., & Morse, J. M. (2007). Read me first for a user’s guide to qualitative
methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Riessman, C. K. (2008). Narrative methods for the human sciences. Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage Publications.
Riggs, D. E. (1997). Editor’s observations. College & Research Libraries, 58(6), 496-497.
Riggs, D. E. (1998). Visionary leadership. In T. Mech & G. McCabe (Eds.). Leadership
and academic libraries (pp. 55-65). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Riggs, D. E., & Sykes, V. M. (1993). The time for transformational leadership is now.
Journal of Library Administration, 18, 55-68.
Roberto, J. A., & Levesque, L. C. (2005). The art of making change initiatives stick. MIT
Sloan Management Review, 46(4), 53-60.
Rogers, S. A. (2007). Assessing trends to cultivate new thinking in libraries. Library
Management, 28(6/7), 366-378.
Romanelli, E., & Tushman, M. L. (1994). Organizational transformation as punctuated
equilibrium: An empirical test. Academy of Management Journal, 37(5), 1141-1166.

	  
	  

	  

294	  

Rubin, H. J., & Rubin, I. S. (2012). Qualitative interviewing: The art of hearing data (3rd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rubin, R. S., Munz, D. C., & Bommer, W. H. Leading from within: The effects of
emotion recognition and personality on transformational leadership behavior. Academy
of Management Journal, 48(5), 845-858.
Sarros, J. C., Cooper, B. K, & Santora, J. C. (2010). Leadership vision, organizational
culture, and support for innovation in not-for-profit and for-profit organizations.
Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 32(3), 291-309.
Sashkin, M. (1988). The visionary leader. In J.A. Conger, R.N. Kanungo and associates,
Charismatic leadership: The elusive factor in organizational effectiveness (pp.122160). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Saw, G., Lui, W. W., & Yu, F. (2008). 2010: A library odyssey. Library Management,
29(1/2), 51-66.
Schaffler, H. (2004). How to organize the digital library: Reengineering and change
management in the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek, Munich. Library Hi Tech, 22(4), 340346.
Schein, E. H. (1992). Organizational culture and leadership (2nd ed.). San Francisco: CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Schramm, W. (1971, December). Notes on case studies of instructional media projects.
Retrieved from http://eric.ed.gov/?id=ED092145. (ED092145).
Schulenburger, D. (2011, February). The future of the US research university. Research
Library Issues, no. 274. Retrieved from http://publications.arl.org/rli274/2

	  
	  

	  

295	  

Seidman, I. (2006). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
education and the social sciences (3rd ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Selingo, J. J. (2013). What presidents think: A 2013 survey of four-year college
presidents. The Chronicle of Higher Education. Retrieved from
http://images.results.chronicle.com/Web/TheChronicleofHigherEducation/%7B6e0efc
69-0828-4b97-b51f5d9915a72aca%7D_CHECOR1081_Pres_Report_%28Pearson%29.pdf
Senge, P. M., Kleiner, A., Roberts, C., Ross, R., Roth, G., & Smith B. (1999). The dance
of change: The challenges to sustaining momentum in learning organizations. New
York: Doubleday.
Shaughnessy, T. W. (1996). The library director as change agent. Journal of Library
Administration, 22(2/3),43-56.
Shuler, J. A. (2005). Creative destruction: Academic libraries and the burden of change.
The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 31(6), 593-597.
Sidorko, P. E. (2007). Transforming library and higher education support services: Can
change models help? Library Management, 29(4/5), 307-318.
Sidorko, P. E., & Yang, T. T. (2009). Refocusing for the future: Meeting user expectations
in a digital age. Library Management, 30(1/2), 6-24.
Sim, Y. S. (1997). Identifying the future roles of the library at the community college: A
Delphi study. (Doctoral dissertation, Nova University, 1997). Available from
University Microfilms International.

	  
	  

	  

296	  

Smith, B. D. (2009). Maybe I will, maybe I won’t: What the connected perspectives of
motivation theory and organisational commitment may contribute to our understanding
of strategy implementation. Journal of Strategic Marketing, 17(6), 473-485.
Somerville, M. M., Schader, B., & Huston, M. E. (2005). Rethinking what we do and how
we do it: Systems thinking strategies for library leadership. Australian Academic &
Research Libraries, 36(4), 214-227.
Souza, J. M. (2007). Factors contributing to the successful implementation of planned
change at a small, private, four-year institution in the Mid-Atlantic area. (Doctoral
dissertation, University of Nebraska, 2007). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/304842805/abstract/13B96C
133267D9791B7/1?accountid=13870
Steane, P. D. (1997). Oils ain’t oils! Strategy across sectors. The International Journal of
Public Sector Management, 10(6), 461-470.
Stephan, E. (2010). Strategic planning on the fast track. Library Leadership &
Management, 24(4), 189-198.
Stoffle, C., Allen, B., & Fore, J. (2000). Reinventing academic libraries and librarianship.
College & Research Libraries News, 61(10), 894-897.
Stoffle, C., Leeder, K., & Sykes-Casavant, G. (2008). Bridging the gap: Wherever you are,
the library. Journal of Library Administration, 48(1), 3-30.
Stoffle, C., & Phipps, S. (2003). Creating a culture of assessment: The University of
Arizona experience. ARL Bimonthly Report, 230/231, 26-27.
Stoffle, C., Renaud, R., & Veldof, J. R. (1996, 2015). Choosing our futures. College &
Research Libraries, 57(3), 213-225. Reprinted C&RL, 76(3), 316-327.

	  
	  

	  

297	  

Straumsheim, C. (2014, December 10). Clash in the stacks. Inside Higher Ed. Retrieved
from https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2014/12/10/rethinking-library-provesdivisive-topic-many-liberal-arts-institutions
Strauss, A.L. (1987). Qualitative analysis for social scientists. New York: Cambridge
University Press.
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. M. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded theory
procedures and techniques. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications.
Sturdy, A., & Grey, C. (2003). Beneath and beyond organizational change management:
Exploring alternatives. Organization, 10(4), 561-662.
Sucozhanay, D., Siguenza-Guzman, L., Zhimnay, C., Cattrysse, D., & Wyseure, G.
(2014). Transformational leadership and stakeholder management in library change.
Liber Quarterly, 24(2), 55-83.
TerHaar, L. K. (2000). “Go where the students go!” The fate of the undergraduate library.
Library Journal, 125(18), 38-41.
The Times Higher Education. Opinions and Leaders. (2008, June 5). Leader: A Googleeyed view of the world. Retrieved from
http://www.timeshighereducation.co.uk/story.asp?storyCode=402256&sectioncode=2
6
Thomas, R. J. (2008). Crucibles of leadership. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School
Publishing Corporation.
Thornton, G. (2010). Academic libraries: A poly-faced future. In Leaders look toward the
future: A companion website to C.A. Alire & E.G. Evans, Academic librarianship.

	  
	  

	  

298	  
New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers. Retrieved from http://www.nealschuman.com/academic/Thornton2010.pdf

Tichy, N. M., & Devanna, M. A. (1986). The transformational leader: The key to global
competitiveness. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Tobin, E. M. (2009, October 24). Eugene Tobin inaugural remarks: Remarks for Jonathan
Veitch’s inauguration as 15th president of Occidental College. Retrieved from
http://www.oxy.edu/x9241.xml
Troll, D. A. (2002). How and why libraries are changing: What we know and what we
need to know. portal: Libraries and the academy, 2(1), 99-123.
U.S. The White House. (n.d.). Education: Knowledge and skills for the future: Higher
education. Retrieved from http://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/education/highereducation
Values. (2014). BusinessDictionary.com. Retrieved from
http://www.businessdictionary.com/definition/values.html
Van de Ven, A. H., & Poole, M. S. (1995). Explaining development and change in
organizations. Academy of Management Review, 20(3), 510-540.
Van de Ven, A. H., & Sun, K. (2011). Breakdowns in implementing models of
organizational change. Academy of Management Perspectives, 25(3), 58-74.
Van Vught, F. (1999). Innovative universities. Tertiary Education and Management, 5(4),
347-355.
Wagner, A. (2006, September). Measuring up internationally: Developing skills and
knowledge for the global knowledge economy. The National Center for Public Policy

	  
	  

	  

299	  
and Higher Education (Report #06-7). Retrieved from
http://www.highereducaiton.org/reports/muint/inex.shtml

Walter, S. (2014). Guest editorial: A new age of reason for academic libraries. College &
Research Libraries, 75(5), 612-615.
Wang, D-S., & Hsieh, C-C. (2013). The effect of authentic leadership on employee trust
and employee engagement. Social Behavior & Personality: An international journal,
41(4), 613-624.
Warnken, P. (2004). New technologies and constant change: Managing the process. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 30(4), 322-327.
Webster, L., & Mertova, P. (2007). Using narrative inquiry as a research method: An
introduction to using critical event narrative analysis in research on learning and
teaching. New York: Routledge.
Weick, K. E. (1995). Sensemaking in organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Wells, A. (2007). A prototype twenty-first century university library: A case study of
change at the University of New South Wales library. Library Management, 28(8/9),
450-459.
Wenger, E. (2008). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Werkman, R. A. (2009). Understanding failure to change: A pluralistic approach and five
patterns. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 30(7), 664-684.
Wicks, R. J., & Buck, T. C. (2013). Riding the dragon: Enhancing resilient leadership and
sensible self-care in the healthcare executive. Frontiers of Health Services
Management, 30(2), 3-13.

	  
	  

	  

300	  

Willinsky, J. (2007). Rethinking what’s public in the university’s public mission.
Retrieved from
http://www.academia.edu/2851658/Rethinking_whats_public_in_the_universitys_publ
ic_mission
Wilson, L. A. (2012). Creating sustainable futures for academic libraries. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 78-93.
Wilson, L. A. (2013). Quoted by J. Jones in The library in 2020. ACRL-CHOICE
Webinar, May 22, 2013. Retrieved from https://connect.iu.edu/p7gc1l8dn7k/
Winters, L. S. (2004). California community college libraries in the 21st century. (Doctoral
dissertation, Pepperdine University, 2004). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/305034068/abstract/13CCE
E97D8E3F648251/1?accountid=13870
Wood, E. J., Miller, R., & Knapp, A. (2007). Beyond survival: Managing academic
libraries in transition. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Woodward, J. A. (2013). The age of high anxiety: Threats that fuel library nightmares. In
J.A. Woodward, The transformed library: E-books, expertise, and evolution (pp. 3143). Chicago: American Library Association.
Wright, L. (2010). The leadership of the future. In S. McKnight, Envisioning future
academic library services: Initiatives, ideas and challenges (pp. 169-195). London:
Facet Publishing.
Yi, Z. (2010). The management of change in the information age: Approaches of
academic library directors in the United States. (Doctoral dissertation, Texas
Woman’s University, 2010). Retrieved from ProQuest http://0-

	  
	  

	  

301	  
search.proquest.com.library.simmons.edu/pqdtft/docview/597657499/abstract/13B968
C9F5477CAB790/1?accountid=13870

Yin, R. K. (2009). Case study research: Design and methods (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications.
Zhang, C., & Strange, C. C. (1992). Shaping institutional vision: The risk of presidential
leadership in small colleges. A preliminary report (ED352921). ASHE Annual
Meeting Paper.
Zusman, A. (2005). Challenges facing higher education in the twenty-first century. In P.
G. Altbach, R. O. Berdahl, & P. J. Gumport (Eds.), American higher education in the
twenty-first century: Social, political and economic changes (2nd ed., pp. 115-160).
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. Retrieved from
http://www.educationanddemocracy.org/Resources/Zusman.pdf

	  
	  

	  

302	  
Appendix A

Sample Email Sent to Listservs
______________________________________________________________________
Dear Colleagues,
I am asking for suggestions of college libraries in the United States that you would
identify as innovative. I am particularly interested in college libraries that are partnering
with their academic institutions to help solve wider problems facing higher education in
general, e.g., cost, relevancy, retention, economic issues, and social challenges.
If you are aware of a college library that has moved outside of our more traditionallyfocused roles and is using its unique strengths in a broader partnership with its college to
help it thrive, please let me know.
I am researching college libraries that are redefining themselves in innovative ways to
meet the challenges we, and our institutions, face in the twenty-first century. I would
really appreciate your help.
Please email me or call me with the names of college libraries you consider innovative in
non-traditional ways.
Thank you,
Pat Kreitz, Saint Mary’s College of California
pak2@stmarys-ca.edu

	  
	  

(925) 631-4525

	  

303	  

Appendix B
Sample Library Director Request to Participate
______________________________________________________________________
Patricia A. Kreitz
1043 Cowper Street
Palo Alto, CA 94301
pakreitz@earthlink.net
Cell: 650-714-1146
Work: 925-631-4525

January 29, 2014

[Address redacted]
Dear Library Director,
Many college library deans and directors are deeply engaged in leading change that
will ensure their libraries continue to play a central role in supporting students, faculty,
and campus administrations. Yet much of what we know about how academic libraries are
experimenting with redefining themselves comes from the largest academic research
libraries. Little is known about how college libraries, particularly those that are part of the
liberal arts tradition, are responding to the challenges and opportunities facing academic
librarianship.
I am studying college libraries that are re-inventing themselves. What changes are
library leaders making to ensure their libraries continue to play a relevant and vital role in
the academic life of their campuses? How are they shaping their organizations so that
they continue to serve the college’s vision and strategic priorities? What opportunities and
challenges are they facing? What lessons have college library change agents learned?

	  
	  

	  

304	  
I am writing to you because your colleagues have identified you as an innovative

leader and suggested that the organizational changes in your library could offer the
profession valuable insight about academic library change. Will you help me by
participating in this study? If so, I would plan to visit your campus for one or two days, at
a time that is convenient for you, hopefully, by the end of March, in order to conduct
interviews and review relevant documents that you may be able to supply. Any data I
gather will be kept under the strictest confidence and the dissertation will not allude to
your library or college in any way that an outsider could identify.

The interviews I am planning would be a personal interview with you, a personal
interview with your provost or chief academic officer, and a group interview with your
library management team. The documents I hope to obtain would be anything related to
the organizational changes that have taken place and are being planned, such as planning
documents, mission and goal statements, organization charts, minutes, budgets, reports,
speeches, and other documents about the change journey you have led.

May I call you to discuss this further? I would like to share more information on
my research study with you as well as the specifics regarding the interviews. In addition, I
would imagine that you have questions for me. If you can suggest some times for a 30-45
minute phone call in the next week or so, I would be happy to accommodate your
schedule.

Thanks in advance for any help you can offer.

	  
	  

	  

305	  

Sincerely,

Patricia A. Kreitz
Dean, Library & Academic Resources
Saint Mary’s College of California
ABD, Simmons College, GSLIS

	  
	  

	  

306	  
Appendix C

Sample Consent Form
________________________________________________________________________
CONSENT TO PARTICIPATE IN A RESEARCH STUDY
Redefining the Twenty-first Century College Library: Change Leadership in
Academic Libraries
You are invited to participate in a research study conducted by Patricia A. Kreitz, who is a doctoral
student from the Graduate School of Library and Information Studies, Simmons College. Ms.
Kreitz is conducting this study for her doctoral dissertation. Dr. Laura Saunders is her faculty
sponsor for this project.
Your participation in this study is entirely voluntary. You should read the information below and
ask questions about anything you do not understand before deciding whether or not to participate.
You are being asked to participate in this study because you have been one of the key leaders in
the changes your campus library has made to its mission and activities over the past few years.
•

PURPOSE OF THE STUDY

The purpose of this study is to examine college libraries that are re-defining their traditional roles
and engaging with campus-wide issues to help their parent institutions solve the challenges they
face and accomplish their strategic goals. It will explore the organizational changes that your
library has made as it has re-focused its mission and activities at a broader campus level. It will
also explore what these re-definition efforts imply for the future of academic libraries.
•

PROCEDURES

If you volunteer to participate in this study, we will ask you to do one of the following:
a. As a Library Director, you will be asked to participate in an interview and at least one followup phone conversation. The interview will be audiotaped and transcribed and you will be
asked to review the written transcription for errors, clarification, etc. and send your revisions
back to the researcher.
b. As a College Provost, you will be asked to participate in an interview and, if needed, a followup phone conversation. The interview will be audiotaped and transcribed and you will be
asked to review the written transcription for errors, clarification, etc. and send your revisions
back to the researcher.
c. As a member of the Library’s senior management team, you will be asked to participate with
your other senior management team members in a group interview. The interview will be
audiotaped and transcribed and each team member will be asked to review the written
transcription for errors, clarification, etc. and send his or her revisions back to the researcher.

	  
	  

	  
•

307	  
POTENTIAL RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS

The researcher has taken steps to minimize the risks of this study. If you feel you experience some
risks related to your participation, you may discontinue your participation.
•

POTENTIAL BENEFITS TO SUBJECTS AND/OR TO SOCIETY

It is not likely that you will benefit directly from participation in this study, but the research should
help the academic library profession understand how to engage the library in the broader campus
priorities and challenges, how to undertake organizational change, and the ways in which
innovative college libraries are redefining themselves to meet the evolving teaching, research, and
learning needs of the academic communities they serve.
•

COMPENSATION FOR PARTICIPATION

You will not receive any payment or other compensation for participation in this study. There is
also no cost to you for participation other than your time during the interview, for a possible
follow-up phone conversation, and editing the transcript of your interview.
•

CONFIDENTIALITY

Any information that is obtained in connection with this study and that can be identified with you,
your library, or your college will remain confidential and will be disclosed only with your
permission. Ms. Kreitz and Dr. Saunders will not use your name, your college’s name, or your
library’s name in any of the information we get from this study or in the dissertation.
Information that can identify you individually or your institution will not be released to anyone
outside the study. Ms. Kreitz will, however, use the information collected in her dissertation and
other publications. We also may use any information that we get from this study in any way we
think is best for publication or education. Any information we use for publication will not identify
you or your institution individually.
The audiotapes made will not be listened to by anyone outside the study except the professional
hired to transcribe them. Two years after the study is finished, Ms. Kreitz will destroy the
audiotapes and transcripts of the interviews and any notes taken during phone conversations.
•

PARTICIPATION AND WITHDRAWAL

You can choose whether or not to be in this study. If you volunteer to be in this study, you may
withdraw at any time without consequences of any kind. You may also refuse to answer any
questions you do not want to answer. There is no penalty if you withdraw from the study and you
will not lose any benefits to which you are otherwise entitled.

	  
	  

	  
•

308	  
IDENTIFICATION OF INVESTIGATORS

If you have any questions or concerns about the research, please feel free to contact
Ms. Patricia A. Kreitz
Doctoral Student, GSLIS
Simmons College
1043 Cowper St.
Palo Alto, CA 94301
650-714-1146 (cell)
925-631-4525 (w)
pak2@stmarys-ca.edu

•

Dr. Laura Saunders
Assistant Professor
Graduate School of Library &
Information
Science
Simmons College
300 The Fenway, P-111
617-623-3655
laura.lidano@simmons.edu

RIGHTS OF RESEARCH SUBJECTS

The Simmons College Institutional Review Board has reviewed my request to conduct this
project. If you have any questions about the research, or if you experience any research related
injury, you should contact Patricia Kreitz or Dr. Laura Saunders, above. If you have any questions
about your rights as a research subject, you should contact Valerie Beaudrault, Human Protections
Administrator in the Office of Sponsored Programs, Simmons College, at 617-521-2415.

I understand the procedures described above. My questions have been answered to my satisfaction,
and I agree to participate in this study. I have been given a copy of this form.
________________________________________
Printed Name of Subject
________________________________________
Signature of Subject

_________________________
Date

________________________________________
Signature of Witness

_________________________
Date

	  
	  

	  

309	  
Appendix D

Sample Interview Transcript Cover Letter
________________________________________________________________________
Patricia A. Kreitz
1043 Cowper Street
Palo Alto, CA 94301
pakreitz@earthlink.net
Cell: 650-714-1146 Work: 925-631-4525

[date], 2014

name
Address
RE: Enclosed Transcript for Review and Return
Dear xxx,
Thank you again for letting me do one of my case studies at [insert institution] for
my dissertation on Re-defining the Twenty-First Century College Library: Change
Leadership in Academic Libraries. The change journey you and your institution have
experienced is going to be a rich resource for understanding how libraries change as they
redefine the services their colleges need to support research, teaching and learning.
As promised, I am sending for your review a paper copy of the transcript of your
interview.
Would you please review your comments and hand write any corrections or
amendments that may be appropriate? As I explained during the interview, all individuals
and their organizations will be kept confidential. Also, no detailed information that might
reveal the Library’s identity will be included.

	  
	  

	  

310	  
I have enclosed a self-addressed, stamped envelope to return your reviewed copy

to me. Would you please return it by [insert date]? If you have any questions, please call
me on my cell, 650-714-1146, or email me at pakreitz@earthlink.net.
Thank you again for your time and insights—talking with you was so valuable!

Sincerely,
Patricia A. Kreitz
Doctoral Candidate, MLIP, GSLIS
Simmons College, Boston, MA

	  
	  

	  

311	  
Appendix E
Library Director Interview Questions

__________________________________________________________________
This study looks at the ways college libraries are changing and redefining
themselves in this new century and how the library’s changes are related to broader
changes in higher education and to the challenges facing all academic institutions.
Two key areas are how you, as a change leader, are redefining the Library’s
mission, activities, and services, perhaps in non-traditional ways, and how you see
the library’s present and future role on campus.
1. First, in broad terms, how would you describe the library change you have led
and your vision of what a college library should be?
2. What was the timeframe of the change(s)? One big change, multiple at same
time, or?
3. Was there a plan, a goal, or a vision guiding change? Please describe.
4. (If not discussed above) What made you decide to engage in organizational
change?
5. Has the college/university been engaged in change? Please describe.
6. How would you characterize your organizational change(s) within the broader
context of the campus’s mission, strategies, and stakeholders?
7. What did you change and at what level(s)? Please consider structure, services,
reporting relationships, staff roles, new work, partnerships or collaborations.
8. How would you characterize your role in the organizational changes you have
described? Did it change over time?

	  
	  

	  
9. Who else was involved—positively and not positively?
10. Reflecting on your experience with organizational change, can you describe
one or two critical incidents, events, or experiences that you found particularly
significant? Why?
11. What do you see as the results of the change process? What happened that you
didn’t expect?
12. What did you want to do that you were not able to accomplish? Why?
13. Reflecting on the change process, what have been the major benefits, costs,
and lessons learned?
14. What would you say were the most important things that created opportunities
for you as a leader to be successful at change management?
15. What advice would you want to give others?
16. What would be your ideal college library of the future? How would that ideal
fit within the broader campus’ ideal future?
17. What haven’t we covered that you would like to share or comment on?
18. What should I have asked you about that I didn’t?
__________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

312	  

	  

313	  
Appendix F
Provost Interview Questions

__________________________________________________________________
I’m looking at the ways college libraries are changing and redefining themselves in
this new century. I’m interested in how the library’s changes are related to broader
changes in higher education and to the challenges facing the broader academic
institution. To put the Library’s changes in context, I’m interested in
understanding if and how your college has changed, and if those changes may have
affected, or been affected by, the Library’s changes. And finally, I would like to
know how you, as a campus change leader, see the Library’s present and future
role on campus.
1. First, can you describe from your perspective the changes that have taken place
in the Library?
2. What was the context of the change(s), its antecedents?
3. Has there been significant change at the broader campus level during the period
in which the library has engaged in organizational change?
4. How have the Library and the Library Dean been involved in and/or affected by
the campus’ change journey?
5. How do you see the library contributing to your campus’ mission, strategic
priorities, and goals?
6. Is the current Library support of the campus’ mission and goals effective? Are
there other activities, services or ways you’d like to see the library serving the
college’s mission and strategic plans?

	  
	  

	  
7. Given all the pressures facing liberal arts colleges and universities and the
libraries that serve them, what advice would you give to future library directors? 8.
8. What should the college library do and be going forward?
9. Other thoughts? Anything that I should have asked but didn’t?
__________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

314	  

	  

315	  
Appendix G
Library Senior Management Team Interview Questions

__________________________________________________________________
This study looks at the ways college libraries are changing and redefining
themselves in this new century and how the library’s changes are related to
broader changes in higher education and to the challenges facing all academic
institutions. Two key areas are how you, as participants in the change process,
reflect on the change, on how it may be redefining the Library’s mission,
activities, and services, and how you see the library’s present and future role on
campus.
1. First, would you please describe the library’s change journey from your
perspectives?
2. What was the timeframe of the change(s)? One big change, multiple at same
time, or?
3. Was there a plan, a goal, or a vision guiding change? Please describe.
4. (If not discussed above) What prompted the Library to engage in organizational
change?
5. What changed and at what level(s)? Please consider structure, services,
reporting relationships, staff roles, new work, partnerships or collaborations.
6. How would you characterize your role in the organizational changes you have
described? Did it change over time?
7. Who else was involved—positively and not positively?

	  
	  

	  
8. Reflecting on the change process, what have been the major benefits, costs, and
lessons learned?
9. What advice would you want to give others?
10. Has the college/university been engaged in change? Please describe.
11. How would you characterize your organizational change(s) within the broader
context of the campus’s mission, strategies, and stakeholders?
12. What would be your ideal college library of the future? How would that ideal
fit within the broader campus’ ideal future?
13. What haven’t we covered that you would like to share or comment on?
14. What should I have asked you about that I didn’t?
__________________________________________________________________

	  
	  

316	  

	  

317	  
Appendix H
The Five Practices and Ten Commitments of Leadership

________________________________________________________________________
A. Model the Way
1. Clarify values by finding your voice and affirming shared ideals.
2. Set the example by aligning actions with shared values.
B. Inspire a Shared Vision
3. Envision the future by imagining exciting and ennobling possibilities.
4. Enlist others in a common vision by appealing to shared aspirations.
C. Challenge the Process
5. Search for opportunities by seizing the initiative and by looking outward for
innovative ways to improve.
6. Experiment and take risks by constantly generating small wins and learning
from experience.
D. Enable Others to Act
7. Foster collaboration by building trust and facilitating relationships.
8. Strengthen others by increasing self-determination and developing competence.
E. Encourage the Heart
9. Recognize contributions by showing appreciation for individual excellence.
10. Celebrate the values and victories by creating a spirit of community.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2007). The leadership challenge (4th ed.). San Francisco,
CA: John Wiley & Sons, p. 26.

	  
	  

