INCREASING CIRCULATION IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL LIBRARIES
USING E-BOOK LENDING PROGRAMS: AN ACTION RESEARCH
STUDY
by
James M. Spatara, Jr.

MARLA BERG, PhD, Faculty Mentor and Chair
PATRICIA HANRAHAN, EdD, Committee Member
SUSANNE BEIERS, PhD, Committee Member

James Wold, PhD, Interim Dean, School of Education

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Education

Capella University
May 2015

UMI Number: 3706115

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3706115
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© James Spatara 2015

Abstract
Reading is integral to the academic success and personal fulfillment of students, and as
such, is strongly emphasized in educational institutions worldwide. However, when
considering the rate at which students accessed library materials in grades four, five and
six at a rural elementary school in Pennsylvania, this research found a sharp decline. With
this in mind, the purpose of this action research study was to implement an e-book
lending program in this school to increase the rate at which students accessed reading
material. The theoretical framework for this study includes elements of Rogers’ (2003)
diffusion of innovations theory to explain the benefits of an initiative such as e-book
lending. This dissertation addresses two research questions. First, is there a significant
difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade students access
library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the implementation of an
e-reader lending program? Second, what are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending
program? To consider the first question, my alternative hypothesis states that the e-book
lending program has changed the reading behavior of the students involved, while my
null hypothesis states that the reading behavior of the students involved is unchanged.
The methodology for this research is twofold. In the first part, students were made aware
of the e-book lending program and chose whether or not to use e-readers to view e-book
material for a period of six weeks, after which a test was performed to determine whether
or not reading at the school increased. In the second part, students were interviewed
individually to gauge their feelings about the program. The students’ comments were
then analyzed qualitatively. Considering the results of this research, it is likely that

similar initiatives to the e-book lending program would be successful in other educational
settings.

Dedication
This dissertation is dedicated to my wife, Tammy, and my children, James and
Isabella. You all have put up with a lot of my time being taken with doing school work
these last few years. You have put up with me through all of the crankiness that comes
with all of the sleep that I have lost. Thanks for all of the support that you have given me
over this time. I could not have done this without the three of you.

3

Acknowledgments
I would like to acknowledge Dr. Marla Berg, my mentor, throughout the last year
plus while I worked on this dissertation. She has been so very supportive and helpful
through all of the many rewrites and edits. All of your advice has been very valuable and
so much appreciated. I would also like to acknowledge my committee members, Dr.
Patricia Hanrahan and Dr. Susanne Beiers. All of these individuals have provided me
with such sound guidance and advice. I could not have done this without your advice and
support.
I would also like to acknowledge the assistance of the technology department at
my research site. They were a huge help in getting things done there and I could not have
gotten this project off of the ground without them.

4

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments

iv

List of Tables

viii

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction to the Problem

1

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework

2

Statement of the Problem

7

Purpose of the Study

7

Research Questions

7

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance of the Study

8

Nature of the Study

10

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations

12

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

14

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

15

Introduction to the Literature Review

15

Theoretical Framework

18

Review of Research Literature and Methodological Literature

18

Summary

41

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

43

Introduction

43

Purpose of the Study

43

Research Questions and Hypotheses

43

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures

44

5

Data Collection

46

Field Test

47

Data Analysis Procedures

48

Limitations of the Research Design

50

Internal Validity

51

External Validity

51

Expected Findings

52

Conflict of Interest Assessment

54

Ethical Issues

54

Summary

56

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

56

Introduction

56

Description of the Sample

56

Summary of the Results

57

Detailed Analysis

58

Findings

61

Summary

65

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

66

Introduction

66

Summary of the Results

66

Discussion of the Results

68

Limitations

69

Implication of the Results for Practice

71

vi

Recommendations for Further Research

71

Conclusion

72

REFERENCES

74

APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK

85

vi

List of Tables
Table 1. Description of Study Participants

57

Table 2. Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Fourth-Grade Students

58

Table 3. Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Fifth-Grade Students

58

Table 4. Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Sixth-Grade Students

59

Table 5. Post-Study Circulation Rates for Fourth-Grade Students

60

Table 6. Post-Study Circulation Rates for Fifth-Grade Students

60

Table 7. Post-Study Circulation Rates for Sixth-Grade Students

60

Table 8. Combined Circulation Rates for All Grades

61

viii

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Chapter 1 introduces the central research problem: the decline in the rate of
circulation of library materials among students in grades four, five and six at a rural
elementary school in Pennsylvania (the research site). The background to this study is
also discussed, as well as the theoretical framework. The primary theory that informs this
research is Rogers’ (2003) diffusion of innovations theory, which seeks to explain how,
why, and at what rate new ideas and technologies disperse. Research questions are also
provided, as well as the study’s rationale and its wider significance to the field of
elementary education. Finally, this chapter will define commonly used terms and will
address the assumptions and limitations of this research.
Introduction to the Problem
The central problem of this research is defined as the decline in the rate of
circulation of library materials among students in grades four, five and six at the research
site. Specifically, there was a decline in the rate at which students accessed physical
library books, particularly those aged 10-12. To address this problem, this research
introduced e-readers to enable students to access e-books, which it was hoped would
increase the circulation rate of the students involved.
Recent research has shown that children enjoy reading e-books and would like to
read them more. A report commissioned by Scholastic (2012, pp. 6-14), the world’s

1

largest publisher of children’s books, revealed some pertinent statistics regarding
children’s access to and enjoyment of e-books, including:
• The percentage of children who have read an e-book has almost doubled
between 2010 and 2015 (25% compared with 46%).
• Among children who have read an e-book, 26% of boys and 16% of girls read
more books for fun.
• Half of children age 9–17 say they would read for fun more if they had greater
access to e-books (there has been a 50% increase since 2010).
These statistics suggests that the introduction of e-readers in school libraries
would increase students’ access to and enjoyment of e-books as well as other library
materials.
Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework
Initially, this research was influenced by systems theory, specifically in terms of
the political system in place at the research site. In October 2014, the high school, which
is affiliated with the elementary school, introduced the use of Kindles to replace physical
textbooks. The program was not well received, however, which significantly influenced
the design of this research. After the failure of this initial program, the district took a
political risk by funding another e-reader program. Because of the expertise involved in
this second program, and given the lessons learned from the first program, the potential
for student benefit outweighed the risks.
The elementary school where the research took place is located in a rural,
farming-oriented district with enrollment numbers barely reaching 100 students per grade
level (Neuch, 2014). According to the most recent available scores (2012), students in the
2

district have made Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) in the statewide proficiency tests.
Anecdotal evidence provided by the school’s librarian suggests that the rate of circulation
of library material has declined markedly year on year for students moving from fourth
through sixth grade.
The main assumption about the decline in the rate of circulation among fourth,
fifth, and sixth graders, is that the introduction of e-readers will encourage students to
read more. It is apparent that the novelty value of an electronic device such as a Kindle
might encourage students to access library material more often.
Marc Prensky’s (2001) seminal research theory, “Digital Natives, Digital
Immigrants,” provides the basis for this research. The students involved in this research
can be considered digital natives. As Prensky (2001, p. 1) states, these students are
““native speakers” of the digital language of computers, video games and the Internet,”
and as such, are comfortable reading e-books on e-readers and may even be enthusiastic
about their use. The fact that students who participated in this study have increasingly
brought their own e-readers to the library supports the argument that digital natives
benefit from increased access to electronic reading material.
Another theory that is applicable here is Rogers’s (2003) theory of diffusion of
innovations. This theory seeks to explain how, why, and at what rate new ideas and
technologies disperse through cultures. For the purposes of this research, Rogers’ theory
considers the rate at which the use of e-readers disperse, as well as how this rate was
established.
This research also utilizes Argyris’s action science theory, which facilitated two
important objectives: First, to verify the hypothesis that the rate of circulation will
3

increase for the students involved. Second, to provide an appropriate framework to
determine the effectiveness of the e-book program. The theory’s emphasis on a
theoretical basis when implementing a plan, 4as well as its insistence on regular
communication with stakeholders have been important considerations for this research.
Fullan and Stiegelbauer’s (1991) change theory provided one of many change
models for education. This model delineates the following four steps: initiation,
implementation, continuation and outcome.
Change is needed in many forms at the research site, particularly in terms of
communication. With the failed initiative to introduce Kindles at the affiliated junior high
school as a means to replace textbooks, it became clear that there was a distinct lack of
communication at the research site. Increased communication between staff could have
benefited the program, though none of the staff were involved until the implementation
phase. Furthermore, the principles of the action science theory could have facilitated
communication from the outset.
Systems theory facilitated the changes needed to develop more effective
communication between staff. Before creating this new learning culture, one must first
establish the culture(s) that already exists. According to the research of systems theorists
such as Peter Senge and others (2010), it is crucial to examine existing behavior before a
new culture of learning can be implemented.
Schein (1999, p. 63) states that “Lewin’s basic model of change leads to a whole
range of insights and new concepts that enrich change theory and make change dynamics
more understandable and manageable.” Lewin’s change theory facilitates a new culture.

4

On November 19, 2007 Amazon introduced their highly successful Kindle range
of e-reader devices, which sold out in 5 1/2 hours (Patel, 2007). Since its introduction, the
Kindle has become the bestselling e-reader. While the exact figures are unclear, Walsh
(2011) estimates that Amazon has shipped 59% of all e-readers sold, while the financial
services corporation Morgan Stanley state that “will do $5 billion in sales, Morgan
Stanley estimates, followed by similarly modest growth in 2015, when Amazon will do
an estimated $5.5 billion in Kindle sales” (Del Rey, 2013, p. 1). It is clear that the Kindle
has monopolized the global e-reader market and is therefore a sensible choice for use in
this research.
This popularity is also reflected by the number of studies on the use of e-readers,
specifically Kindles. There are a number of studies on Kindle usage in public libraries,
high schools, and colleges. This study is somewhat unique in that it involves the use of
the devices at the elementary level (K-6), where far fewer studies exist. Of those studies
that do involve e-readers at the elementary level, most focus on gains in literacy. While
this suggests possible future research, this study is more concerned with understanding
whether or not the devices themselves will generate more interest in reading at the K-6
level.
In terms of change management, this represents a change in style for this research
site. This is also an example of Argyris’s single loop versus double loop learning.
In terms of leadership and management, this represents a change from the typical
top-down initiative that occurs in most schools. At this research site, as with many
schools, new programs are typically implemented by district leadership, either of their
own volition, possibly due to their own educational theories, or to meet with a regulatory
5

demand from the state or federal government. In other words, teachers, and often
administrators, do not have a say in whether or not these changes occur or how they are
to be implemented.
This change has resulted in a significant switch from the standard model because
changes are identified, developed, and implemented by an individual inside the
classroom. Aside from the potential for affecting students’ achievement levels, this type
of initiative can have a profound effect on teachers. Furthermore, empowering staff to
make necessary changes will certainly have a positive influence.
An action science research (ASR) project has not been done at this site before. No
site-based research of any sort has been done at the site at all during at least the past 10
years. As such, if this study reveals some conclusive findings that can inform practice one
way or another it would a. be seen as a success and b. potentially lead to more ASR
studies being done there.
This represents a change from the status quo where programs are set up from the
top down and set up for the district as a whole. This is standard practice for the research
site and for the field of education in general. This study shows that it is possible for an
individual teacher to identify a problem specific to their class and develop a solution to
address that problem.
This method of dealing with classroom issues has the potential to be a game
changer for the research site and for many classrooms throughout the field of education.
The increased focus on accountability for classroom teachers brought about by such
initiatives as the No Child Left Behind (NCLB) Act and the Race to the Top grant
program has made the ability to deal with small problems locally, and even on an
6

individual classroom level, crucial. For example, NCLB has mandates that all students be
on grade level in reading and mat
One problem with achieving this goal is that it gets increasingly difficult to
progress towards that 100% score as you get into, say, the 90th percentile range. Having a
tool like the ability to do a research project of this sort would allow classroom teachers to
identify problems within their specific classes and to adapt instruction accordingly.
Statement of the Problem
This intervention was designed to address an issue with library circulation,
specifically the decline in the rate of circulation of reading material among students in
fourth, fifth, and sixth grades. The problem was that the use of library lending services
decreased for these students. The intervention addressed circulation issues with
intermediate grade students.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of the action research study was to implement an e-book lending
program in order to increase the number of times students access material from the
library in a rural elementary school for students in fourth, fifth, and sixth grades.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
A decline in the rate of circulation of library material at the research site among
students in grades four, five, and six was noted, first anecdotally by the school librarian
and was confirmed by data from the library circulation desk software as shown in Tables
2, 3, and 4. In light of this issue, Kindle e-readers were introduced to encourage students
to use the school library more. To facilitate the study of the results of the intervention, the
following research questions are posed.
7

Research Question 1
Is there a significant difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth
grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the
implementation of an e-reader lending program?
Alternative Hypothesis
There is a difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade
student’s access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the
implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Null Hypothesis
There is no difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade
students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the
implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Research Question 2
What are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending program?
Rationale, Relevance, and Significance
Library procedures have remained constant at the research site for this study.
Technology is used to check books in and out and to take inventory. Technology has not
been used for students to read books. The last big change was the introduction of
computerized cataloging and book check out system, according to several of the longtenured staff members. The e-reader program introduced a number of changes to how the
library functions, for the better.
First, the frequency with which books are checked out should increase in the
target audience. There was a noticeable decline in the rate of circulation among students
8

in grades four, five, six, particularly among boys. At the same time, there has been a great
increase in the number of students, of both genders, who own e-reader devices. Hopefully
the introduction of e-books will encourage students to use the research site’s library
services more.
Second, this could well be a time saver for the librarian. Once a system is in place
for e-book check outs, students should be able to use an online system to sign out
materials. This will save time in the checkout process as well as when it comes time to
reshelf books.
Finally, this could also be a money-saving idea for the research site. Librarybound books, which are better quality and have a more durable construction, are more
expensive than books that can be bought at a retail outlet. As e-book prices continue to
drop the district will begin to realize a greater and greater savings.
In terms of the status quo, the changes are largely outlined in the answers to the
last question. One other change, though, would be a bit more nebulous, more in line with
a change of attitude than anything physical or measureable. In a small, rural district such
as this research site, change does not always come easily or quickly. As mentioned
above, the last big change to the library was at least a decade ago. This initiative
represents a real move forward for the district. While many districts are trying similar
initiatives, there are none in the county where the research site resides. This move could
position the district as a front-runner in technology usage very quickly. This would, in
turn, increase the impetus for change and open up the district to other progressive and
innovative ideas.

9

The implications are many for this research site as a result of implementing this
study. In addition to those things already outlined above, there are benefits to the
students. There is a far lesser chance of damaging an e-book than a physical copy of that
same book. This then impacts time spent repairing books, issuing fines for damages, and
other things. Also, since e-books do not have to be physically returned but rather are
removed from the user’s device in a set time, there is no need to track down overdue
books.
Nature of the Study
The research study involved implementing an e-book lending program. As a part
of the intervention, library class time was used to introduce the readers and how to use
them. This included mentioning to students that they are not to download any material to
the device, since this is the sole responsibility of the librarian. Each class had available
four Kindle Keyboard devices and one Kindle Fire. Students had to have parental
permission forms signed and returned to use the devices. Each student in a class had a
chance to sign out the device before anyone can sign it out a second time. Sign outs of the
Kindles occurred as with regular texts in the library, by scanning a barcode affixed to the
device. Finally, students were asked to suggest titles that they would like to see on the
Kindles. The intervention occurred in an elementary school library. The participants were
students in fourth, fifth, and sixth grades at the research site.
The process steps included
1.

Gain approval of the district administration.

2.

Secure the necessary equipment for student use. This would be Kindles to
be made available for loan to students in fourth, fifth, and sixth grades.
10

These are, for the most part, already available within the district. The
district attempted an earlier Kindle initiative that did not succeed, though
this led to the development of more than fifty Kindle keyboard models for
this project. Also, the district has agreed to provide up to 15 new Kindle
Fire devices as well as funds to purchase e-books.
3.

The students were introduced to the program. At this time, the guidelines
for using the Kindles were explained to the students. Permission forms are
the first requirement for signing out a Kindle. These were developed by
the district’s technology coordinator who adapted the form used from the
previous Kindle project to use with this project. Students were not be
permitted to sign out a Kindle device until the permission forms were
signed by their parents and returned. Students were required to obtain
parental permission in order to participate in the data collection for the
study. For a small group of the students, this included completing a oneon-one interview with the researcher.

4.

While awaiting the return of the permission slips, some data was collected
for the study. As this project was meant to influence the rate of circulation
for the target student population, data on the rate of circulation for
previous years for students in these age ranges was gathered.

5.

Once students began returning signed permission slips (and IRB approval
was gained), the study period began.

6.

At the conclusion of the study, which lasted for six weeks, the rate of
circulation for the target student population was examined and compared
11

to the rate of circulation of previous years. The data examined the rate of
circulation at grade level as well as according to gender. Further, students
were surveyed to determine their feelings on the e-book program.
The study began upon receipt of IRB approval, approximately the beginning of
October, 2014 and ran for 6 weeks thereafter.
The success of the study was measured in two ways. First, the rate of circulation
for the target student groups was examined from the beginning of the year and compared
to the rate during the study period. Second, a post study focus group interview was
conducted with the students to gauge their perceptions about the program and what they
liked or disliked.
Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations
It was assumed that the students in the study group would be enthusiastic in their
adoption of the use of this technology and thus would increase the rate of circulation. If
this assumption proves true, it is further assumed that (a) the program will continue to be
funded to purchase new e-books annually, (b) the program will eventually expand to
other grades within the elementary building to encompass all K-6 students, and (c) the
program will be further expanded to include the middle/high school (grades 7-12).
A limitation in this study can be defined as “those characteristics of design or
methodology that impacted or influenced the interpretation of the findings from your
research” (USC Libraries, 2015, “Definition,” para. 1). As development of the study
continued, a few limitations came to light. First, not all of the data that had been sought
was available. It had been planned to analyze the rate of circulation for the student
population in this study, which is still possible. However, it was not possible to parse the
12

data by gender. The system used to track library circulation simply does not break down
data in this way. No redesign was done as data is still available by grade level, which was
the primary concern.
A second limitation of the study was the timing of the introduction of the
treatment phase. Members of the district technology department are responsible for
ordering, setting up and preparing, and delivering the Kindle’s to the elementary school.
Having this out of the hands of the researcher placed outside limits that could not be
controlled at the start of the treatment phase of the study. The technology department was
also responsible for other facets of the plan such as setting up a payment account for
purchasing titles to load onto the devices. The department only has two members who are
burdened with a heavy workload without the requirements of this study. As such, while
some requests can be made to complete the necessary set up for the study, ultimately the
researcher is at the mercy of forces beyond his control and had to wait until such time as
the technology department could fit these tasks into their schedule.
A third limitation to the study lay with the students themselves. The researcher
has noted, anecdotally, that there are a growing number of students who own or have
access to e-reader devices already. As such, the more of these students who exist within
the study group the less effective the treatment will be in increasing the rate of
circulation. One way that the researcher addressed this was by seeking student input into
the books to be purchased for the school’s devices. By doing this the hope is that students
will find books on the school devices that are not available to them at home. Thus,
students who already have a Kindle may still ask to borrow a school device if it has
materials that are of interest to them.
13

Organization of the Remainder of the Study
Chapter 2 includes an introduction to the literature review, the theoretical
framework of the literature and a summary of the research literature methodology.
Chapter 3 communicates the research design, population and data collection procedures
and a data analysis of the study findings. Chapter 4 offers a report of the results of the
study and will summarize the results in a detailed analysis. Finally, Chapter 5 discusses
the conclusions drawn from the research findings as well as a summary of the results.

14

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Chapter 2 examines the literature that is used from the theoretical basis for this
study. This framework is considered, particularly as regards the work of Rogers (2003).
Further, this chapter looks at the research regarding e-books as well as examining the
literature on e-book usage in libraries specifically.
Introduction to the Literature Review
E-books and e-readers are an emerging technology of the 21st century, a
technology with enormous potential and broad implications for readers, libraries and
publishers. O'Brien and Voss (2011) argued that in the next few years digital textbook
sales for universities will explode and middle and secondary schools will follow suit. Ebooks have been deemed “the most important development in the world of literature after
Gutenberg” (Rao, 2005, p. 116). New innovations in education, including online/distance
education courses and technological upgrades have bolstered the popularity of e-books
and this has led to an increase in replacing of printed book with devices in academics
(Dewan, 2012). The importance of e-books becomes more visible as e-book selling by
Amazon exceeds the print sales (Dewan, 2012; Platt, 2011). In addition, Velde and Ernst
(2009) pointed out that downloads of the full texts increased by 16 million from 2007 to
2008.

15

E-books are defined by researchers in different ways. Brown (2001) defined it as
an electronic version of a printed book downloadable to portable devices. Vassiliou and
Rowley (2008) defined the e-book based on two basic criteria: (a) the concept of books in
an electronic environment and (b) additional functionality such as cross references,
hypertext links, bookmarks, annotation, and so forth. Rao (2005) analyzed the definitions
of e-books and categorized them under four perspectives of media, content/file format,
device and delivery. He emphasized the digital nature of texts and defined the e-book as
“text in digital form, or a book converted into digital form, or digital reading material, or
a book in a computer file format, or an electronic file of words and images” (Rao, 2003,
pp. 86-87). Generally, e-books can be downloadable, online readable or readable on
specific devices (Hernon, Hopper, Leach, Saunders, & Zhang, 2007). There are different
formats of e-books including simple text files (TXT), portable document files (PDF), or
special formats for certain e-readers (e.g., EPUB; Siegle, 2012). According to e-book
sellers, Amazon, Barnes & Noble, and Apple are the most dominant e-book companies
(Walters, 2013).
Digital texts or e-books drive an emerging business and commercial aspects of ereaders and supporting software, publishers, retailers and distribution channels
(Vasileiou, Hartley, & Rowley, 2009). E-readers are becoming more important with the
increase of e-book reading experiences (Godwin-Jones, 2007). In general, e-readers are
stand-alone devices that can be used to read an e-book. There are two primary types of ereaders available: dedicated e-readers (e.g., Amazon Kindle or Sony PRS reader) and
non-dedicated e-readers (e.g., e-reader for desktop, tablet etc.; Lai & Chang, 2011).
Dedicated book readers are those where specific e-books can be downloaded and read
16

with specific kinds of e-readers, and restricted to copy and sharing with other readers
(Rao, 2005).
Although an e-reader is an electronic device built primarily to facilitate reading
digital books or e-books (Burk, 2001; Jung, Chan-Olmsted, Park, & Kim, 2011), the
design and technological evaluation have already made the e-book capable of more than
that. A national consumer survey in South Korea found that there exists a positive
correlation between e-reader awareness, interest, and adoption with demography and the
perceived attributes of e-readers (Jung et al., 2011). Some papers also provide a technical
overview of e-readers. However, due to rapid technological changes, they are outdated as
soon as they are published (Moyer, 2012). Therefore, a technical review of e-books
readers is not included in this review.
E-books and e-readers are now becoming an integral part in academics (Platt,
2011). The academics have identified already the need of responding to the change due
this up and coming technology (Larson, 2008). However, digital reading is not a new
concept, especially reading from the computer screen, but the research into e-books is
relatively new (Larson, 2009; Pattuelli & Rabina, 2010).
To understand the nature of the e-book diffusion and the attitude of children
towards the e-book, the following sections provide a brief review of diffusion of
innovation theory, particularly as posed by Everett Rogers and e-book usage from patron
and library perspective.

17

Theoretical Framework
The theoretical framework in this study includes an examination of the diffusion
of innovation theory as posed by Rogers (2003). All of these are explained in greater
detail within the following sections of this literature review.
Review of the Research Literature and Methodological Literature
Diffusion of Innovation Theory
Different fields of study (e.g., social or information technology researchers) have
expended great effort to understand the nature of technological diffusion or adoption of
innovations. Among the most popular theories are the technology acceptance model
(TAM) (Davis, 1989; Davis, Bagozzi, & Warshaw, 1989), the extension of technology
adoption model, the TAM2, (Venkatesh & Davis, 2000), the unified theory of acceptance
and the use of technology model (Venkatesh, Morris, Davis, & Davis, 2003), the
technology acceptance model TAM3 (Venkatesh & Bala, 2008) and the lazy user model
(Tetard & Collan, 2009). However, perhaps the most accepted and leading theory is
Rogers’ (2003) diffusion of innovations theory, as well as the various concepts of this
theory which are applied to other models (Jung et al., 2011). Therefore, the present work
considers Rogers’ theory as the primary framework for informing the study. The
following section briefly reviews this theory.
Elements of innovations diffusion. The definition of diffusion of innovations is
described as “the process in which an innovation is communicated through certain
channels over time, among the members of a social system” (Rogers, 2003, p. 12).
Rogers clearly points out the following four elements of diffusion of innovations:

18

Innovation. Any idea, practice, or project is considered an innovation if it is
“perceived as new by an individual or other unit of adoption” (Rogers, 2003, p. 12).
According to Rogers, the individual’s perception of an idea as new is the key factor to
determining if the idea is an innovation. Rogers explained innovation diffusion with the
help of the innovation decision process. In that process, one of the most important factors
of adoption is the group attribute of innovation. Both of these concepts are discussed later
in this review. The newness of an innovation does not refer to new knowledge, but that
which is new to a specific individual. The newness of an innovation is dealt with under
the steps of the Rogers innovation decision process, namely the knowledge, persuasion,
and decision to adopt phases. Further, an innovation is always followed by some sort of
uncertainty, for example, uncertainty about the applicability, uncertainty about reliability,
high cost, and so forth. According to Rogers (2003), uncertainties emerge as a
consequence due to adoption or rejection of an innovation by individuals or social group,
and proper awareness about the innovation is required to deal with these uncertainties.
The consequences can be desirable or undesirable, direct or indirect, and anticipated or
un-anticipated (Rogers, 2003). The term re-invention is used when an innovation is
changed by users during the adoption and implementation of the innovation (Rogers,
2003).
Communication channel. According to Rogers (2003, p. 18), communication is a
process “by which participants create and share information with one another in order to
reach a mutual understanding,” and diffusion is a special type of communication where a
communication channel is the means through which the information is shared. The most
rapid and efficient channel is the mass media channel (e.g., radio, television, newspaper,
19

etc.) to reach a larger audience, whereas interpersonal channels are targeted to motivate
individuals by face-to-face contact (Rogers, 2003). Generally, individuals like to adopt
innovation based on others’ personal experience, therefore “diffusion is a very social
process that involves interpersonal communication relationships” (Rogers, 2003, p. 19). It
is easy to diffuse new ideas between two similar individuals (i.e., homophily- individuals
who have similarities in thinking). However, in most cases diffusion of innovation occurs
among individuals who are quite different (heterophily) (Rogers, 2003). He argued that
from the innovation decision perspective, mass media are important during knowledge
stage and interpersonal channels during the persuasion stage. Depending on the boundary
of information spreading, it could be cosmopolite (i.e., reaching individuals outside the
social system) or localite (i.e., reaching individuals within the social system).
Interpersonal channels can be both types. Most of the mass media channels are
cosmopolite (Rogers, 2003).
Time. The time element is one of the strengths of the innovation diffusion theory
that is, from Rogers (2003) point of view, ignored in most behavioral research. He
explained three main aspects of the time element: (a) time taken by an individual making
a decision for or against the innovation (i.e., time in innovation-diffusion process), (b)
adopter categorization, and (c) rate of adoptions. The innovations diffusion theory
explains the processes through which individuals adopt or reject an innovation. This
includes the five following steps: knowledge, persuasion, decision, implementation and
confirmation. However, adoption or refusal time depends on the individual (Rogers,
2003). The second criterion is the innovativeness of individuals with regards to how fast
an adoption is done compared to others. Roger classifies people as innovator, early
20

adopter, early majority, late majority and laggard (Rogers, 2003). The third dimension of
the time element is the rate of adoption defining the relative speed of adoption of
innovation by members of a social system (Rogers, 2003).
Social system. The social system is defined by Rogers as “a set of interrelated
units engaged in joint problem solving to accomplish a common goal” (Rogers, 2003, p.
23). As the diffusion occurs in the social system, the innovation diffusion is influenced by
social structure, which is defined as “the patterned arrangements of the units in a system”
(Rogers, 2003, p. 24). In a social system, norms of the system as well as opinion leaders
can influence the individual’s adoption of an innovation.
Innovation decision process. Decisions about an innovation by individuals take
certain steps. Rogers (2003) described the decision making process for an innovation in a
five stage process model. The innovation decision process is the process through which
individual works starting from the contact with the idea and moving towards building
one’s own attitude towards it (Rogers, 2003). The five stages of the diffusion process are
as follows
Knowledge. The starting point of the innovation-decision process is the
knowledge stage. Here, individuals get first contact with the knowledge or information
and learn about the functionality of the innovation (Rogers, 2003). The following three
main questions about innovation are: “What is it?” “How does it work?” and “Why does
it work?” (Rogers 2003). They are clarified in this phase to build awareness about the
innovation. According to Rogers, the questions lead to awareness-knowledge, how-toknowledge, and principles-knowledge. Several characteristics of the decision making unit
like socioeconomic, personality and communication behavior influence the awareness of
21

the innovation. For example, Staiger (2012) emphasized that awareness of e-books
among the academic community is very much needed for the increased use of e-books,
or, in the case of e-learning, knowledge of how to use e-learning systems is required to
be disseminated for the adoption (Lee, Hsieh, & Hsu, 2011). Jung et al. (2011) found that
demographic factors have high influence at the awareness stage regarding e-book
adoption.
Persuasion. At this stage, individuals build positive or negative attitudes towards
the innovation (Rogers, 2003). Rogers differentiates the knowledge of the persuasion
phase, which is more centered around personal feeling, in other words, individuals
become more sensibly attach to the innovation at this stage when compared with other
stages. Rogers described that the individual seeks information about possible advantages
and disadvantages with the innovation in his or her situation. Remarks and opinion from
others play a role in decreasing uncertainty about the innovation. For example, teachers
can play an important role in e-book adoption in the classrooms by motivating students’
use of e-books and by making them familiar with the basic functions of e-books
(Schugar, Smith, & Schugar, 2013). Perceived innovation characteristics are very
meaningful at this stage. Jung et al. (2011) found that personal innovativeness factors
have high influence on the interest stage regarding e-book adoption.
The decision stage. The decision stage is the point where individuals make the
choice to adopt or reject an innovation. Here adoption means “make full use of an
innovation as the best course of action available,” and rejection means “not to adopt an
innovation” (Rogers, 2003, p. 177). Rogers argued that in most cases, individuals test the
innovation on a trial basis, and after satisfactory results he or she is motivated to adopt it.
22

In that case, trial by others or demonstration can speed up the decision process (Rogers,
2003). On the other hand, the decision process can also end up with rejection. According
to Rogers (2003), there are two types of rejection: active rejection (i.e., at first, the
decision to use and then reject) or passive (i.e., never consider using). Jung et al. (2011)
found that innovations’ perceived attributes are very much influential in the decision
phase regarding e-book adoption.
The implementation stage. Until this stage the other innovation decision process
is mental exercises and at this stage the decided innovation is put into use. However,
Rogers mentioned that there are still some levels of uncertainty and the individual seeks
information to deal with these uncertainties. According to him, the problem of
implementation is more for organizational adopters than individuals. Reinvention is “the
degree to which an innovation is changed or modified by a user in the process of its
adoption and implementation” (Rogers, 2003, p. 180). It is considered one of the most
important parts of this stage.
Confirmation stage. Any new conflicting information can change the adoption
decision made in the previous stage. So, in the confirmation stage, individual tries to stay
on the path of adoption by seeking possible supportive information regarding adoption, in
other words, the individual tries to avoid a dissonance regarding the innovation (Rogers,
2003). Dissonance can be defined as an uncomfortable state of mind that one tries to
avoid. In the worst case, discontinuance occurs when individuals reject a previously
accepted innovation (Rogers, 2003). There are two forms of discontinuance: replacement
(rejection due to the adoption a better innovation) or disenchantment (rejection due to
unsatisfactory performance or failure to meet the need).
23

Rate of adoption and perceived attribute of innovation. Rate of adoption
describes the speed with which an innovation is adopted by the members of a social
system. There are several criteria that can influence the rate of adoption. Among these
perceived attributes are the most important. Rogers described the following attributes:
Relative advantage. Rogers (2003, p. 229) defined the relative advantage as “the
degree to which an innovation is perceived as being better than the idea it supersedes,”
and it is one of the strongest attributes influencing rate of adoption. Several factors like
economic (initial cost of an innovation), social (status) as well as personal (rationality)
characteristics influence the determination of related advantages. For example, the
perceived costs of e-books was a major concern for many e-book users (Clark, Goodwin,
Samuelson, & Coker, 2008; Romero, 2011). Several reviews by Mumtaz (2000) found
that teachers consider an innovation (e.g., information technology) suitable for adoption
only when it made their presentation and lessons more interesting and easier. Students are
considered digital natives (Prensky, 2006) and this characteristic might influence them to
adopt new age technologies rapidly. As example of social factor, Jung et al. (2011) found
that younger, more educated, and higher income consumers are more likely to adopt ereaders. However, Rogers also mentioned that some factors also lead to over adoption of
innovation because of insufficient knowledge or inability to predict consequences.
Rogers (2003) divided the innovation as preventive and perceive innovation according to
the different adoption rates.
Compatibility. This refers to the adaptability of an innovation with existing value,
past experience, adopter’s requirements, and so forth (Rogers, 2003). For example,
24

teachers or administrators try to stay in their comfort zone during adoption of new
technology (Johnson, 2008); therefore, compatibility in the innovation influences their
choice of innovation adoption. Compatible innovation decreases the risk of uncertainty.
Clustering of interrelated technology or giving a proper name to an innovation can help
adopters perceive the compatibility. The name e-book or e-book reader is a good example
of this because it gives the idea that the purpose of the innovation is to read books in an
electronic format (Brown, 2001; Rao, 2003; Vassiliou & Rowley, 2008). Also functional
similarities of e-books with other mediums such as internet and print media motivated
users to explore this innovation (Jung et al., 2011). Several researchers found a positive
relation between compatibility and the intention to use a new innovation (Agarwal &
Prasad, 1999; Chang & Tung, 2007).
Complexity. The complexity of an innovation refers to the difficulty of
understanding it (Rogers, 2003). Differing from other attributes, the complexity attributes
negatively influence the rate of adoption and can appear as an obstacle. For example,
Platt (2011) argued that smart phones ease of use attribute is driving many Americans
towards the world of e-books. Complexity is influencing the intension to use of
innovation negatively, as noted by different researchers (Hardgrave, Davis, &
Riemenschneider, 2003)
Trialability. Rogers (2003, p. 258) defined trialability as “the degree to which an
innovation may be experimented with on a limited basis.” If the innovation is designed to
be tried then the possibility for adoption is also increased, thus showing the positive
impact of trialability on adoption rate. During the trial stage, re-invention may occur to
adjust the innovation with the needs. For example, de Jong and Bus (2002) argued that
25

the reading pattern of children varies according to the basic knowledge of reading
developed by children while using e-book for reading. Studies have found a positive
relation between trialability and intention to use (Al-gahtani, 2003; Lee et al., 2011).
Observability. This refers to the visibility of the results of adopting an innovation
to individuals (Rogers, 2003). It is also positively related to the adoption of diffusion.
With the example of software and hardware, Rogers argued that software dominant
innovations have a lower adoption rate as they are barely visible. With the emergence of
e-ink technology, the outcome in terms of the adoption of the e-book is now more
observable and this is encouraging people to buy e-books (Benedetto, Drai-Zerbib,
Pedrotti, Tissier, & Baccino, 2013; Dewan, 2012; Shin, 2010).
Review of Research Regarding the Use of E-readers
Reader perspective.
Alluring features of e-books and e-readers. There are several features that make
e-books attractive when compared to printed books. For Burk (2001), the most appealing
feature of an e-reader is its ability to carry a small library in a device that is similar in
weight and size to a single hardcover book. To identify the importance of several features
of an e-book, Foasberg (2011) conducted a survey among 1705 students where 401
students had read e-books. The students who read e-books ranked features as follows:
portability, storage, special function and text-to-speech function. Several authors
mentioned appealing features of e-books like highlighting, bookmarking, searching
(online and offline), multimedia, annotation, online accessibility, dictionary, and so forth.
(Burk, 2001; Chu, 2003; Dewan, 2012; Ghaebi & Fahimifar, 2011; Walters, 2013).
Potential in e-books lies in the possibility of instant worldwide publication, cost
26

effectiveness, convenience in storage and sharing as well as environmental friendliness
(Rao, 2003). In a review of literatures from 2006 to 2011, Staiger (2012) found that two
main advantages of e-books were search ability and around-the-clock availability. In
general, e-books are “changing the way information is created, disseminated and
displayed” (Benedetto et al., 2013, p. 1).
E-book developers are innovating new features that make the e-book more userfriendly by focusing primarily on screen size, functionalities and weight of the device
(Ghaebi & Fahimifar, 2011). As price, interface, subject coverage and reading lists are
the most important regarding e-book buying decisions (Vasileiou, Hartley, & Rowley,
2012), e-book publishers and e-reader manufacturers are trying hard to meet the
requirements of consumers. Adoption of new screen technology like e-ink, decrease in
costs of e-readers, longer battery life, and options for reading under the sunlight make the
e-reader more adoptable (Dewan, 2012; Shin, 2010). Even current e-book technology
facilitates readers with a different text control mechanism to fulfill personal requirements
(Larson, 2013).
Mixed mode of learning with e-books. Traditional printed books include words,
picture and graphics. On the other hand, e-books can include multimodal features like
hyperlinked table of contents, sound, animation, videos, and narrations, all of which are
considered beneficial for reading (Larson, 2013; Roskos, Brueck, & Widman, 2009;
Schugar et al., 2013). For example, most children are comfortable with combining modes
and are able to interpret the message (Bearne, 2005). The study by Verhallen, Bus, and de
Jong (2006) revealed that animated story books are found to be more helpful for children
compared with the hard copy story book with static pictures. They suggested that the
27

addition of multimedia is effective in enriching knowledge about the implied element of
the stories. In addition, Verhallen et al. (2006) argued that multimedia helps in drawing
attention to contiguous content and later on help children to comprehend the story.
According to the use of multimedia in digital books, de Jong and Bus (2003) divided the
book as talking book, living book and interactive book. However, some researchers also
argued that multimedia elements are not effective in enhancing the comprehension of
texts, but it increases the engagement of the children with text reading (Schugar et al.,
2013). Woody, Daniel, and Baker (2010) suggested designing the e-book differently from
the printed book to give a more constructive user experience.
Reading experience from the screen. Screen-based reading is becoming more
popular each day (Liu, 2005). In a consumer survey with 257 respondents, Shin (2010)
found that users like the advanced functionalities of e-books, but still they like to have a
feeling of reading like a paper book (Shin, 2010). To achieve such a screen reading,
Brown (2001, p. 390) suggested that “improved text and improved screens are only the
first steps to building a better digital reading.” Technology is improving and making
reading from an e-book more enjoyable, for example, users can now customize fonts and
pages of their e-book (Dewan, 2012). Reading from an e-reader using EPUB format is
flowable, meaning that contents adjust to the screen, in other words, layout is adjusted to
the screen size and this is very much helpful reading from the small screen (Siegle,
2012). Although previous studies found that readers required more time to read from a
computer monitor (Mayes, Sims, & Koonce, 2001), the recent study revealed that
readers’ eye movements for the new e-ink display are very similar to eye movements
when reading paper books (Benedetto et al., 2013; Siegenthaler, Wurtz, Bergamin, &
28

Groner, 2011). For this reason, the three most popular e-readers, namely Amazon Kindle,
Sony Reader, and Barnes and Noble Nook are now using e-ink technology to support a
more book-like reading experience (Trott & Dunneback, 2011). Berg, Hoffmann, and
Dawson (2010) found that students use a more linear reading strategy when they read
printed books and this reading is more successful than reading from an e-book. They
argued that familiarity with the printed paper made them more comfortable in reading,
and this familiarity can be incorporated into e-books to enhance the reading friendliness.
There are also negative remarks regarding the reading from the screen. For example,
Walters (2013) mentioned several drawbacks concerning the display of an e-book like
limited color range, lower contrast and intensity, page size limited by device size, and
poor resolution for compatible but non-native file formats (e.g., PDF) and so forth. In
another study, Mangen, Walgermo, and Brønnick (2013) found that students who read
from the screen scored lower than those who read from printed books. They supposed
that scrolling the e-book texts could be one factor that hampered smooth reading. In
another study, students who were experienced with reading e-books preferred printed
books for learning (Woody et al., 2010).
Challenges in e-book reading. The challenges and shortcomings of an e-book are
not static because technological innovation is making the e-reader more user friendly. For
example, reasons for not using e-books like being hard to read and browse or being heavy
and bulky (Chu, 2003; McKnight & Dearnley, 2003) are not as relevant nowadays. de
Jong and Bus (2002) claimed in their study that pictorial and iconic exploration of ebooks distracts children from comprehending the story. Instead of e-readers long
appearance in the market, there is always a lack of insufficient digital contents (Shin,
29

2010). Similarly, content availability, licensing issues, graphic display capabilities,
organizational issues and prohibitive costs are found as barriers for the use of e-books in
academic settings (Clark et al., 2008).
During an opinion survey, students indicated that e-books were not a useful and
practical tool for academic learning and the enjoyment of the e-book reading process was
not high (Lam, Lam, Lam, & Mcnaught, 2009). Similarly, Huang, Liang, Su, and Chen
(2012, p. 704) stated that “teachers and students believe that current e-books are not
readily used as printed books.” One of the reasons is probably the missing emotional
elements in the e-book (Shin, 2010). In one study, Stephens (2012) examined existing
usage patterns of students given options to use their own devices in the school. The
students bought several e-book devices like Kindles, iPod, and Nooks, but they were not
willing to buy or lend electronic files.
She suggested that during these transitions librarian’s involvement can have a
positive impact on the motivation for e-book usage. Staiger (2012) summarized the two
main challenges of e-books as the difficulty in navigation and inability to perform
customary research practices because of lack of physicality. Similarly, Maynard (2010)
noted that, among children, they preferred printed books over e-books because they were
accustomed to it and they liked the visual aspect of the printed book (e.g., touching or
seeing how far they read). However, the benefits of readily available reading resources
offsets the negative concerns of e-books, such as decreased reading speed, inability to
accurately scan and so forth. (Wright, Fugett, & Caputa, 2013). But still, in some cases,
e-books claims of being cheaper are not enough to bring about a change away from the
printed version (Robinson & Anton, 2012).
30

Changing reading habits. Digital reading is changing the behavior of the readers
(Liu, 2005). Maynard (2010) studied the influence of e-readers on the reading habits of
12 children (7-12 year) and found that e-readers (in this case, Kindles) inspired the
children to read instead of watching television. The readers of the new age consider
speed, efﬁciency, and convenience as the most important criteria for information seeking,
which are pretty much fulfilled with a new generation of e-readers (Dewan, 2012). Now
the users do not read the whole book, rather they browse or scan content or go directly to
the relevant chapter from the table of contents (Hernon et al., 2007). Pattuelli and Rabina
(2010) reported that students read more during the test when using e-readers. The easy
access to content is supposed to motivate them to read more. A review of literature from
2006 to 2011 found that academics use e-books mostly for discrete information, in other
words, a behavior similar to use rather than read (Staiger, 2012). Another study showed
that reading rate and concentration are much more related to the individual reading
behavior and the content rather than the reading device (Grzeschik, Kruppa, Marti, &
Donner, 2011).
A large survey with students suggested that they like to use e-books primarily for
leisure purposes and printed books for educational purposes (Foasberg, 2011). However,
in the case of graduate students, Wu and Chen (2011) conducted a survey in Taiwan and
found that students use e-books mainly for study and research purposes, and that they like
the search option in e-books. They also added that they are more likely to browse pages
in e-books, but they like the print version for further reading. Interestingly, a study
conducted from 2000 to 2004 in Net Library found that e-books are more popular among
31

students from the subject area ‘business, economics and management’ than other fields of
study (Nicholas, Rowlands, & Jamali, 2010). However, another study claimed that among
academics, members of humanities and the social-sciences are less satisfied with e-books
compared to hard science and business (Staiger, 2012).
New technology for a new generation: e-books and children. Children of today
are “digital natives,” meaning that they are fluent with digital language and grasp new
technology promptly (Prensky, 2006, p. 1). This leads to the understanding that children
will easily adopt new technology like e-books. In that sense, e-books can also play an
important role in closing the gap between teachers and children today (Wright et al.,
2013). However, there is a lack of enough study on e-books with children and many
researchers who considered students as a focus group for the investigation (Huang et al.,
2012). The following paragraphs summarized some of the prominent studies with a child
focus group regarding e-book usage and impacts.
Electronic books can help students in diverse learning as well as reading and
comprehending expository texts (Grant, 2004). Today’s children like to read e-books
(Huang, Liang, & Chiu, 2013) more so than previous generations (Lam et al., 2009).
Roskos, Burstein, You, and Brueck (2011) have tested a four-component model to
support integration of e-books into the early literacy in four school classes in the USA.
They found that the quality of e-books, precise design for classroom use, explicit
guidelines during children's engagement with e-books and stronger teacher trainings are
important factors for the successful integration of this technology into the classroom.
Another study with 24 children attending Early Reading First classrooms revealed the
interdependency between the device type and the child's engagement in reading (Roskos,
32

Burstein, Shang, & Gray, 2014). The study found that looking, touching, moving, and
gesturing behaviors differ with different devices. This is important in decision making
about when and how devices can be used for educational purposes. For example, Roskos
et al. (2014) argued that larger touch screens might prove less useful to certain
multisensory behaviors of children.
A study with 128 kindergarteners (5 to 6 years) showed that students reading from
an e-book had similar scores in emergent literacy compared heard the story read by adults
from the printed version of the same book (Korat & Shamir, 2007). This outcome pointed
out the technological advancement of e-books because previous studies noticed that
software story telling does not support the story comprehension and literacy development
positively (de Jong & Bus, 2002; Labbo & Kuhn, 2000; Underwood & Underwood,
1998). Segal-Drori, Korat, Shamir, and Klein (2010), in their experiment with 28
kindergarteners (5 to 6 years), found that students reading an e-book with adult
instruction showed an enhancement in their reading. Shamir (2009) found that the
process of e-book use (e.g., picture-based hotspot activation) helps emergent learning
among children. However, in spite of the handiness of e-books as a tool for early literacy,
Schugar et al. (2013) clearly stated that an interactive e-book cannot serve as a
replacement for a teacher.
E-books can help children with some sorts of reading problems. Berkeley and
Lindstrom (2011) argued that assistive technologies like e-readers seem to be helpful for
struggling readers. An experiment with 52 preschoolers at risk for learning disability
development revealed that children reading e-books improved both in their vocabulary
and early math skills compared to the group without e-book access (Shamir & Baruch,
33

2012). The audible format of e-books is very much useful for those who have print
disabilities and low literacy language problems (Blanck, 2010). Grimshaw, Dungworth,
McKnight, and Morris (2007) mentioned that e-books can encourage literacy activities
for struggling readers. For example, Mcclanahan, Oklahoma, and Williams (2002)
experimented with fifth grade children having Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD). They found that the reading device (in their case, iPad) helped the children with
their concentration in reading and the children showed one year advancement in reading
in only six weeks.
Children’s early literacy is very much sensible in that it requires lots of patience
and a variety of approaches. Korat and Shamir (2008) have tried in their research to find
how educational e-books help in a child’s early literacy. A study of 149 kindergarten
children (ages 5-6) was divided into two groups according to low and middle
socioeconomic status. Regardless of the social group, all children showed improvement
in reading with e-books in terms of word meaning. However, the lower socioeconomic
group showed better improvement than the middle group in terms of emergent literacy.
They also found that modes of learning (e.g., reading using a dictionary which came with
the e-book or reading just a story) have different impacts on the improvement of early
learning.
The experience of children reading e-books with parents or printed book with
parents are different. For example, children reading e-books with parents are more
responsive and they initiated the discourses while parents seem to be more responsive in
the case of children reading printed books with parents (Korat & Or, 2010). Self-

34

explanatory capabilities of e-books (e.g., animation, music, sound effect, etc.) are
considered a possible reason for this outcome.
Comprehension of e-book texts by children is still under discussion. For example,
an experiment with 132 children ages 9-10 in seven different primary schools in the UK
was conducted in 2007 to find children’s reading and comprehension levels of e-book
texts from the computer (Grimshaw et al., 2007). In this experiment, the children took a
longer time to read the text, they were sometimes unable to follow the text and the
dictionary did not help them a lot. However, the narration of the text was found
beneficial. In summary, no significant differences about the children’s enjoyment during
e-text reading were noticed. Similarly, Huang et al. (2012) found no significance
differences in terms of reading accuracy using e-book or printed book. On the other hand,
six cases from six grade-1 students (7 years old) showed that online reading has increased
children’s comprehension capability and the children enjoyed the online reading
experience (Ciampa, 2012). A study by Wright et al. (2013) showed that children
comprehend written material from printed and digital version similarly, but they use
reading resources like a dictionary more frequently while reading digital materials.
Huang et al. (2013) studied the impact of gender on learning with e-readers with
166 elementary school students. In contrast to the general perception that boys are more
technology acceptant, the girls showed better performance with e-book readings. The
researchers argued that probably various functionalities of the e-reader distracted boys in
e-book reading.
The new generation of e-books include interactive book apps where parents and
children can add their voices, and often include special features like read-a-loud (Siegle,
35

2012). Shuker and Terreni (2013) have discussed how self-authored e-books can foster
children’s literacy through the creation of interactive texts. They argued that children can
easily share and distribute their works with a new generation of e-books.
One concern about the e-book remains whether they are suitable for young
children. Many researchers believe that the multimedia or interactive nature of e-books
does not help a lot in enriching language and literacy (Korat & Or, 2010; Shamir &
Korat, 2006). For example, research by Korat and Shamir (2008) found that e-books as a
tool for emergent literacy are not totally satisfactory. They suggested that e-book creators
should be cautious about creating appropriate e-books for children. The same is also true
for e-readers.
Library perspective.
E-book as a new dimension of service. E-books are a part of the mainstream of
academic communities and, thereby, increase expectations of availability of e-books in
academic libraries (Vasileiou et al., 2012). Academic libraries are in a transition state
with respect to the acquisition, selection and other processing associated with e-books
(Vasileiou et al., 2012). Velde and Ernst (2009) argued that libraries consider an e-book
as an option to grow collections and to provide users with a varied reading experience.
However, many libraries still have only a small portion of their budget available for ebook purchasing and many of them are now in an experimental phase in the acquisition,
selection and processing associated with e-books (Vasileiou et al., 2012) However,
libraries still consider an e-book as a complement to printed books, not as a replacement
of them (McLuckie, 2005). During an e-book-reader (Kindle) lending program in a
university, Clark (2009) observed that there exists a great interest about the e-reader
36

among the users and users are interested more with general title compared to academic
titles. He suggested that librarians can consider e-readers to supplement their highdemand books. Berube (2005) argued that the traditional role of libraries as a bridge
between right holder and users will be more crucial with the inclusion of e-books.
When we look at things from the library’s perspective, the e-book provides
several advantages like multiple access, continuous access (time and place), instant
delivery, saving space on the shelf, preventing damage, loss or theft, no shipping and
handling and access to out of print materials (Romero, 2011). E-books can also help
libraries with the problem of space and storage related costs (Hodges, Preston, &
Hamilton, 2010). However, there are also drawbacks like the cost of e-readers, difﬁculty
in accessing computers or the internet, resistance to change in reading habits and lack of
knowledge of software/hardware (Romero, 2011). E-books also offer potential benefit to
disabled and disadvantaged users in several ways: specific functionality of e-books like
talking book, adjustable fonts, backlit screen, or special services like Digital Accessible
Information System (DAISY) for the blind and partially-sighted users (McKnight &
Dearnley, 2003).
Changes in library process. E-books are changing the way libraries function.
Patrons do not need to go to the library to borrow an e-book or digital texts, or extend the
borrowing time, or to return them to the library premises (Brown, 2001; Dewan, 2012;
Romero, 2011). So, many things are happening without interacting with library
personnel. Even when there are not enough copies of the printed book, users can access
e-bbooks easily all day long (Brown, 2001; Dewan, 2012; Romero, 2011).

37

The purchasing of e-books is quite different from purchasing printed books for
libraries. For example, a library often is required to pay more for multiple copies of ebooks, or pay for a copy with a set license fee for the download (Romero, 2011). During
their purchase, libraries need to think about options like package purchases, access
licenses, single versus multiple users, and so forth. (Romero, 2011). In addition, libraries
have to consider e-book titles in which academic users have an interest (Price, 2011). So,
libraries have to think about the process and criteria for e-book selection and acquisition,
according to academic prerequisites (Vasileiou et al., 2012). For example, a library
catalog is expanded by libraries by adopting a cross platform strategy where e-books are
listed in the search outcome, but the book originally stored in publishers or aggregators
data base (Romero, 2011).
Changes in a librarian’s job. The librarian’s job is not the same any more.
Simply, the book acquisition responsibility is now different and they have to understand
several processes. For example, different vendors have different model of acquisition of
e-books. Vasileiou et al. (2012) mentioned three models for e-book acquisition after
reviewing several research works: perpetual ownership enables libraries to acquire ebook directly from vendors (publishers or aggregator) by paying up for a couple of years,
subscription requires to pay for subscription for a certain period (e.g., yearly) and the
rental mode enable a library to access certain title for a limited time. Among librarians,
the perpetual model is the most popular (Vasileiou et al., 2012) so they have to be aware
of at least this process. The librarians need to be aware of upcoming new e-book titles,
much as they would for regular texts. Not only that, many publishers use email
notification, subscription options, or reorganize their websites with new titles (McLuckie,
38

2005). The librarians have to be aware of these updates and take steps to enrich the
library collection. A study by Abdullah and Gibb (2008) revealed that students have a
very positive attitude as regards search for and reading e-books, however, they think that
e-books need to be promoted by libraries. Several in-house trainings can make them
ready for these sorts of tasks.
Besides administrative tasks, librarians are considered as an important resource
for promoting digital literacy among children as well as parents (Borawski, 2009).
Librarians should also consider that one size does not fit for all, in other words,
individuals or group of individuals have their own choice of interest especially when it
comes to the adoption of a new technology (Johnson, 2008; Moreillon, 2009). For
example, Wu and Chen (2011) found that graduate students like to have both e-books and
print versions of the same book in the library. In addition, Lund (2011) concluded in his
study that librarians need to be objective and should avoid obsession with e-books while
considering what is actually right for and preferred by their patrons. The multiple options
for buying e-books like purchasable, licensable, loanable, all day accessible, and so forth,
are making the job of the librarian more complex (Armstrong, 2008).
Lockley, Lockley, and Tarulli (2012) suggested training and different mind sets
are required to increase the use of the library in the digital age. They introduced an
advisory model focused with an all for one, one for all mentality. According to the model,
staff should get training in how to assist readers in learning to use the e-readers extending
to e-book download or any other help. Additionally, the readers’ advisory trainers must
consider discussion about e-book technologies even in the case of unavailability of ebooks in the present (Trott & Dunneback, 2011). Indeed, the librarian's job is
39

transforming from a static to a more dynamic one including such duties as technology
leadership, teaching or information specialization. These things are now becoming a part
of their expected responsibilities (Moris, 2012).
Administrating e-book access. Walters (2013) argued that e-book licenses are not
universal and are mostly negotiated with individual libraries. Eschenfelder (2008)
summarized technological protection measures that were already present in the existing
licensing system. She categorized them under user-discouraging feature or soft restriction
and hard restriction for preventing unauthorized use (Eschenfelder 2008). Soft restriction
includes page print limits, PDF download limit, data export limit, absence of button to
enact usage, saving document results in many files, page chunking, copyright warning,
and so forth. Hard restrictions include OCR exposed for searching, but not for copy and
paste and variation of use right by resource (Eschenfelder, 2008). Many of these
restrictions are mentioned by other authors too (Hodges et al., 2010; Price, 2011). She
argued that library should be cautious regarding adopting soft restrictions to their patrons.
Trott and Dunneback (2011, p. 325) argued that “e-books do not enjoy the same
sort of protection under copyright law as physical books do.” The e-book protection that
publishers have assigned is known as digital right management (DRM) to protect
themselves from loss of revenue by limiting access and sharing of electronic content
(Delquié & Polanka, 2011). DRM is different from the other enforcement mechanisms
that the publishers are granted by the authority to limit of their content (Walters, 2013).
Walters (2013) summarized the imposed restriction due to DRM broadly under
restrictions on library circulation and interlibrary loan, restrictions on the number and
type of users and so on. However, these are to some extent contradictory with library
40

policies. The DRM can be considered a barrier for the dispersal of e-readers (Walters,
2013). Aaltonen, Mannonen, Nieminen, and Nieminen (2011) tested several e-readers
among different types of users and they pointed out the existence of incompatibility
among e-materials. Berube (2005) showed her concern questioning whether DRM is
putting an end to the sharing culture fostered by printed books.
On the other hand, libraries also have policies to control the use of information.
From a library perspective, Chmara (2012, p. 65) defined it as “the right to receive
information that must be protected.” The issue becomes more critical for e-books. The
library may purchase e-readers that allow users to download and read books for a specific
duration. However, most third-party vendors can also track patron data (Chmara, 2012).
For example, user interest for certain contents can be tracked easily and these can have an
impact on the use of library contents. Chmara (2012) suggested that libraries should
consider such possibilities and ensure protection of information for their young patrons,
which might lead to maximum use of electronic reading material.
Summary
The e-book technology is an example of the innovation where first adoption needs
more time and then it begins diffusion into society very quickly (Siegle, 2012). This
review shows that e-books possess several advantages over the printed book and that
library services are trying to keep up with e-book technology. Currently, the e-books are
more user friendly in terms of functionality and reader friendly in terms of on screen
reading. There are still challenges, but the technological evolution is superseding the
challenges. There are many research works of e-books with student groups, but very few
with younger children's group (Huang et al., 2012; Larson, 2009; Pattuelli & Rabina,
41

2010). Rapid technological changes are opening the new doors of research in this area,
especially when it comes about the adoption of e-books among children. Most of the
previous studies with children concerned themselves with text comprehension and
reading enhancement. A few of them focused on the emergent learning and early literacy.
However, a negligible amount of research is found focusing on how e-books can
encourage children’s reading habits. Huang et al. (2013) argued that further studies are
needed on the use of e-books for reading in the digital learning environment. This study
tries to fill that gap by observing the changing reading behavior of students with access to
e-books.

42

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
In Chapter 3, the purpose of this action research study was identified and the
research questions were identified. This chapter also examines the research design,
population, sampling method and procedures for the study. Also, in this chapter the
instrumentation used for the data collection and data analysis procedures are delineated.
Limitations of the study are discussed, as well as external and internal validity. The
chapter ends with a look at the expected findings and ethical issues considered as a part
of this study.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of the action research study is to implement an e-book lending
program in order to increase the number of times students access material from the
library in a rural elementary school for students in grades four to six.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
Two research questions were developed for this study. They were
Research Question 1. Is there a significant difference between the numbers of
times fourth through sixth grade students access library material (e-books, books, or
audio-visual materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program?
Alternative Hypothesis. There is a difference between the numbers of times
fourth through sixth grade student’s access library material (e-books, books, or audiovisual materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program.

43

Null Hypothesis. There is no difference between the numbers of times fourth
through sixth grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual
materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Research Question 2. What are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending
program?
Research Design
Target population, sampling method, and related procedures.
Target population. The research study examines the effects of the use of Amazon
Kindle e-readers on the rate of circulation of reading material of the target student
population, which is made up of male and female students in grades four, five, and six at
the research site. These students are largely from a lower socio-economic group (about
2/3 of the students receive free or reduced lunches). Little is actually required of these
students in terms of their participation in the research project. All that they are asked to
do is to read. The choice to use the e-reader or to check out hard copy books or even no
books at all is theirs to make.
Sampling method. The selection process for choosing study participants is
random. This method was chosen since the researcher could not control who ultimately
chose to join the study. All students received information and training on the use of the
devices. Only those students who were permitted by their parents to be a part of the study
group had data collected from them for the purposes of the study.

44

Sample size. The total possible target population was 259 students in grades four,
five, and six to gather quantitative data from. The aim was to attain a participation rate
from the total target population of around 8-10 students to participate in interviews at the
conclusion of the study. Parents were contacted through a letter sent home with the
students explaining the study. There was no selection process or criteria for inclusion in
the study group other than being a part of the target population as mentioned above.
Setting. The research site was a small, rural public school district in Pennsylvania.
Recruitment. The participants in the study were students in grades four, five, and
six at the research site. During the first week of school they were informed, on an
informal basis, of the forthcoming project. All members of this group of students were
considered to be participants in the study. There was no requirement of them as a member
of the study group. They were simply being offered an option to use the e-readers or not
as they chose. Whether or not they chose to avail themselves of this opportunity was
completely up to them. At the conclusion of the study period, data was collected to
ascertain the usage rates of the devices. Parents were contacted through a letter sent
home with the students explaining the study and asking for their consent for their child to
be allowed to participate in a 1-on-1 interview with the researcher and to collect data
from them. Up to ten students were recruited for this phase of the study. Parents had to
return a signed form consenting to their child being interviewed. Interviews were
recorded and transcribed by the researcher. Students were informed of the results of the
study after its conclusion.

45

Data Collection
The data collection for the action research study consisted of three parts. The first
part involved collecting quantitative data while the other two were qualitative. This
section describes each of the three data types collected as well as how they were
analyzed.
The first data set for this study were quantitative. Data was collected by
examining the library’s rate of circulation for this year prior to the study period and then
comparing those numbers to how many books are signed out during the study.
The second data set collected for this study was qualitative. Data were collected
via interviews individually with a small group of 8-10 students at the end of the study
period to understand their perceptions of the e-reader lending program. A thematic
analysis was conducted on the answers given by the students in the interviews looking for
common themes among them. Interviews were chosen as a method of data collection to
provide some measure of explanatory power to the numbers. Whether the intervention
was successful or not, the insights gathered from the students in the interviews provide a
look into why the intervention either succeeded or failed.
The final data set was also qualitative. Data were collected during the study
period as well. Students who were a part of the interview group were asked to answer two
questions before they signed out the device: “What do you plan to read?” and “How
much time do you think you will read on the device?” When these same students returned
the devices one week later they were asked “What did you actually read?” “How much
time do you estimate that you actually spent reading on the device?” and “How did you
like reading on the device?”
46

Field Test
The one instrument that needed to be tested for this study was the interview
questions given after the implementation phase of the study. These questions were
adapted from one completed by Scholastic, Inc. (2012) concerning the use of e-books by
students. As such, it is felt that the instrument has been sufficiently field tested. However,
the researcher conducted a field test for the interview questions. A group of 12 teachers
from the research site (the homeroom teachers for the fourth through sixth grade students
who were a part of the study) read each question for clarity, relevancy, grammar, and
whether or not the questions provided useful information. Based on their feedback, the
researcher made the necessary revisions.
The interview questions were emailed to the 12 teachers to ensure that they were
written at a level accessible to all students, and that the content of the questions will
provide sufficient and appropriate data to answer the research questions. The responses
were received from all of the reviewers who offered no suggestions for improvement in
terms of the wording of the interview questions.
Data Analysis Procedures
Data analysis for this study occurred through the following methods:
Data Source: Circulation Rates
Circulation rate data was gathered at the start of the school year and again later
that same year during the intervention period. These numbers were compared to show
any change in the rate of circulation. Data was also provided to show the rate of
circulation for the same study group for the previous two years.

47

The hypothesis for this research question is that there exists a difference between
the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade students access library material (e-books,
books, or audio-visual materials) after the implementation of the e-reader lending
program.
The null hypothesis for this research question states that there is no difference
between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade student’s access library material
(e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the implementation of the e-reader
lending program.
An Excel spreadsheet was created to organize the data for this research question.
Once all of the data was collected and entered into an Excel spreadsheet, the different
rates of circulation before and during the intervention were compared. The researcher
reviewed the numbers for accuracy that are found in the Excel spreadsheet and proceeded
with the calculations. All data was stored in a file on the researcher’s computer.
Additionally, data was backed up on Google Drive and Microsoft SkyDrive cloud
storage.
This data provided an answer to the research question: how has the e-book
lending program changed the circulation rate of library materials among students in
grades four, five and six (including e-books, books and audio-visual materials)?
For the student interviews, generic qualitative data analysis was done to identify
patterns and themes in the student responses. Interviews were recorded and transcribed
by the researcher. Interview data was triangulated with quantitative data. An Excel
spreadsheet was created to organize this data. The students’ responses were coded, and a
thematic analysis was done on the students’ comments. The researcher reviewed the
48

comments for accuracy and proceeded with the thematic analysis. All data was stored in a
file on the researcher’s computer. Additionally, data was backed up on Google Drive and
Microsoft SkyDrive cloud storage. This data provided an answer to research question
two: What are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending program?
In terms of the questions that students were asked during the study period, generic
qualitative data analysis was done to identify patterns and themes in the student
responses. Student answer to questions before and after signing out the device were
recorded and transcribed by the researcher. An Excel spreadsheet was created to
organize this data. The students’ responses were coded and a thematic analysis was done
on the students comments. The researcher will review the comments for accuracy and
proceeded with the thematic analysis. All data was stored in a file on the researcher’s
computer. Additionally, data was backed up on Google Drive and Microsoft SkyDrive
cloud storage. This data was an answer to research question two: What are students’
reactions to the e-reader lending program.
Methodological triangulation was used. Methodological triangulation involves
using both quantitative and qualitative data to see if these different data sources provide
similar outcomes. This also helped to establish validity (Guion et al, 2011).
Limitations of the Research Design
As development of the study continued, a few limitations developed. First, not all
of the data that had been originally sought was available. The initial plan was to analyze
the rate of circulation of the student population in this study, which is still possible.
However, it would not be possible to parse the data by gender. The system used to track

49

library circulation simply did not break down data in this way. No redesign was done as
data was still available by grade level, which was the primary concern.
A second limitation of the study was the timing of the introduction of the
treatment phase. Members of the district technology department were responsible for
ordering, setting up, preparing, and delivering the Kindle’s to the elementary school.
Having this out of the hands of the researcher placed outside limits on the study that
could not be controlled. The technology department was also responsible for other facets
of the plan such as setting up a payment account for purchasing titles to load onto the
devices. The department only had two members who were burdened with a heavy
workload without the requirements of this study. As such, while some requests were
made to complete the necessary set up for the study, ultimately the researcher was at the
mercy of forces beyond his control and had to wait until such time as the technology
department could fit these tasks into their schedule.
A third limitation to the study lied with the students themselves. The researcher
had noted, anecdotally, that there were growing numbers of students who owned or had
access to e-reader devices already. As such, the greater the number of students within the
study group the less effective the treatment was in increasing the rate of circulation. One
way that the researcher addressed this was by seeking student input into the books to be
purchased for the school’s devices. By doing this, the hope was that students would find
books on the school devices that were not available to them at home. Thus, students who
already had a Kindle may still ask to borrow a school device if it had materials that were
of interest to them.

50

Internal Validity and External Validity
The issue of transferability is key to the researcher. This project, while done in
isolation, to other settings was seen as having maximized its value via its transferability.
The researcher documented the details of conducting this project step-by-step so that
another researcher could replicate the study if they desire. A detailed outline of the
research steps is included in the dissertation.
To address the issues of dependability and confirmability, an audit was conducted
by a reliable and competent colleague. The audit allowed this colleague to examine any
materials related to the study such as the survey results and the data on circulation rates in
the library to verify their dependability and to confirm that the study was conducted
ethically and up to the standards required of action research. The data for this study came
from multiple sources (quantitative data from circulation rates, questionnaires, and
interviews.) Methodological triangulation was used. Methodological triangulation
involves using both quantitative and qualitative data to see if these different data sources
provide similar outcomes. This also helps to establish validity (Guion et.al, 2011).
Expected Findings
It is assumed that the students in the study group were enthusiastic in their use of
e-readers, which led to an increase in the rate of circulation of reading material. If this
assumption proves true it is further assumed that (a) the program will continue to be
funded to purchase new e-books annually, (b) the program will eventually expand to
other grades within the elementary building to encompass all K-6 students, and (c) the
program will be further expanded to include the middle/high school (grades 7-12).

51

Ethical Issues
Researcher's Position Statement
The researcher was the elementary school librarian and was responsible, among
other things, for maintaining and increasing the rate of circulation. Before this, the
researcher was a technology integration coach. This combination of professional
experiences gave the researcher a unique perspective on the use of technology in the
library as compared to previous librarians. The use of e-books was seen as a way to
expand the use of library services rather than as a threat to the existence of libraries and
books.
This was a new initiative for the district. However, the district did attempt to
initiate a Kindle program at the high school as a means to replace textbooks. The
initiative was not successful since the program sought to replace textbooks that are not
widely available for the Kindle. This program used the same Kindles that were originally
purchased to be used for the high school textbook initiative as well as some newer
devices and was not seeking to replace anything. It was seen as a way to reach the target
audience (grades four, five, and six), a growing number of who are likely using e-books
outside of school.
While, as researchers, we all hope to remain neutral in our work, it must be
acknowledged that this researcher did hold certain biases and attitudes regarding this
research project. Since it was the researcher who was initiating this project, the researcher
had a personal desire to it succeed. Professionally, the researcher was asking the district
to put the money into this project and so, for their sake, was anxious for this to go well.

52

It is understood, though, that as a researcher these biases could not be permitted to
cloud the results of this study. Allowing the data to guide the interpretation of success for
the project was the only route to follow. This would allow the researcher to see what
really happened versus what was hoped for and believed the results would be.
Conflict of Interest Assessment
There was no conflict of interest seen in this project. While the project was
instituted by the researcher, there were no demands placed on him in terms of success or
failure for the project. Certainly, the preference was to see the project succeed, but its
success or failure in no way affected the job of the researcher.
There are also no conflicts involving the students who were a part of this research.
The choice to use library materials or not was entirely theirs as it has always been. There
was no pressure or coercion of any sort placed upon them to participate in any capacity in
the study. Students’ grades were not affected in any way by their choice to use the
library’s services either now or prior to this research project, so no conflict existed there
either.
Ethical Issues in the Study
The researcher was the library teacher at the site. There was potential for the belief
that student participation, or lack thereof, in the study may affect student grades in some
way. However, the researcher was aware of this and emphasized to stakeholders that
participation was entirely voluntary and would in no way affect their grade in library or
any other class.

53

Summary
Chapter 3 introduces the research study that was designed to determine if the
intervention introduced to the treatment group would effectively solve the problem of a
declining rate of circulation among the study group participants. The study was used to
answer the following questions:
Research Question 1
Is there a significant difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth
grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials)
after the implementation of an e-reader lending program?
Alternative Hypothesis
There is a difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade
student’s access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after
the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Null Hypothesis
There is no difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade
students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after
the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Research Question 2
What are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending program?
This chapter discussed the research design, outlining where the research was taking
place. The chapter also discusses who the participants were in the study and the selection
process for being included in the various phases of the study.

54

The instruments used in this study were both quantitative and qualitative.
Quantitative data in the form of circulation statistics from the last three years as well as
the current year were gathered for analysis. Qualitative data consisted of questions asked
of the student during the study period concerning their usage of the Kindles as well as the
responses of a small group of students to a set of interview questions. These instruments
proved useful to the researcher in answering the research questions.
Limitations of the study were described in this chapter. These are considerations
that must be looked at by others who may use this study as a means to guide their own
attempts at implementing a similar initiative. The researcher kept notes on observations,
occurrences, and other actions in a journal throughout the study period as a means to
reflect on ways to improve the program as well as to explain the results of the study.
These notes and reflections helped to make the study more credible and valid. Using the
journal helped to verify confirmability by showing the implementation process as it
unfolded throughout the study.
Lastly, all ethical considerations, positionality, and conflicts of interest were
examined in order to ensure ethical treatment of all subjects and study data.
In the next chapter, the researcher will discuss the study period itself. A detailed
data analysis and summary of the study’s results will also be included.

55

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS
Chapter 4 of this study will present the research sample used, discusses the
research methodology and analysis conducted on the data, both quantitative and
qualitative, and summarizes the outcomes of the research project.
Data collection began on October 27, 2014 and concluded on December 5, 2014,
a total of six weeks. Participants were given forms that needed to be signed by parents
prior to being able to sign out a Kindle device. Only those students who returned a signed
permission form could actually sign out a device.
Description of the Sample
The research study examined the effects of the use of Amazon Kindle e-readers
on the rate of circulation for the target student population, which was made up of male
and female students in grades four, five, and six at the research site. These students were
largely from a lower socioeconomic group (about two thirds of the students receive free
or reduced lunches). Little was actually required of these students in terms of their
participation in the research project. All that they were asked to do is to read. The choice
to use the e-reader or to check out hard copy books or even no books at all was theirs to
make. The selection process for choosing study participants was random. This method
was chosen since the researcher could not control who will ultimately chose to join the
study. All students received information and training on the use of the devices. Only
those students who were permitted by their parents to be a part of the study group had
56

data collected from them for the purposes of the study. The total possible target
population was 259 students in grades four, five, and six to gather quantitative data from.
The aim was to attain a participation rate from the total target population of around 8-10
students to be involved in interviews at the conclusion of the study. Parents were
contacted through a letter sent home with the students explaining the study. There was no
selection process or criteria for inclusion in the study group other than being a part of the
target population as mentioned above.
Table 1
Description of Study Participants
Eligible
Participants

Treatment Group
Participants

Post Study Interview
Participants

259

62

8

Summary of the Results
This was an action research study utilizing qualitative and quantitative data. First
is a summary of the results of the quantitative portion of the study, followed by the
results for the qualitative research question.
Research Question 1

There was found to be no difference between the numbers of times that students
in the target population accessed library reading material with the implementation of the
treatment as compared to prior to the treatment. Therefore, the null hypothesis is
accepted, as there was no difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth
grade students accessed library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after
the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
57

Research Question 2

Students’ reactions to the Kindle lending program showed that they felt positively
about the program, at least those who were able to participate in the program.
Detailed Analysis
Research question one asked whether or not there was a difference between the
numbers of times that students in the target population accessed library reading material
with the implementation of the treatment as compared to prior to the treatment. In
answering this question, it was important to look at the data not only from the study
period but also from previous years. The tables below summarize the circulation rate for
each of the three grade levels involved in the study. They give the current year’s
circulation rate for each grade as well as the previous three years’ rates for each grade
level.
Table 2
Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Fourth-Grade Students
Grade Level
1
2
3
4*
Annual
7,981
7,450
6,988
1,923
Circulation Rate
*The circulation rate for grade level 4 only covers the period from the start of term
to 12/5/14.

Table 3
Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Fifth-Grade Students
Grade Level
2
3
4
5*
Annual
8,043
6,638
3,721
1,012
Circulation Rate
*The circulation rate for grade level 5 only covers the period from the start of term
to 12/5/14.

58

Table 4
Pre-Study Circulation Rates for Current Sixth-Grade Students

Grade Level
3
4
5
6*
Annual
8,211
7,638
3,621
512
Circulation Rate
*The circulation rate for grade level 6 only covers the period from the start of term
to 12/5/14.

As the tables demonstrate, the circulation rates for each grade level declined from year to
year for each grade level.
This data analysis examines the number of times fourth through sixth grade
students accessed library material after the implementation of an e-reader lending
program. The null hypothesis states that there is no difference between the numbers of
times fourth grade students accessed library material after the implementation of an ereader lending program.
Summary-level information was available for the number of times students
accessed library reading material. To simplify terminology, the number of times student’s
access library reading materials is herein referred to as circulation. Circulation is a
discrete-type of data as it represent counts. The original research plan outlined a chisquare test as the intended statistical analysis to demonstrate no statistical association
between e-device use and circulation counts.
The available data utilized summary-level circulation counts for students between
grades four through six. Each grade's circulation counts were available for the current
year and prior year. An updated database included individual-level circulation counts for
students participating in the e-reader program.
59

Due to the structure of the existing data, one of the limitations is the data are in a
year-to date format. The year-to-date circulation for this current year is compared to the
complete prior year. In order to standardize the timelines, the circulation counts for the
prior year were inferred based upon the number of days in the year-to-date information
for the current year.
The previous 2013 – 2014 academic year included 200 weekdays (includes
holidays). The data for the current year includes only 75 days (25 August 2014 – 5
December 2014). As 75 days represents 37.5% of 200 days, the data for the previous year
were inferred as the product of the their previous year circulation counts and 0.375 (the
proportion of days completed this academic year as compared to the previous academic
year).
Table 5
Post-Study Circulation Rates for Fourth-Grade Students
E-reader Users
Current Year
Previous Year

258
182

% Increase
from Previous
Year

Non-e-reader
Users

% Decrease from
Previous Year

41.8

1665
2438

31.7

Table 6
Post-Study Circulation Rates for Fifth-Grade Students

Current Year
Previous Year

E-reader Users

% Increase
from Previous
Year

Non-e-reader
Users

% Decrease from
Previous Year

312
196

59.2

700
1200

41.7

Table 7
Post-Study Circulation Rates for Sixth-Grade Students
60

E-reader Users
Current Year
Previous Year

123
65

% Increase
from Previous
Year

Non-e-reader
Users

% Decrease from
Previous Year

89.2

389
1293

69.9

% Increase
from Previous
Year

Non-e-reader
Users

% Decrease from
Previous Year

56.4

2754
4931

44.1

Table 8
Combined Circulation Rates for All Grades

E-reader Users
Current Year
Previous Year

693
443

Findings
Research Question 1 asked if there was a difference between the numbers of times
fourth through sixth grade students accessed library material (e-books, books, or audiovisual materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program. Based on the
data in Table 5, it is shown that there is, in fact, a positive difference in the rate of
circulation for the study group after the introduction of the e-readers. Given the available
data, it is difficult to surmise for certain that the difference in circulation rate before and
after the intervention is due to the intervention. Other factors such as the time of year
(near Christmas, close to the time a book fair was held in the school) could have
influenced this as well. There was no control in place to account for these other factors.
Research Question 2 required quantitative data analysis. The quantitative analysis
actually had two parts. In the first part, students were asked a series of questions when
they signed out the Kindle and when they returned it. Students who were also a part of
the interview group were asked to answer two questions before they signed out a device:
61

“What do you plan to read?” and “How much time do you think you will read on the
device?” When these same students returned the devices one week later they were asked
“What did you actually read?” “How much time do you estimate that you actually spent
reading on the device?” and “How did you like reading on the device?”
In response to the question “What do you plan to read?”, the eight students
surveyed had a few different answers. Particular books that were on the devices were
mentioned five out of eight of the students. The most popular title mentioned was The
Hunger Games (four out of eight students). Three of the students mentioned Diary of a
Wimpy Kid: The Long Haul as their first choice. One student in this group said
“Everything!” When asked “How much time do you think you will read on the device?”
In general, the students’ answers varied widely. Three of the students said “A few hours.”
Two answered “A lot.” Two more students responded “As much as I can.” One student
said “I don’t know.”
In the second part of qualitative data collection, the students in the interview group
were asked a series of questions in order to determine their perceptions of the e-reader
lending program. These are the questions
1. How has using the Kindle changed your reading habits?
2. What did you enjoy the most about using the Kindle?
3. What did you like the least about using the Kindle?
4. Outside of using the Kindle to read a book, what was the most useful feature
of the device? Why?
5. What are some other uses you can see for the Kindle other than here in the
library?

62

6. What are the advantages that you see of using a Kindle versus a hard copy
book? Or, what are the advantages of using the hard copy book versus the
Kindle?

The interview group questions drew out certain themes. The use of the Kindle evoked
expressions of feelings about its use supported by what was said for the answer to
Question 2. Problems with using the Kindle were a theme that emerged in response to
Question 3. Question 4 asked students about favorite features, with the portability of the
device being the top response. Students also saw the capability of the Kindle as a tool for
textbook replacement, a theme supported by the responses to Question 5. Finally,
responses to Question 6 showed that the students appreciated the fact that the Kindle
could hold a large number of books on one small, portable device.
Question 1 yielded a range of responses that thematically were very similar. When the
8 students interviewed were asked this question, they responded in one of two ways.
They either felt that it “did not really make much difference” to their reading habits or
they said they liked reading on the Kindle more than reading a regular book. The
responses were divided 50/50 between these two sentiments.
The answers to Question 2 were only a little more diverse. The most common
response, from five of the students, was “It’s just different.” This is thematically similar
to the response of another student who replied “I think it’s more fun to read with
something electronic than a regular book.” The two remaining students shared the
sentiment that they enjoyed the fact that they were using an electronic device. These two
also shared that they liked having “a wide variety of books to choose from instead of
being stuck with just one book at a time. Then I can read whatever I like.”
63

There were a few issues that the students identified as something that they did not
like about using the Kindle in response to question three. The most common (reported by
6 of the 8 students) was not having a sense of where they are in the book. While with the
models that the students used the percentage of the book read is displayed, they felt this
did not allow them to really gauge how much they had to read in, say, a particular chapter
let alone the book as a whole. Along this line, one girl responded that “I don’t like to stop
reading in the middle of a chapter and it was hard to know how far I had to go.” It is
worth noting that this and the other reported issues, like fear of “losing my place in the
book,” all can be addressed one way or another through the capabilities of the device.
Question 4 asked the students about the most useful features of the Kindles. The
most popular response to this was the size, reported by all eight of the respondents. The
students appreciated the fact that they could carry so many books stored on such a small
device. One boy commented that “This is so much easier to carry around and hold.”
Other responses included a girl who commented that she liked the built in dictionary
because she could look up words she did not know.
The students came up with a couple of other uses for the devices outside of being
used simply for reading books. The most common, which all of the students commented
on, was to use the devices to replace textbooks. They felt that this would make their lives
much easier because they “wouldn’t have to lug around these super heavy backpacks all
of the time.” Three of the students also thought they could use the device to do
homework such as “looking up junk on the internet. And maybe play games.”
Finally, Question 6 asked the students about the advantages of Kindles vs. Hard
copy books. The answers here tended to echo earlier responses. The most cited advantage
64

for the Kindle was its size followed closely by its ability to “hold a lot of books.” The
biggest advantages mentioned for hard copy books were the ability to mark pages and the
fact that pictures were better than on the Kindle.
Summary
This action research study looked to determine whether or not the use of an ereader device would encourage students in grades four, five, and six at the research site to
use the library more often, which would increase the rate of circulation. This chapter
presented the quantitative and qualitative data that was used to answer the studies two
research questions in Chapter 5.

65

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
The purpose of this study was to decide whether or not the introduction of an ereader lending program for grades four, five, and six would improve library circulation
counts at the research site. The study was introduced due to an observed decline in the
rate of circulation for these same students from year to year.
Summary of the Results
Data collection began on October 27, 2014 and concluded on December 5, 2014,
a total of 6 weeks. Participants were given forms that needed to be signed by parents
prior to being able to sign out a Kindle device. Only those students who returned a signed
permission form could actually sign out a device.
Research Questions and Hypotheses
Two research questions were used for this study. They were
Research Question 1. Is there a difference between the numbers of times fourth
through sixth grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual
materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program?
Alternative Hypothesis. There is a difference between the numbers of times
fourth through sixth grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audiovisual materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program.

66

Null Hypothesis. There is no difference between the numbers of times fourth
through sixth grade students access library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual
materials) after the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
Research Question 2. What are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending
program?
For Research Question 1, there was found to be a difference between the numbers
of times that students in the target population accessed library reading materials with the
implementation of the treatment as compared to prior to the treatment. The circulation
data supported this conclusion. Therefore, the Null Hypothesis is rejected and there is a
difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade students access
library material after the implementation of an e-reader lending program.
For Research Question 2, students’ reactions to the Kindle lending program
showed that they felt positively about the program, at least those who were able to
participate in the program. Research Question 2 required quantitative data analysis. The
quantitative analysis actually had two parts. In the first part, students were asked a series
of questions when they signed out the Kindle and when they returned it. In the second
part of qualitative data collection, the students in the interview group were asked a series
of questions in order to determine their perceptions of the e-reader lending program.
These are the questions
1. How did using the Kindle changed your reading habits?
2. What did you enjoy the most about using the Kindle?
3. What did you like the least about using the Kindle?

67

4. Outside of using the Kindle to read a book, what was the most useful feature
of the device? Why?
5. What are some other uses you can see for the Kindle other than here in the
library?
6. What are the advantages that you see of using a Kindle versus a hard copy
book? Or, what are the advantages of using the hard copy book versus the
Kindle?
Discussion of the Results
The goal of this study was to determine whether or not an e-reader lending
program would cause students in grades four, five, and six at the research site to sign out
more library materials, in other words, to increase the rate of circulation. In order to
determine the success of the treatment, two research questions were asked. First, is there
a difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade students access
library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the implementation of an
e-reader lending program? Second, what are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending
program?
In terms of Question 1, an analysis of the circulation data was performed. It was
intended to demonstrate whether or not there was improvement to the library circulation
counts as a result of the treatment. The results of the test show that there was, in fact, an
improvement to the circulation counts after the application of the treatment.
Question 2, in two parts, looked at the qualitative side of the research. The goal
was to determine the feelings of those students who took part in the study (who signed
out the Kindle at least once), to hear what they thought about using the devices. While
there were some concerns, the most common being not having a sense of where they are
in the book, the overall impression given by the students in the treatment group was
68

positive. The particular models of e-readers that the students used displayed the
percentage of the book read, but they felt this did not allow them to really gauge how
much they had to read in, say, a particular chapter let alone the book as a whole. Along
this line, one girl responded that “I don’t like to stop reading in the middle of a chapter
and it was hard to know how far I had to go.” It is worth noting that this and the other
reported issues, like fear of “losing my place in the book,” all can be addressed one way
or another through the capabilities of the device.
So, it is shown through both quantitative and qualitative data that the treatment
was successful. The most intriguing part, for the researcher, was that a relatively small
number of the total population (74 out of 259, or 28.57%) actually used the devices at
least once. Prior to implementation, it was anticipated by the researcher that the
participation rate would be much higher. Two reasons come to the forefront to explain
this lower than anticipated participation rate. First, 68 out of the 259 students from the
total population (26.25%) reported already having access to an e-reader device at home
and so did not wish to sign one out from school. Second, 35 out of the 259 students
(13.5%) said that they were not allowed by their parents or guardians to sign out a device.
One condition of being allowed to sign out a device was to have a signed permission
form from the parents or guardians, which stated that the parents would be responsible
for replacement of the device if it was lost, stolen, or damaged. Some parents may simply
have not been confident in their child’s ability to take care of the device.
Limitations
As development of the study continued, a few limitations developed. First, not all
of the data that had been originally sought was available. The initial plan was to analyze
69

the rate of circulation of the student population in this study, which is still possible.
However, it would not be possible to parse the data by gender. The system used to track
library circulation simply did not break down data in this way. No redesign was done as
data was still available by grade level, which was the primary concern.
A second limitation of the study was the timing of the introduction of the
treatment phase. Members of the district technology department were responsible for
ordering, setting up, preparing, and delivering the Kindle’s to the elementary school.
Having this out of the hands of the researcher placed outside limits on the study that
could not be controlled. The technology department was also responsible for other facets
of the plan such as setting up a payment account for purchasing titles to load onto the
devices. The department only had two members who were burdened with a heavy
workload without the requirements of this study. As such, while some requests were
made to complete the necessary set up for the study, ultimately the researcher was at the
mercy of forces beyond his control and had to wait until such time as the technology
department could fit these tasks into their schedule.
A third limitation to the study lied with the students themselves. Two reasons
come to the forefront to explain this lower than anticipated participation rate. First, 68 out
of the 259 students from the total population (26.25%) reported already having access to
an e-reader device at home and so did not wish to sign one out from school. Second, 35
out of the 259 students (13.5%) said that they were not allowed by their parents or
guardians to sign out a device. One condition of being allowed to sign out a device was to
have a signed permission form from the parents or guardians, which stated that the
parents would be responsible for replacement of the device if it was lost, stolen, or
70

damaged. Some parents may simply have not been confident in their child’s ability to
take care of the device.
There was also a limitation in relation to the quantitative data. First, due to the
limited data on hand, it was necessary to infer the circulation counts of the prior year to
match the observed time for circulation counts with the current year. One assumption
surrounding this limitation is circulation counts remain steady throughout the academic
year. Simply put, this assumption requires that there is no seasonality in circulation
counts among students. A second limitation centers on the data and when the e-reader
program began. Although the program began in October 2014, there is only data on-hand
from the beginning of the academic year until now. While this does limit the analysis,
one could expect the results to be downward biased. As such, a downward bias would
limit the effect seen on the statistical estimates. As the data analysis demonstrated an
association between e-device use and circulation counts, this limitation does not hinder
overall inference.
Implication of the Results for Practice
The results of the treatment have a great potential for impacting practice in other
locations. The quantitative analysis shows that there was, in fact, an improvement in
library circulation with the application of the treatment. Given this fact, as well as the
positive statements made during the qualitative data collection, there is certainly reason
to believe that similar initiatives would be successful in other settings.
Recommendations for Further Research
While there is positive data that shows that this initiative was successful, there are
also further avenues of study to be examined. Some of these include
71

1. Would such a treatment show a similar effect for younger children?
2. Would the treatment be as successful over a longer study period or would the
rate of circulation fall back over a longer period of time, say, a full academic
year?
3. Would the treatment be as successful for a larger school district? A smaller
one?
4. Would a similar treatment effect be seen in other types of study sites like a
university or a public library?
Conclusion
The goal of this study was to determine whether or not an e-reader lending
program would cause students in grades four, five, and six at the research site to sign out
more library materials, in other words, to increase the rate of circulation. In order to
determine the success of the treatment, two research questions were asked. First, is there
a difference between the numbers of times fourth through sixth grade students access
library material (e-books, books, or audio-visual materials) after the implementation of an
e-reader lending program? Second, what are students’ reactions to the e-reader lending
program?
The results of the quantitative and qualitative analysis of the data show that the
treatment was successful. These results have a great potential for impacting practice in
other locations as well as continuing to effect change at the research site. Such a
demonstrable success has the potential to persuade the administration at the research site
to fund the expansion of the program to allow it to occur with younger grades in the same
building, as well as expanding to the districts junior/senior high school. The
72

administration at the research site is also in the early stages of considering the use of
portable devices (i.e., iPads, Chromebooks) in the district. A successful initiative such as
was conducted with the e-readers should only encourage this development.

73

REFERENCES
Aaltonen, M., Mannonen, P., Nieminen, S., & Nieminen, M. (2011). Usability and
compatibility of e-book readers in an academic environment: A collaborative
study. International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions, 37(1),
16-27. doi: 10.1177/0340035210396775
Abdullah, N., & Gibb, F. (2008). Students’ attitudes towards e-books in a Scottish higher
education institute: Part 2: Analysis of e-book usage. Library Review, 57(9), 676689. doi: 10.1108/00242530810911798
Agarwal, R., & Prasad, J. (1999). Are individual differences germane to the acceptance
of new information technologies? Decision Sciences, 30, 361-391. doi:
10.1111/j.1540-5915.1999.tb01614.x
Al-gahtani, S. S. (2003). Computer technology adoption in Saudi Arabia : Correlates of
perceived innovation attributes. Information Technology for Development, 10, 5769.
Armstrong, C. (2008). Books in a virtual world: The evolution of the e-book and its
lexicon. Journal of Librarianship and Information Science, 40(3), 193-206. doi:
10.1177/0961000608092554
Barr, L. (2013, March 13). [Web log message]. Research demonstrates ebooks motivate
kids to read. Retrieved June 10, 2014, from http://www.scholastic.com/parents/
blogs/scholastic-parents-learning-toolkit/research-demonstrates-ebooks-motivatekids-to-read
Bearne, E. (2005). Multimodal texts: What they are and how children use them. In J.
Evans (Ed.), Literacy moves on: Popular culture, new technologies, and critical
literacy in the elementary classroom (pp. 13-29). Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann.
Benedetto, S., Drai-Zerbib, V., Pedrotti, M., Tissier, G., & Baccino, T. (2013). E-readers
and visual fatigue. PloS one, 8(12), e83676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083676
Berg, S. A., Hoffmann, K., & Dawson, D. (2010). Not on the same page: Undergraduates'
information retrieval in electronic and print books. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 36(6), 518-525. doi: 10.1016/j.acalib.2010.08.008
Berkeley, S., & Lindstrom, J. H. (2011). Technology for the struggling reader: Free and
easily accessible resources. Teaching Exceptional Children, 43(4), 48-55.
Berube, L. (2005). E-books in public libraries: A terminal or termination technology?
Interlending & Document Supply, 33(1), 14-18. doi:
10.1108/02641610510582090
74

Blanck, P. (2010, March 7). E-books must be accessible, and that means audio. Chronicle
of Higher Education, 56(26), 31.
Borawski, C. (2009). Beyond the book literacy in the digital age. The Journal of the
Association for Library Service to Children, 7(3), 53-54.
Brown, G. J. (2001). Beyond print: Reading digitally. Library Hi Tech, 19(4), 390-399.
doi: 10.1108/07378830110412456
Burk, R. (2001). E-book devices and the marketplace: In search of customers. Library Hi
Tech, 19(4), 325-331. doi: 10.1108/07378830110411907
Chang, S.-C., & Tung, F.-C. (2007). An empirical investigation of students' behavioural
intentions to use the online learning course websites. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 39, 070625111823003-??? doi: 10.1111/j.14678535.2007.00742.x
Chmara, T. (2012). Privacy and e-books. Knowledge Quest, 40(3), 62-65.
Chu, H. (2003). Electronic books: Viewpoints from users and potential users. Library Hi
Tech, 21(3), 340-346.
Ciampa, K. (2012). ICANREAD: The effects of an online reading program on grade 1
students’ engagement and comprehension strategy use. Journal of Research on
Technology in Education, 45(1), 27-59.
Clark, D. T. (2009). Lending Kindle e-book readers:First results from the Texas A&M
University project. Collection Building, 28(4), 146-149. doi:
10.1108/01604950910999774
Clark, D. T., Goodwin, S. P., Samuelson, T., & Coker, C. (2008). A qualitative
assessment of the Kindle e-book reader: Results from initial focus groups.
Performance Measurement and Metrics, 9(2), 118-129. doi:
10.1108/14678040810906826
Davis, F. D. (1989). Perceived usefulness perceived ease of use, and user acceptance of
information technology. MiS Quarterly, 13, 319-340.
Davis, F. D., Bagozzi, R. P., & Warshaw, P. R. (1989). User acceptance of computer
technology: A comparison of two theoretical models. Management Science, 35,
982-1003. doi: 10.1287/mnsc.35.8.982

75

Del Rey, J. (2013, August 12). [Web log message]. Retrieved from
http://allthingsd.com/20130812/amazon-to-sell-4-5-billion-worth-of-kindles-thisyear-morgan-stanley-says/?mod=obinsite
de Jong, M. T., & Bus, A. G. (2002). Quality of book-reading matters for emergent
readers: An experiment with the same book in a regular or electronic format.
Journal of Educational Psychology, 94(1), 145-155. doi: 10.1037//00220663.94.1.145
de Jong, M. T., & Bus, A. G. (2003). How well suited are electronic books to supporting
literacy? Journal of Early Childhood Literacy, 3(2), 147-164. doi:
10.1177/14687984030032002
Delquié, E., & Polanka, S. (2011). E-book standards. In P.S. (Ed.), No Shelf Required
(pp. 135-151). Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Dewan, P. (2012). Are books becoming extinct in academic libraries? New Library
World, 113(1/2), 27-37. doi: 10.1108/03074801211199022
Eschenfelder, K. R. (2008). Every library’s nightmare? Digital rights management , use
restrictions , and licensed scholarly digital resources. College & Research
Libraries, 69(3), 205-225.
Foasberg, N. M. (2011). Adoption of e-book readers among college students: A survey.
Informtion Technology and Libraries, 30(3), 108-128.
Fullan, M., & Stiegelbauer, S. (1991). The new meaning of educational change. (2nd
ed.). New York: Teachers College Press.
Ghaebi, A., & Fahimifar, S. (2011). E-book acquisition features: Attitude of Iranian
information professionals. The Electronic Library, 29(6), 777-791. doi:
10.1108/02640471111188006
Godwin-jones, R. (2007). Emerging technologies e-texts, mobile browsing, and rich
internet applications. Language Learning & Technology, 11(3), 8-13.
Grant, J. (2004). Are electronic books effective in teaching young children reading and
comprehension? International Journal of Instructional Media, 31(3), 303-308.
Grimshaw, S., Dungworth, N., McKnight, C., & Morris, A. (2007). Electronic books:
Children's reading and comprehension. British Journal of Educational
Technology, 38(4), 583-599. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-8535.2006.00640.x

76

Grzeschik, K., Kruppa, Y., Marti, D., & Donner, P. (2011). Reading in 2110 – reading
behavior and reading devices: A case study. The Electronic Library, 29(3), 288302. doi: 10.1108/02640471111141052
Hardgrave, B., Davis, F. D., & Riemenschneider, C. K. (2003). Investigating
determinants of software developers ' intentions to follow methodologies. Journal
of Management Information Systems, 20(1), 123-151.
Hernon, P., Hopper, R., Leach, M. R., Saunders, L. L., & Zhang, J. (2007). E-book use
by students: Undergraduates in economics, literature, and nursing. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 33(1), 3-13. doi: 10.1016/j.acalib.2006.08.005
Hodges, D., Preston, C., & Hamilton, M. (2010). Resolving the challenge of e-books.
Collection Management, 35(3), 196-200. doi: 10.1080/01462679.2010.486964
Huang, Y.-M., Liang, T.-H., & Chiu, C.-h. (2013). Gender differences in the reading of ebooks: Investigating children’s attitudes, reading behaviors and outcomes.
Educational Technology & Society, 16(4), 97-110.
Huang, Y.-M., Liang, T.-H., Su, Y.-N., & Chen, N.-S. (2012). Empowering personalized
learning with an interactive e-book learning system for elementary school
students. Educational Technology Research and Development, 60(4), 703-722.
doi: 10.1007/s11423-012-9237-6
Johnson, D. (2008). Change from the radical center of education. Teacher Librarian,
35(5), 14-19.
Jung, J., Chan-Olmsted, S., Park, B., & Kim, Y. (2011). Factors affecting e-book reader
awareness, interest, and intention to use. New Media & Society, 14(2), 204-224.
doi: 10.1177/1461444811410407
Korat, O., & Or, T. (2010). How new technology influences parent-child interaction: The
case of e-book reading. First Language, 30(2), 139-154. doi:
10.1177/0142723709359242
Korat, O., & Shamir, A. (2007). Electronic books versus adult readers: Effects on
children's emergent literacy as a function of social class. Journal of Computer
Assisted Learning, 23(3), 248-259. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2729.2006.00213.x
Korat, O., & Shamir, A. (2008). The educational electronic book as a tool for supporting
children’s emergent literacy in low versus middle SES groups. Computers &
Education, 50(1), 110-124. doi: 10.1016/j.compedu.2006.04.002

77

Labbo, L., & Kuhn, M. (2000). Weaving chains of affect and cognition: A young child's
understanding of CD-ROM talking books. Journal of Literacy Research, 32(2),
187-210. doi: 10.1080/10862960009548073
Lai, J.-Y., & Chang, C.-Y. (2011). User attitudes toward dedicated e-book readers for
reading: The effects of convenience, compatibility and media richness. Online
Information Review, 35(4), 558-580. doi: 10.1108/14684521111161936
Lam, P., Lam, S. L., Lam, J., & Mcnaught, C. (2009). Usability and usefulness of ebooks on PPCs: How students ’ opinions vary over time. Australian Journal of
Educational Technology, 25(1), 30-44.
Larson, L. C. (2008). Electronic reading workshop: Beyond books with new literacies
and instructional technologies. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 52(2),
121-131. doi: 10.1598/JA
Larson, L. C. (2009). E-reading and e-responding: New tools for the next generation of
readers. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 53(3), 255-258. doi:
10.1598/JAAL.53.3.7
Larson, L. C. (2013). It’s time to turn the digital page: Preservice teachers explore e-book
reading. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 56(4), 280-290.
Lee, Y., Hsieh, Y., & Hsu, C. (2011). Adding innovation diffusion theory to the
technology acceptance model: Supporting employees ’ intentions to use elearning systems e-learning. Educational Technology & Society, 14(4), 124-137.
Liu, Z. (2005). Reading behavior in the digital environment: Changes in reading behavior
over the past ten years. Journal of Documentation, 61(6), 700-712. doi:
10.1108/00220410510632040
Lockley, L. M., Lockley, L. M., & Tarulli, L. (2012). All for one, one for all. Reference
& User Services Quarterly, 52(2), 98-101.
Lund, J. R. (2011). The essential librarian e-books: Little use so far. The Bottom Line:
Managing Library Finances, 24(2), 122-124. doi: 10.1108/08880451111169179
Mangen, A., Walgermo, B. R., & Brønnick, K. (2013). Reading linear texts on paper
versus computer screen: Effects on reading comprehension. International Journal
of Educational Research, 58, 61-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ijer.2012.12.002
Mayes, D. K., Sims, V. K., & Koonce, J. M. (2001). Comprehension and workload
differences for VDT and paper-based reading. International Journal of Industrical
Ergonomics, 28(6), 367-378.

78

Maynard, S. (2010). The impact of e-books on young children’s reading habits.
Publishing Research Quarterly, 26(4), 236-248. doi: 10.1007/s12109-010-9180-5
Mcclanahan, B. B., Oklahoma, S., & Williams, K. (2002). A breakthrough for Josh: How
use of an iPad facilitated reading improvement. TechTrends, 56(3), 21-28.
McKnight, C., & Dearnley, J. (2003). Electronic book use in a public library. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 35(4), 235-242. doi:
10.1177/0961000603035004003
Moreillon, J. (2009). Reading & the library program. Knowledge Quest, 38(2), 24-31.
Moris, R. J. (2012). Find where you fit in the common core, or the time I forgot about
librarians and reading. Teacher Librarian, 39(5), 8-12.
Moyer, J. E. (2012). Audiobooks and e-books: A literature review. Reference & User
Services Quarterly, 51(4), 340-354. doi: 10.5860/rusq.51n4.340
Mumtaz, S. (2000). Factors affecting teachers' use of information and communications
technology: A review of the literature. Journal of Information Techology for
Teacher Education, 9(3), 319-342. doi: 10.1080/14759390000200096
Neuch, J. (2014, January 1). About our district. Retrieved January 9, 2014, from
http://www.reynolds.k12.pa.us/aboutourdistrict.aspx
Nicholas, D., Rowlands, I., & Jamali, H. R. (2010). E-textbook use, information seeking
behaviour and its impact: Case study business and management. Journal of
Information Science, 36(2), 263-280. doi: 10.1177/0165551510363660
O'Brien, D., & Voss, S. (2011). Reading multimodally: What is afforded? Journal of
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(1), 75-78. doi: 10.1598/JAAL.55.1.9
Patel, N. (2007, November 21). [Web log message]. Retrieved from
http://www.engadget.com/2007/11/21/kindle-sells-out-in-two-days/
Pattuelli, M. C., & Rabina, D. (2010). Forms, effects, function: LIS students' attitudes
towards portable e-book readers. Aslib Proceedings: New Information
Perspectives, 62(3), 228-244. doi: 10.1108/00012531011046880
Platt, C. (2011). Popular e-content at The New York Public Library: Successes and
challenges. Publishing Research Quarterly, 27(3), 247-253. doi: 10.1007/s12109011-9231-6
Prensky, M. (2006). Listen to the natives. Educational Leadership, 63(4), 8-13.

79

Price, J. S. (2011). Patron driven acquisition of publisher-hosted content: Bypassing
DRM. Against the Grain, 23(3), 16-18.
R Core Team. (2013). R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R
Foundation for Statistical Computing. Retrieved from
http://web.mit.edu/r_v3.0.1/fullrefman.pdf
Rao, S. S. (2003). Electronic books: A review and evaluation. Library Hi Tech, 21(1), 8593. doi: 10.1108/07378830310467427
Rao, S. S. (2005). Electronic books: Their integration into library and information
centers. The Electronic Library, 23(1), 116-140. doi:
10.1108/02640470510582790
Robinson, S., & Anton, H. (2012). Student preferences for educational materials: Old
meets new. Academy of Educational Leadership Journal, 16, 99-110.
Rogers, E. M. (2003). Diffusion of innovations (5th ed.). New York: Free Press.
Romero, N. L. (2011). The management of e-book collections and their implication on
the economic management of the library. The Bottom Line: Managing Library
Finances, 24(3), 173-179. doi: 10.1108/08880451111186017
Roskos, K., Brueck, J., & Widman, S. (2009). Investigating analytic tools for e-book
design in early literacy learning. Journal of Interactive Online Learning, 8(3),
218-240.
Roskos, K., Burstein, K., Shang, Y., & Gray, E. (2014). Young children's engagement
with e-books at school: Does device matter? SAGE Open, 4(1). doi:
10.1177/2158244013517244
Roskos, K., Burstein, K., You, B., & Brueck, J. (2011). A formative study of an e-book
instructional model in early literacy. Creative Education, 2(1), 10-17. doi:
10.4236/ce.2011.21002
Schein, E. H. (1999). Kurt Lewin’s change theory in the field and in the classroom: Notes
toward a model of managed learning. Reflections, 1(1), 59-74.
Scholastic. (2012). Kids & family Reading Report (4th ed.). New York: Scholastic, Inc.
Schugar, H. R., Smith, C. A., & Schugar, J. T. (2013). Teaching with interactive picture
e-books in grade K-6. The Reading Teacher, 66(8), 615-624. doi:
10.1002/TRTR.1168

80

Segal-Drori, O., Korat, O., Shamir, A., & Klein, P. S. (2010). Reading electronic and
printed books with and without adult instruction: Effects on emergent reading.
Reading and Writing, 23(8), 913-930. doi: 10.1007/s11145-009-9182-x
Senge, P., Cambron McCabe, N., Lucas, T., Kleiner, A., Dutton, J., & Smith, B. (2000).
Schools that learn: A fifth discipline fieldbook for educators, parents, and
everyone who cares about education. New York, NY: Crown Books.
Shamir, A. (2009). Processes and outcomes of joint activity with e-books for promoting
kindergarteners' emergent literacy. Educational Media International, 46(1), 8196. doi: 10.1080/09523980902781295
Shamir, A., & Baruch, D. (2012). Educational e-books: A support for vocabulary and
early math for children at risk for learning disabilities. Educational Media
International, 49(1), 33-47. doi: 10.1080/09523987.2012.662623
Shamir, A., & Korat, O. (2006). How to select CD-ROM storybooks for young children:
The teacher's role. The Reading Teacher, 59(6), 532-543. doi: 10.1598/RT.59.6.3
Shin, D.-H. (2010). Understanding e-book users: Uses and gratification expectancy
model. New Media & Society, 13(2), 260-278. doi: 10.1177/1461444810372163
Shuker, M.-j., & Terreni, L. (2013). Self-authored e-book: Expanding young children’s
literacy experiences and skills. Australasian Journal of Early Childhood, 38(3),
17-24.
Siegenthaler, E., Wurtz, P., Bergamin, P., & Groner, R. (2011). Comparing reading
processes on e-ink displays and print. Displays, 32(5), 268-273. doi:
10.1016/j.displa.2011.05.005
Siegle, D. (2012). Embracing e-books: Increasing students’ motivation to read and write.
Gifted Child Today, 35(2), 137-144. doi: 10.1177/1076217511436089.
Staiger, J. (2012). How e-books are used: A literature review of the e-book studies
conducted from 2006 to 2011. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 51(4), 355365. doi: 10.5860/rusq.51n4.355
Stephens, W. (2012). Deploying e-readers without buying e-books: One school's
emphasis on the public domain. Knowledge Quest, 40(3), 40-43.
Trott, B., & Dunneback, K. (2011). E-books and readers’ advisory. Reference & User
Services Quarterly, 50(4), 325-329. doi: 10.5860/rusq.50n4.325

81

Underwood, G., & Underwood, J. D. M. (1998). Children’s interactions and learning
outcomes with interactive talking books. Computers & Education, 30(1-2), 95102. doi: 10.1016/S0360-1315(97)00084-5
USC Libraries. (n.d.). The Discussion: Limitations of the Study. Retrieved February 12,
2015, from http://libguides.usc.edu/content.php?pid=83009&sid=616083
Vasileiou, M., Hartley, R., & Rowley, J. (2009). An overview of the e-book marketplace.
Online Information Review, 33(1), 173-192. doi: 10.1108/14684520910944454
Vasileiou, M., Hartley, R., & Rowley, J. (2012). Choosing e-books: A perspective from
academic libraries. Online Information Review, 36(1), 21-39. doi:
10.1108/14684521211206944
Vassiliou, M., & Rowley, J. (2008). Progressing the definition of “e-book.” Library Hi
Tech, 26, 355-368. doi: 10.1108/07378830810903292
Velde, W. V. D., & Ernst, O. (2009). The future of e-books? Will print disappear? An
end-user perspective. Library Hi Tech, 27(4), 570-583. doi:
10.1108/07378830911007673
Venkatesh, V., & Bala, H. (2008). Technology acceptance model 3 and a research agenda
on interventions. Decision Sciences, 39(2), 273-315. doi: 10.1111/j.15405915.2008.00192.x
Venkatesh, V., & Davis, F. D. (2000). A theoretical extension of the technology
acceptance model: Four longitudinal field studies. Management revue, 46(2), 186204.
Venkatesh, V., Morris, M. G., Davis, G. B., & Davis, F. D. (2003). User acceptance of
information technology: Toward a unified view MIS Quarterly, 27(3), 425-478.
Verhallen, M. J. A. J., Bus, A. G., & de Jong, M. T. (2006). The promise of multimedia
stories for kindergarten children at risk. Journal of Educational Psychology,
98(2), 410-419. doi: 10.1037/0022-0663.98.2.410
Walsh, M. (2011, March 29). [Web log message]. Retrieved from
http://www.mediapost.com/publications/?fa=Articles.showArticle&art_aid=1476
27
Walters, W. H. (2013). E-books in academic libraries: Challenges for sharing and use.
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science. doi:
10.1177/0961000612470279

82

Woody, W. D., Daniel, D. B., & Baker, C. a. (2010). E-books or textbooks: Students
prefer textbooks. Computers & Education, 55(3), 945-948. doi:
10.1016/j.compedu.2010.04.005
Wright, S., Fugett, A., & Caputa, F. (2013). Using e-readers and Internet resources to
support comprehension. Educational Technology & Society, 16(1), 367-379.
Wu, M.D., & Chen, S.C. (2011). Graduate students' usage of and attitudes towards ebooks: Experiences from Taiwan. Program: electronic library and information
systems, 45(3), 294-307. doi: 10.1108/00330331111151601

83

Appendix A. Statement of Original Work
Academic Honesty Policy
Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for
the integrity of work they submit, which includes but is not limited to discussion
postings, assignments, comprehensive exams, and the dissertation or capstone project.
Established in the Policy are the expectations for original work, rationale for the policy,
definition of terms that pertain to academic honesty and original work, and disciplinary
consequences of academic dishonesty. Also stated in the Policy is the expectation that
learners will follow APA rules for citing another person’s ideas or works.
The following standards for original work and definition of plagiarism are discussed in
the Policy:
Learners are expected to be the sole authors of their work and to acknowledge the
authorship of others’ work through proper citation and reference. Use of another
person’s ideas, including another learner’s, without proper reference or citation
constitutes plagiarism and academic dishonesty and is prohibited conduct. (p. 1)
Plagiarism is one example of academic dishonesty. Plagiarism is presenting
someone else’s ideas or work as your own. Plagiarism also includes copying
verbatim or rephrasing ideas without properly acknowledging the source by author,
date, and publication medium. (p. 2)
Capella University’s Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06) holds learners accountable for
research integrity. What constitutes research misconduct is discussed in the Policy:
Research misconduct includes but is not limited to falsification, fabrication,
plagiarism, misappropriation, or other practices that seriously deviate from those
that are commonly accepted within the academic community for proposing,
conducting, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. (p. 1)
Learners failing to abide by these policies are subject to consequences, including but not
limited to dismissal or revocation of the degree.

84

Statement of Original Work and Signature
I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy
(3.01.01) and Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06), including the Policy Statements,
Rationale, and Definitions.
I attest that this dissertation or capstone project is my own work. Where I have used the
ideas or words of others, I have paraphrased, summarized, or used direct quotes following
the guidelines set forth in the APA Publication Manual.
Type in
learner name
and date

James M. Spatara, Jr.

Type in
mentor name
and school

Dr. Marla Berg, School of Education

85

