IMPACTS OF SCHOLARSHIP AND PUBLICATION ON ENTRY-LEVEL
HIRING: PUBLIC SERVICES APPLICANTS IN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES IN
THE UNITED STATES

A Thesis
Presented to
The Faculty of the School of Information
San José State University

In Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Master of Library and Information Science

by
James E. Hicks
May 2015

UMI Number: 1593077

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 1593077
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2015
James E. Hicks
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

The Designated Thesis Committee Approves the Thesis Titled

IMPACTS OF SCHOLARSHIP AND PUBLICATION ON ENTRY-LEVEL
HIRING: PUBLIC SERVICES APPLICANTS IN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES IN
THE UNITED STATES
by
James E. Hicks
APPROVED FOR THE SCHOOL OF INFORMATION
SAN JOSÉ STATE UNIVERSITY
May 2015

Dr. Anthony Bernier

School of Information

Dr. Lili Luo

School of Information

Dr. Michelle Holschuh-Simmons

School of Information

ABSTRACT
IMPACTS OF SCHOLARSHIP AND PUBLICATION ON ENTRY-LEVEL
HIRING: PUBLIC SERVICES APPLICANTS IN ACADEMIC LIBRARIES IN
THE UNITED STATES
by James E. Hicks
This study examines the impact of a single knowledge, skill, and ability
(KSA), specifically research and publication experience, on the hiring decisions of
selection committees for entry-level public services academic librarian positions in
the United States. Current library and information science literature contains few
studies focusing on a single KSA factor. For this study, respondents (n=141) from a
selective sample of 382 institutions of higher education completed an online survey in
January and February 2015. The results show that research and publication
experience had a greater impact on hiring decisions at urban research universities with
large full-time equivalent (FTE) student enrollments, and very large FTE library staff.
Forty-five percent of respondents who hired an entry-level public services librarian in
the previous 5-year period encouraged research and publication as a primary or
secondary duty, and 21% felt its impact on hiring decisions had increased over the
previous 10-year period. However, only 14% of respondents categorized research and
publication experience as extremely or very important when making hiring decisions.
A future investigation of the exact sub-skills associated with research and publication
could illustrate how this KSA is currently utilized in the practice of academic
librarianship.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I want to thank my thesis chair, Dr. Anthony Bernier, for his steadfast
encouragement throughout the process of conducting my literature review and
completing my research. I couldn't have hoped for a more knowledgeable and
collegial partner to guide me through this process. I would also like to express my
thanks to the other members of my thesis committee for their generous support. Dr.
Lili Luo offered essential advice on issues related to research methodology and the
drafting of my research proposal and Dr. Michelle Holschuh-Simmons contributed
vital feedback on mature drafts that allowed me to address broad issues of
organization and flow. Finally, I would like to thank the many anonymous university
administrators and academic librarians who gave a few minutes of their valuable time
to contribute data to this study.

v

	  
	  

	  
	  

	  
	  

	  
	  

TABLE OF CONTENTS
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  
	  

	  	  	  	  	  

PAGE

Introduction .................................................................................................................. 1
Literature Review ........................................................................................................ 5
The Traditional Hiring Model ................................................................................. 5
Core Competencies ................................................................................................ 11
The Hybridization of Academic Library Staffing .................................................. 17
Trends in Research on Academic Librarian KSAs ................................................ 26
Broad trends in research on academic librarian KSAs ..................................... 27
Recent trends in research on academic librarian KSAs .................................... 29
Conclusion ............................................................................................................. 37
Methodology ............................................................................................................... 40
Methodology Selection ........................................................................................... 40
Study Population .................................................................................................... 44
Sampling Design .................................................................................................... 45
Data Collection Instrument ......................................................................................... 48
Online Questionnaire Form .................................................................................... 49
Definition of terms ............................................................................................ 50
Data Collection Process .......................................................................................... 52
Results and Analysis.................................................................................................... 56
Respondents ............................................................................................................ 56
General respondent characteristics .................................................................... 56
Specific subgroups of respondents .................................................................... 62
Contrasted respondents ................................................................................. 62
Primary respondents ..................................................................................... 66
Discussion ................................................................................................................... 72
Conclusion .................................................................................................................. 90
References .................................................................................................................. 93
Appendix A: Online Survey ..................................................................................... 101
Appendix B: Request for Participants ...................................................................... 107
Appendix C: Reminder Email .................................................................................. 108
Appendix D: Entry-Level Public Services Position Titles ....................................... 109
Appendix E: Informal Survey .................................................................................. 111

vi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1. Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education - Basic
Classification ........................................................................................................... 45
Table 2. Institution Percentage and Enrollment Percentage ........................................ 46
Table 3. Institution %, Enrollment %, Sample Size, and Sampling Interval .............. 53
Table 4. General Respondents - Job Title .................................................................. 57
Table 5. General Respondents – Institution ............................................................... 58
Table 6. General Respondents - FTE Student Enrollment ........................................ 59
Table 7. General Respondents - FTE Library Staff .................................................... 59
Table 8. General Respondents - Carnegie Classification / FTE Library Staff Size ... 60
Table 9. General Respondents - Geographic Region ................................................. 61
Table 10. General Respondents - Type of Community .............................................. 61
Table 11. General Respondents - Geographic Region / Type of Community ............ 62
Table 12. Contrasted Respondents - Job Titles .......................................................... 63
Table 13. Contrasted Respondents - Carnegie Classifications ................................... 64
Table 14. Contrasted Respondents - FTE Student Enrollments ................................. 65
Table 15. Contrasted Respondents - FTE Library Staff ............................................. 65
Table 16. Contrasted Respondents - Geographic Regions ......................................... 66
Table 17. Primary Respondents - KSAs Ranked by Weighted Rating Scale ............. 67
Table 18. Primary Respondents - Work Experience Requirements ........................... 69
Table 19. Primary Respondents - MLS/MLIS Requirements .................................... 69
Table 20. Primary Respondents – Encouragement for Research and Publication ..... 70
Table 21. Primary Respondents - Research and Publication Value in Hiring Process
..................................................................................................................................... 70
Table 22. Primary Respondents - Publications Quality Check .................................. 70
Table 23. Primary Respondents - Impact of Research and Publication ..................... 71
Table 24. Evolution of the Term Entry-Level in the Literature ................................. 73
Table 25. Value of Research and Publication - Institutional & Respondent
Characteristics ......................................................................................................... 79
Table 26. Carnegie Classification / Research and Publication Encouragement ......... 83
Table 27. Impact of Research and Publication on Hiring Decisions is Increasing .... 87
Table 28. Impact of Research and Publication on Hiring Decisions is Decreasing ... 88

vii

Introduction
The field of academic librarianship in the United States is changing.
Academic librarians are taking on an array of roles and responsibilities that require a
broad range of knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSAs). Aspiring entry-level public
services academic librarians looking to match their skill set to these positions face a
challenge. How can Master of Library Science/Master of Library and Information
Science (MLS/MLIS) students or recent graduates make themselves attractive
candidates for entry-level public services positions at academic libraries, and what
KSAs will help them to thrive in such positions? What do selection committees look
for in a candidate? Many MLS/MLIS students gain practical experience through
internships or paraprofessional work at academic libraries. Are there other ways to
gain skills and experience that will be regarded to be of value by selection committees
charged with hiring entry-level public services academic librarians? Do certain types
of institutions hire more entry-level public services academic librarians? How can
prospective academic librarians stand out among a crowded field of applicants? How
can library administrators and staff ensure that new academic librarians have skills
that match the roles and responsibilities of an evolving field?
The current Library and Information Science (LIS) literature on hiring at
academic libraries in the United States has focused largely on examining data that
tracks trends in KSAs sought by selection committees at academic libraries. One very
popular method for collecting these data has been through content analyses of job
advertisements. Studies have examined specific areas of librarianship and specific
types of positions; they have generally offered very broad findings across a range of
variables (Reser & Schuneman, 1992; Xu, 1995; Beile & Adams, 2000; Starr, 2004;

1

Sproles & Ratledge, 2004; Grimes & Grimes, 2008; Choi & Rasmussen, 2009; Wang,
Tang, & Knight, 2010; Reeves & Hahn, 2010; Wise, Henninger, & Kennan, 2011;
Detmering & Sproles, 2012; Tewell, 2012). These content analyses may have
suffered from an over-reliance on the written text of job advertisements, which may
not always capture the exact on-the-job performance skills required of public services
librarians. This methodology has become less viable as more and more
advertisements are posted online, necessitating the complicated and time-consuming
task of archiving ephemeral online job postings. Case studies and evaluation research
studies of single institutions have examined the hiring process in detail but fail to
offer generalizable results due to the granular examination of a single transitional
program or process (Womack, 1997; Giesecke & McNeil, 1999; Engel, Huang, &
Reiss, 2003; Crowe & Jaguszewski, 2010; Brunner, 2010; Carlson & Garritano, 2010;
Woodard & Hinchliffe, 2010; Huff-Eibl, Voyles, & Brewer, 2010; Nutefall &
Chadwell, 2012; Feldmann, Level, & Liu, 2013). Other studies have used qualitative
interviews and focus group studies to add depth to findings on single institutions or
small groups of institutions (Fulough, 2010; Hansson & Johannesson, 2013).
Surveys, both print and online, have also been used to capture the views of large
numbers of librarians, often through open calls for participation posted on listservs
and social media websites (Bajjaly, 2005; Wang & Guarria, 2010; Hodge & Spoor,
2012; Simpson, 2013; Berg, Jacobs, & Cornwall, 2013).
Studies of the trends in desired KSAs for academic librarians show the gradual
emergence of skills valued by different sectors of academic librarianship (Reser &
Schuneman, 1992; Xu, 1995; Beile & Adams, 2000; Starr, 2004; Sproles & Ratledge,
2004; Bajjaly, 2005; Choi & Rasmussen, 2009; Wang & Guarria, 2010; Wang et al.,

2

2010; Reeves & Hahn, 2010; Nutefall & Chadwell, 2012; Detmering & Sproles,
2012; Tewell, 2012; Feldmann et al., 2013; Berg et al., 2013). Technical skills,
communication skills, and interpersonal skills have been growing in importance for
decades as academic librarianship has undergone a sharp transformation sparked by
technological change, economic pressures, and shifting institutional priorities. A
variety of KSAs are also valued beyond these core skills, but studies that intentionally
examined individual KSAs are rare (Xu, 1995; Heinrichs & Lim, 2009). Many
studies have also failed to link specific types of positions and specific KSAs to
institutional characteristics such as the Carnegie classification, geographic region,
full-time equivalent (FTE) student enrollment, FTE library staff, and type of
community. This may be because case studies and evaluation research studies track
the success or failure of a single program or process, and content analyses of job
advertisements tend to lose focus when they gather too broad a data set.
The literature also shows an ongoing hybridization of academic librarianship,
which demands that academic librarians have diverse skill sets they can use in a
variety of work environments. Identifying individual KSAs of increasing value to
selection committees or with multiple applications in completing the day-to-day tasks
of academic librarianship would be of use to job candidates and selection committees
alike. One KSA that has been minimally investigated is the ability to conduct and
publish scholarly research. This KSA is occasionally mentioned under the broader
heading of professional development activities, but evaluations of its value appear
only as peripheral conclusions in studies covering multiple KSAs (Sproles &
Ratledge, 2004; Choi & Rasmussen, 2009; Wang & Guarria, 2010; Detmering &
Sproles, 2012; Hodge & Spoor, 2012). Conducting and publishing academic research

3

in a peer-reviewed publication requires many skills that may contribute to the goals of
an academic library. Current trends in the academic librarianship as revealed by the
LIS literature include increases in scholarly communication initiatives, data-curation
efforts, collaborative research projects, and increased expectations for evaluation and
assessment of all programs and practices. An academic librarian with the skills
gained through conducting and publishing scholarly research would be well suited to
these activities. It is possible that the peripheral status of this KSA in the literature
may be related to a more service-oriented view of academic librarianship - one that
presumes a role for academic librarians below that of other faculty members. No
study has exclusively examined research and publication as a KSA and its impact on
hiring decisions for entry-level public services academic librarian positions in the
United States. Determining where research and publication fits within the evolving
roles and responsibilities of public services academic librarians will contribute to
understanding current and future trends in academic librarian hiring practices.
This study used a voluntary, anonymous, multiple-choice, online
questionnaire to gather data and draw preliminary conclusions on a variety of KSAs
while focusing in particular on scholarly research and publication and how it impacts
hiring decisions for entry-level public services academic librarian positions in the
United States. The questionnaire was distributed to a stratified sample of university
administrators and librarians (by Carnegie classification) to measure the responses of
selection committee members charged with hiring an entry-level public services
academic librarian in the previous 5-year period (January 2010 – January 2015). The
data revealed connections between the impact of research and publication experience
on hiring decisions and specific categories of universities, types of positions, and

4

geographic regions. The study also compared and contrasted the impact of various
common KSAs deemed valuable to selection committees. A measurement of the
perceived trend in the value of research and publication experience on hiring
decisions revealed the institutional characteristics that most closely correlate with
valuing this KSA.
The results of this survey confirm that conducting scholarly research and then
navigating the peer-reviewed publication process is of greater value to larger
universities and those universities at the top of the Carnegie classifications list (those
institutions with many PhDs engaged in research activities) than to smaller
baccalaureate colleges at the bottom of the Carnegie classifications list. It is expected
that the value of research and publication experience may be trending upward to
varying degrees in all Carnegie classification categories as public services academic
librarians continue to adopt a variety of new roles and responsibilities. Correlation to
specific geographic regions, types of communities and selection committee member
job types suggests areas worth further exploration. The evolution of the meaning of
the term entry-level in studies of hiring at academic libraries points to the need for
additional investigation of the KSAs expected of prospective academic librarians
entering the job market for the first time.
Literature Review
The Traditional Hiring Model
In a series of case studies examining minimum qualifications for academic
librarians, Womack (1997) pointed out that a standard expectation of hiring
committees is that an applicant’s KSAs approximately match the job requirements of
the position being offered. This may seem obvious, but successfully matching the job

5

duties and responsibilities of a specific position to the KSAs of a particular applicant
is not always an easy process.
Several authors have contributed practical essays and best practices guides to
the hiring process (Birdsall, 1991; Wheeler, Johnson, & Manion, 2008; Choi &
Rasmussen, 2009; Defa, 2012). Birdsall’s (1991) oft-cited essay intended for use by
library administrators and selection committees tasked with hiring at academic
libraries laid out 14 key steps for successfully executing and completing the hiring
process. One critical step was when a search committee developed a set of selection
criteria based on the job requirements as the basis for the creation of a weighted or
unweighted scoring instrument to be used in the initial screening process. The
applicants’ KSAs were compared to the job’s required or desired KSAs and some
applicants were disqualified due to lack of skills or experience deemed valuable by
the committee.
In addition to the collaborative development of the job description and
selection criteria by the selection committee, Duran, Garcia and Houdyshell (2009)
recommended the development of a rubric to be used in screening applications
according to a system of weighted values for required or desired qualifications. In an
observational essay from the dual perspectives of a search committee chair and a
prospective applicant, Sproles and Detmering (2010) also included the development
of a rating system to rank applicant’s qualifications as they relate to the requirements
in the job ad.
The use of some kind of screening matrix in which evaluation criteria are
developed to help rank candidates is consistently noted in the literature (Birdsall,
1991; Womack, 1997; Lehner, 1997; Wheeler et al., 2008; Duran, Garcia &

6

Houdyshell, 2009; Sproles & Detmering, 2010; Huff-Eibl et al., 2011; Shaffer, 2011).
A weighted scoring instrument, which puts a numerical value on specific KSAs, may
be used to rank candidates before making the choice of who will reach the interview
phase, or a rubric with detailed descriptions of performance expectations may be
compared to a candidate’s KSAs as represented in their resume or interview responses
(Brannon & Leuzinger, 2014). Reasons for choosing one method over the other
include the ability to allow for subjectivity among hiring committee members in the
case of rubrics; and to guarantee a more standardized, efficient process in the case of
weighted scoring instruments.
The only study that appeared to challenge the frequency and commonality of
using screening matrices as part of the hiring process was an anonymous online
survey conducted by Wang and Guarria (2010). Only 37% of respondents (selection
committee members) replied that they used a weighted scoring instrument, but the
study was unclear as to what percentage of respondents used some other type of
screening matrix (e.g. rubrics). The percentage of respondents to the survey who used
a screening matrix of any type was unclear.
The LIS literature shows that most hiring committees chose to create a
uniform screening device of some type to assist selection committee members in
identifying the candidate most qualified for the position. Once evaluated and ranked,
the screening phase of the hiring process represented the endpoint for many
candidates who failed to present evidence of a sufficient number of desired KSAs.
Despite general agreement on the steps involved and the importance of
implementing some system for comparing and ranking applicant KSAs as they relate
to the job description, there is some variety in the hiring process sequence. For

7

example, Harralson (2001) placed the drafting of the job announcement prior to the
development of selection criteria for rating and screening applicants in the evaluation
stage. In a paper on best practices for hiring in law libraries, Wheeler, et al. (2008)
recommended checking references before evaluating or screening applicants. Despite
some variation in the exact sequence of the steps, the LIS literature shows general
consistency in the steps involved in evaluating and considering the specific KSAs as
they relate to the position being filled.
This standard hiring process has been challenged on several fronts. Some
authors have taken issue with the lack of focus on the process of creating job
descriptions that more accurately match job descriptions to their fundamental duties
and responsibilities. For example, Lehner’s (1997) main challenge to the traditional
hiring model was rooted in the view that search committees failed to develop
sufficiently detailed job descriptions as the basis for the creation of valid selection
systems for use in evaluating resumes. Lehner argued that the solution was to
incorporate genuine job analysis into the hiring process whereby each aspect of a
particular position was examined to identify the required job tasks, responsibilities,
knowledge, and skills. Lehner argued that completing such a job analysis could result
in more accurate job descriptions and more efficient and relevant selection criteria
instruments. Wheeler et al. (2008) also advised a review of all responsibilities and
duties associated with the position to get a sense of which KSAs would be necessary
to succeed at the job.
A similar view on the importance of creating job descriptions based on precise
criteria was investigated by Huff-Eibl et al. (2011) in an evaluation study of the
University of Arizona Libraries. In 2004-2005 the University of Arizona Libraries

8

began the process of developing a competency-based model for creating new library
job classifications that would lead to the hiring of more highly skilled librarians with
up-to-date KSAs. As a part of the development of this competency-based model an
extensive selection matrix was created to ensure that the assessment of current
employees and the evaluation of future candidates would be consistent, fair, and
oriented towards fulfilling the needs of the institution.
These studies reveal a desire by hiring committees to spend more time
creating accurate job descriptions with up-to-date KSAs in order to ensure that the
candidate selected truly meets the job requirements. This concern with up-to-date
KSAs may be tied to the disruption caused by the technological impact of the rapid
growth of the Internet; pervasive access to information; simplified, accessible search
engines; and mass content digitization. The past 20 years have seen an explosion of
technological progress that has required an updated view of what it means to be an
academic librarian and what KSAs are required to be one.
Other studies have found that the hiring process is too lengthy, with
unnecessary amounts of time and effort devoted to it. Raschke (2003) claimed that
traditional hiring models were too slow and uncompetitive. He recommended
creating search committees that move expeditiously through the resume review
process; flexibility in required qualifications and experience; effective advertising that
utilizes the most current technology; and targeted recruiting efforts. Raschke did not
offer clear predictions on the impact of a speedier resume review process on the
quality of candidates selected, but did suggest that mistakes made by more risktolerant, aggressive selection committees would be made up for by the amount of time
and resources saved in the long run. Defa (2012) stressed the importance of updating

9

and streamlining university hiring policies to allow for flexibility and the ability to
complete the hiring process in an efficient and timely manner. Defa also mentioned
the negative repercussions of making a bad hiring decision as reason for reviewing
and updating the hiring process on a regular basis.
Despite its clear impact on hiring timelines, the process described by Raschke
(2003) and Defa (2012) does not eliminate the consideration of KSAs generally. An
expedited search may actually increase the value of some KSAs over others as the
committee decision-making process common to traditional hiring models may
decrease the impact of individual selection committee members holding less powerful
positions. Which KSAs benefit from an expedited search process would depend on
the relative value placed on different KSAs by different types of selection committee
members working independently (i.e. library deans/directors, university librarians,
heads of service areas, academic librarians).
In order to avoid long delays caused by the creation and implementation of
uniform screening devices, which might result in losing top candidates, Raschke
(2003) recommended that selection committee members work independently to
review and rank resumes. In addition to Raschke’s concerns, another potential
negative aspect is the possibility of limited effectiveness in measuring actual job
performance skills. Gendron (2010) defined job duties as what someone does at their
job, and job competencies as the skills, knowledge and behaviors that are evidenced
by daily job performance. Job descriptions written for use in job advertisements may
represent a top-down view of job duties rather than an insider’s view of the job
competencies needed to perform well in the position. If a screening device is based
on a hastily or poorly written job description, it may not accurately match the KSAs

10

needed to fulfill the necessary job competencies and it could mistakenly weed out
promising candidates before the interview phase. This would negate the effectiveness
of using such a device and suggests that it is quite important to focus carefully and
precisely on specific KSAs and their relation to the position throughout the process.
Despite some challenges to certain aspects of the traditional hiring model,
there remains a desire by selection committees at academic libraries to accurately
match candidates’ KSAs to the tasks, duties, and responsibilities of the position. The
ability to closely match candidates to positions has been achieved through careful job
analysis leading to the identification of essential job duties and responsibilities, and
the use of screening devices designed to identify promising candidates and to weed
out less qualified individuals based on their KSAs.
Core Competencies
Another method for identifying desired KSAs at academic libraries is through
reference to core competencies as designated by national, local or institutional
committees. According to Giesecke & McNeal (1999), core competencies are
essentially just a set of KSAs that allow an individual to succeed at their job. More
recently, Gonzalez (2010) defined core competencies as the KSAs, possessed by
individuals, that an organization employs to achieve institutional goals and objectives.
Fisher (2001) pointed out that organizations really just want to hire competent people
no matter how well they may “fit in” with a group of staff members or the
organization as a whole. One way an organization can identify who is competent is to
identify which core competencies are of value to the organization and find a candidate
who matches them. One broad purpose of core competency documents is to assist in
this process.

11

Core competency documents are common among many library organizations
and they generally serve to measure the value placed on certain fundamental KSAs by
different types of libraries. The Association of Southeastern Research Libraries
(ASERL) released Shaping the Future: ASERL's Competencies for Research
Librarians (2000) to help encourage research libraries to hire qualified staff for
research libraries in the United States. The American Library Association (ALA)
listed skills and knowledge that MLS/MLIS graduates should possess in its Core
Competencies of Librarianship (2009). The ALA's Association of College and
Research Libraries' (ACRL) document A Guideline for the Appointment, Promotion
and Tenure of Academic Librarians (2010) presented the minimal KSAs necessary for
achieving faculty status as an academic librarian. Finally, though not a US
organization, the Canadian Association of Research Libraries (CARL) offered another
perspective on academic librarian KSAs in its Core Competencies for 21st Century
CARL Librarians (2010). In addition to these four documents, many other specialized
core competency statements exist for professional organizations in a range of areas
related to library and information science (ALA, 2015).
As for specific institutional core competencies, in a systematic survey of
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) members, McNeil (2002) found that 25% of
the ARL respondents used core competencies to assist in evaluating and hiring library
employees. The survey found that these libraries were located at solidly middle-sized
and disproportionately state-supported institutions. These core competencies were
sometimes created by the institution itself or sometimes blended with national or
regional library association core competency documents. These core competencies
were “widely viewed as a tool for clarifying common goals for all employees” and

12

were used for employee assessment, training programs, recruitment, promotions, and
retention efforts (McNeil, 2002, p. 8). The significant effort involved in creating core
competencies was seen as a reasonable trade-off for gains in these areas.
Whether these documents represent exact measurements of real KSAs of use
in today’s libraries, or lofty, idealistic visions of where the profession should be
headed, they are used as a reference by some administrators and practitioners who
serve on selection committees at academic libraries. This means the KSAs that are
listed in core competency documents may affect the KSAs that are valued by these
selection members. It is important to keep in mind, however, that core competency
documents created by national, regional, or specialized library organizations
(academic, public, special) may not perfectly match the priorities of an individual
institution with its own unique characteristics. In fact, the members of committees
who create such core competency documents may be more likely to hold higher
positions at academic institutions and may thus create a set of competencies skewed
to the needs of their own highly ranked educational institutions. If this is true, the
KSAs that receive priority in core competency documents would then favor the needs
of institutions with a more active research community.
In his literature review of academic library recruitment from 1990 to 2000
Harralson (2001) stressed that hiring at academic libraries should be done using
certifiable and measure standards that will reflect well on the profession at large. This
view supports the use of core competencies as guideposts in the hiring process. An
example of this is given by Giesecke and McNeil (1999) in their evaluation of the
University of Nebraska-Lincoln's transformation into a "learning organization"
capable of learning, growing, and adapting to rapid change. They list many core

13

competencies used not only to recruit staff, but also for performance evaluations and
retention efforts. Huff-Eibl et al. (2011) offer a more recent example in their
evaluation of the process of moving towards a competency-based hiring and
performance management model at the University of Arizona Libraries. This
comprehensive effort included new job titles and competency descriptions, the
creation of a competency model index, detailed performance goals, and sample
interview questions aimed at accurately identifying a prospective employee's
competencies as they relate to a position's precise duties and responsibilities. Once an
institution identifies such core competencies, they represent a useful framework for
describing the KSAs needed to successfully complete the tasks and duties of a given
position.
These studies show that the specific KSAs related to a position are identified
and ranked by selection committees at academic libraries for use in the screening and
hiring process. The question remains as to whether or not scholarly research and
publication is considered a valued KSA or core competency at these institutions.
There is some evidence available from both core competency documents and
the library and information science (LIS) literature to show an ongoing and consistent
desire to encourage and support academic research and publishing of scholarly works
as a valued competency for academic librarians. In response to a decrease in the
number of students choosing to pursue an MLS degree in the late 1970s and early
1980s, Hudson stressed the need for academic librarians to assume a range of duties
and responsibilities more similar to academic faculty members, including a second
master’s degree, management experience, enhanced communication skills, and
research and publication experience (as cited in Harralson, 2001, pp. 43-44). These

14

KSAs were meant to secure more professional status and job security for academic
librarians in the future.
In a similar vein, ASERL (2000) predicted in Shaping the Future: ASERL's
Competencies for Research Libraries (2000) that academic research libraries would
increasingly function as teaching institutions and become more actively involved in
instructional and research processes. To fulfill this mission, ASERL’s desired
competencies for academic librarians included a thorough understanding of the
research process.
Some universities have gone even further in promoting a more active research
environment among academic librarians on campus. In their examination of the
Librarian Development Program at the University of Oklahoma, Engel et al. (2003)
found that assigning a mentor helped to orient the participants and guide them in
achieving the program goal of conducting quality research and then achieving
publication in a peer-reviewed journal. In an evaluation study of the task force
assigned to address leadership training and development opportunities at Colorado
State University Libraries (CSUL), Feldmann et al. (2013) found that CSUL librarians
showed interest in grant writing workshops and research methods classes, among
other options, as ways to improve professional growth.
Other recent library organization core competency documents have also stated
the value of research and publication as a core competency. The ALA's Core
Competencies of Librarianship (2009) included research as one of its eight core
competencies that should be possessed by an MLS/MLIS graduate, including a
fundamental understanding of quantitative and qualitative research methods and the
ability to understand and assess the value of ongoing research in the field.

15

In A Guideline for the Appointment, Promotion and Tenure of Academic
Librarians (2010) the ACRL indicated a direct need for research skills and
publication experience as a prerequisite for advancement within the field and they
mention various professional level tasks that contribute to the research mission of the
university including scholarly publication specifically. This may be directly related to
a growing role for academic librarians in digitization efforts and scholarly
communication initiatives that utilize Open Access publishing and institutional
repositories.
In a recent environmental scan of trends in academic librarianship and higher
education, the ACRL Research, Planning, and Review Committee (2012) discovered
a trend toward new publishing paradigms with evolving forms of authoring,
publishing, and researching (College & Research Library News, 2012). New models
such as open access, digital repository services, and metadata curation and
preservation are changing the face of research and publishing. This new environment
will require a familiarity with the process of conducting research and achieving
publication in this new landscape.
In a general overview of the research base available for evidence-based
librarianship (EBL), Koufogiannakis and Crumley (2006) suggest that librarians,
administration, and professional associations should shift their focus towards making
research and publication a core part of the daily practice of librarianship. CARL
sounds a similar note in Core Competencies for 21st Century CARL Librarians (2010)
when it includes research and contributions to the profession as one of its seven broad
competencies necessary to excel as an academic research librarian. The knowledge,
skills, and behaviors listed include the ability to write, edit, or review academic

16

articles or reports; stay on top of current research in the field; and support the research
agenda of the university through a working knowledge of basic research methods.
The CARL competencies ask research librarians to support the research efforts of
their institution and to be active researchers themselves. These core competency
documents all point to some value being placed on research skills, though its relative
position among other KSAs would vary according to the institutional characteristics
of the individual institution.
Though some evidence of the value of research and publication experience
for library organizations has been shown to exist, it remains to be seen whether this
has impacted actual hiring decisions at academic libraries in the United States.
Perhaps these are only broad aspirations that have little impact on real hiring
decisions. Examining the continuously evolving roles and responsibilities of today's
academic librarians may offer another perspective on what matters most to selection
committees. The rapid changes brought on by technological progress and economic
pressures has reshaped academic librarianship and created a new kind of “hybrid”
academic librarian. An examination of these new hybrid positions should offer
additional evidence as to whether research and publication experience is likely to be
valued in this new environment.
The Hybridization of Academic Library Staffing
In examining which KSAs are currently of value to selection committees
several trends in “hybrid” academic librarian positions have emerged over the past
decade. The conditions that have triggered these changes in academic librarianship
may be found in the changing economic and technological realities of academic
libraries in the United States.

17

In an examination of academic and public librarian salaries and library staffing
expenditures from 2000 to 2009, Davis (2010) found that following the economic
downturn, budgets were constricted by staff salary and benefit packages, which
resulted in the elimination or consolidation of some positions. Consolidation, in
particular, led to the creation of hybrid positions with a broader set of roles and
responsibilities than were required in the past. In a similar study of FTE staffing
levels at US research university libraries, Stewart (2010) recognized the impact of
declining funding at academic libraries and the resulting redefinition of academic
librarian roles and responsibilities. Economic realities post-recession have
contributed to a new set of budget realities for academic libraries that may have
contributed to the creation of these new kinds of hybrid positions.
A second factor impacting the creation of new kinds of academic library
positions has been rapid technological change. Lankes (2010) stressed that the
mission of academic libraries has been gradually shifting away from providing access
to information, and towards building knowledge in the community. Technology is
making online and database searching easier and more effective for non-professionals
to conduct on their own, so public services librarians will be increasingly focused on
other tasks such as instructing patrons on how to critically analyze and evaluate
source materials, assisting students and faculty in navigating new publication models,
and facilitating scholarly communication. The combination of these economic and
technological factors has created new categories of academic librarianship rooted in a
desire to adapt and remain a vital part of the academic community.
Several overlapping job titles reflect the evolution of academic librarianship
into new categories and job types including embedded librarian, blended librarian,

18

and feral professional. These three “hybrid” positions will be examined in detail for
job duties and responsibilities including any application of scholarly research and
publication.
One term used to describe a new type of academic librarian is the embedded
librarian, partly clarified and more precisely defined by Shumaker and Tyler (2007)
at a Special Libraries Association Conference in June 2007. Sometimes called “field
librarians,” these librarians aim to become active partners in academic departments
through physical and organizational proximity to academic faculty and advanced
knowledge of their needs. Gibson and Coniglio (2010) saw them as collaborators
who assisted in advancing scholarship and research while also engaging in
instructional duties. The goal was to become a valued member of a team who could
assist in education, research projects, grant writing, and knowledge assets
management. Furlough (2010) acknowledged that when it comes to academic
librarians, “familiarity with the scholarly research process helps them to ‘speak the
language’ of faculty with whom they work” (p. 216). In making the argument in
support of academic librarians playing a more active role in the area of scholarly
publishing, Furlough also mentioned institutional repository services and open access
journals as potentials areas for growth. These efforts to claim a central role in the
creation, curation, and preservation of the scholarly output of academic faculty place
the embedded academic librarian squarely in the center of the scholarly production
process.
Bell and Shank (2004) defined another hybrid position, the blended librarian,
as one “who combines the traditional skill set of librarianship with the information
technologist’s hardware/software skills, and the instructional or educational

19

designer’s ability to apply technology appropriately in the teaching-learning process”
(p. 374). This definition emphasized the value of technical and instructional KSAs,
but Carlson and Garritano (2010) suggested that a slightly different type of blended
librarian “with knowledge and understanding of the production and use of research
data instead of instructional design” skills would be of more use to the academy (p.
249). Carlson and Barritano’s blended librarian represents a complex, multi-skilled
academic librarian with a key role in the knowledge production process.
In a similar vein, Crowe and Jaguszewski (2010) called for “blended or
versatile librarians who collaborate with faculty to actively contribute to an
institution’s research and instructional mission” (p. 127). In their review of the
process of identifying and assessing core competencies at the University of Minnesota
Libraries, Crowe and Jagszewski examined the professional expectations for
academic librarians, which included the need to participate in scholarship and “seek to
be a full partner in the educational and research process” (p. 140). They also
identified desired KSAs at the University of Minnesota Libraries, which included “a
basic understanding of research methodology,” experience writing for publication,
and the ability to “present information or data in an understandable format” (pp. 156157). These optimal KSAs for blended or versatile academic librarians were
informed by librarian self-assessments, which pointed to a desire by academic
librarians themselves to acquire these KSAs, in addition to grant writing and the
accurate use of statistics. A single evaluation study at the University of Minnesota
Libraries cannot be generalized across all academic libraries, but the professional
expectations of a first-tier academic research institution do have value. Determining

20

whether such views extend beyond this narrow scope to include academic libraries in
general remains to be seen.
In addition to the terms embedded librarian and blended librarian, there is
another new term for academic librarians that was triggered by the MLS/MLIS degree
itself being called into question as the sole route to professional employment
opportunities at academic libraries. Moran, Marshall and Rathbun-Grubb (2010)
examined the evolution of the academic library workforce over several decades in an
extensive literature review that asked whether academic libraries would continue to
hire primarily MLS/MLIS graduates or seek instead to attract a more diversified staff
made up of professionals in other fields such as communications, information
technology, or management. A similar question was asked by Neal (2006) in a
popular and thought-provoking article on a new type of feral professional. Neal
called into question the relevance of an MLS/MLIS degree focusing on traditional
skill sets, and examined a trend toward hiring professionals with “a variety of
qualifications, such as advanced degrees in subject disciplines, specialized language
skills, teaching experience, or technology expertise” (Neal, 2006, p. 42) to work
across a range of professional assignments. He felt these feral professionals would
bring fresh outlooks, new styles, and forward-thinking expectations. Neal was giving
recognition to a non-MLS/MLIS trend increasingly noted in the LIS literature since
the 1990s.
In a content analysis of 539 job advertisements taken from library journals in
1983 and 2003, Starr (2004) found that the MLS/MLIS degree had decreased in
importance as a prerequisite for securing a position at an academic library in the US
during this time period. Bajjaly (2005) conducted a job recruitment survey which

21

showed that selection committees for academic, public, and special librarian positions
valued post MLS/MLIS work experience, service orientation, and personality more
than the specific MLS/MLIS program attended, courses taken, or recency of
graduation. This suggests that factors other than an MLS/MLIS degree were
increasingly important across a range of positions. In a more recent quantitative
analysis of FTE staffing levels at US research university libraries, Stewart (2010)
found that while librarian FTE staffing levels had increased only marginally in the
time period between 2000 and 2008, non-librarian FTE staffing levels had increased
substantially. Stewart concluded that this staff redistribution was a part of a broad
transformation of academic libraries across the United States impacting the types of
tasks being performed by full-time staff, support staff, and paraprofessionals. Such
transformations will likely result in a new set of desired KSAs that could negatively
impact the value of the MLS/MLIS degree if the KSAs stressed at MLS/MLIS
programs fail to meet the expectations of today's academic library selection
committees. MLS/MLIS students interested in a career in academic librarianship
need to remain keenly aware of the evolving definition of an academic librarian and
the types of skills, knowledge, and abilities that are currently of value.
A desire to experiment with the use of a new kind of non-MLS/MLIS library
professional is indicated by the creation of the Council on Library and Information
Resources (CLIR) Fellowship Program, which attempts to attract Ph.D. holders from
a variety of fields to work at research libraries in the United States. The stated aim of
the CLIR Fellowship Program is to prepare "a new generation of librarians, scientists
and scholars for work at the intersections of scholarship, teaching and librarianship in
the emerging research environment" (CLIR, " Fellowships in Academic Libraries",

22

2014). Among other opportunities they are tasked with developing new research
models and providing insight into the future of scholarship. Brunner (2010) claimed
that the current division of labor between academic departments, campus
administrative units, research centers, and academic libraries has pigeonholed
academic librarians into a service role that impacts their relationship with faculty.
These views are backed by the feedback of former CLIR fellows who felt they were
able to overcome this limiting role through the utilization of their own substantial
research skills while exhibiting comfort working with faculty and the mutual respect
that is critical to creating rewarding relationships. Brunner anticipated the creation of
a new kind of “scholar-librarian” who could continue to fulfill some of the traditional
roles of academic librarianship while also collaborating effectively with faculty and
pursuing independent scholarship. This points to an increasing need for academic
librarians who are familiar with research methodologies and have experience
conducting research successfully and publishing their results in peer-reviewed
journals.
Some recent recruitment statistics also support this trend toward a more
flexible set of expectations regarding librarian qualifications. In a survey of academic
and public libraries Simpson (2013) found that an MLS/MLIS is not consistently a
requirement for librarian recruitment and hiring in the United States. In a surprising
result, Wanucha (2014) found that of 431 jobs posted on Library Jobline only 18%
required an MLS/MLIS degree and only 15% preferred one in the year 2013. The
remaining 66% of postings either stated that an MLS/MLIS degree was not required
or did not mention an MLS/MLIS degree at all. This result must take into account the
variety of job types included on Library Jobline (public, academic and special

23

libraries) and cannot be extended to academic libraries specifically, but it is a
surprising finding. The Simpson (2013) and Wanucha (2014) results include both
public and academic libraries, but they do add evidence of a trend towards a more
flexible view of librarianship generally. In a study focused more precisely on
academic libraries Grimes and Grimes (2008) studied over 4000 job advertisements
for academic librarian positions listed in College and Research Libraries from 1975
to 2005 and found that job listings including an MLS/MLIS requirement had declined
significantly over the 30-year period. The authors posited that an increasing demand
for skills and knowledge pertaining to new technologies may have contributed to this
drop. Despite detailed data collected on distribution of jobs by category (public
services, technical services, systems, administration) Grimes and Grimes didn’t
present results contrasting the MLS/MLIS requirement across job categories.
Measuring whether the majority of this decline in MLS/MLIS degree requirements is
in fact focused on technical service positions or extends across all types of positions
would be quite useful information for applicants seeking different types of academic
librarian positions. Is an MLS/MLIS degree still a precondition to securing an entrylevel public services position at an academic library in the United States? The
literature has not sufficiently answered this precise question.
The slow downward trend in MLS/MLIS degree requirements compels us to
ask why an academic library might choose to hire a non-MLS/MLIS candidate. Is it
related to the type of position? The answer probably lies in specialized skill sets that
may or may not be developed by current MLS/MLIS graduates. One such set of skills
is clearly technological. Many studies have tracked the growing value of
technological skills for academic librarians since the early 1990s (Xu, 1995; Beile &

24

Adams, 2000; Starr, 2004; Choi & Rasmussen, 2009; Wang et al., 2010). Many of
these highly technical positions may now be looked upon as support positions that do
not necessarily require an expert knowledge of librarianship. Information technology
(IT) and systems positions with titles such as systems administration, library
technology specialist, and library technician may increasingly be filled by nonMLS/MLIS candidates, though all MLS/MLIS programs will continue to stress the
importance of acquiring basic technological skills and some will offer much more
technical specializations. These types of positions are not of direct interest to this
investigation, but the trend may represent a splintering that impacts the structural
integrity of the profession. What highly specialized KSAs can a public services
academic librarian offer to match those being offered by technical service academic
librarians? Do these KSAs include research and publication experience? Which
types of institutional characteristics describe libraries where research and publication
experience is highly valued by selection committee members? These questions have
yet to be addressed by the literature.
A second specialized skill set more closely linked to public services positions
involves subject knowledge in a specific field and extensive research skills and
experience. A prime example of these skills being utilized at academic libraries is
offered by the CLIR Fellowship, which attracts fellows with specific subject
knowledge and research experience to work as subject specialists, liaison librarians,
or field librarians. Gibson and Coniglio (2010) feel that such liaison librarian
positions require diverse skill sets, including the ability to work on research teams;
engage in knowledge assets management and stewardship; and collaborate closely
with faculty and students involved in research projects. Brunner's (2010) concern that

25

academic librarians might get trapped in a service role rather than work with faculty
as active collaborators is validated in part by the growth in non-MLS/MLIS academic
librarians. Specific technical, subject knowledge, and research skills may be acquired
by acceptable candidates with or without an MLS/MLIS degree in this evolving
employment landscape. These visions of a new breed of library professional increase
the need for current MLS/MLIS students and recent graduates to strongly consider
what KSAs are going to be most valued by academic libraries in the future and how to
tailor their own skill set to match the needs of specific types of academic libraries.
Trends in Research on Academic Librarian KSAs
Academic library selection committees consider, rank, and compare the KSAs
of job candidates during the hiring process and these KSAs ideally reflect the actual
job duties, tasks, and responsibilities of the position. Recent economic pressures and
technological trends have put pressure on the field of academic librarianship that has
created new “hybrid” positions that require more specific sets of KSAs. Which KSAs
have been of value to academic libraries over the past few decades and do they
include research and publication experience? A close examination of the literature
will reveal if there is any evidence of research and publication experience as a valued
KSA.
Broad trends in KSAs desired by selection committees over the past few
decades include the growing importance of technological skills, and the consistent
need for excellent communication and interpersonal skills. More recent trends in
academic librarian KSAs, as highlighted by research over the past five years, include
organizational transformations at institutions of higher education, the rise of escience, the growth of new avenues of scholarly communication, greater value placed

26

on previous experience for entry-level academic librarians, and an increasing need for
academic librarians to handle a broader range of responsibilities. Examining these
two broad, long-term trends and five recent trends will move us closer to
understanding the current focus of the literature around desired KSAs for entry-level
public services academic librarians.
Broad trends in research on academic librarian KSAs. A fair amount of
research has been conducted over the years on trends in KSAs of value to academic
libraries and the purpose of such research has usually been to inform MLS/MLIS jobseekers of employer expectations, allow administrators to keep abreast of industrywide trends, and measure the impact of various factors on required and desired KSAs.
The broadest of trends revealed by research on academic librarian KSAs has roughly
mirrored the major division in library services: technical services vs. public services.
Some KSAs are of more use in technical service positions and others are more useful
in public services positions. Reser and Schuneman (1992) used a content analysis of
1133 job advertisements to identify and analyze the differences between public and
technical services and found, as might be expected, that tech services required more
computer skills, while public services were more likely to need an advanced subject
degree in addition to the MLS/MLIS. Many other studies through the ensuing years
have recognized the growing value of technical skills for academic librarians (Xu,
1995; Beile & Adams, 2000; Nesbeitt, 2003; Starr, 2004; Choi & Rasmussen, 2009;
Heinrichs and Lim, 2009; Wang et al., 2010; Reeves & Hahn, 2010). The literature
shows a consistent need for specialized technical skills extending over the past few
decades. These skills are likely to continue to be a highly valued, especially in
technical service jobs.

27

Another broad trend in the research focuses on academic librarian jobs in
general, but applies more to public services positions than to technical services. In
addition to a second MA degree, several studies have noted that public services
positions increasingly require excellent interpersonal and communication skills. Starr
(2004) noted a dramatic trend towards demanding communication skills for academic
librarians in a content analysis of job ads between the years 1983 and 2003. Reeves
and Hahn (2010) found that personal attributes such as communication skills, service
orientation, and personality traits such as cooperation and creativity have increased in
value in their content analysis of job ads published or posted online between 2006 and
2009. In a best practices literature review Shaffer (2011) found that among many
other KSAs an 'outgoing personality' was highly valued. In a similar result, Wise et
al. (2011) found that Australian academic libraries increasingly valued interpersonal
and communication skills at their institutions as well.
These broad trends dividing technical and public services librarians reveal an
interesting dichotomy. Technological skills have become increasingly discrete and
require ongoing professional development efforts by technical service librarians to
remain adept at handling new software, tools and technologies. Meanwhile, public
services librarians are taking on an even broader range of tasks that include actively
communicating and interacting with patrons, faculty, and administrators on a daily
basis through instruction, collaboration, evaluation, outreach, and scholarly
communication initiatives. These new tasks require the kind of interpersonal and
communication skills mentioned above. The bottom line, noted by Beile and Adams
(2000) over a decade ago, is that academic library jobs are becoming both more
specialized and more complex. These broad KSAs apply across a swath of job titles

28

and categories of academic librarianship, but aside from the skills mentioned across
the literature broadly (technical, communication, interpersonal), which other KSAs
are valued and what impact do they have on hiring decisions at academic libraries? A
closer look at the most recent trends in desired KSAs as illustrated in the literature
should help us to extract more examples of valued KSAs from the literature.
Recent trends in research on academic librarian KSAs. One recent area of
coverage in the literature is organizational transformations at institutions of higher
education. In a literature review of recent staffing trends at academic libraries
Gremmels (2013) noted that the primary drivers for recent organizational
transformations at academic libraries have included both technological and economic
factors. The study predicted a shift toward the use of more paraprofessionals for
front-line reference service and the outsourcing of much of the technical service work,
which will leave greater expectations for highly educated and versatile professional
public services academic librarians. A similar conclusion was drawn in Applegate’s
(2010) study of competencies for librarians and support staff, which found that a clear
delineation of professional librarian jurisdiction from support staff jurisdiction has
become increasingly important. The study saw professional librarians as those who
were adept at managing people and collections, understood the history and theory of
librarianship, were expert at assisting and educating patrons, and had the ability to
conduct research in the hopes of moving the profession forward. Earning the right to
claim a clearly delineated jurisdiction places even higher demands on public services
librarians in terms of versatility and adaptability. Will increasing skills and
experience related to academic research and publication contribute to this claim and

29

add to the building of a zone of professional jurisdiction for public services academic
librarians?
As part of the conclusion of his quantitative analysis of FTE staffing levels at
academic libraries, Stewart (2010) predicted an ongoing redistribution in staffing as
part of a broader transformation in academic libraries involving new service delivery
models; shifting librarian roles in education, scholarly communication, and data
curation; and support activities such as marketing, fundraising, and systems. He
predicted that this transformation was likely to continue through the end of the
decade.
Recent evaluation studies have charted efforts to realign and restructure
academic libraries to offer new services while becoming more active partners in the
university's research and instructional mission. Crowe and Jaguszewski (2010)
investigated the University of Minnesota Libraries' restructuring around new core
competencies aimed at analyzing gaps in current KSAs and improved professional
development and hiring strategies for the future, while Nutefall and Chadwell (2013)
described the Oregon State University Libraries' realignment toward new services in
the areas of digital publishing and scholarly communications. These studies offer
evidence of large-scale efforts to transform academic libraries to better fit the needs of
higher education institutions in the 21st century. Such transformations will require
prospective academic librarians to track which KSAs are in demand under these new
systems and create skill sets that are responsive to this changing environment. If the
transformation involves a greater level of involvement in digital publishing, research
support services, or scholarly communication initiatives, prospective applicants would
be wise to acquire matching skills.

30

A second recent trend in the literature related to valued KSAs is the growth of
e-science. As information and communication technologies have increased in size
and scope, a massive cyberinfrastructure has made the accessing of widely distributed
data sets possible. This means that research can now be conducted by accessing
valuable data sets from multiple, interdisciplinary sources in order to test a
hypothesis. This new e-science method of conducting research requires significant
data curation and preservation efforts at research institutions around the world.
Academic librarians are uniquely situated to contribute to these efforts as both
creators and stewards of data sets being generated and shared through the networks
provided by this networked cyberinfrastructure. Carlson and Garritano (2010) studied
these new models of research support at the Purdue University Libraries and
concluded that librarians in charge of building and maintaining these collections of
data sets would need to have good communication skills, creativity and flexibility,
and a willingness to take risks in their efforts to support and contribute to faculty
research and spur new projects through grant proposals. This suggests that skills and
experience related to research and grant writing would be valued in such positions.
A third area of recent research has been in the areas of scholarly
communication initiatives by academic librarians and in-house publishing at academic
institutions. More than a decade ago, in reflecting on emerging roles for research
libraries in the digital age, Lougee called for academic libraries to move away from
being managers of scholarly output and towards being more active participants in
scholarly communication processes (as cited in Gremmels, 2013, p. 240). The term
scholarly communication refers to "the entire process of creating, distributing and
accessing scholarship and research" (Furlough, 2010, p. 220).

31

An example of the growing trend toward more active participation in this
process by academic libraries is shown by Nutefall and Chadwell (2012) who
conducted a case study of the realignment of the Oregon State University (OSU)
Libraries in 2009-2010 in which support for the knowledge creation process through
digital publishing and scholarly communication support were key components. As
mentioned previously, a new Center for Digital Scholarship and Services was created
at the OSU Libraries to centralize these efforts.
In a separate empirical study of two Swedish higher education institutions,
Hansson and Johannesson (2013) used personal logs and focus group interviews to
identify levels of support for scholarly publishing by academic librarians. Though not
a study of US universities, the results mirror those above in finding that there is a
trend towards academic librarians being more proactively involved in the research
process as integrated members of research teams with special responsibilities in the
areas of information provision; data storage and curation; and publication strategies.
Hansson and Johannesson saw evidence of this trend in the increased involvement in
"digital repository development and Open Access publishing" (p. 232).
Mercer (2013) also confirmed a trend toward academic librarian involvement
in Open Access publication through an analysis of the publication efforts of US
academic librarians in the United States. Mercer found that nearly half of all
scholarly articles in the US, written by academic librarians, were available in Open
Access as of 2011. In support of this trend toward making research results freely
available through Open Access publishing, Furlough (2010) noted a desire by
academic libraries to challenge the power and control of commercial scholarly
publishers by offering more collaborative services and the utilization of technologies

32

that will drive future research and publishing efforts at academic institutions. These
efforts will require a new breed of academic librarian more comfortable speaking the
language of academic faculty members in the area of research and publication. These
new types of positions related to digital repository development, data curation, Open
Access publishing, and collaborative research and publication will require a broad
range of skills and varying levels of technological expertise.
Another trend in the recent literature indicates an increasing expectation for
entry-level candidates at academic libraries to have acquired some previous
experience before applying for a position. This expectation has been growing over
the past few decades. In a content analysis of entry-level job advertisements
published in American Libraries over a 20 year period Sproles and Ratledge (2004)
found that employers were seeking "well-rounded and experienced entry-level
applicants" (p. 22), while Bajjaly (2005) tracked a trend toward valuing postMLS/MLIS work experience over the specific MLS/MLIS program attended. In an
exploratory study of librarian job advertisements in Australia, Kennan, Willard and
Wilson (2004) found that among new librarian jobs a decade ago, the majority
required experience. These studies suggest a very real need for entry-level public
services academic librarian candidates to acquire work experience in the field before
seeking a position.
More recent evidence of this trend exists as well. In service of reviewing and
updating the MLS/MLIS curriculum at the University of Maryland iSchool, Reeves
and Hahn (2010) conducted a quantitative content analysis of over a thousand job
advertisements and concluded that getting practical experience before applying for
entry-level positions was advisable. In a survey of selection committee members,

33

Wang and Guarria (2010) discovered that "demonstrated performance of job
requirements" was in high demand (p. 74). Additionally, Tewell (2012) conducted a
content analysis of 1385 job advertisements posted from 2010 to 2011 and found that
only 20% of academic librarian jobs are truly entry-level. He defined an entry-level
position as one that required an MLS/MLIS degree, "one or fewer years of
experience" and "no experience or duties that entry level librarians typically do not
possess" (p. 412). The inclusion of up to one year of experience in Tewell’s
definition of “entry-level” recognized the increasing expectation that entry-level
applicants would acquire some practical experience before applying for a position.
His study also found that more than 57% of job advertisements required more than
one year of experience and that over 16% required duties and experience not typically
possessed by entry-level applicants. In suggesting future research in this area, Tewell
(2012) felt that a survey or qualitative study measuring which types of experience
mattered most to selection committees would be of great value. What kinds of
experience or project work matter most to selection committees when considering the
previous work experience of a candidate?
The lone dissenting voice with regards to the importance of previous
experience for entry-level candidates comes from Hodge and Spoor (2012) who
investigated the hiring and interview process for entry-level academic librarian
positions by surveying selection committee members and concluded that new
MLS/MLIS graduates need not necessarily worry about lack of experience when
interviewing for entry-level librarian positions. This conclusion was based on the
belief that hiring committees would take many factors into account when seeking the
best fit for their institution. Despite this advice, a previous section of their study did

34

state that survey respondents (selection committee members) had recommended that
applicants seek out "internships, part-time jobs or volunteer work ... while still in
school ... as any form of experience is better that none" (p. 158).
With the increasingly complex and varied nature of public services academic
librarian positions, it appears to be a near consensus that an MLS/MLIS graduate
should invest time and effort into acquiring some practical experience in preparation
for a competitive job market. Ascertaining which types of academic libraries are
more likely to value such previous experience would clearly contribute to job seekers
knowledge base in a positive way. And beyond identifying where previous work
experience is valued most, the question remains whether time spent on conducting
scholarly research and achieving publication in a peer-reviewed journal is also
considered to be a valuable kind of experience that impacts hiring decisions.
A final trend in the recent LIS literature is indicated by growth in the
expectation that academic librarians have exceptionally diverse skill sets. Two
decades ago, Bechtel (1994) foresaw the need for more flexible staffing options at
academic libraries and the growing need for "generalist librarians". She predicted a
more holistic approach to academic librarianship that included a broader knowledge
of library service in general, in addition to expert knowledge in several areas of
librarianship. She felt that this balance of broad and deep knowledge would add
enthusiasm and energy to the field. Lewis (2010) predicted continuing demands for
varied technical and subject knowledge requirements in the coming decade, and in a
content analysis of job advertisements focusing on the roles and responsibilities of
entry-level academic reference positions, Detmering and Sproles (2012) noted that
current entry-level reference positions have a "strikingly diverse and complex range

35

of responsibilities" (p. 543). These diverse roles and responsibilities are identified
from a broad perspective, but the authors acknowledge the need for future research
into these KSAs and how they vary when contrasted with specific institutional
characteristics such as institution type (Carnegie classification), staff size, or
geographic location. This reflects a gap in the literature with regards to a deeper
analysis of KSAs as they relate to institutional characteristics. Wang and Guarria
(2010) conducted an online survey that examined some of the desired KSAs for
academic librarian positions and collected data on institutional characteristics with the
KSAs desired by specific types of institutions but failed to contrast the two.
Examining desired KSAs as they relate to specific institutional characteristics will fill
a gap in the current research and offer valuable conclusions of real value to first-time
job seekers, selection committee members, and those in charge of planning the
transformation of academic libraries more broadly.
Due to developments in the field, academic libraries now have entirely new
areas of academic librarianship and concomitant specialist positions to match.
Metadata librarians catalog materials in a networked environment applying standards
to the "disorderly world of user-generated metadata and distributed, reusable Web
content" (Clair, 2010, p. 271). Data research scientists "build and maintain
collections of digital research data sets" and enable others to more easily "conduct
research and educational activities using collections of digital data through
consultation, collaboration, and coordination" (Carlson and Garritano, 2010, p. 253).
Outreach librarians actively engage in promoting and marketing the library and its
services to patrons and faculty alike, including the ability to conduct citation analyses
of previously published papers for faculty members seeking tenure. Reference

36

librarians design information literacy lessons, evaluate their effectiveness, and instruct
students in better approaches to successful completion of research projects. Liaison
or subject librarians offer enhanced services such as research project collaboration
and faculty assistance with evolving scholarly communication patterns. These many
different roles require a broad range of skills, some of which overlap, and provide a
common set of skills of use in many positions. In addition to the broad trends in
technological and interpersonal skills mentioned above, experience conducting
scholarly research and publishing results represents a relevant skill at some level
across a range of positions. How is that skill perceived by selection committee
members? How does it impact their decision to hire a candidate for an entry-level
public services position? These questions have not been answered by the LIS
literature to date.
Conclusion
This examination of the research literature has covered hiring at academic
libraries and how KSAs factor into the process; the development and implementation
of both broad core competencies and narrow sets of KSAs based on job analyses; the
evolution and hybridization of academic librarian positions; and research studies
investigating the KSAs most desired by selection committees at academic libraries in
the United States.
Research shows that attaining specific KSAs of value to selection committees
will move a candidate through the hiring process by ensuring that they survive the
resume screening phase. Successfully clearing the various hurdles in the hiring
process can be best achieved by discovering which KSAs will best identify candidates

37

of value to both individual selection committee members and selection committee
panels working as a group.
Core competency statements offer a general view of KSAs valued by the
profession including scholarly research and publication experience, but specific
institutions or selection committee members may or may not agree about the relative
value of this particular KSA. The literature presents several broad, long-term trends
that show the increasing importance of acquiring technological, communication and
interpersonal skills, but beyond these broad categories, the literature is less clear as to
which KSAs would add significant weight to an application for an entry-level public
services academic librarian position.
Technical service jobs are becoming increasingly specialized and require
librarians in this service area to keep abreast of constantly changing tools and
technologies and this sector may trend toward more non-MLS/MLIS employees in the
future. Meanwhile, new “hybrid” positions have emerged in the public services
sector that challenge traditional models of academic librarianship in this area. In
addition to higher levels of collaboration requiring extensive interpersonal and
communication skills, research shows that there is a growing need to display
additional expertise in other areas such as instruction, marketing and promotion,
management, data curation, scholarly communication, and program evaluation and
assessment. In addition to its value as a KSA in and of itself, the ability to conduct
scholarly research and experience navigating the publication process is a KSA that
enhances several of the other KSAs listed above. Despite its apparent value, this
KSA has remained largely unexamined in the research on hiring at academic libraries.
When included at all, it has been listed in previous studies on academic librarian

38

KSAs under the headings of scholarship, or professional development. These vague
or catch-all categories have not given this KSA an identifiable place among the KSAs
traditionally examined in studies on the KSAs of value to academic library selection
committees.
This study examines how this KSA factors into hiring decisions for entry-level
public services positions at academic libraries by asking selection committee
members for their opinions directly through an online survey. Information on
institutional characteristics (Carnegie classification, FTE student enrollment, FTE
library staff size, geographic region, type of community), job titles, selection
committee member job types, previous experience requirements, MLS/MLIS degree
requirements, and perceived trends in the value of this KSA will be gathered to allow
for comparisons across a range of variables. The goal is to illuminate the current
value of research and publication experience to selection committee members when
hiring for entry-level public services academic librarian positions. This will show
where this KSA stands and whether it is worth pursuing as an important step in the
process of achieving employment in this field.
Though not comparable to the broad and growing importance of technical
skills or communication/interpersonal skills, research and publication experience may
have some as yet unmeasured weight at academic libraries in the United States and it
is likely to have even higher value at larger doctoral-granting/research universities.
Certain types of selection committee members (administrators, academic librarians)
may value it more or less depending on their preference for supporting either broad
institutional goals or specific job competencies. Without the benefit of longitudinal

39

statistics, measuring a trend in the perceived value of research and publication
experience to selection committee members will be difficult to assess.
A study that measures whether or not research and publication experience is
important to selection committee members charged with hiring entry-level public
services librarians at academic libraries in the United States will fill a gap in the
research literature that will be of value to job-seekers, academic librarians,
administrators, and faculty alike. The realities of a new era in academic librarianship
demand a more careful examination of this fundamental and relevant KSA and its
place and purpose within the ongoing transformation of the field.
Methodology
Methodology Selection
In selecting a methodology for this study, several possibilities were
considered. The most popular method for studying hiring practices and academic
librarian Knowledge, Skills and Abilities (KSAs) has been a content analysis of job
advertisements listed in print or online. White and Marsh (2006) defined content
analysis as "a systematic, rigorous approach to analyzing documents obtained or
generated in the course of research" (p. 22). Harper (2012) conducted a critical
review of 70 Library and Information Science (LIS) research studies that collected
and analyzed job advertisements going back to the early 1970s and found that the
method had only increased in popularity over that 40-year period. As a result, many
content analyses of academic librarian job advertisements are available in the LIS
literature. Their popularity has been largely due to the ease with which the data can
be culled from print or online sources. Very broad samples can be collected and
analyzed from existing print periodicals, online journals, or websites. In addition,

40

archived, historical sources make comparisons across many years relatively easy to
conduct.
Though quite popular in the past, content analyses are currently waning in
popularity due to a decrease in the availability of stable sources of job ads. Reeves
and Hahn (2010) pointed out that although past issues of periodicals that contained
job ads are still available, a higher and higher percentage of job advertisements are
being posted temporarily on job sites or listservs. These posted ads disappear after a
few weeks and are not archived for easy retrieval. This means researchers are now
responsible for archiving this data, significantly complicating the process and
requiring much more time and effort.
In addition to these access and storage issues, researchers have had other
concerns with this approach. Xu (1996) showed concern for the minimal number of
coders engaged in analysis and the strong possibility of coding error when so much
data is being processed. Harper (2012) took issue with content analyses due to the
use of purposive sampling, the lack of sufficient pilot studies, and the minimal use of
inferential statistics. Finally, the language used in the advertisements is not always
perfectly clear and may not accurately match the actual job performance skills
necessary to succeed at the job. Selection committee members or administrators are
tasked with tailoring the job ad to precisely match the KSAs needed for the position,
but they may not always be successful due to the long and complicated collaborative
process of hiring. A method that allows for more direct interaction with individual
selection committee members may have a better chance of measuring the KSAs they
find most valuable for these positions.

41

Another possible approach is to conduct evaluation research or do a series of
case studies of an organizational transformation or new approach to hiring and
evaluating staff at a small number of institutions. This would favor qualitative
methodologies such as focus groups or interviews. The advantage of such an
approach is that the researcher can measure one set of standards for hiring librarians
at a single institution or a small number of institutions. This may reveal favored core
competencies or changing priorities in desired KSAs at a few institutions of higher
education and could be suggestive of broader transformations underway. The
disadvantage of evaluation research is the narrow scope of the data collected and the
possibility that local economic, political, or institutional issues may inordinately
affect the hiring priorities at a single institution. The results of the study would need
to include many limitations and would be of more illustrative value than as an
indication of broad trends.
Several studies of hiring practices and desired KSAs at academic libraries
have used print or online surveys to gather data from individuals. These studies use
closed and/or open-ended questions and either qualitative or quantitative analysis
techniques (or both). This methodology allows for the more direct questioning of
individual respondents that is missing from a content analysis of job descriptions
(often created by committee) while maintaining the ability to collect data from a
broad set of respondents. There is an opportunity to capture a more nuanced set of
responses from the individuals involved in the entire process from the creation of the
job description to the final hiring decision. Surveys also have the advantage of being
much easier to conduct due to the existence of convenient online survey instruments.

42

One disadvantage of this method of data collection is related to choices made
concerning sampling methods that can lead to scattershot data collection. The ease of
posting calls for participation to listservs and social media sites must be weighed
against the eventual watering down of conclusions due to the broad swath of
respondent types. Respondents who reply to an open call for participation in a survey
could make up a very different sample than one intentionally selected and invited to
participate. One factor is the sense of formality that comes from being selected and
invited as opposed to the casual nature of an open call for participants. Another factor
is the type of respondent who chooses to volunteer to join a study as compared to
those who may require direct contact and encouragement. How respondents are
selected, contacted, and recruited for participation may affect the quality of results. A
sample deliberately collected through careful selection and direct invitation to
participants should differ significantly from a convenience sample of participants
recruited through listservs and social media sites.
The overly broad nature of content analysis of job advertisements and the
increasing existence of ephemeral job postings online has made this a less attractive
option for this study. Content analyses of job advertisements are also increasingly
likely to require much larger budgets and staff time commitments. Alternately, a
series of qualitative interviews aimed at getting highly descriptive data would offer
fascinating insights into the process at one or several institutions, but would not offer
a snapshot of desired KSAs for entry-level public services librarians across the United
States. Surveys have their own set of disadvantages, but with a carefully controlled
sample, this method should offer reasonably strong evidence of what KSAs are

43

currently desired by individual selection committee members and how research and
publication experience fits into hiring decisions.
Study Population
In studies of the evolution of desired KSAs at academic libraries the most
common population has been selection committees. This population was typically
studied through the analysis of the job advertisements produced by selection
committees to attract and hire new librarians. Other studies have interviewed
selection committee members directly or conducted surveys to collect their views.
The advantage of this population is that they know the current needs at the institution
where they are employed and can be expected to accurately reflect institutional
priorities. This study examined the viewpoints of administrators, librarians, and
faculty at universities in the United States who served on a selection committee for an
entry-level public services position at an academic library in the United States within
the last five years (January 2010 to January 2015). The university libraries were
selected from the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education
(CCIHE) Basic Classification listings1. The sample included doctoralgranting/research universities, including both doctoral programs in research
specialties and professional practice, master’s colleges and universities, and
baccalaureate colleges. The sample did not include institutions that offered only
associate’s degrees, tribal colleges, or special focus institutions that had a high
concentration of degrees in a single field. Deselection of these areas decreased the
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
1	  “On	  October	  8,	  2014,	  the	  Carnegie	  Foundation	  for	  the	  Advancement	  of	  Teaching	  announced	  that	  it	  transferred	  
responsibility	  for	  the	  Carnegie	  Classification	  of	  Institutions	  of	  Higher	  Education	  to	  Indiana	  University	  Bloomington's	  
Center	  for	  Postsecondary	  Research.	  	  The	  Classification	  will	  continue	  to	  retain	  the	  Carnegie	  name	  after	  the	  Center	  for	  
Postsecondary	  Research	  takes	  over	  responsibility	  on	  Jan.	  1,	  2015”	  (Carnegie	  Foundation	  for	  the	  Advancement	  of	  
Teaching,	  2010).	  	  The	  new	  website	  for	  the	  Carnegie	  Classification	  basic	  classification	  list	  can	  be	  found	  at	  
http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup_listings/standard.php.	  	  This	  interim	  site	  will	  remain	  available	  until	  the	  
Carnegie	  Classification	  of	  Institutions	  of	  Higher	  Education	  moves	  to	  its	  new	  home	  at	  the	  Indiana	  University	  Bloomington	  
Center	  for	  Postsecondary	  Research.	  

44

number of very small universities in the sample and improved the overall response
rate among universities that had student bodies of over 1000 students. This also
ensured that the sample included more universities with a diverse array of degrees
available. These decisions were made on the assumption that such universities were
more likely to have a larger library workforce and more frequent hiring.
Sampling Design
The sampling frame for this study was the Carnegie Classification of
Institutions of Higher Education Standard Listings (Basic Classification) (2010). A
stratified sample was selected from three types of universities: doctoralgranting/research universities, master’s colleges and universities, and baccalaureate
colleges. A systematic sample with a random start was drawn from each of the nine
Basic Classification subcategories (Table1).
Table 1
Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education - Basic Classification
· RU/VH: Research Universities (very high research activity)
· RU/H: Research Universities (high research activity)
· DRU: Doctoral/Research Universities
· Master's L: Master's Colleges and Universities (larger programs)
· Master's M: Master's Colleges and Universities (medium programs)
· Master's S: Master's Colleges and Universities (smaller programs)
· Bac/A&S: Baccalaureate Colleges--Arts & Sciences
· Bac/Diverse: Baccalaureate Colleges--Diverse Fields
· Bac/Assoc: Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges
Note. From 2010 Carnegie Classification - National Center for Education
Statistics, IPEDS Fall Enrollment (2009).
The sampling ratio was calculated according to a percentage representing the total
enrollment of the institutions in each subcategory rather than as a percentage
representing the number of institutions in each subcategory. Table 2 shows the large
disparity between the total number of institutions in the doctoral-granting/research

45

universities subcategories and their total enrollment (297 institutions/49% of total
enrollment) as compared to baccalaureate colleges (810 institutions/12% of total
enrollment).
Table 2
Institution Percentage and Enrollment Percentage
Carnegie Class. Institutions
Inst. %
Enrollment

Enroll. %

RU/VH
RU/H
DRU
RU Subtotal

108
99
90
297

6%
5%
5%
16%

2,809,581
1,746,651
1,228,846
5,785,078

24%
15%
10%
49%

Master's L
Master's M
Master's S
Master's Subtotal

413
185
126
724

23%
10%
7%
40%

3,503,396
785,985
367,219
4,656,600

29%
7%
3%
39%

Bac/A&S
Bac/Diverse
Bac/Assoc
Bac Subtotal

271
392
147
810

15%
21%
8%
44%

460,036
664,939
298,300
1,423,275

4%
6%
2%
12%

Total
1831
100%
11,864,953
100%
Note. Class. = Classification; Inst. = Institution; Enroll. = Enrollment;
RU/VH = Research Universities (very high research activity); RU/H =
Research Universities (high research activity); DRU = Doctoral/Research
Universities; Master's/L = Master's Colleges and Universities (larger
programs); Master's/M = Master's Colleges and Universities (medium
programs); Master's/S = Master's Colleges and Universities (smaller
programs); Bac/A&S = Baccalaureate Colleges - Arts & Sciences;
Bac/Diverse = Baccalaureate Colleges - Diverse Fields; Bac/Assoc =
Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges. From 2010 Carnegie Classification National Center for Education Statistics, IPEDS Fall Enrollment (2009).
A systematic sampling of the institutions listed in the three subcategories that did not
consider enrollment levels would skew the sample heavily towards smaller
institutions with smaller enrollments. These institutions have smaller collections,
smaller staff sizes, and a less active research base.

46

An example of the kind of sample that might result from a random
convenience sample is demonstrated by a study conducted by Wang and Guarria
(2008), which employed an anonymous survey across multiple listservs to gather data
on the hiring process for academic librarians. The sample of respondents for this
study (N=242) was split quite evenly with 31% of respondents in each of the three
main Carnegie classifications (research universities, master’s colleges and
universities, baccalaureate colleges). The remaining 7% were from two-year
associate colleges. The resulting sample was heavily focused on smaller institutions
with smaller staff sizes due to the use of an open call for participation rather than a
systematic sample.
In a study of academic library staffing Applegate (2007) used two National
Center for Education Statistics databases (Compare Academic Libraries/ALS and the
Integrated Postsecondary Educational Data Service (IPEDS)) to show that the
majority of academic librarians have more than 24 colleagues and almost half of
academic librarians are employed by doctoral-granting/research universities (RU). In
another study of academic library staffing through the period of the great recession of
2008-2010, Regazzi (2012) found that large libraries had been dramatically expanding
the number of academic librarians employed since 1998 and, despite significant staff
reductions at smaller institutions, had managed to hold steady through the
recessionary period.
In light of these facts about random, open calls for participation and national
academic library staffing trends, three different sampling ratios were employed to
randomly select and invite institutions from the three broad categories
(RU/Master’s/Bac) based on enrollment percentages in order to avoid any imbalance

47

caused by the large number of small institutions. The following formula was used to
take a systematic sample of institutions from each of the nine subcategory lists. The
number of institutions in each subcategory was divided by the subcategory population
size (total population multiplied by the enrollment percentage of the subcategory) to
get the sampling interval (rounded to the nearest whole number). A random start was
employed for each subcategory and the sampling interval was used to extract the
subcategory sample from the sampling frame.
Total sample size was originally set at 200 institutions, but was later increased
to 400 once a successful first round was initiated. This means that the total sample
was extracted from the sampling frame in two rounds, each with a sample size of 200.
Data Collection Instrument
As the first step in the design of the data collection instrument an informal
survey was distributed to a non-probability convenience sample of 17 faculty
members of an ALA- accredited MLS/MLIS program in April 2014 (Appendix E).
Perhaps due to the informal nature of the questionnaire and the short time frame for
response (2 weeks), only five respondents answered the four open-ended questions.
Despite the low response rate (29%), the responses revealed several points that helped
shape the design of the data collection instrument. Respondents indicated that the
importance of research and publication experience varies significantly according to
the size of the university, the type of position, and the research environment of the
individual university. This reinforced the view that collection of data on institutional
characteristics would allow for more accurate placement of this KSA among other
important KSAs impacting the hiring process.

48

Another key observation was that research and publication experience was
becoming more and more critical and would help to set a candidate apart as a more
active and engaged applicant. This view supports the idea that some selection
committee members find research and publication experience a highly desirable KSA
for a potential new library staff member.
Online Questionnaire Formulation
The questionnaire consisted of 17 mostly closed-ended questions with a few
open-ended responses included for the inclusion of specific job title descriptions or
additional suggestions (Appendix A). The design of the questionnaire included
adopting and adapting a variety of job categories and KSAs used across many
previous studies for the formulation of the key question on the impact of a variety of
common KSAs on hiring decisions at academic libraries. The result was a melding
and redefining of the KSAs listed in three different studies into 12 specific KSAs to
be used for comparison (Sproles and Ratledge, 2004; Detmering and Sproles, 2012;
Hodge and Spoor, 2012). The exact wording used to describe these categories is
original. In addition, the response choices about levels of importance were altered
slightly from the author’s original version to a version that exactly matched those in
Wang and Guarria (2010) to allow for easier comparative analysis. SurveyMonkey
™ was chosen as a reputable company offering online survey implementation and
analysis services.
The research proposal and online questionnaire were submitted to the San Jose
State University Human Subjects Institutional Review Board (IRB) and in early
December 2014 the proposal was registered and received exempt status. The primary
data for this study was collected in January and February of 2015 through an

49

anonymous, voluntary, online questionnaire completed by selection committee
members from randomly selected universities in the United States. The anonymous
nature of the data collection method was of critical importance because there were
potential issues regarding privacy in the areas of employment and hiring practices.
Clearly stating the voluntary and anonymous nature of the study, as required for IRB
approval, also likely helped to improve response rates and increased the likelihood of
receiving forthright responses.
Definition of terms. The first question of the survey asked whether the
respondent had served on a selection committee (hiring committee/search and screen
committee) for an entry-level public services position at their academic library in the
time period from January 2010 to January 2015. To define the parameters of the term
entry-level position the definition used by Tewell (2012) in his content analysis of
entry-level job advertisements was adapted and simplified. Tewell defined an entrylevel position as one requiring an ALA-accredited MLS/MLIS degree, requiring one
or fewer years of experience, and not requiring “experience or duties that entry-level
librarians typically do not possess,” (p. 412) such as supervisory or administrative
experience. Tewell chose to amend previous stricter definitions of entry level (Reser
& Schuneman, 1992; Sproles & Ratledge, 2004; Reeves & Hahn, 2010; Detmering &
Sproles, 2012) by allowing for some experience in the form of short-term internships
or pre-professional experience as a required or desired aspect of an entry-level
position. Previous content analyses of entry-level job advertisements generally
defined entry-level as requiring no experience, but Tewell was correct that such an
assumption would be less valid in the current academic librarian job market. The
decision to use this slightly broader definition in which jobs that require up to a year

50

of experience are considered as entry-level was also made in the hopes that more
respondents would be able to participate in the study under a more flexible and
realistic guideline.
For this study, the requirement of an MLS/MLIS as a prerequisite for defining
a job as entry-level was dropped entirely. The literature has shown that some
positions at academic libraries are being filled by non-MLS/MLIS candidates (Grimes
& Grimes, 2008; Shaffer, 2011; Strothman & Ohler, 2011; Simpson, 2013) and if any
of these positions are entry-level public services positions they should also be
included in the study. In addition, Tewell’s (2012) requirement that applicants lack
supervisory or administrative experience will also be cut from the definition used in
this study. A significant number of librarians receive their MLS/MLIS degree after
40 years of age (Lewis, 2010) and such applicants could possess a range of skills and
experience, yet still be applying for an entry-level position. Selection committees are
aware of the age and experience range of new hires and may value and seek out those
with such experience. This leaves the simplified definition of entry-level position
used in this study as one that requires either no experience or one year or less of
experience.
A second term that required definition was public services librarian. Keeping
in mind that virtually all academic librarian positions require some technical skills
and familiarity with technological tools, public services librarian was defined as one
whose duties are majority public services in nature. This means that less than 50% of
their tasks are technical and they serve a majority public service function.

51

Data Collection Process
In December 2014 a sample size of 200 universities was selected and the
number of institutions to be extracted from each Carnegie classification was
calculated according to the enrollment percentages in that category. This total sample
size was later doubled and the process was repeated using the same technique for a
total of 400 universities and colleges selected. The decision to double the sample size
was made following the successful completion of the first round of sampling. The
sample size and sampling interval for each Carnegie Classification category were
calculated according to the formula in the sampling design section above and a
random start was employed for each category (Table 3). A random start number was
applied to each category list and the sampling interval was used to select the sample.

52

Table 3
Institution %, Enrollment %, Sample Size, and Sampling Interval
Inst.
Enr.
Sample
Carnegie Class.
Inst.
%
Enrollment
%
Size
RU/VH
108
6%
2,809,581
24%
47
RU/H
99
5%
1,746,651
15%
30
DRU
90
5%
1,228,846
10%
21
RU Subtotal
297
16%
5,785,078
49%
98

Sample
Int.
2
3
4
-

Master's L
Master's M
Master's S
Master's Subtotal

413
185
126
724

23%
10%
7%
40%

3,503,396
785,985
367,219
4,656,600

29%
7%
3%
39%

59
13
6
78

7
14
20
-

Bac/A&S
Bac/Diverse
Bac/Assoc
Bac Subtotal

271
392
147
810

15%
21%
8%
44%

460,036
664,939
298,300
1,423,275

4%
6%
2%
12%

8
11
5
24

35
35
29
-

Total
1831 100% 11,864,953 100%
200
Note. Class. = Classification; Inst. = Institution; Enr. = Enrollment; Int. =
Interval; RU/VH = Research Universities (very high research activity); RU/H
= Research Universities (high research activity); DRU = Doctoral/Research
Universities; Master's/L = Master's Colleges and Universities (larger
programs); Master's/M = Master's Colleges and Universities (medium
programs); Master's/S = Master's Colleges and Universities (smaller
programs); Bac/A&S = Baccalaureate Colleges - Arts & Sciences; Bac/Diverse
= Baccalaureate Colleges - Diverse Fields; Bac/Assoc =
Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges. From 2010 Carnegie Classification National Center for Education Statistics, IPEDS Fall Enrollment (2009).
Once the sample was randomly extracted from the sample frame, in two rounds of
200 each, the selected university names were transferred to an Excel spreadsheet. The
website for each university library in the sample was carefully examined for contact
information, which was added to the spreadsheet. The primary contact was a library
director, library dean, or university librarian. If a contact email address could not be
located for one of these positions, a head of a service area or academic librarian was
found instead. Over 90% of initial contacts were top administrators such as library

53

directors, university librarians, or deans as their contact information was easily
available with a little searching. A few universities seemed to have either no physical
campus or were located in an urban or suburban office space. These were likely
universities oriented towards continuing education or strictly online education
programs. Some had no physical library. Other universities had no contact emails for
specific staff at the library or only internal email systems. Wherever possible a
contact email for a library staff member was located for inclusion in the study. The
first group of 200 universities yielded 190 contact emails and the second group of 200
universities yielded 192 contact emails for a total of 382 viable contact emails from
the attempted sample of 400.
A SurveyMonkey ™ Select account was opened in January 2015 and the data
collection instrument was transferred to the online survey implementation platform.
A data collection period of one month from January 11, 2015 to February 10, 2015
was set and the data collection period opened on January 11, 2015.
The first set of 190 requests for participation (Appendix B) were sent out as
blind carbon copy (Bcc) emails in groups of 10 or fewer. The requests for
participation included a link to the survey webpage and a request to either fill out the
survey or forward it to an appropriate person who had served on a selection
committee for an entry-level public services position in the last five years. Three
instances of typos in the contact email addresses were corrected and resent. Two
emails were rejected by the server or were undeliverable for technical reasons. Due to
the anonymous nature of the survey there was no way to confirm whether or not a
particular contact had completed the survey, so on January 23, 2015 reminder emails
(Appendix C) encouraging participation by the deadline were sent to all selectees who

54

had not specifically sent an email opting out of the study. In a study of course and
teaching evaluation surveys, Nulty (2008) found that survey response rates were
boosted by providing incentives and/or using reminder emails. The inclusion of this
reminder email was meant to maximize participation and improve response rates.
The second round of 192 new requests for participation was also sent out on
January 23, 2015. There were only two requests rejected by the server or
undeliverable due to technical reasons from this second group. A final reminder
email was sent out to the second round of selectees on February 3, 2015. The data
collection period closed on February 10, 2015 and the survey implementation tool
was closed down.
During the data collection period several respondents contacted the primary
researcher (author) either through automated response emails or with direct concerns.
The majority of responses were automated response emails that generally referred to
being out of the office temporarily. The direct concern emails fell into a few
categories. Some contacts had retired or changed positions and recommended a new
contact. In these cases, the new contact email was put to use immediately. Other
emails announced the completion of the survey or a lack of interest or ability to
participate. One email asked for clarification on the parameters of the study, which
was provided promptly. Another respondent expressed confusion about the
numeration of the survey. Apparently, when respondents answered “No” to the first
contingency question (Question1) and then automatically skipped to the final “general
information” questions a SurveyMonkey ™ function had renumbered the final eight
survey questions, causing some confusion for at least one respondent. In response to
this issue, the request for participation and reminder emails were changed slightly to

55

more accurately match the survey and avoid any further confusion. A final
respondent emailed with additional information more accurately capturing the details
of the hiring practices at their institution.
Results and Analysis
Of the 382 selectees contacted during the 1-month data collection period there
were 161 responses to the survey for a preliminary response rate of 42%. Eighteen
incomplete surveys were deleted. In addition to the incomplete surveys, there was
one respondent who answered "no" to the final request to allow the data collected in
this voluntary, anonymous survey to be published and shared. Another respondent
did not answer this final question. These two surveys were also deleted. This left a
total of 141 fully or nearly complete surveys for a final response rate of 37%. In a
meta-analysis of 39 studies comparing Web and mail surveys, Shih and Fan (2008)
found that the average response rate for online surveys was 34%, so 37% was
considered a reasonably good response rate for an online survey.
Respondents
General respondent characteristics. The survey collected general
information about all respondents’ job titles, category of university (Carnegie
classification), FTE student enrollment, FTE library staff, geographic region, and type
of community (Appendix A).
More than half of respondents (53%) categorized themselves as library
directors, but due to the lack of a category for “dean” many respondents checked the
“Other” box and filled in “dean”, “associate dean”, “assistant dean” or “interim dean”.
Other respondents checked “Other” and filled in “head of a service area”, “assistant
director”, “administrator”, or “vice provost/director”. By adding the assistant director

56

and vice provost to the director category and the dean positions to the university
librarian category the general job categories were maintained, with one additional
category added for respondents who filled in “administrator” (Table 4).
Table 4
General Respondents - Job Title (N=141)
Job title
Library director/Asst. LD
University librarian/Dean
Head of specific service area
Academic librarian
Faculty member/ Professor
Administrators

%, n
53%, 75
25%, 36
13%, 18
6%, 9
1%, 2
1%, 1

Administrative positions
Non-administrative positions

79%, 112
21%, 29

The adjusted results show a sample weighted towards administrators (80%) as would
be expected given that the primary contact information gathered from university
library websites was for primarily library directors, library deans and university
librarians.
Respondents were asked to identify what category of institution they worked
for in two separate questions. Respondents were asked if they worked at a doctoralgranting/research university, a master’s college or university, or a baccalaureate
college. In a separate question respondents selected the exact Carnegie classification
category of their institution. A link to the official Carnegie classification category list
was included. The responses for these two questions were roughly equivalent (Table
5).

57

Table 5
General Respondents - Institution
Q 11
Q 12
Institution
%, n
%, n
Research universities
44% , 61
44% , 62
Master's colleges and universities
36% , 49
35% , 49
Baccalaureate colleges
18% , 25
15% , 21
unable to answer
2% , 3
6% , 8
Note. Q = Question. Question 11 (N=138); Question 12
12 (N=140).
(N=140).
The small discrepancy in responses may have been caused by some
respondents’ unfamiliarity with the Carnegie classification system and their own
institution’s rank within that system. To ensure the most accurate analysis possible,
the more specific question on Carnegie classifications was used to make comparisons
across categories of institution for this study.
This breakdown of respondents by Carnegie classification is very close to the
selective sample percentages that were calculated based on enrollment (Table 2). The
difference of only a few percentage points indicates that the selected method for
maximizing the opportunity to find respondents who were on a selection committee
for an entry-level public services academic librarian position in the past five years
was successful. This was based on an assumption that larger institutions with larger
FTE student enrollments, larger FTE library staff members, and a more active
research base would hire more entry-level public services librarians.
Data on full time equivalent (FTE) enrollment size of respondents’ institutions
showed that a large percentage of respondents worked at universities with very large
student bodies (Table 6).

58

Table 6
General Respondents - FTE Student Enrollment (N=138)
FTE student enrollment
10,000 or more
3000 - 9,999
1,000 - 2,999
fewer than 1,000

%, n
42% , 58
29% , 40
24% , 33
5% , 7

Despite the bias towards larger FTE enrollments, the FTE library staff at
respondents’ workplaces is quite average at 50% with over 25 staff members and 50%
with less than 25 staff members (Table 7). This result is quite close to Applegate’s
(2007) finding that the majority of academic librarians have more than 24 colleagues.
Table 7
General Respondents - FTE Library Staff (N=140)
FTE library staff
more than 300
100 - 300
25 - 99
less than 25

%, n
4% , 5
16% , 23
30% , 42
50% , 70

A closer examination of the data revealed something interesting about staff
sizes at research universities. Universities with very large FTE student enrollments
(10,000+) were mostly research universities (79%) with the rest being master’s
colleges and universities (19%) and baccalaureate colleges (2%). When only research
universities with very large FTE student enrollments (10,000+) were examined, the
study found that 40% of these universities had FTE library staff of under 100
employees. When examined in even more detail, the study showed that only the top
two levels of Carnegie classifications (RU/VH & RU/H) had a significant percentage

59

of universities with over 100 FTE library staff members and only the top category
(RU/VH) had a large majority above this threshold (Table 8).
Table 8
General Respondents - Carnegie Classification / FTE Library Staff Size (N=140)
more than 300
100 to 300
25 to 99
less than 25
%, n
%, n
%, n
%, n
RU/VH
13% , 4
61% , 19
13% , 4
13% , 4
RU/H
0% , 0
24% , 4
76% , 13
0% , 0
DRU
7% , 7
0% , 0
43% , 6
50% , 7
Master's L
0% , 0
0% , 0
33% , 8
67% , 16
Master's M
0% , 0
0% , 0
17% , 2
83% , 10
Master's S
0% , 0
0% , 0
31% , 4
69% , 9
Bac/A&S
0% , 0
0% , 0
15% , 2
85% , 11
Bac/Diverse
0% , 0
0% , 0
17% , 1
83% , 5
Bac/Assoc
0% , 0
0% , 0
0% , 0
100% , 2
unable to
answer
0% , 0
0% , 0
25% , 2
75% , 6
Note. RU/VH = Research Universities (very high research activity); RU/H = Research
Universities (high research activity); DRU = Doctoral/Research Universities;
Master's/L = Master's Colleges and Universities (larger programs); Master's/M =
Master's Colleges and Universities (medium programs); Master's/S = Master's
Colleges and Universities (smaller programs); Bac/A&S = Baccalaureate Colleges Arts & Sciences; Bac/Diverse = Baccalaureate Colleges - Diverse Fields; Bac/Assoc
= Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges.
Research universities do have the largest FTE library staffs, but it remains to be seen
if this then translates into the hiring of more entry-level public services academic
librarians.
The geographic regions represented in the study were fairly well balanced
across the Midwest, Northeast, and South, with a smaller percentage in the West
(Table 9).

60

Table 9
General Respondents - Geographic Region (N=139)
Geographic region
%, n
Midwest
27% , 37
Northeast
25% , 35
South
31% , 43
West
14% , 20
unable to answer
3% , 4
The final general information question asked about the type of community in
which the university campus was located. The respondent population was roughly
one-half urban, one-quarter suburban, and one-quarter rural (Table 10).
Table 10
General Respondents - Type of Community (N=140)
Type of community
%, n
Rural
24% , 33
Suburban
26% , 37
Urban
49% , 68
unable to answer
1% , 2
When responses for types of communities were compared with responses for
geographic region some clear differences emerged. The largest percentage of rural
universities (nearly 50%) were in the Midwest, the largest percentage of suburban
universities (over 40%) were in the South, and the largest percentage of a more well
distributed set of urban universities were in the Northeast (31%) (Table 11).

61

Table 11
General Respondents - Geographic Region / Type of Community (N=137)
unable to
Midwest
Northeast
South
West
answer
%, n
%, n
%, n
%, n
%, n
Rural
Suburban
Urban

48% , 16
16% , 6
21% , 14

21% , 7
19% , 7
31% , 21

27% , 9
41% , 15
28% , 19

3% , 1
19% , 7
18% , 12

0% , 0
5%, 2
1% , 1

Specific subgroups of respondents. The main subgroups to examine in
detail were the respondents who answered either “yes” or “no” to Question 1, which
asked whether they had served on a selection committee for an entry-level public
services academic librarian position in the past five years. Whether a respondent
answered “yes” or “no” to Question 1, they still answered the seven general
information questions at the end of the survey and these responses will allow us to
contrast these two groups (Appendix A).
Contrasted respondents. Of the total number of respondents (N=141), 68%
(n=96) had served on a selection committee for an entry-level public services
academic librarian position in the previous five years (January 2010 - January 2015).
The remaining 32% (n=45) had not served on a selection committee for such a
position in this time period. The survey instructions given in the request for
participation email asked that the initial contact forward the email to another staff
member in the case where they did not serve on such a selection committee. The
primary contact was almost always either a library director, dean, or university
librarian who would probably be a part of any selection committee for a new position.
We will now examine the differences in institutional characteristics of those who did
or did not hire an entry-level public services librarian in the past five years.

62

When contrasting the two groups, there was a noticeable difference in the
balance between administrator and non-administrator respondents who did or do not
hire an entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years (Table 12).
Table 12
Contrasted Respondents - Job Titles (N=141)
Q 1 – Yes
Q 1 - No
Q 1 – Total
Job title
%, n
%, n
%, n
Library director/ Asst. LD
52%, 50
54%, 25
53%, 75
University librarian/Dean
24%, 23
28%, 13
25%, 36
Head of specific service area
17%, 16
4%, 2
13%, 18
Academic librarian
6%, 6
7%, 3
6%, 9
Faculty member/ Professor
1%, 1
2%, 1
1%, 2
Administrators
0%, 0
2%, 1
1%, 1
Administrative positions
76%, 73
87%, 39
79%, 112
Non-administrative positions
24%, 23
13%, 6
21%, 29
Note. Q = Question; Asst. = Assistant; LD = Library Director. Question 1 Yes
(n=96); Question 1 No (n=45).
When considering Carnegie classification categories of universities for all
respondents (Table 5), the largest percentage of total respondents (44%) worked at
research universities, which make up the top three categories (RU/VH, RU/H, DRU),
the second largest (35%) were from master’s colleges and universities (Master’s L,
Master’s M, Master’s S), and the smallest group (15%) were from baccalaureate
colleges (Bac/A&S, Bac/Diverse, Bac/Assoc). Percentages closely match the
enrollment percentages that shaped the selective sampling method (Table 2) and any
differences can be partly explained by the 6% of respondents who were not sure of
their Carnegie classification. When divided by “yes” or “no” responses to Question 1,
respondents that hired an entry-level public services academic librarian were most
likely to come from master’s colleges and universities, despite the larger number of

63

research universities in the stratified sample based on enrollment percentages. By
contrast, those who did not hire for such a position in the last five years were very
likely to be from research universities, in excess of the percentage of research
universities in the sample (Table 13). This despite that fact that research universities
in the top two Carnegie classification categories (RU/VH & RU/H) have much larger
FTE library staff sizes on average (Table 8).
Table 13
Contrasted Respondents - Carnegie Classifications (N=140)
Q 1 – Yes
Q 1 - No
Q 1 - Total
Carnegie classification
%, n
%, n
%, n
Research Universities
40% , 38
55% , 24
44% , 62
Master's Colleges and
Universities
42% , 40
20% , 9
35% , 49
Baccalaureate Colleges
12% , 12
20% , 9
15% , 21
unable to answer
6% , 6
5% , 2
6% , 8
Note. Q = Question. Question 1 Yes (n=96); Question 1 No (n=44).
The question is why a disproportionate number of respondents from research
universities have not hired an entry-level public services academic librarian in the
past five years (January 2010-January 2015). The answer may lie in the definition of
entry-level used for Question 1. The definition used for this study included the
requirement that the position require either no experience or one year or less of
experience. This definition may have been too narrow to include some entry-level
public services positions at research universities. This issue will be covered in more
detail in the discussion section. In addition, 43% of baccalaureate colleges answered
“no” to Question 1, which could be directly related to the smaller FTE library staff
sizes at baccalaureate colleges where 86% of respondents reported having FTE library
staff of less than 25.

64

FTE student enrollment numbers at institutions of respondents who had or
hadn’t hired an entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years
indicated no large difference between the two subgroups (Table 14).
Table 14
Contrasted Respondents - FTE Student Enrollments (N=138)
Q 1 - Yes
Q 1 - No
Q 1 - Total
FTE enrollment
%, n
%, n
%, n
10,000 or more
43% , 41
39% , 17
42% , 58
3,000 to 9,000
28% , 26
33% , 14
29% , 40
1,000 to 2,999
24% , 23
23% , 10
24% , 33
less than 1,000
5% , 5
5% , 2
5% , 7
Note. Q = Question. Question 1 Yes (n=95); Question 1 No (n=43).
Comparison of FTE library staffing for subgroups who hired or didn’t hire an
entry-level public services librarian did not show any consistent variation either
(Table 15).
Table 15
Contrasted Respondents - FTE Library Staff (N=140)
Q 1 – Yes
Q 1 - No
Q 1 - Total
FTE library staff
%, n
%, n
%, n
more than 300
2% , 2
7% , 3
4% , 5
100 to 300
19% , 18
11% , 5
16% , 23
25 to 99
27% , 26
36% , 16
30% , 42
less than 25
52% , 50
46% , 20
50% , 70
Note. Q = Question. Question 1 Yes (n=96); Question 1 No (n=44).
There are some variations for the geographic regions in which respondents had
or hadn’t hired an entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years
(Table 16).

65

Table 16
Contrasted Respondents - Geographic Regions (N=139)
Q 1 – Yes
Q 1 - No
Q 1 - Total
Geographic region
%, n
%, n
%, n
Midwest
29% , 28
21% , 9
27% , 37
Northeast
21% , 20
35% , 15
25% , 35
South
35% , 34
21% , 9
31% , 43
West
12% , 11
21% , 9
14% , 20
unable to answer
3% , 3
2% , 1
3% , 4
Note. Q = Question. Question 1 Yes (n=96); Question 1 No (n=43).
There was a greater tendency for universities in the Midwest and South regions to hire
and a greater tendency for universities in the Northeast and West regions not to hire
such a candidate.
Primary respondents. The primary group of respondents under examination
in this study were the respondents who served on selection committees that hired
entry-level public services academic librarian positions in the United States in the past
five years (January 2010 – January 2015). The selective sample of 382 university
library contacts garnered 141 responses of which 97 were in this select group.
The central question of this study is what impact various KSAs has on hiring
decisions for entry-level public services positions at academic libraries. Respondents
ranked 10 valuable KSAs in terms of their impact on the selection committees hiring
decisions (Appendix A). The following list ranks the KSAs according to the
weighted average (M) of their responses to the question with the following point
values assigned to their responses: extremely important (5), very important (4),
moderately important (3), slightly important (2), and not important at all (1) (Table
17).

66

Table 17
Primary Respondents - KSAs Ranked by Weighted Rating Scale
Rank KSAs (knowledge, skills & abilities)
M
1
Communication
4.75
2
Technology
4.46
3
Interpersonal
4.36
4
Collaboration
4.25
5
Teaching
3.40
6
Evaluation and Assessment
3.06
7
Marketing
2.71
8
Leadership
2.46
9
Research and Publication
2.20
10 Second Language
1.55
Note. M = Mean.
In the review of the literature two broad trends in desired KSAs emerging over the
past few decades. One was the trend toward valuing technological skills and the other
was an increasing need for excellent communication and interpersonal skills. The
first was generally applicable to technical service jobs, but these results make clear
how important this KSA is for any type of job, including those in the public services
sector. Technology (rank=2) is pervasive and impacts on all activities and all other
KSAs. The second broad trend is also supported by these results as communication
(rank=1) and interpersonal skills (rank=3) also rank at the top of the list. These KSAs
are more traditionally valued in public services positions, though they are certainly
valued to varying degrees in all types of positions. The ability to collaborate and
work as a member of a team (rank=4) is also a KSA that could be closely associated
with communication and interpersonal skills. After we account for these four skills
tied to broad trends in KSAs that are found across the LIS literature, there is a sharp
drop in importance as ranked by respondents. The top four KSAs are all ranked as
extremely or very important on average, but teaching, evaluation and assessment, and

67

marketing are only moderately important. Leadership, research and publication, and a
second language round out the list as slightly important KSAs on average.
The second question on the survey was an open-ended question about the
exact job title of the entry-level public services position. A total of 86 job titles were
collected (Appendix D). The most common job types were identified through a
textual analysis. Many job titles covered two or more types of work (i.e.
Reference/Instruction Librarian), so the results of this analysis may overlap among
categories. The most common type of job was Reference Librarian with 28% of jobs
including the word “reference”. The second most common type of job was
Instruction Librarian (“instruction”, “teaching”, “information literacy”) with 17% of
jobs including these terms. There were also a range of jobs related to technology
(“digital”, “e-resource”, “electronic”, “Web”, “Systems”) and these covered another
17% of jobs. The remaining jobs covered a wide variety of terms including
“science”, “information” “outreach”, “research”, “collection(s),” and “assistant”. The
job titles and textual analysis match quite well with the desired KSAs (Table 17).
Reference librarians require excellent communication and interpersonal skills,
instruction librarians need teaching skills, and technology skills are of use in a wide
range of positions. The remaining terms cover a broad range of areas including
subject area specializations like “science” or “humanities” and specific KSAs like
“outreach” or “research”.
Only jobs that required one year or less of work experience were considered to
be entry-level for the purposes of this study. The survey results show that 30% of
entry-level public services positions required up to a year of work experience and

68

60% preferred some work experience. Only 10% had no requirements for work
experience (Table 18).
Table 18
Primary Respondents - Work Experience Requirements (N=97)
Work experience
%, n
some work experience required (one year or less)
30% , 29
some work experience preferred, but not required
60% , 58
no work experience required
10% , 10
Several authors have suggested that applicants for entry-level positions would be
better off gaining some practical work experience before applying for a position. This
study confirms this view by showing that 90% of selection committee members for
entry-level public services academic librarian positions state that they either prefer or
require some work experience from their applicants.
For entry-level public services positions as defined by this study, 87% of
respondents stated that they required an MLS/MLIS degree and an additional 10%
preferred one. Only 3% did not require an MLS/MLIS degree (Table 19).
Table 19
Primary Respondents - MLS/MLIS Requirements (N=97)
MLS/MLIS degree requirements
%, n
required MLS/MLIS
87% , 84
preferred MLS/MLIS, but not required
10% , 10
MLS/MLIS not mentioned as a requirement
3% , 3
The results show some encouragement for conducting scholarly research and
publishing in peer-reviewed journals with 45% of respondents considering it either a
primary or secondary duty (Table 20).

69

Table 20
Primary Respondents – Encouragement for Research and Publication (N=97)
Encouragement for research and publication
%, n
required (a primary duty)
20% , 20
strongly encouraged, but not required (a secondary duty)
25% , 24
mildly encouraged, but not required (a tertiary duty)
27% , 26
neither encouraged nor required (prof. development only)
28% , 27
actively discouraged (a distraction from primary duties)
0% , 0
Over half of respondents (56%) stated that research and publication
experience was not a factor in hiring decisions. The remaining 43% believed that it
has some value during the screening phase, the interview phase, or both (Table 21).
Table 21
Primary Respondents - Research and Publication Value in Hiring Process (N=96)
Hiring process phase
%, n
screening phase
13% , 12
interview phase
9% , 9
both the screening and interview phase (approx. equal weight)
21% , 20
not a factor in hiring decisions
56% , 54
unable to answer
1% , 1
Only 31% of respondents examined publications listed in an applicant’s
resume for journal quality at some point in the hiring process (Table 22).
Table 22
Primary Respondents - Publications Quality Check (N=97)
Are publications examined for quality?
Yes, during the screening phase
Yes, after the screening phase, but prior to the interview phase
No, publications are not examined carefully for quality
No, because applicant publications do not impact my decision
unable to answer

%, n
14% , 14
17% , 16
32% , 31
35% , 34
2% , 2

This figure (31%) is less than the number of respondents who felt that research and
publication experience was of value during the hiring process (43%) (Table 20). This

70

suggests that there are some respondents who value research and publication
experience in the hiring process, but do not examine the quality of applicant
publications in detail. This may be because they do not feel it is necessary or worth
the additional time and effort given its weight in the decision process, or because they
are just too busy to spend time on examining publication quality.
Respondents were asked to describe the trend over the past ten years in the
impact of research and publication experience on hiring decisions at academic
libraries (Table 23).
Table 23
Primary Respondents - Impact of Research and Publication (N=97)
10 year trend in impact on hiring decisions
%, n
becoming more impactful
21% , 20
remaining relatively stable in level of impact
38% , 37
becoming less impactful
25% , 24
unable to answer
16% , 16
Among those respondents who were on a selection committee for the hiring of an
entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years (January 2010 –
January 2015) 21% felt that during the past 10 years (January 2005 – January 2015)
the impact of research and publication on hiring decisions at academic libraries had
increased. Another 25% felt that this KSA had decreased in level of impact on hiring
decisions, while 38% felt it had remained unchanged in level of impact. A significant
percentage of respondents (16%) were unable to answer, which may have been an
indication that they did not consider research and publication to have any impact on
hiring decisions at their universities. This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that
when only the responses of this subgroup (unable to answer) are examined the study
finds that none of the respondents felt that research and publication experience was an

71

extremely or very important KSA, and 63% (n=10) felt it was not important at all. In
addition, 75% (n=12) said it was not a factor in hiring decisions.
It is important to consider that among the subgroup of respondents who felt
that the impact of research and publication on hiring decisions had remained stable
there may be some who felt that the impact of this KSA was initially zero and
remained unchanged.
Discussion
Applicants for academic librarian positions in the United States must
demonstrate various qualifications and skills to maximize their opportunity to secure
employment. This study used a systematic sample of online survey respondents to
investigate the impact of various applicant KSAs on the decision making process of
selection committee members charged with hiring entry-level public services
academic librarians in the United States. In addition to comparing 10 important
KSAs that impact hiring decisions, the influence of previous work experience and an
MLS/MLIS degree were also considered. Particular focus was placed on discovering
the impact of one KSA: scholarly research and publication experience. The results of
the study revealed several findings worth further consideration.
Specific definitions for the terms entry-level and public services set the
parameters for which respondents would be included in the study. The selectees were
asked in the first question whether they were on a selection committee for an entrylevel public services academic librarian in the past five years (January 2010 – January
2015). Entry-level was defined for this study as either requiring no experience or
requiring one year of experience or less. This was the only stipulation. This broad

72

definition represented the culmination of a gradual broadening of the term in the LIS
literature covered in this study (Table 24).
Table 24
Evolution of the Term Entry-Level in the Literature
Study
Definition of Entry-level Position
Reser & Schuneman
(1992)

* the position be labeled as "entry-level"
* no mention of required work experience
* a statement stating no work experience required

Sproles & Ratledge
(2004)

* the position be labeled as "entry-level"
* no mention of required work experience
* no experience or duties impossible for entry-level
librarians to gain (supervisory or administrative)

Reeves & Hahn
(2010)

* the position be labeled as "entry-level"
* no mention of professional work experience
* no experience or duties impossible for entry-level
librarians to gain

Detmering & Sproles
(2012)

* the position be labeled as "entry-level"
* no mention of professional work experience
* no experience or duties impossible for entry-level
librarians to gain

Tewell (2012)

* requires an MLIS degree
* requires one or fewer years of experience
* does not require experience or duties that entrylevel librarians typically do not possess
(supervisory, administrative, etc.)

The requirements that a job advertisement state explicitly that it is “entry-level” and
that it does not require any work experience were eventually dropped by Tewell
(2012). In addition, Tewell accepted up to a year of work experience to match
employer expectations of some internship or pre-professional work experience, but

73

kept the prohibition of any supervisory or administrative experience used in previous
studies (Sproles & Ratledge, 2004; Reeves & Hahn, 2010). For this study, the term
entry-level was broadened even further to include selection committee members in the
survey who hired candidates without an MLS/MLIS, as well as those who had
acquired various kinds of experience before seeking employment as a librarian. The
assumption was that new academic librarians could have gained valuable experience
in the past, given that some academic librarians enter the field as a second career.
This view of the significance of experience gained in previous careers demands a
definition of work experience that goes beyond the experience gained in an academic
library setting. Previous experience has been described in librarian job
advertisements as professional, non-professional, specialized or general (Reser &
Schuneman, 1992). Other studies have labeled experience as either professional or
non-professional (Reeves & Hahn, 2010). Required experience can and does include
work experience gained outside of the profession. How this impacts the definition of
“entry-level” and how we define a new or first-time academic librarian is an issue
worth further exploration.
Despite the broadening of the term entry-level for this study, there is some
evidence that the chosen parameters of this term may have been too narrow to capture
all the data available on the value of research and publication experience for first-time
academic librarians. A total of 55% of respondents who had not hired an entry-level
public services librarian in the past five years were from research universities, despite
the fact that research universities were only 44% of the total sample. By contrast,
42% of respondents who did hire an entry-level public services librarian in the past
five years were from master's colleges and universities, despite this group only

74

representing 35% of the total respondent population (Table 13). It is possible that
research universities are more likely than master’s colleges and universities or
baccalaureate colleges to demand very highly qualified entry-level candidates or, put
another way, may hire only candidates that are not so easily categorized as entrylevel. Previous research supports this conclusion. Tewell (2012) reported that 57% of
job advertisements in his study of entry-level positions required more than one year of
experience.
Focusing on respondents from research universities (n=62) reveals that 39% of
these respondents answered “no” to Question 1 indicating that they had not hired an
entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years. This compares to
only 18% of respondents from master’s colleges and universities (n=49) answering
“no”. This is an unusual result given that research universities have much larger FTE
staff sizes than all other categories of universities (Table 8). It is possible that these
results represent the advanced hiring expectations of research universities and what
they consider to be “entry-level”. A decade ago, Paulson (2003) worried about the
difficulty of finding entry-level positions at academic libraries because of increasing
requirements for a second Master’s degree and the types of work experience typically
gained by older applicants during their first or second careers. This study may have
revealed some evidence of this difficult reality at the upper end of the Carnegie
classification scale. The fact that research universities with larger FTE student
enrollments and larger FTE library staff may be underrepresented due to the
parameters of the term entry-level must be considered when assessing the results
presented here. A significant percentage of academic librarians enter librarianship
after 40 years of age (Lewis, 2010) and if research universities are hiring these first-

75

time academic librarians with their varied skills sets and experiences, these research
universities should also be included in an investigation of which KSAs have the
greatest impact on hiring decisions for first-time public services academic librarians.
Future investigations of the desired KSAs for new academic librarians should take
care to include a more nuanced definition of entry-level to avoid the loss of valuable
data.
With the existence of new or evolving job titles and hybrid positions, the term
public services was also defined in a way that would allow for a flexible interpretation
of the term entry-level public services academic librarian. The term public services
was defined as any position in which the duties and responsibilities of the employee
are less than 50% technical in nature [A majority public service function]. In
responses concerning the impact of various KSAs on hiring decisions, the study
showed that among respondents who were on a selection committee that hired an
entry-level public services academic librarian in the past five years, technology was
considered to be an extremely or very important KSA by 88% of respondents
(M=4.46). This shows that even in public services positions, technology is pervasive
and skills in this area have a strong impact on hiring decisions. A textual analysis of
the exact job titles for these entry-level public services positions (Appendix D)
revealed that at least 17% had titles that included words suggesting technical
responsibilities as a part of the job.
One of the trends noted in the LIS literature has been an indication of a
gradual decrease in the MLS/MLIS requirement for academic librarian jobs in the
United States (Starr, 2004; Bajjaly, 2005; Grimes and Grimes, 2008; Simpson, 2013).
In a longitudinal content analysis, Grimes and Grimes (2008) tracked a gradual

76

decline in the MLS/MLIS as a prerequisite for applying at an academic library from
1990 through 2005. According to Grimes and Grimes, by 2005 only 58% of all
advertised jobs listed an MLS/MLIS requirement, but when the job advertisements
were separated into job categories (public services, technical services, head of service
area, systems, and special collections) the study found that the public services
category was the sector most likely to require an MLS/MLIS.
With 87% of primary respondents for this study requiring an MLS/MLIS
degree and an additional 10% preferring one, the results of this study support the
resiliency of the MLS/MLIS requirement when it comes to entry-level public services
positions. Grimes and Grimes (2008) found that the MLS/MLIS is of more value in
positions that include core functions in public, technical, and administrative areas,
while highly specialized areas such as systems or special collections were less likely
to require an MLS/MLIS degree. This study supports that conclusion.
The 13% (n=13) of primary respondents who did not require an MLS/MLIS
degree (Table 19) had some interesting similarities in respondent characteristics.
Over 66% of respondents who did not require an MLS/MLIS were from research
universities and 75% were from universities with FTE student enrollments of over
10,000. Of the 11 job titles for positions that did not require an MLS/MLIS degree,
three were science-related and three were technology-related. These results support
the findings of Grimes and Grimes that some specialist categories of academic
librarian positions in universities with high levels of research activity do not require
an MLS/MLIS degree. This also supports the decision not to require an MLS/MLIS
degree for the definition of entry-level public services position used in this study.

77

There is a need to consider the current parameters of public services academic
librarianship when examining entry-level hiring in future studies.
As the KSA being closely examined by this study, research and publication
was of primary interest. When answering the survey question on the impact of
various KSAs on hiring decisions, only 14% of primary respondents found research
and publication experience to be an extremely or very important KSA. In fact, over
one-third (34%) felt it was not important at all. When responses to this question were
weighted according to a 5-point rating scale there were additional differences in
institutional characteristic subgroups worth noting. To calculate a weighted average
based on multiple responses the following point values were used: extremely
important (5), very important (4), moderately important (3), slightly important (2), or
not important at all (1) (Table 25).

78

Table 25
Value of Research and Publication - Institutional & Respondent
Characteristics
Institutional and respondent characteristics
N or n
M
All respondents
N=97
2.20
Respondent - Administrative
n=73
2.15
Respondent - Non-administrative
n=23
2.35
Research universities
Master's colleges and universities
Baccalaureate colleges

n=38
n=40
n=12

2.29
2.25
1.92

FTE enrollment - 10,000 or more
FTE enrollment -3,000 to 9,999
FTE enrollment - 1,000 to 2,999
FTE enrollment - fewer than 1,000

n=41
n=26
n=23
n=5

2.46
1.85
1.87
3.00

FTE staff - more than 300
FTE staff - 100 to 300
FTE staff - 25 to 99
FTE staff - less than 25

n=2
n=18
n=26
n=50

3.50
2.06
2.54
2.02

Midwest
Northeast
South
West

n=28
n=20
n=34
n=11

2.14
2.05
2.18
2.73

n=23
n=32
n=39

2.04
2.13
2.36

Rural
Suburban
Urban
Note. M = Mean.

When it comes to the impact of the research and publication KSA on hiring decisions,
there are a few institutional and respondent characteristics that point to institutions
where research and publication experience may be have a greater impact on hiring
decisions. Hiring committee members who are not in administrative positions tend to
value research and publication slightly more. It is difficult to speculate based on such
a small sample size, but this could be an indication of the difference between a topdown perspective of job duties as defined by administrators vs. a task-oriented view
of job competencies as seen by non-administrative personnel. If so, this would

79

indicate a need to focus more directly on the views of non-administrative respondents
in a future study to discover if research and publication experience is of increasing
value in performing the tasks involved in the practice of public services academic
librarianship.
Research universities and master’s colleges and universities had a slightly
stronger tendency to value research and publication as a factor in hiring for entrylevel public services positions than baccalaureate colleges. There is a possibility that
research universities may be underrepresented in the sample of those who have hired
an entry-level public services librarian in the past five years due to the parameters of
the term entry-level used in this study. Given their FTE library staff size and high
level of interest in research activities, they should have a stronger tendency to value
research and publication as a factor in hiring. The inclusion of more research
universities that had hired first-time academic librarians with more than one year of
previous experience could alter the results of this study. Further studies would be
necessary to discover if research universities actually hire true entry-level public
services librarians and whether the term entry-level needs to be redefined in the
current academic librarian job environment.
Larger universities with higher FTE enrollments also tend to have a higher
value for research and publication in hiring decisions, though the data also revealed
an interesting result concerning institutions with less than 1000 FTE students
enrolled. The weighted average for this small group (n=5) was 3.00, indicating a
large increase in the value of this KSA as compared to the average of all respondents
(2.20). This could be an anomaly caused by the small sample size of this subgroup, or
it could indicate that further study of the value of this KSA at smaller institutions is

80

warranted. The average response for institutions with over 10,000 FTE student
enrollment (2.46) is unsurprising as there would be more space for specialization in
larger universities and more tenure-track academic librarians who would need to
utilize research and publication skills. Grimes and Grimes (2008) report that the
percentage of tenure track academic librarian jobs has increased from just 6% in 1975
to 33% in 2005. This increase in tenure opportunities would result in more academic
librarians conducting academic research and publishing scholarly papers on a regular
basis.
The results for FTE library staff are also inconsistent. The highest weighted
average for any subgroup (3.5) is indicated for primary respondents from institutions
with FTE library staff of 300 or more, but this result is based on only 2 respondents.
Some of the other respondents from the largest universities may have been lost due to
the definition of entry-level as defined by this study. The remaining categories of this
group returned inconsistent results and do not reveal a trend in the value of this KSA
attached to an institution’s library staff size.
The four geographic regions showed results close to the average except for the
West (2.73), which also had the smallest sample size (n=11). Finally, urban
campuses (2.36) were slightly more likely to value this KSA when making hiring
decisions. This result is likely tied to the fact that many universities near the top of
the Carnegie classification scale exist in urban environments. Over 64% of
respondents from research universities were located in urban environments with
another 24% in suburban and only 10% in rural communities (2% were unable to
answer).

81

Taken as a whole, these results would suggest that research and publication
experience has a greater impact on hiring decisions at urban, research universities
with very large FTE student enrollments and very large library staffs in the western
region of the United States. Still, only 14% of primary respondents felt that research
and publication experience was an extremely or very important KSA when it came to
its impact on hiring decisions. It ranked 9th out of the 10 KSAs on the ranked
weighted averages list, above only second language (Table 17). Despite this relative
lack of importance, the results can be viewed in another way. Much as technology is
a KSA that pervades and impacts many other KSAs, the skills gained through
research and publication experience may be indicated within other KSAs. Research
and publication experience and familiarity with the research process in a variety of
formats would contribute to instructional program evaluation and assessment,
marketing research, institution-wide statistical analyses, grant proposals, digital
publishing efforts, scholarly communication initiatives, and collaborative efforts with
faculty who are conducting and publishing research. It would definitely contribute in
some way to other KSAs on this list, such as Evaluation and Assessment, Teaching,
and Marketing. As such it may have a deeper value that contributes to a candidate’s
skill set in a variety of other ways. The value of the tangential skills associated with
research and publication experience may not be fully considered or appreciated by all
selection committee members. Perhaps additional questions on the survey will
capture some sense of the value of research and publication experience for selection
committee members.
Primary respondents were asked to what degree scholarship and publication in
peer-reviewed journals was encouraged for public services librarians at their

82

institutions. A total of 45% of respondents considered research and publication as
either a primary or a secondary duty (Table 20). When responses to this question are
compared by respondent Carnegie classification there is a clear evidence of a
connection between higher-level research universities and levels of encouragement
for conducting research and publishing scholarly works (Table 26).
Table 26
Carnegie Classification / Research and Publication Encouragement (N=96)

Primary duty
- required
(n=20)

Secondary
duty strongly
encouraged
(n=24)

Tertiary
duty mildly
encouraged
(n=26)

neither
encouraged
nor required
(n=26)

RU/VH (n=18)

28%

33%

22%

17%

RU/H (n=11)

36%

18%

27%

18%

DRU (n=9)

22%

33%

22%

22%

Master's L (n=20)

30%

30%

20%

20%

Master's M (n=8)

25%

0%

25%

50%

Master's S (n=12)

0%

42%

33%

25%

12.5%

12.5%

25%

50%

0%

0%

0%

100%

Bac/A&S (n=8)
Bac/Diverse (n=3)

Bac/Assoc (n=1)
0%
0%
100%
100%
unable to answer
(n=6)
0%
16.5%
67%
16.5%
Note. RU/VH = Research Universities (very high research activity); RU/H = Research
Universities (high research activity); DRU = Doctoral/Research Universities;
Master's/L = Master's Colleges and Universities (larger programs); Master's/M =
Master's Colleges and Universities (medium programs); Master's/S = Master's
Colleges and Universities (smaller programs); Bac/A&S = Baccalaureate Colleges Arts & Sciences; Bac/Diverse = Baccalaureate Colleges - Diverse Fields; Bac/Assoc
= Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges.
Over fifty percent of primary respondents in the top four categories on the Carnegie
classification scale responded that they require or strongly encourage research and
publication at their institutions as a primary or secondary duty. This group represents

83

35% of the respondents who have hired an entry-level public services position in the
past five years (N=97, n=34). Given this reasonably high level of encouragement for
research and publication as a primary or secondary duty, the question remains as to
why this KSA is not more highly valued during the hiring process. It is puzzling that
only 14% of primary respondents rank research and publication experience as
extremely or very important during the hiring process, but 45% require or strongly
encourage it as a job duty. One possibility is that administrators, who make up 76%
of the respondents who hired an entry-level public services librarian, are not
comfortable exhibiting less than enthusiastic support for research by their staff when
filling out a questionnaire such as this survey. This general support for research and
publication may not extend into the specific time when hiring decisions must be made
based on a variety of KSAs. Alternately, the expectation for extensive research and
publication activity may not begin until after being hired. This could be as a part of
the advancement process for tenure track positions, or as a part of ongoing assessment
and evaluation efforts in instruction, marketing, collection development, or statistical
analysis of user services.
A separate survey question asked primary respondents if previous research
and publication experience was of value to the applicant at different phases of the
hiring process. A majority 56% of select respondents stated that research and
publication experience was not a factor in hiring decisions, while 43% believed that it
had value during the screening phase, the interview phase, or both (Table 21). More
specifically, of those who found this KSA to be of value, 29% felt it was primarily of
use during the screening phase. This means that for this group of respondents it
would be a factor in weeding out candidates prior to the interview phase. Another

84

22% felt that it would be of most value during the interview phase when a candidate
might be able to use their knowledge of research methodology or past experience
conducting research and navigating the peer-reviewed publication process to
demonstrate their suitability for the position. The final 49% of respondents who
valued this KSA during the hiring process felt that it was equally valuable during the
screening and interview phases.
These figures of 43% of primary respondents who stated that research and
publication had some value during the hiring process and 56% of primary respondents
who felt it had no impact at all roughly match the percentage of respondents that felt
that research and publication was a primary or secondary duty (45%) vs. those that
felt it was a tertiary duty or solely of use for personal professional development (55%)
(Table 20). This reinforcement of the respondents into two distinct groups is
interesting. Nearly half of primary respondents felt that research and publication was
either a primary/secondary duty or felt that this KSA could be of some value in the
screening or interview phases of the hiring process. While these numbers indicate
real value for research and publication experience at academic libraries generally, this
study presents no evidence of a strong impact on hiring decisions specifically.
One of the key questions in this survey asked for the primary respondents’
opinions of the trend in the impact of research and publication experience on hiring
decisions at academic libraries. Careful examination of the various subgroups should
reveal which types of universities, geographic areas, and job types tend to value or
dismiss this KSA.
Twenty-one percent of primary respondents felt that during the past 10 years
(January 2005 – January 2015) the impact of research and publication on hiring

85

decisions at academic libraries had increased, 25% felt that this KSA had decreased in
level of impact on hiring decisions, while 38% felt it had remained unchanged in level
of impact. (16% of respondents were unable to answer) (Table 23).
The most interesting groups of respondents for this question are those that
believed there was a positive or negative ten-year trend in the impact of this KSA on
hiring decisions. These two groups were fairly evenly distributed (n=20, n=24)
between those who saw an increase in the impact of research and publication and
those who saw a decrease in the impact of this KSA. A careful examination of which
types of respondents are found in each category should help to pinpoint what caused
such balanced disagreement among nearly half the respondents in this group. Tables
27 and 28 contrast these two groups. Table 27 shows the various characteristics of
respondents who believe that the impact of research and publication experience on
hiring decisions is increasing (n=20). The percentages in parentheses represent total
respondents who were on a hiring committee for an entry-level public services
position in the past five years (N=97).

86

Table 27
Impact of Research and Publication on Hiring Decisions is Increasing
n=20, (N=97)
Institutional and respondent characteristics
% (%)
Respondent - Administrative
70% (79%)
Respondent - Non-administrative
30% (21%)
Research universities
55% (44%)
Master's colleges and universities
30% (35%)
Baccalaureate colleges
10% (15%)
FTE enrollment - 10,000 or more
70% (42%)
FTE enrollment -3,000 to 9,999
15% (24%)
FTE enrollment - 1,000 to 2,999
15% (24%)
FTE enrollment - fewer than 1,000
0% (5%)
FTE staff - more than 300
5% (4%)
FTE staff - 100 to 300
25% (16%)
FTE staff - 25 to 99
40% (30%)
FTE staff - less than 25
30% (50%)
Midwest
15% (27%)
Northeast
25% (25%)
South
50% (31%)
West
10% (14%)
Rural
10% (24%)
Suburban
30% (26%)
Urban
60% (49%)
Respondents who believe that there is an upward trend in the impact of research and
publication experience over the past ten years (January 2005 – January 2015) are
more likely to be non-administrative than the average respondent. They also tend to
be from research universities with very large FTE student enrollments and medium to
large FTE library staffs. They are more likely to be located in urban areas in the
South or Northeast. Of course the type of community could be directly associated
with the Carnegie classification as research universities tend to be located in more
urban environments.
By contrast, the respondents who believe that the impact of research and
publication experience on hiring decisions is decreasing over a ten-year period have

87

quite different characteristics (n=24) (Table 28). The percentages in parentheses
again represent total respondents who were on a hiring committee for an entry-level
public services position in the past five years (N=97).
Table 28
Impact of Research and Publication on Hiring Decisions is Decreasing
n=24, (N=97)
Institutional and respondent characteristics
% (%)
Respondent - Administrative
87% (79%)
Respondent - Non-administrative
13% (21%)
Research universities
25% (44%)
Master's colleges and universities
50% (35%)
Baccalaureate colleges
12.5% (15%)
FTE enrollment - 10,000 or more
29% (42%)
FTE enrollment -3,000 to 9,999
46% (24%)
FTE enrollment - 1,000 to 2,999
12.5% (24%)
FTE enrollment - fewer than 1,000
12.5% (5%)
FTE staff - more than 300
0% (4%)
FTE staff - 100 to 300
12% (16%)
FTE staff - 25 to 99
21% (30%)
FTE staff - less than 25
67% (50%)
Midwest
50% (27%)
Northeast
12.5% (25%)
South
25% (31%)
West
12.5% (14%)
Rural
46% (24%)
Suburban
29% (26%)
Urban
25% (49%)
Respondents who believe that there is a downward trend in the impact of research and
publication experience over the past ten years (January 2005 – January 2015) are
more likely to be administrative than the average respondent. They tend to be from
master’s colleges and universities with medium-sized FTE student enrollments and
small FTE library staffs. They are more likely to be located in rural communities in
the Midwest or South. Their tendency to be from rural communities exceeds the
average by a significant amount.

88

Despite the probability of the loss of some respondents due to the parameters
of the term entry-level used in this study, the remaining research universities in this
study still represent a significant portion (70%) of the respondents who see the impact
of research and publication experience on hiring decisions increasing over a ten year
period (Table 27). Research universities also represented 50% of respondents who
felt research and publication was a primary or secondary duty, probably due to its
importance for tenure-track promotion. These research universities tend to have
higher FTE student enrollment, higher FTE library staff and are primarily located in
more urban communities than smaller master's colleges and universities and
baccalaureate colleges at the lower end of the Carnegie classification scale. These
smaller, rural campuses with lower FTE student enrollments and smaller FTE library
staff do not see an increase in the impact of this KSA on hiring decisions over a tenyear period. When examined in detail, more than 60% of respondents who saw a
decrease in the impact of this KSA, and who were able to identify their Carnegie
classification, came from the bottom four categories of the Carnegie classification
scale (Master's S, Bac/A&S, Bac/Diverse, Bac/Assoc).
Several possible hiring trends are suggested by these findings. If trends in
academic librarianship tend to be led by the research universities and largest master's
colleges and universities then there is some evidence that the impact of research and
publication on hiring decisions for entry-level public services positions could
continue to grow. If changes percolate up from the grassroots across campuses of all
types and sizes, then there is evidence that this KSA may continue to be viewed as a
peripheral skill. The more likely reality is that the needs of different types of
academic libraries will continue to differ and the skills required for each environment

89

may vary according to the individual specialization of the each position and the
priorities of the individual institution. This means that a specific, but sizeable,
number of potential employers will continue to value this KSA and want to hire
employees who can utilize it once engaged in the day-to-day tasks of a public services
academic librarian, but it may not impact hiring decisions for entry-level public
services positions across all institutions.
Conclusion
The results of this study do not support the view that the impact of research
and publication experience on hiring decisions for entry-level public services
academic librarian positions in the United States is rising across all Carnegie
classifications. This study has found that the impact of research and publication
experience on hiring decisions for entry-level public services academic librarian
positions is slightly higher at institutions ranked higher on the Carnegie classification
scale, despite the possible loss of a number of respondents from research universities
due to the limitations of the definition of entry-level used in this study. The study
showed less impact for research and publication experience on hiring decisions at
smaller universities and colleges. A large percentage of respondents to the survey
(45%) stated that they considered research and publication to be a primary or
secondary duty for academic librarians at their institutions. This may indicate that
selection committee members see some value for this KSA in the performance of job
duties. Despite this fact, the relative position of this KSA as compared to the other
nine KSAs examined in this study was low. This could be an indication that research
and publication experience is only valued after hiring has occurred and that it is under
appreciated or devalued at hiring time. Or it could indicate that it is still emerging as

90

a KSA of relative importance in the hiring of academic librarians for new hybrid
positions. Future studies may contribute to answering some of these questions.
This study has indicated several promising areas for additional research.
Answering the question of precisely what types of work experience are typically
required for first time public services academic librarians at universities and colleges
would help to clarify the current expectations of employers across the field. The
existence of various types of professional and non-professional work experience of
value to selection committee members at academic libraries makes it difficult to
ascertain what kinds of experience are usually sought at specific types of academic
libraries. It would be worth investigating the current, accurate definition of entrylevel position and how MLS/MLIS graduates and first-time academic librarians can
best prepare to meet evolving expectations.
The small differences in the views of research and publication by
administrators and non-administrators should be explored further to discover if there
is a gap between the KSA expectations (job duties) of administrators and the KSA
realities (job competencies) of academic librarians. Do non-administrator academic
librarians tend to see research and publication experience as a valuable KSA of use in
their jobs? A study that elucidated the exact sub-skills associated with research and
publication and then revealed how they were manifested in the daily tasks of a public
services academic librarian could offer evidence of the pervasive and useful nature of
this KSA within a variety of contexts.
A final area that is worth exploring is suggested by the gap between the 44%
of respondents who saw some value for research or publication experience in the
screening or interview phase of the hiring process (Table 21) and the 31% who

91

indicated that they examined resumes in detail for journal/publication quality (Table
22). This gap suggests that some selection committees may be failing to assess
whether publications given as evidence of this KSA were properly peer-reviewed.
Some open access journals operate on a fee-based model that can in extreme cases
lead to a degradation of quality and a threat to the peer-review system. This danger
can be addressed through careful monitoring at all levels of the knowledge creation
and dissemination process including the hiring process at institutions of higher
education.
Several lists focusing on journal quality are available and could be utilized to
assist in checking journal quality. Harzing (2015) has compiled the Journal Quality
List, now in its 53rd edition, since 2000. It is designed to help authors find reputable
journals for their own articles and papers, but could be used to evaluate publication
quality generally. The Ulrichsweb Global Serials Directory (2015) is an easy-to-use
database that can be accessed to quickly identify refereed journals. Beall (2015) has
also compiled a list of questionable, scholarly open-access journals and publishers
engaged in predatory publishing at the Scholarly Open Access website. The list is
updated regularly and highlights the worst offenders operating on the dark side of
academic publishing. Future research that anonymously tracked levels of publication
quality as presented in resumes for academic librarian positions could shed a light on
this troubling trend and alert authors and potential employers alike to the scope of the
problem.

92

References
American Library Association. (2012, June). 2012 top ten trends in academic
libraries: A review of the trends and issues affecting academic libraries in
higher education. College & Research Libraries News, 73, 311-320.
American Library Association. Association of College & Research Libraries.
(2010, June). A guideline for the appointment, promotion and tenure of
academic librarians. Retrieved March 26, 2014, from http://www.ala.org/
acrl/standards/promotiontenure
American Library Association. (2009). ALA’s core competencies of librarianship.
Retrieved March 26, 2014, from http://www.ala.org/educationcareers/
sites/ala.org.educationcareers/files/content/careers/corecomp/
corecompetences/finalcorecompstat09.pdf
American Library Association. (2015). Knowledge and competencies statements
developed by relevant professional organizations. Retrieved March 19,
2015, from http://www.ala.org/educationcareers/careers/corecomp/
corecompspecial/knowledgecompetencies
Applegate, R. (2007). Charting academic library staffing: Data from national surveys.
College & Research Libraries, 68, 59-68.
Applegate, R. (2010). Clarifying jurisdiction in the library workforce: Tasks,
support staff, and professional librarians. Library Trends, 59, 288-314.
Association of Research Libraries. (2002, October). SPEC Kit 270: Core
competencies. (ISSN 0160 3582). Office of Leadership and Management
Services. Retrieved March 26, 2014, from http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/
pt?id=mdp.39015051918897;view=1up;seq=1
Association of Southeastern Research Libraries. (2000). Shaping the future:
ASERL’s competencies for research librarians. Retrieved March 26, 2014,
from http://www.aserl.org/programs/competencies/
Bajjaly, S.T. (2005). Contemporary recruitment in traditional libraries. Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, 46, 53-58.
Beall, J. (Ed.) (2015). List of publishers / List of standalone journals. Scholarly
Open Access: Critical analysis of scholarly open-access publishing.
Retrieved March 12, 2015, from http://scholarlyoa.com/
Bechtel, J.M. (1994). Librarian generalists: Holistic librarianship. College &
Undergraduate Libraries, 1(1), 9-22.

93

Beile, P.M., & Adams, M. (2000). Other duties as assigned: Emerging trends in the
academic library job market. College & Research Libraries, 61, 336-347.
Bell, S.J., & Shank, J. (2004, July). The blended librarian: A blueprint for redefining
the teaching and learning role of academic librarians. College & Research
Libraries News, 65, 372-375.
Berg, S.A., Jacobs, H., & Cornwall, D. (2013). Academic librarians and research: A
study of Canadian library administrator perspectives. College & Research
Libraries, 74, 560-572.
Birdsall, D.G. (1991). Recruiting academic librarians: How to find and hire the
best candidates. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 17, 276-283.
Bishop, B.W., Cadle, A.W., & Grubesic, T.H. (2015). Job analyses of emerging
information professions: A survey validation of core competencies to
inform curricula. Library Quarterly: Information, Community, Policy, 85, 6484.
Brannon, S., & Leuzinger, J. (2014). Keeping human resources happy: Improving
hiring processes through the use of rubrics. Library Leadership &
Management, 29(1), 1-10.
Brown, P.O., Cabell, D., Chakravarti, A., Cohen, B., Delamothe, T., Eisen, M., . . .
Watson, L. (2003, June 20). Bethesda Statement on Open Access Publishing.
http://www.earlham.edu/~peters/fos/bethesda.htm. Retrieved February 16,
2014 from http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:4725199
Brunner, M.L. (2010). Ph.D. holders in the academic library: The CLIR
postdoctoral fellowship program. In S. Walter & K. Williams (Eds.), The
expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic library in
the 21st century (pp. 158-189). Chicago: Association of College and
Research Libraries.
Canadian Association of Research Libraries. (2010, October). Core competencies for
21st century CARL librarians. Retrieved March 26, 2014, from
http://www.carl-abrc.ca/uploads/pdfs/core_comp_profile-e.pdf
Carlson, J.R., & Garritano, J.R. (2010). E-science, cyberinfrastructure, and the
changing face of scholarship: Organizing for new models of research
support at the Purdue University Libraries. In S. Walter & K. Williams
(Eds.), The expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic
library in the 21st century (pp. 234-269). Chicago: Association of College and
Research Libraries.

94

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (2010). The Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Standard Listings. Basic
Classification. Retrieved April 27, 2014, from http://classifications.
carnegiefoundation.org/lookup_listings/standard.php
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (2010). The Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Summary Tables.
Retrieved April 27, 2014, from http://classifications.carnegiefoundation.
org/lookup_listings/standard.php
Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. (2010). The Carnegie
Classification of Institutions of Higher Education Interim Site. Standard
Listings. Basic Classification. Retrieved January 4, 2015, from
http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup_listings/standard.php
Choi, Y., & Rasmussen, E. (2009). What qualifications and skills are important for
digital librarian positions in academic libraries? A job advertisement
analysis. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 35, 457-467.
Clair, K. (2010). Creative disorder: The work of metadata librarians in the 21st
century. In S. Walter & K. Williams (Eds.), The expert library: Staffing,
sustaining, and advancing the academic library in the 21st century (pp. 270291). Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Council on Library and Information Resources (CLIR). (2014). Fellowships in
Academic Libraries. Retrieved October 13, 2014, from
http://www.clir.org/fellowships/postdoc/applicants/acad
Crowe, S.H., & Jaguszewski, J.M. (2010). Preparing our librarians for the future:
Identifying and assessing the core competencies at the University of
Minnesota Libraries. In S. Walter & K. Williams (Eds.), The expert library:
Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic library in the 21st century
(pp. 127-157). Chicago: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Davis, D.M. (2010). Academic and public librarian salaries and library staffing
expenditures trends, 2000-2009. Library Trends, 59, 43-66.
Defa, D.D. (2012). Recruitment of employees in academic libraries. Library
Leadership & Management, 26(3/4), 1-10.
Detmering, R., & Sproles, C. (2012). Forget the desk job: Current roles and
responsibilities in entry-level reference job advertisements. College &
Research Libraries, 73, 543-555.
Durán, K., Garcia, E.P., & Houdyshell, M.L. (2009). From the inside out and the
outside in: The academic library interview process in a tight economy.
College & Research Libraries News, 70, 216-219.

95

Engel, D., Huang, J., & Reiss, F. (2003). Librarians wanted: A staff development
program designed to solve recruiting woes. Library Management, 24,
229-236.
Feldmann, L.M., Level, A.V., & Liu, S. (2013). Leadership training and
development: An academic library’s findings. Library Management, 34, 96104.
Fisher, W. (2001). Core competencies for the acquisitions librarian. Library
Collections, Acquisitions, & Technical Services, 25, 179-190.
Furlough, M.J. (2010). The publisher in the library. In S. Walter & K. Williams
(Eds.), The expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic
library in the 21st century (pp. 190-233). Chicago: Association of College and
Research Libraries.
Gendron, H. (2010). Put the pieces together and you get the perfect academic
librarian… or do you? What competency standards tell us about academic
librarianship in the 21st century. In S. Walter & K. Williams (Eds.), The
expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic library in
the 21st century (pp. 76-92). Chicago: Association of College and Research
Libraries.
Gibson, C., & Coniglio, J.W. (2010). The new liaison librarian: Competencies for the
21st century academic library. In S. Walter & K. Williams (Eds.), The
expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the academic library in
the 21st century (pp. 93-126). Chicago: Association of College and Research
Libraries.
Giesecke, J., & McNeil, B. (1999). Core competencies and the learning
organization. Library Administration & Management, 13, 158-166.
Gonzalez, M.E. (2010). Workforce competencies: Focus on urban public libraries.
Library Trends, 59, 269-287.
Gremmels, G.S. (2013). Staffing trends in college and university libraries. Reference
Services Review, 41, 233-252.
Grimes, M. F., & Grimes, P. W. (2008). The academic librarian labor market and the
role of the Master of Library Science degree: 1975 through 2005. The Journal
of Academic Librarianship, 34, 332-339. DOI: 10.1016/j.acalib.2008.05.023
Hansson, J., & Johannesson, K. (2013). Librarian’s views of academic library
support for scholarly publishing: An every-day perspective. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 39, 232-240.

96

Harper, R. (2012). The collection and analysis of job advertisements: A review of
research methodology. Library and Information Research, 36(112), 29-54.
Harralson, D.M. (2001). Recruitment in academic libraries: Library literature in the
90s. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 8(1), 41-74.
Harzing, A.W. (Ed.) (2015). Journal quality list (53rd ed.). Retrieved April 16,
2014, from http://www.harzing.com/jql.htm.
Heinrichs, J.H., & Lim, J.S. (2009). Emerging requirements of computer related
competencies for librarians. Library & Information Science Research, 31,
101-106.
Hodge, M., & Spoor, N. (2012). Congratulations! You’ve landed an interview:
What do hiring committees really want? New Library World, 113, 139-161.
Huff-Eibl, R., Voyles, J.F., & Brewer, M.M. (2011). Competency-based hiring, job
description, and performance goals: The values of an integrated system.
Journal of Library Administration, 51, 673-691.
Jennerich, E.Z., & Baughman, M.S. (2010). Creating smooth sailing: The benefits
of organization development for the expert library. In S. Walter & K.
Williams (Eds.), The expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing the
academic library in the 21st century (pp. 337-364). Chicago: Association of
College and Research Libraries.
Kennan, M.A., Willard, P., & Wilson, C.S. (2006). What do they want? A study of
changing employer expectations of information professionals. Australian
Academic & Research Libraries, 37, 17-37.
Koufogiannakis, D., & Crumley, E. (2006). Research in librarianship: Issues to
consider. Library Hi Tech, 24, 324-340.
Lankes, R.D. (2010). Innovators wanted: No experience necessary? In S. Walter &
K. Williams (Eds.), The expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing
the academic library in the 21st century (pp. 52-75). Chicago:
Association of College and Research Libraries.
Lehner, J.A. (1997). Reconsidering the personnel selection practices of academic
libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 23, 199-204.
Lewis, D.W. (2010). Academic library staffing a decade from now. In S. Walter &
K. Williams (Eds.), The expert library: Staffing, sustaining, and advancing
the academic library in the 21st century (pp. 1-29). Chicago:
Association of College and Research Libraries.

97

Lewis, D.W. (2012). The inevitability of open access. College & Research
Libraries, 73, 493-506.
Mercer, H. (2011). Almost halfway there: An analysis of the open access behaviors
of academic librarians. College and Research Libraries, 72, 443–453.
Moran, B.B., Marshall, J.G., & Rathbun-Grubb, S. (2010). The academic library
workforce: Past, present and future. Library Trends, 59, 208-219.
Neal, J.G. (2006). Integrating the new generation of feral professionals into the
academic library. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Nesbeitt, S. (2003). Librarian recruitment process at home in the wired nation.
American Libraries, 34(6), 116-118.
Nulty, D.D. (2008). The adequacy of response rates to online and paper surveys:
What can be done? Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 33, 301314.
Nutefall, J.E., & Chadwell, F.A. (2012). Preparing for the 21st century: Academic
library realignment. New Library World, 113, 162-173.
Paulson, K. (2003). Recruitment, education, and retention of librarians: A response to
the top issues. College and Research Libraries News, 64, 89.
Raschke, G.K. (2003). Hiring and recruitment practices in academic libraries:
Problems and solutions. Portal: Libraries and the Academy, 3, 53-67.
Reeves, R.K., & Hahn, T.B. (2010). Job advertisements for recent graduates:
Advising, curriculum, and job-seeking implications. Journal of Education for
Library and Information Science, 51, 103-119.
Regazzi, J.J. (2013). U.S. academic library spending, staffing and utilization during
the Great Recession 2008-2010. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 39,
217-222.
Reser, D.W., & Schuneman, A.P. (1992). The academic library job market: A
content analysis comparing public and technical services. College &
Research Libraries, 53, 49-59.
Shaffer, C. (2011). Best practices for hiring academic librarians with faculty
status and rank. The Southeastern Librarian, 59(3), 3-9.
Shih, T.H. & Fan, X. (2008). Comparing response rates from web and mail surveys:
A meta-analysis. Field Methods, 20, 249-271.

98

Shumaker, D., & Tyler, L.A. (2007). Embedded library services: An initial inquiry
into practices for their development, management and delivery. Paper
presented to the Special Libraries Association Annual Conference - Denver,
CO. - June 6, 2007.
Simpson, B. (2013). Hiring non-MLS librarians: Trends and training implications.
Library Leadership & Management (Online), 28(1), 1-15.
Sproles, C., & Detmering, R. (2010). Job seeking in an academic environment: A
dual perspective. The Southeastern Librarian, 58(1), 9-18.
Sproles, C., & Ratledge, D. (2004). An analysis of entry-level librarian ads
published in American Libraries, 1982-2002. Electronic Journal of
Academic and Special Librarianship, 5(2/3), Retrieved April 16, 2014,
from http://southernlibrarianship.icaap.org/content/v05n02/
sproles_c01.htm
Starr, J. (2004). A measure of change: Comparing library job advertisements of
1983 and 2003. Library and Information Science Research e-journal
(LIBRES), 14(2).
Stewart, C. (2010). Half empty or half full? Staffing trends in academic libraries at
U.S. research universities, 2000-2008. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 36, 394-400.
Strothman, M., & Ohler, L.A. (2011). Retaining academic librarians: by chance or
by design? Library Management, 32, 191-208.
SurveyMonkey. (2014). available at https://www.surveymonkey.com/
Tewell, E.C. (2012). Employment opportunities for new academic librarians:
Assessing the availability of entry level jobs. Portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 12, 407-423.
Ulrichsweb Global Serials Directory. (2015). available at
ulrichsweb.serialssolutions.com
Wang, Z., & Guarria, C. (2010). Unlocking the mystery: What academic library
search committees look for in filling faculty positions. Technical Services
Quarterly, 27, 66-86.
Wang, H., Tang, Y., & Knight, C. (2010). Contemporary development of academic
reference librarianship in the United States: A 44-year content analysis. The
Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36, 489-494.

99

Wanucha, M. (2014). A year of library jobline: 2013 edition. Library Research
Service. (Fast Facts ED3/110.10/No. 328). Retrieved March 13, 2015,
from http://www.lrs.org/fast-facts-topics/academic/
Wheeler, R.E., Johnson, N.P., & Manion, T.K. (2008). Choosing the top candidate:
Best practices in academic law library hiring. Law Library Journal, 100,
117-135.
White, M.D., & Marsh, E.E. (2006). Content analysis: A flexible methodology.
Library Trends, 55, 22-45.
Wise, S., Henninger, M., & Kennan, M.A. (2011). Changing trends in LIS job
advertisements. Australian Academic & Research Libraries, 42, 268295.
Womack, K. (1997). Applying for professional positions in academic libraries:
Meeting minimum requirements. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 23,
205-209.
Xu, H. (1996). The impact of automation of job requirements and qualifications for
catalogers and reference librarians in academic libraries. Library Resources
and Technical Services, 40, 9-31.

100

Appendix A
Online Survey
Message to participant
Thank you for agreeing to participate in my thesis study on the hiring of academic
librarians in the United States. The results of the study will better prepare MLS/MLIS
graduates for their job search efforts and add to the scholarly conversation on the
evolving roles and responsibilities of academic librarians. This survey is entirely
anonymous and voluntary. There will be no identifying information collected about
you, your library, your institution, or your staff. If at any time you decide you do not
want to participate you may simply stop filling out the survey. By clicking “Yes” for
question 17 at the end of the questionnaire you are consenting to participate in the
study and share the anonymous data collected. The data collected may subsequently
be published as generalizable knowledge and presented to other professionals or
academics.
Online Questionnaire
1. Did you serve on a selection committee (hiring committee/ search and screen
committee) for an entry-level public services position at your academic library in the
time period from January 2010 to the present? If you have served on more than one
hiring committee for an entry-level position since January 2010, please choose the
most recent case.
Note:
• Entry-level position shall be defined as either requiring no experience or
requiring one year of experience or less.
• Public services positions shall be defined as positions in which the duties
and responsibilities of the employee are less than 50% technical in nature.
[A majority public service function.]
☐ Yes (Please continue with Questions 2-17 below)
☐ No (Please complete Questions 10-17 below)
Please consider the most recent selection committee you served on and answer all the
questions below in relation to that specific case.
2. What was the exact title of the entry-level public services position?
3. How would you assess the following 10 applicant KSAs (Knowledge, Skills,
Abilities) in terms of their impact on the selection committee’s hiring decision for this
entry-level public services position? Please select one answer for each KSA.
Ability to utilize technology successfully through the use of basic hardware, software,
and/or technological tools and applications.
☐ extremely important

101

☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience with leadership through supervisory experience and/or project
management.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience conducting scholarly research and publishing results in peer-reviewed
journals.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience designing lesson plans and teaching a class of students.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience promoting and/or marketing a product or service.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience collaborating successfully as a part of a team.
☐ extremely important

102

☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Ability to communicate efficiently and effectively in written and spoken form.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Experience evaluating or assessing instructional sessions, programs, services or
collections.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Ability to exhibit emotional intelligence and successfully create and maintain
interpersonal relationships.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Ability to speak a second language.
☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ unable to answer
Other (Please add any essential KSA that impacted your hiring decision, but wasn’t
included or emphasized sufficiently in the categories above.)

103

☐ extremely important
☐ very important
☐ moderately important
☐ slightly important
☐ not important at all
☐ not necessary to add an additional KSA
4. Did this entry-level public services position require previous work experience?
Please select one answer.
☐ some work experience required (one year or less)
☐ some work experience preferred, but not required
☐ no work experience required
☐ unable to answer
5. Is scholarship and publication in peer-reviewed journals by public services
academic librarians encouraged at your institution? Please select one answer.
☐ required (a primary duty)
☐ strongly encouraged, but not required (a secondary duty)
☐ mildly encouraged, but not required (a tertiary duty)
☐ neither encouraged nor required (personal professional development only)
☐ actively discouraged (a distraction from primary duties)
☐ unable to answer
6. At what phase of the application process is previous research and publication
experience of the most value to the applicant? Please select one answer.
☐ screening phase
☐ interview phase
☐ both the screening and interview phase (approximately equal weight)
☐ not a factor in hiring decisions
☐ unable to answer
7. In your role as a selection committee member, do you examine publications on an
applicant’s resume in detail for journal/publication quality? Please select one answer.
☐ Yes, during the screening phase
☐ Yes, after the screening phase, but prior to the interview phase
☐ No, publications are not examined carefully for journal/publication quality
☐ No, because applicant publications do not impact my decision
☐ unable to answer
8. How would you describe the trend over the past ten years in the impact of research
and publication experience on hiring decisions at academic libraries? Please select
one answer.

104

☐ becoming more impactful
☐ remaining relatively stable in level of impact
☐ becoming less impactful
☐ unable to answer
9. Was an MLS/MLIS degree required or preferred for this entry-level public services
position? Please select one answer.
☐ required MLS/MLIS
☐ preferred MLS/MLIS, but not required
☐ MLS/MLIS not mentioned as a requirement
☐ unable to answer
Please answer these last few questions about you and your academic institution.
10. Which of the following most closely matches your job title?
☐ library director
☐ university librarian
☐ head of specific service area
☐ academic librarian
☐ faculty member / professor
☐ other – Please specify.
11. Which of these categories best describes your university? Please select one
answer.
☐ Doctoral-granting / Research University (more than 20 research doctoral degrees
awarded)
☐ Master’s Colleges and Universities (more than 50 Master’s degrees awarded)
☐ Baccalaureate Colleges (less than 50 Master’s degrees awarded)
☐ unable to answer
12. What is your university’s Carnegie Classification? (listings of universities
available at http://carnegieclassifications.iu.edu/lookup_listings/
institution.php) Please select one answer.
☐ RU/VH: Research Universities (more than 20 research doctoral degrees &
very high research activity – Level 1)
☐ RU/H: Research Universities (more than 20 research doctoral degrees &
high research activity – Level 2)
☐ DRU: Doctoral/Research Universities (more than 20 research doctoral degrees)
☐ Master's L: Master's Colleges and Universities (200+ MA degrees)
☐ Master's M: Master's Colleges and Universities (100-199 MA degrees)
☐ Master's S: Master's Colleges and Universities (50-99 MA degrees)
☐ Bac/A&S: Baccalaureate Colleges--Arts & Sciences (less than 50 MA degrees
awarded, more than 50% of BA degrees are arts and sciences)

105

☐ Bac/Diverse: Baccalaureate Colleges--Diverse Fields (less than 50 MA degrees
awarded, less than 50% of BA degrees are arts and sciences)
☐ Bac/Assoc: Baccalaureate/Associate's Colleges (BA degrees represent
10-50% of undergraduate degrees awarded)
☐ unable to answer
13. What is your student full-time equivalent (FTE) enrollment? Please select one
answer.
☐ 10,000 or more FTE enrollment
☐ 3,000 to 9,999 FTE enrollment
☐ 1,000 to 2,999 FTE enrollment
☐ fewer than 1,000 FTE enrollment
☐ unable to answer
14. How many FTE library staff are employed by your institution? Please select one
answer.
☐ more than 300
☐ 100 to 300
☐ 25 to 99
☐ less than 25
☐ unable to answer
15. In which geographic region of the United States is your institution located?
Please select one answer.
☐ Midwest
☐ Northeast
☐ South
☐ West
☐ unable to answer
16. How would you describe the location of your campus? Please select one answer.
☐ Rural
☐ Suburban
☐ Urban
☐ unable to answer
17. Do you consent to allow all data collected in this voluntary, anonymous
questionnaire to be published and shared?
☐ Yes
☐ No

106

Appendix B
Request for Participants
Subject Line: Study on the hiring of entry-level academic librarians
My name is James Hicks and I am currently attending the San Jose State
University School of Information. I’d like to invite you to participate in my thesis
study on the hiring of academic librarians in the United States. You have been
randomly selected from 1831 academic libraries to take part in this anonymous,
voluntary study. The results of the study will better prepare MLS/MLIS graduates for
their job search efforts and add to the scholarly conversation on the evolving roles and
responsibilities of academic librarians. It would be greatly appreciated if you could
forward this email to one participant from your institution who has served on a
selection committee for an entry-level public services academic librarian position
since January 2010. The participant may be a library director, university librarian,
academic librarian, head of a specific service area, or faculty member (including
yourself). “Entry-level” is defined as requiring one year or less of experience
(including internships, part-time work or volunteer work). “Public services” is
defined as a position in which the duties or responsibilities of the employee are less
than 50% technical in nature [A majority public service function]. If your institution
has not hired an entry-level public services academic librarian since January 2010,
please answer “No” for Question 1 of the survey and take a couple of minutes to
answer a few multiple choice questions about your institution. Your answers will still
provide valuable data for the study.
Participating respondents will complete a short, 17-question, multiple-choice,
online questionnaire (SurveyMonkey link below). The survey is completely
anonymous and participation indicates consent to allow the data to be published and
shared. There will be no identifying information collected about you, your library,
your institution, or your staff. The data will be collected during January and February
of 2015. You will receive one additional reminder email. I apologize for the
inconvenience, but the fully anonymous design of the study does not allow for
differentiation between respondents and non-respondents. Thank you for your
patience.
The primary investigator for this study is James Hicks. I can be reached at
xyz@xyz.com or 123-456-7xxx. This study has been approved by the San Jose State
University Institutional Review Board, which can be reached at 987-654-3xxx.
You can access the anonymous, self-administered, multiple-choice
questionnaire using the link below. It should take no longer than 10 or 15 minutes to
complete. Thanks so much for your time.
Sincerely,
James Hicks
San Jose State University School of Information
SurveyMonkey Survey Link: https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/VR6Q9VF

107

Appendix C
Reminder Email
My name is James Hicks and I am currently attending San Jose State
University School of Information. I contacted you one week ago about participation
in my thesis study. This is just a short reminder to random selectees who have not yet
completed the online questionnaire examining the hiring of academic librarians in the
United States. The results of this study will better prepare MLS/MLIS graduates for
their job search efforts and add to the scholarly conversation on the evolving roles and
responsibilities of academic librarians.
If you have already completed the survey, I apologize for the reminder and
thank you for your time. If you haven’t had the chance to complete the short,
anonymous, multiple-choice questionnaire, it would be greatly appreciated if you
could forward this email to one participant from your institution who has served on a
selection committee for an entry-level public services academic librarian position
since January 2010. The participant may be a library director, university librarian,
academic librarian, head of a specific service area, or faculty member (including
yourself). If your institution has not hired an entry-level public services academic
librarian since January 2010, please answer “No” for Question 1 of the survey and
take a couple of minutes to answer a few multiple-choice questions about your
institution. Your answers will still provide valuable data for this study.
Thanks again.
Sincerely,
James Hicks
San Jose State University School of Information
Survey Monkey Survey Link: https://www.surveymonkey.com/s/VR6Q9VF

108

Appendix D
Entry-Level Public Services Position Titles
Respondent
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41

Response Text
Information Services Librarian
Science Librarian
Campus Librarian
Instruction Specialist
Electronic Access and User Experience Librarian
Science Reference & Instruction Librarian
Distance Education Librarian
Reference/Instruction Librarian
Digital Services Librarian
Reference Librarian
Business Reference Librarian
Undergraduate Education Librarian
Business Liaison Librarian
Digital Services Librarian
Research & Instruction Librarian
Humanities Librarian
Assistant Librarian
Art Collection Public Services Librarian
Assistant Librarian
Assistant Librarian
Electronic resources librarian
assistant librarian
multiple
Distance Education Librarain
Reference Librarian
Web/STEM Librarian
Reference/Government Information Librarian
Regional Campus Librarian
Emerging Technologies Librarian
Instruction Librarian
Reference Librarian
Distance Learning and E-Resources Librarian
Reference/Instruction Librarian
Undergraduate Outreach Librarian/Assitant Prof
Collection Development Librarian (position has siginficant ref and
instruction work also)
Collection development librarian
Technical Services Librarian
Electronic Services Librarian
Reference and Instructional Librarian I
Digital Services and Reference Librarian
library reference assistant

109

42
43
44
45
46
47
48
49
50
51
52
53
54
55
56
57
58
59
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86

University Archivist/Librarian
Reference Librarian
Reference Librarian
Social Science Teaching and Faculty Outreach Librarian
Outreach/Marketing Librarian
"Writing and Information Literacy in the Disciplines" grant funded
position
Outreach Librarian
Reference Assistant
Reference Librarian
Instruction Librarian
Public Services Librarian
College Librarian for Liberal Arts and Information Literacy
Instruction Librarian
Information Services Librarian
Reserve librarian. I recall
Reference Librarian
Circulation Assistant
Information services librarian
Undergraduate Learning Librarian
Access Services Librarian
Undergraduate Engagement Librarian
Access Services Librarian
Special collections cataloger
Part-time Reference Librarian
Reference and Instruction Librarian
Reference Librarian
Chemical Information Specialist, Assistant Professor
Reference Librarian
Agricultural Sciences and Digital Initiatives Librarian
Research Librarian
Reference Librarian
Science reference librarian
Access Services Librarian
public service librarian
Electronic Resource Librarian
Information Librarian / Electronic Resources Management
Reference/Instruction librarian
Science Librarian
Online Learning/Instructional Design Librarian
Systems Librarian
3 positions: Architecture Library Specialist and Technical Reference
Librarian
Instructional Technology Librarian
Access services librarian
librarian
Reference Librarian/Subject Specialist

110

Appendix E
Informal Survey
Subject Line: SJSU-SLIS student: Informal Qualitative Survey
My name is James Hicks and I’m currently enrolled in the San Jose State
University School of Library and Information Science. As a step in the development
of my thesis research proposal I was hoping you might answer a few questions to help
me gather some qualitative data. My thesis will investigate the impact of research and
publication experience on hiring for academic librarian positions. The attached short
questionnaire is being conducted using nonprobability, convenience sampling of
SJSU-SLIS faculty who are likely to have experience serving on an academic library
selection committee. It will be used to clarify and refine the direction of my thesis
research and the development of the data collection instrument. All participants will
have full anonymity and the results may be mentioned in the methodology section of
my thesis. If you have the time, I do hope you will complete the short questionnaire
by the end of April 2014 and send it back to me as at this email address.
(xyz@xyz.com). It should only take 5 to 10 minutes. Thanks for your time in either
case.
Sincerely,
James Hicks
xyz@xyz.com
Questionnaire
Question 1: Have you ever served on a selection committee charged with hiring an
academic librarian? If so, what was the year or time period in which you served on
hiring committee(s)?
Question 2: Did the hiring process include a resume or applicant screening phase in
which specific criteria were used to narrow the field of applicants? If so, what were
the specific criteria used for screening applicants?
Question 3: Was the applicant’s previous research and publication experience a factor
in either the applicant screening phase or the interviewing phase of the hiring process?
How would you categorize the impact of research and publication experience on
hiring prospects for an individual applicant?
Question 4: In your opinion, what is the general trend in the importance of research
and publication experience for academic librarians?

111

