FLORIDA STATE UNIVERSITY
COLLEGE OF COMMUNICATION AND INFORMATION

INFORMATION BEHAVIOR AT HIGHPATH SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY: A CASE STUDY

By
THEODORE PATRICK MILAS, JR.

A Dissertation submitted to the
School of Library and Information Studies
in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the degree of
Doctor of Philosophy

Degree Awarded:
Spring Semester, 2015

UMI Number: 3705884

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3705884
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Theodore Patrick Milas, Jr. defended this dissertation on April 10, 2015.
The members of the supervisory committee were:

Don Latham
Professor Directing Dissertation

Matthew Goff
University Representative

Gary Burnett
Committee Member

Paul Marty
Committee Member

The Graduate School has verified and approved the above-named committee members, and
certifies that the dissertation has been approved in accordance with university requirements.

ii

Dedicated to my lovely wife, Piper.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to thank my major professor, Don Latham. I thank the committee members, Gary
Burnett, Paul Marty and Matthew Goff for their patience with me throughout my doctoral
program. I would like to thank the research subjects for their participation and the host site for its
hospitality and enthusiasm. I thank my wife, Piper, for believing in me when I struggled, and
supporting me through the finish.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Abstract .......................................................................................................................................... vi
1. INTRODUCTION ......................................................................................................................1
2. LITERATURE REVIEW .........................................................................................................15
3. METHODOLOGY....................................................................................................................30
4. RESULTS .................................................................................................................................43
5. DISCUSSION ...........................................................................................................................97
APPENDICES .............................................................................................................................115
A. RESEARCH QUESTIONS, INTERVIEWEES AND INTERVIEW QUESTIONS .............115
B. CONTACT SUMMARY FORM ............................................................................................119
C. HUMAN SUBJECTS COMMITTEE APPROVAL MEMORANDUM ...............................121
D. HUMAN SUBJECTS COMMITTEE APPROVAL MEMORANDUM FOR CHANGE IN
RESEARCH PROTOCOL...........................................................................................................122
E. CONSENT FORM FOR INTERVIEW PARTICIPANTS .....................................................123
F. HIGHPATH SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY CASE STUDY CODE BOOK .............................125
References ....................................................................................................................................138
Biographical Sketch .....................................................................................................................144

v

ABSTRACT

This study explored the roles of graduate theological students’ religious faith and degree
program affiliation in their information behaviors, particularly their degree-related research
behaviors. In 2015, religious intolerance continues to stratify barriers between communities. One
domain where faith significantly affects student life is in graduate studies of religion and
theology. This study’s purpose was to explore problems in information action inherent to the
dichotomy between academic study of theology that leads to Master of Arts (MA) and Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD) degrees and professional study of theology that leads to Master of Divinity
(MDiv) and Doctor of Theology (ThD) degrees. To locate the most appropriate research subjects
for qualitative inquiry, this study first investigated the content of PhD and ThD dissertation
acknowledgements using bibliometric analysis. The frequency with which the PhD and ThD
dissertations’ acknowledgements acknowledge affiliates within their authors’ own degree
programs and religious faith traditions guided the research design for subsequent interviewing of
MA and MDiv students about the roles of their religious faith, degree program affiliation and
interpersonal information sources in their research processes. Data were collected, coded and
analyzed as a lens into the relationships between authors, affiliations and acknowledgements.
The qualitative component – intensive interviewing about Master’s students’ research processes
– qualified the results of the quantitative analysis of PhD and ThD students’ interpersonal
information source preferences manifest in their dissertations’ acknowledgements. The study
found that information behavior does relate to degree program affiliations and students’ religious
faith, thus degree program affiliation and religious faith background should be considered in
research consultations and bibliographic instruction in theological libraries.

vi

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Library and information science (LIS) has traditionally examined particular kinds
of information and information behavior as embedded in a variety of contexts. For
instance, information seeking has been studied in the “context of occupations” (Case,
2002, p. 233), among other contexts. This study explores the domain of religion in terms
of its information phenomena and processes. The two disciplines I broadly harness for
this study are information studies and religion. I narrow the study’s scope to the specific
context of information science and the research process at Highpath School of Theology.
What do information, information needs, information seeking, as well as
information systems and technology have to do with religion, particularly the
phenomenon of graduate theological education? Research in LIS on the intersections of
theological research behavior and information science is sparse, but as a point of entry, I
explore the information behavior of users (students, faculty and librarians) of the
Highpath School of Theology Library. Since user studies, suggested Krikelas (1983),
“probably form the largest single body of research literature in librarianship” (p. 5), it is
hoped that this research will contribute to an underrepresented area of library research:
graduate theological research behavior.
In this chapter I introduce the study significance, research problem, prior research
(including preliminary study), research design, study mandate, and research climate
(ongoing and recent studies). In the four chapters that follow the introduction, I report on
the literature review conducted, present the details of the research methodology, present

1

the results of the research conducted, and, finally, discuss how the results address the
research questions.
Cross-cultural Significance of the Study
Throughout history, faith-based communities have come into tragic conflict with
one another. In 2015, religious intolerance continues to stratify barriers between native
communities, especially those whose cultural identity is embedded in religious conflict,
(e.g. Israeli Jews and Palestinian Muslims, Indian Hindus and Pakistani Muslims). Such
barriers not only threaten to aggravate socio-political stability in the local communities of
multiple faith perspectives, but exacerbate the aggression of ideological fundamentalists.
The significance of faith in decision making is not specific to the Middle East or
the Indian subcontinent, to Islam, to Hinduism or to any world religion – it crosses ethnic
strata and abides. Indeed, one critical observation of former U.S. President George W.
Bush’s administration centered on his faith-based approach to information relevance and
decision making (“In the World of Good and Evil,” 2006). Examining the level of
political elites’ information access and appraising their intimately personal religious
beliefs may provide valuable insight into the role of faith in information behavior.
Influential public figures’ professions of conservative Christian faith and the former
presidential administration’s concern for privileged sources are both germane to this
research agenda (“Revisiting the World of Good and Evil,” 2012).
Although the role of information behavior in political decision making remains a
provocative topic, faith’s role in information behavior is significant to many individuals’
roles and social/institutional networks. One area where profession of faith substantially
affects careers via institutional policy is in graduate studies of religion and theology

2

(Wilson, 2002). However, formally hypothesizing and testing the role of faith in
information behavior is not the plan of this research. If information behavior is
determined to be related not only to degree program but to “faith” itself, Dervin (personal
communication, October 15, 2006) has suggested how such conclusions could bear
profound import for communication practices among people of different faiths and from
different cultures. If recognized paradigmatically, a broadening of the range of
significance of research in this domain may engender cultural understanding between
ethno-religious groups around and within the United States, and may extend to foster
mutual respect abroad by informing multinational diplomacy with cultural sensitivity for
relevant faith-based political regimes.
Problem Statement
Theological libraries typically have students and faculty members as their primary
users. Such libraries understand their principal mission as meeting information needs
related to degree programs and research. However, few empirical studies have reported
on the information-seeking behavior or mindset of students in the context of graduate
theological education. This study intends to gain increased understanding of how
master’s-level students studying theology discover and use information sources as they
conduct research among theological librarians and faculty. This research study explores
the information behavior of graduate students of religion in the research process.
A recent survey (Wilson, 2002) of all accredited institutions that teach religion
and theological studies, categorized each school as either a “seminary” or a “secular
divinity school,” according to the type of degree it awards (p. 132). Seminaries offer the

3

professional Master of Divinity degree (MDiv) to aspiring clergy who profess faith1
during the admissions process; their libraries support graduate studies for students
interested in the vocation of ministry (p. 135). Divinity schools award the Master of
Theological Studies (MTS), a version of the standard Master of Arts (MA) offered in
academic departments within a research university; their libraries cater to the more
secular audiences of comparative theology and religious criticism (pp. 139-142).
Theologians have long considered the library as a haven of truth and the
articulations of theology (Wicks, 1999, p. 208); less is known about secular students’ and
religion professors’ information-seeking behavior that does not emphasize library use.
Traditional information needs and uses studies represent an atomistic approach that
focuses on “user behavior primarily in the context of user intersection with systems”
(Dervin & Nilan, 1986, p. 14). Theological librarians and secular, academic information
professionals require not only a robust understanding of how users interact with
information systems but also an awareness of and attention to informal, interpersonal
information behavior. To be more efficient information providers/mediators, they require
information about what to expect about the needs beyond the characteristics of dogmatic
materials, the context of the research process in which information needs occur, how
information is used, and whether the information retrieval method is appropriate to the
faith-related degree type of patrons.
Preliminary Study and Research Context
The institutional division between the MDiv program for graduate students who
profess faith (and typically attend seminaries), and the MA program whose students only

In the context of seminary applications, faith is conceived as an individual’s commitment to the principles
of a denomination of organized religion with which the adherent formally affiliates (Wilson, 2002, p. 132).
1

4

commit to the academic study of religion, may function as a barrier between these related
communities.2 The information sources acknowledged by students may reflect
differences in approach to thesis research and the extent to which students’ information
behavior may vary according to the type of degree pursued. Through prior analysis of
Doctorate of Theology (ThD) and Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD) in Religious Studies
dissertation acknowledgements –authors’ metatextual reflections – this dissertation’s
preliminary study discovered personal histories of collaboration, patterns of affiliation,
and glimpses into a social world in which information behavior may be considered
contingent on degree type and religious affiliation (Milas, 2008b).
Academic degree programs, such as graduate programs in religion, are subdivided
into many degree types (e.g. masters, doctorates). Degree types at Highpath School of
Theology are distinguished by various characteristics (e.g. duration of coursework,
requirements for completion, accrediting organizations etc.). Highpath School of
Theology offers both the MA in Theological Discipline degree and the MDiv degree for
aspiring clergy.
For profession of faith to be a valid criterion in any institution’s admissions,
enrollment, and information services policies, its program should be evaluated based on
the significance of the faith-based degree distinction as manifest by degree-related
information behavior. Upon enrollment, students develop within the degree networks of
the MA or MDiv program. In coursework and research, the two degree programs share

Dervin (2006) prefers to refer to these degree programs as “discourse communities.” B. Dervin (personal
communication, November 4, 2006) hypothesizes that the barrier exists “to reinforce the power structure of
the specialized faculties.” Dervin also considers the domain of faith to be so stratified by space and over
time that its constituents are not discourse communities but native communities.” Addressing these
explanatory vectors is beyond the scope of this exploratory study, but they are nonetheless significant to the
problem.
2

5

the same library resources and the opportunity to garner academic, morale and
information services support from the interpersonal information sources of faculty, peers,
and librarians throughout the wider community of scholarship of Highpath School of
Theology. A lack of relationship between the degree program of the interpersonal
information sources involved in research and the degree for which the student is working
would call into question the relevance of the institutional divisions between MA and
MDiv programs.
The broader purpose of the preliminary content analysis of ThD and PhD
acknowledgements was to form an impression of what information source categories
(roles) and relationships (degree type) may be expected to be present in the population of
Highpath School of Theology. I now highlight the aspects of the preliminary study most
salient to the dissertation research.
Preliminary Study Research Design
For the preliminary study the research setting was Harvard University, where
dissertations are written in two mutually exclusive degree programs—one which prepares
future administrators and ministers and one which prepares future academicians.
• Doctorate of Theology (ThD)
• Doctorate of Philosophy (PhD)
From the sampling frame of Dissertation abstracts (1998-2007), Milas took a
stratified random sample by creating a matrix with cells assigned in relative proportions
according to 292 Papers and Presentations the study populations distribution of Th.D. and
Ph.D. dissertations. Based upon the relative quantity of dissertations, 9 Th.D. and 31
Ph.D. dissertations' acknowledgements sections were randomly selected from their

6

respective strata to comprise a sample of 40 dissertations’ acknowledgements out of 265
(≈15%).
To operationalize the variables of degrees in the units of analysis
(acknowledgements), Milas adopted Brenda Dervin’s revised sense-making theory with
its barrier component. At the 2006 Annual Meeting of ASIS&T, Dervin confirmed the
conceptualization of degree type as a barrier in her model, stating, “[it is] potentially
impacting students throughout their [doctoral dissertation] research” (October 8, 2006,
personal communication).
Quantitative: bibliometric analysis of the frequency with which the acknowledgements of
the respective degrees’ dissertation acknowledge affiliates of their own degree programs
Qualitative: hermeneutic content analysis of the role of the acknowledgees in each unit of
analysis, following a codebook (tested by Hyland, 2004) limited to students, faculty,
librarians, and others (e.g. clergy, family etc.)
Data Collection & Analysis
For each unit of analysis, Milas:
1) documented all interpersonal information sources who are acknowledged by first and
last name;
2) identified each acknowledgee’s affiliation with Harvard per the 2007 catalog; and
3) coded all confirmed Harvard affiliates by program affiliation.
To analyze the data, Milas:
1) counted the number of unique affiliates from each program occurring in each
acknowledgement;

7

2) aggregated the frequencies of Th. and PhD affiliates acknowledged in ThD and PhD
dissertations; and
3) measured the aggregated data from the ThD and PhD dissertations’ acknowledgements
in terms of the percentage of the stratified sample that each comprises.
Results
1) PhD dissertations cut across the “barrier” of degree program;
2) ThD dissertations exhibit insularity in the ThD program;
3) PhD dissertations refer to more librarians than ThD’s; and
4) ThD students acknowledge more clergy (Milas, 2008a, p. 294).
Relevance of Preliminary Study to Dissertation Research
By knowing what to expect from the research products of past students, the
researcher may select for interviewing those students, faculty and librarians who reflect a
wide variety of information source categories, including self-reported religious belief and
lack thereof (see Babbie, 2004, pp. 282-283). To explore the information behaviors of
stakeholders in the research setting of Highpath School of Theology, by both role
(student, faculty or librarian) and type (MDiv affiliate or MA affiliate), I asked the
following five overarching research questions:
Research Questions3
RQ1: What are the information behaviors specific to the research processes of
MA and MDiv students at Highpath School of Theology?

3

These questions are fully discussed in Chapter 3; the research instrument for semi-structured interviews
may be found in Appendix A.

8

RQ2: How do Highpath School of Theology graduate faculty (teaching in the MA
and MDiv programs) appraise the information behaviors involved in the research
processes of MA and MDiv students?
RQ3: What information behaviors specific to Highpath School of Theology MA
and MDiv students' research processes do academic librarians see in the Highpath
School of Theology Library and/or on campus?
RQ4: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the role of degree program affiliation in
relation to the information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in
their research processes?
RQ5: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the significance of religious faith in the
information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in their research
processes?
Research Design Overview
The nature of the research questions, coupled with the epistemological and
ontological assumptions, suggest the need for a research design that allows for the
exploration of factors using traditionally qualitative means. These factors were not
preselected but were allowed to emerge as the study progressed, using an inductive
approach. In order to guard against any tendency for the study to start feeding off the
biases of the researcher, the researcher compared the emerging results from ongoing

9

interviews and with the research questions using techniques suggested by Miles and
Huberman (1984). This primarily includes the techniques that would allow analysis
during the data collection phase. Most useful are the techniques relating to the recording
of the data from each interview and in the coding of transcripts from interviews. Miles
and Huberman’s contact summary form (1984, p. 52) allowed for the comparison of the
results of each interview with the preceding interviews. The researcher’s adaptation of
that form may be found in Appendix B.
The study sought to take a qualitative research approach to address the research
questions. To address the research questions, this study used intensive interviewing (fully
discussed in chapter 3). A stratified “purposeful sample” (Creswell, 1998, p. 119) was
taken in order to select 2-3 MDiv students, 2-3 MA students, 2-3 faculty, and 2-3
librarians with rich (disparate) backgrounds to interview. This sample can provide
representation based on dimensions suggested by previous social science research
(Spradley, 1979) and the preliminary study of acknowledgements (Milas, 2008b).
Research Mandate
Qualitative research enabled me to pursue a richer and more intimate
understanding of the MA and MDiv students, faculty and librarians in the processes of
information action than would have been possible with more structured methods such as
true experimental and purely quantitative approaches. The emphasis in qualitative
research on inductive reasoning fits best with the progressive methodology of the
Highpath School of Theology study and the inductive approach to questioning I took
during the intensive interviewing of Highpath School of Theology affiliates; exploratory
research to investigate the uncharted faith settings of the study population and intensive

10

investigations of the subjective and faith-informed meanings that motivate the
information behavior were particularly well served by the techniques of intensive
interviewing.
Learning more about how seminary students understand the information-seeking
and research process directly benefits two audiences. First, increased understanding of
the student research process benefits theological librarians, who shape onsite collections,
provide access to digital information sources, and provide information literacy training to
students. In the current environment stressing accountability for education at all levels, it
is not enough for librarians to see the work of theological libraries as serving “intrinsic
values and goods” (Hook, 2009, p. 20). Rather, librarians are expected to be part of
school-wide efforts to improve student learning.4 Second, increased understanding helps
professors, who create assignments for students. Faculty members want students to
learn—and write interesting papers for professors to read. Because all theological schools
work with finite resources, knowing how students think about the research process and
use resources helps librarians and school leaders to be better stewards (Lincoln, 2008).
Recent and Ongoing Related Studies
Penner’s (2009) review of the information behavior of theologians casts a wide
net “because only a few studies were found that concerned themselves with theologians,
and literature in this area is quite scarce” (p. 67). Based on bibliographic searches in
several databases,5 I found six post-2000 research reports that directly focus on students

4

The standards of the Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada, for instance,
call for theological schools to engage in comprehensive programs of institutional effectiveness (General
Standard 1.2.2) and for libraries of such schools to evaluate collections, usage patterns, services and staff
(5.4.3).
5

Databases searched included Library and Information Science and Technology Abstracts (LISTA), Library
Literature, and American Theological Library Association Serials (ATLAS).

11

pursing the work of information gathering in order to write a paper or deliver a
presentation.
Brunton (2005) studied the information behavior of students at Brisbane College
of Theology based on Briggs’ (1999) 3P model which argues that learning and teaching
occur in three stages: pre-stage (antecedents of learning), process (learning activities),
and product (the outcomes of learning). Brunton sought to learn more about the
effectiveness of user training programs. She interviewed six students at the college to
gain first-hand descriptions of student perceptions of information seeking. She concluded
that students who partnered with librarians and who attended user training employed
more effective search strategies and managed their time better than others.
Heinström (2006) studied the patterns of information seeking of students writing
Master’s theses at Abo Akademi University (Finland). She was attempting to discover,
among other research questions, if “patterns of information behavior can be explained by
discipline differences” (p. 1441). Her respondents included four students in theology. She
found that there was a significant connection between discipline and students who
adopted a broad scanning model of information seeking (i.e., they searched widely in
many different kind of sources). However, she concluded that the personality of students
was more influential on their information-seeking behavior than their specific discipline.
Gaba (2008) is currently studying the research process of MDiv students at
theological schools in the Chicago area. She is focusing on specific academic tasks rather
than assuming that library use is inherently valuable. Her study conducts group
interviews of five to eight students, ideally two groups per research site. She asks a suite
of twenty standard questions. In her study, a research paper is defined as “any assignment

12

where it is up to the student to identify two or more resources for the purpose of writing
or speaking on a topic” (Gaba, 2007, p. 73). So far, she has interviewed more than sixtyfive students. Gaba has not yet reported broadly on study results. To date, she has
discovered that students indicate using Google, online booksellers’ search-inside-thebook features, and online catalogs more than they use article databases.
She also found that a first step in research for some students was to ask professors
directly to suggest sources. In terms of what makes a text valuable for research purposes,
her participants generally wanted trustworthy sources. They identified trustworthiness
with the correct doctrinal position of the work or the fact that a professor recommended it
to students. Gaba defines student research as a specific academic task requiring the
discovery and use of new information. Her approach situates information gathering in
what Tanni and Sormunen (2008) would consider assigned learning tasks, and which
Gross (2004) would term “imposed queries.”
These recent and ongoing studies indicate the paucity of knowledge about the
information-seeking patterns of theological students at the Master’s level. Milas’s (2008)
preliminary study focused only on doctoral students. Heinström’s (2006) study focused
on students at the thesis stage of their academic work and included only four theological
students. Brunton (2005) and Gaba (2009) used qualitative methods; the other studies
used surveys.
Thus, this study will contribute needed data to the modest extant knowledge base
about how Master’s students in theological schools find and use information in their
assigned learning tasks. In this chapter I have delineated the research problem,

13

preliminary study, research design, and context of other studies. In the next chapter I
report on the literature reviewed.

14

CHAPTER 2
LITERATURE REVIEW
This study explores the domain of religion in terms of its information phenomena
and processes. The two disciplines I broadly engage in this literature review are
information studies and religion. I narrow the study’s scope to the specific context of
information science and the research process at Highpath School of Theology. Published
research in LIS on the intersections of theological research behavior and information
science is sparse, but as a point of entry, I now turn to the peer-reviewed academic
publications that generally address both information science and religion.
Religion is a concept that warrants definition here. Clifford Geertz’s definition is
the most relevant to this study. Geertz (1993) defines religion as “(1) a system of symbols
which acts to (2) establish powerful, pervasive, and long-lasting moods and motivations
in [humans] by (3) formulating conceptions of a general order of existences and (4)
clothing these conceptions with such an aura of factuality that (5) the moods and
motivations seem uniquely realistic” (p. 90). The relative scarcity of research connecting
this sphere with library and information science is striking (see Zinnbauer et al., 1997).
Methods for the Review
A thorough literature search and subsequent monitoring of the publication front
was carried out, mainly by using LISA (Library and Information Science Abstracts;
http://oh1.csa.com.proxy.lib.fsu.edu/factsheets/lisa-set-c.php). The relevant texts were
identified on the basis of central keywords – religion, spiritual, esoterica, faith, and
mysticism – and their grammatical variations. For journals, their peer-review status was
checked from the (printed or electronic) journal information. Books were more difficult

15

in this respect, since they almost never mention whether they were refereed or not. Those
relevant monographs that met scholarly standards and had been published by a scientific
publisher were assumed to have undergone at least some sort of peer-review, and were
thus admissible. Since the criteria for including material in the review were strict, no
more than 26 articles and books qualified. Only those claims in the publications were
accepted which had been justified by appealing to data, logic, or some other rational
basis. The end result should therefore represent the best information there is about
religion vis-à-vis information. The literature is naturally discussed from the viewpoint of
information studies.
Literature Pertaining Primarily to Texts
Bella Haas Weinberg pioneered the intersection of religion with information
science; in “Predecessors of Scientific Indexing Structures in the Domain of Religion,”
she writes: “many scientific information systems thought to have been developed in the
computer era were invented about a millennium earlier, in the domain of religion” (2004,
p. 133). The systems Weinberg refers to are just a few of the many predecessors of
information science in the domain of religion.
Electronic Resources
In the absence of plentiful studies on information seeking in graduate programs of
religion, it is necessary to consider the literature examining other disciplines, the
humanities being where religion is usually situated. The acceptance of, and difficulties
experienced with, the use of electronic resources by humanities scholars become the
dominant issue for studies between 1995 and 2008. Stone mentions an early interaction of
humanities scholars with computer technology, considering them as being “anti-machine”

16

and, therefore, reluctant to engage it. Wiberley and Jones mention careful
experimentation with technology in 1989 and revisit the subject in 1994 and again in
2000. They believe that for humanists to adopt electronic technologies for their research,
relevant database content will be crucial as will be search training and perceived time
savings. The Getty project results confirm low search skills and dissatisfaction with
content and imply that, because electronic database design follows science-based theories
and terminology, humanists are currently disadvantaged.
Several later studies follow up this theme to embark on an in-depth exploration of
humanists and their interaction with texts. Buchanan et al. find these “intellectually able
seekers who are not technical in orientation” (218) using electronic resources especially
when they are “new to an area of research,” even more so if they are at an early stage in
their career (223). They see a strong relationship between high usage, strong search skills,
and satisfaction with digital libraries (227) but also observe that even though most
participants felt they were successful in meeting their information needs, they could
improve their skills to lower the amount of effort they expended. Buchanan et al. confirm
a notion expressed in various studies that scholars less privileged with access to wellstocked print libraries are more open to electronic resources.
Studies from 1995 to the present primarily deal with English literature
academicians or, without specifying the discipline, with arts and humanities in general.
Palmer and Neumann (1999) emphasize changes in information-seeking behavior as
humanists are increasingly involved in interdisciplinary work. As a response to the
frequent admission that humanists need more training to effectively use electronic

17

resources, East (2001) provides a robust information literacy syllabus for humanities
researchers.
Literature Pertaining Primarily to Systems
Systems Studies
Some digital information systems chiefly incorporating sacred texts are described
in the research literature. PHI/CCAT CD-ROM contains “biblical and related texts
prepared by the Computer Assisted Tools for Septuagint Studies project (CATSS) and the
Centre for Computer Analysis of Texts (CCAT) in conjunction with the Packard
Humanities Institute (PHI)” (Cornell, 1989, p. 7). Hyper Joseph “combines hypertext,
information retrieval, literary studies, Biblical scholarship, and linguistics” (Nissan et al.,
1996, p. 16). On the other hand, OM Information Service (OMIS) provides CD-ROM
and:
Web access to selected extracts from the writings and sayings of spiritual leaders,
saints, seers, mystics, and scholars, and also to biographical sketches and list of
works of some of these sources. Web access has been made interesting through
display of related images and rendering of background music. The user and search
interfaces have been designed for the novice user. (Rajashekar et al., 1998, p. 1;
see also Neelameghan, 2001)6
Those four articles are quite specific case studies, and they are beginning to be somewhat
outdated, so may that brief presentation suffice. For now, it is enough to note the
existence of databases devoted to religion, and the fact that religion is present on the
internet (see Barzilai-Nahon and Barzilai, 2005), too. Indeed, in early 2008, inputting the

6

OMIS is not currently available via the World Wide Web

18

Google search query “religion OR mysticism” already yielded hundreds of millions of
hits. In 2015, the same search retrieves nearly one billion hits.
Practical System Implications
Leaning on the findings from an earlier inquiry, Smiraglia (2002) contends that
theology probably belongs to “the core canon of literature in academic libraries” (p. 229).
Theology is usually understood as a field of study in the humanities, whereon theological
literature is academic by nature. However, theology also refers to the teachings of a
particular religion (see, e.g. Peterson, 2006). Neither Smiraglia’s (2002) nor Karp and
Keck’s (1996) data analyses differentiate between these two senses. In addition, both
articles examine library phenomena in the context of more than one religion.
A sample of 469 bibliographic records from the theological collections of one
university library and one seminary library in the USA was drawn in Smiraglia’s (2002)
later investigation. It is best to characterize the results presented therein as some sort of
“demographic” evidence about theological literature. The works’ mean age was over one
hundred years, being thrice as old as the works in other, more general pieces of research.
Smiraglia (2002, p. 939) shows how the theological works differed in the two libraries.
Those in the seminary library exhibited a narrower variety of languages; the oldest work
was centuries newer than the oldest work in the university library; on an average,
however, the seminary library works were older. The years demonstrate the temporal
broadness of theological literature (Smiraglia, 2002). The disparity of the two collections
is indisputable. It seems the university library possessed a better stock of theological
works in their coverage of languages, age range, and recency. This is something of a
surprise, for one would expect that a special library would be adept in its own territory.

19

Smiraglia offers no explanation for the difference. The size of the collection
cannot be the determining factor here, because the seminary library held about 400,000
bibliographic records as opposed to the university library’s 65,000 records (Smiraglia,
2002). One might argue that it was the purpose of the library that was crucial: the
seminary library served education, whereas the university library served research. If so, a
similar difference in the distribution of works would be expected in any such case, say,
between a musicological collection and that of a conservatory library. At any rate, the age
of the theological works indicates that they have a longer history than mundane ones, and
that their number has been growing at an accelerated pace. Nearly all of the theological
works in Smiraglia’s study were instantiated in the form of monographs: narrative
nonfiction, theses, lectures, sermons, reports, and handbooks. In number, nonfiction was
by far the largest category of works (Smiraglia, 2002). But to categorize information as
fiction or nonfiction requires considerable information processing and bears considerable
impact on the information itself.
Literature Pertaining Primarily to People
User Studies in General
User studies, suggested Krikelas (1983), “probably form the largest single body of
research literature in librarianship” (p. 5). According to Bisco (1967), cited by Brittain
(1970), “the first known empirical studies of the needs and uses of information, in
contrast to the recorded uses of stored materials, were reported by Bernal […] and
Urquhart […] at the Royal Society Scientific Conference during June and July of 1948”
(p. 13). Within three decades of these British beginnings, Crawford (1978) estimated that
more than 1,000 such studies had appeared in print. In the last decade alone more than

20

500 information-need and user studies have been published (Dervin and Nilan, 1986;
Hewins, 1900). Rohde’s (1986) recent research yielded more than 2,000 potentially
relevant documents in one database alone. Reviews of this literature in the Annual Review
of Information Science and Technology volumes (ARIST), which began in 1966, now
number eleven.
Menzel (1966) wrote the first review of user studies for ARIST, which
concentrated, as did most of the later ARIST reviews, on information use and needs
among scientists and technologists. Preceding Menzel's study were reviews by Davis and
Bailey (1964), who examined 438 user studies relevant to engineering, and by the
Auerbach Corporation (1965), who reviewed 676 items related to Department of Defense
user needs. The second ARIST review was compiled by the Herners (1967) and dealt with
the various methods used in user studies.
Paisley’s (1968) ARIST review is one of the most cited, with its call for more
theory. He suggested a need for what Merton (1967) called “theories of the middle
range.” Paisley also outlined a ten-point conceptual framework of how scientists function
as users. These ten "concentric circles" of the various systems within which information
users (at least scientific information users) operate are culture, politics, discipline,
specialization, invisible college, formal organization, work team, economy, formal
information system, and -- the most foundational system of all -- what Paisley called “the
scientist within his own head” (p. 460). This latter is recognition of the internal
cognitions and process orientation of the information concept.
Allen’s (1969) ARIST review of information needs and uses reduced Paisley’s list
of ten to six by collapsing several categories. Lipetz (1970) in his ARIST review

21

examined the measurement instruments and methodologies common to user studies,
noting the proliferation of questionnaires in particular. He, too, noted the absence of
theory in the field of user studies. The 1971 ARIST review of user studies by Crane and
the 1972 review by Lin and Garvey looked at models of information-seeking behavior,
based primarily on general communication models.
Martyn, in his 1974 ARIST review, suggested that the study of users fell into three
basic periods: during the 1950s and early 1960s the chief area of concern was the broadly
based information needs and uses of scientists and technologists, during the mid-1960s
the emphasis shifted to better methods on the one hand and fewer studies on the other,
and during the late 1960s and early 1970s the study of the economic benefit on
information and its effects became prominent. Martyn (1974, p. 5) argued that “the age of
the dinosaur, the period of the broadly based, discipline-wide user study, is over,”
anticipating some of the concerns for more individually based, situationally focused
studies that Dervin and Nilan (1986) were to call for. Crawford (1978) also conveniently
summarized earlier ARIST reviews and noted the trend toward more studies of a wide
variety of users.
One of the most comprehensive reviews of the literature of user studies in general
is that by Dervin and Nilan in the 1986 ARIST volume. Their research focused on “the
conceptualizations that drive the research” (p. 3) in this field and is especially pertinent to
the present study. They categorized the corpus of this literature into two distinct genres:
the majority of studies which observe users in terms of systems and the minority of
studies that look at users in terms of users.

22

The bulk of the studies in this area, Dervin and Nilan argued, are system oriented
and fall into one of six broad approaches: 1) the demand on systems/resources approach
(measuring the extent to which users use different services), 2) the awareness approach
(focusing on respondent awareness of current services), 3) the likes-dislikes approach
(examining user satisfaction with various services), 4) the priorities approach (generating
library wish lists), 5) the community profile approach (doing demographic surveys of
users), and 6) the interests, activities, and group membership approach (assessing user
interests and involvement).
Dervin and Nilan criticized these “traditional” approaches for focusing on the
system, not the user. In particular, the majority of the studies done to date, in their view,
concentrated on only objective, not subjective information; viewed users as passive
recipients rather than as active constructors of information; sought broad generalization
that tended to ignore situation-specific contexts; looked atomistically at only one
encounter between a user and a system rather than holistically at users’ broader
information needs; focused on easily observable external behavior rather than pursuing
the internal cognitions of users; and concentrated so much on finding predictable group
behavior that “systematic individuality” was overlooked. Based on these observations,
the reviewers called for a shift to “an alternative paradigm,” one that focuses on the user
and how he or she seeks information concerning situations about which their knowledge
is incomplete (cf. the ASK model of Belkin, 1980).
In the most recent ARIST review of user studies, Hewins (1990) noted that much
of the then-current research in this area did follow the alternative paradigm and was much
more user focused. She pointed to the critical-incident technique popularized by Allen

23

(1966) as an increasingly popular and productive method for researching users’
information needs and behaviors. This new paradigm and approach are particularly
prevalent in studying professionals as users. She cited as one example the growing body
of literature in medical informatics, which studies the information needs and uses of the
medical profession, a literature that has been reviewed by Elayyan (1988).
Unfortunately, similar research among other professionals is not as prolific. In
many ways Faibisoff and Ely's statement from the 1970s is still true: “The literature
regarding information needs of educators, clergymen, lawyers, doctors, social workers,
and other professionals is scanty” (1976, p. 7). While a few professions have been
researched at some length, for example, physicians (Elayyan, 1988), engineers (Kremer,
1980), and scientists (Martyn, 1987), a number of groups -- particularly in the humanities
-- have been left unexplored (though see Wiberly and Jones, 1989, and Vale, 1988). One
such professional group whose information needs and uses have been little studied is the
clergy, despite the fact that there are as many ministers in America as there are physicians
(537,000 in medicine and 541,000 in ministry) and considerably more clergy than
scientists (541,000 versus 395,000).
Studies of Information Seeking in the Humanities
In the absence of plentiful studies on information seeking in graduate programs of
religion, it is necessary to consider the literature examining other disciplines, the
humanities being where religion is usually situated. A few studies in religion should be
noted. Brink (1995) examined information seeking in religion but did not consider
information sources. One study of information seeking by Wicks (1999) found that the
pastors studied used informal sources in care-giving and administrative activities.

24

However, Wicks found that the use of informal sources decreased in preaching activities
where biblical research would be undertaken. The relationships among the information
behaviors of theology faculty, students and librarians must still be explored.
Stone (1982), Watson-Boone (1994), and Wilson (2000) surveyed the principal
research on information seeking in the humanities, covering the period from 1970 to
2000. One significant conclusion Stone drew from her examination of the literature was
that individual interpretations play a significant role in humanities research. “One
consequence of this individualistic nature,” Stone wrote, “is that collaborative efforts
among humanists are less normal than in the sciences, and the notion of the invisible
college, which has been explored more fully in the sciences, is less visible” (1982, p.
294). She made reference to a report by Fabian and Vierhaus (1978) that described the
conclusions of a gathering of various humanities scholars to discuss the future of
humanities research. In their report, they stated that “[t]o a large extent, humanistic
research has always been individual research, research pursued by a single scholar, and
this is likely to remain so in the foreseeable future” (p. 550). Stone also cited the idea of
the invisible college described by Crane (1972). Crane used a detailed questionnaire to
explore how information is communicated and disseminated within scientific
communities. Crane explored the role of informal communication and its impact on
research, communication that she distinguished from formal, collaborative relationships.
It is interesting that Crane understood her research as supporting an earlier study by
Coser that concluded that “most intellectuals cannot produce their work in solitude […]
interaction with peers is necessary for the development of ideas” (1965, p. 3). It was

25

Crane’s intent to demonstrate that this informal exchange of information also takes place
in the sciences.
Watson-Boone (1994) built upon Stone’s review by presenting the development
of research from 1982 to 1992. She revisited Stone’s picture of the humanities scholar,
noting particularly the characteristics of “working alone.” Several studies described the
materials used by humanities scholars, notably Stern (1983), Culler (1985), and Broadus
(1987). These studies used citation analysis and inter-library loan logs to determine the
types and frequencies of use of research materials. Since these study techniques only
uncovered formally cited works in completed studies, the results could not indicate
whether people as informal information sources played a role in the information-seeking
process.
Watson-Boone (1994, p. 211) briefly noted a study that is a self-description and
analysis of the information-seeking process followed by Stephen Nissenbaum to study
the poem “The Night before Christmas.” A closer examination of Nissenbaum’s study
itself reveals a description of the information sources used in his research, including, as
his second source, a knowledgeable colleague’s suggestion (1989, p. 206). Nissenbaum
then went on to describe the exchange of ideas that were pivotal to the development of
this research. Noteworthy, the interpersonal exchange occurred early in the research
process, prior to a visit to the library, a point not likely to be uncovered since scholars
rarely cite personal discussions in their research publications. Basker (1984), examining
information gathering by British philosophers, concluded that 45% of those interviewed
went to colleagues rather than the library as a starting point. In this study, librarians
played limited roles, except for archivists and special collection librarians who might

26

have been viewed as having a specialized knowledge of particular collections, and
librarians with superior database searching skills that the scholars lacked. Sievert and
Sievert (1989) examined the browsing activities of twenty-seven philosophers and
determined that only three had formally collaborated on a research project. This study did
not consider possible informal collaboration.
Wiberley and Jones (1989) examined scholarly isolation in a study that also cited
Stone’s assertion that the literature states that humanities scholars work alone. They
interviewed eleven humanities scholars and found that “all eleven were chosen for their
year’s fellowship based on projects that they conceived alone and were executed singlehandedly” (p. 639). However, Wiberley and Jones noted that two scholars made use of
computers for email correspondence (p. 640). They also noted that bibliographies were
considered a convenient but not essential tool for staying current, complementing
“reading the literature itself and talking with other specialists” (p. 642). In neither case
was an attempt made to follow up the role of informal collegial communication in
information seeking. Of the studies Watson-Boone considered, seven were citation
analyses, four were questionnaires, three were interviews, and two were personal
reflections. Citation analyses, however, usually cannot identify informal information
sources such as colleagues. Additionally, as the Wiberley and Jones study suggests, even
where interviews uncover the use of these sources, the assumptions of the researchers
regarding information-seeking behaviors can inhibit exploration of the role of these
sources.
In “Human Information Behavior” (2000), T. D. Wilson reviewed the literature in
information studies that takes as its focus the user rather than the information system.

27

Although his intention was to consider information seeking from the perspective of the
human user, it is interesting to note that Wilson only alluded to the interaction with
human sources in his initial definition of information behavior, in which he included
“face-to-face communication” (p. 49).
Two other useful studies should be noted here. The first is Broadbent (1986),
where questionnaires were used to discover how faculty would identify the library
materials needed. Word of mouth accounted for 13.5% of the sources used. It is possible
that some of the interactions included in the other category may also have been informal
communications that were not identified as such by the researchers, who interpreted word
of mouth as consisting only of face-to-face correspondence. This placed informal sources
at fifth out of seven sources used. The researchers expected that more “mature”
researchers would be more likely to utilize informal communication, such as “after dinner
discussions, casual meetings with colleagues, and correspondence” (p. 27). However,
they discovered no significant variation in the use of formal and informal sources among
faculty at different ranks. In the second study, Lonnquist (1990) explored the methods
used by scholars to gather information. Interviews were used to collect data. Lonnquist
concluded that informal information sources were valued when there was a need to obtain
information quickly. Lonnquist also found that “if the research topic was very
internationally oriented, the importance of an informal network increased especially
abroad” (p. 198).
Studies about Interpersonal Information Sources
Lonnquist (1990) found two specific reasons for the use of people as information
sources: speed and, perhaps, remote access. Lonnquist presupposed that perceived

28

expertise in an area was also a reason. Julien and Michels (2000) explored the use of
personal information sources in information seeking. In their study, information source
selection was explored as the respondents attempted to solve problems that occurred in
daily life. It was found that, in 45 of 88 interviews, participants turned first to personal
sources of help for their questions (p. 18). Julien and Michels wrote, “The apparent
preference of information sources was direct personal contact. People talk to people when
they face a problem or issue in their daily lives” (p. 19). It is significant that respondents
described both instrumental reasons (e.g., perceived expertise, speed) and affective
reasons (e.g., developing social ties, enjoyable encounter) for their preference for
personal contact. Although convenience may play a role in the choice of people as
information sources, it is not necessarily central, as individuals can go to considerable
effort to interact with people sources. The role an informal source plays in the
information-seeking process may, therefore, be complex and may not be related only to
instrumental information needs. This may be significant: if informal sources are used
predominately in the early stages of information seeking, with its associated feelings of
uncertainty (Kuhlthau 1993, p. 339), then informal sources may provide encouragement
and assurance as well as key information.

29

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY
The literature review above discusses current knowledge concerning information
and religion from several different fields. Each provides a conceptualization of
information that could be described as religious information. The primary reason that this
study uses a qualitative design is that our conceptualizations of theological information
behavior are varied and ill-defined. No one field of research contains a conceptualization
that completely describes or explains these phenomena. There is a need to attempt a
synthesis of all the particularistic approaches. This study takes into consideration these
various views to address the research questions.
In addition to the overall research design, methods, and procedures, this chapter
will discuss other relevant topics such as the known biases, the use of theory, constraints
and limitations.
This study attempts to get at the individual’s understanding of this phenomenon to
understand it from his/her point of view in the way that he/she understands it. At the very
least our understanding can be improved by providing conceptualizations that are
grounded in data captured in the theological research environment.
An axiological assumption (Creswell, 1994) is that this research is value-laden
and biased. These biases are an inescapable aspect of having one researcher bringing
his/her experience and education to bear on one problem. As a result, this study is viewed
as an interpretation of interpretations. That is, the researcher is merely interpreting the
evidence that is collected during the time period of the study and is, thus, subject to

30

cognitive capacity of the researcher to understand what is being said and of the limited
and biased manner in which these interpretations can be made.
A methodological assumption is that this is an interpretive study dealing with
meaning. Specifically it is about the meaning that participants ascribe to their thoughts
and feelings about the theological research process. Although this researcher will attempt
to capture participants’ meaning, the end product is merely the researcher's interpretation
of that meaning.
Epistemological foundations for this study are derived from a philosophy of
American pragmatist traditions, primarily the work of Charles Sanders Peirce (1878). The
epistemological extensions of his pragmatist philosophy assert that knowledge is gained
when significance has been attached to life experiences. Further, there is no one valid
significance because each person’s experience is different. Each person attaches
significance in his or her own way based on his or her understanding of the situation.
This is sometimes referred to as a process of sense making where each person is
attempting to make sense of his or her experience. In this way each person would have a
slightly different sense of reality. Each would also be aware of the way in which this
sense differs from those around one’s self as well as from the so-called social reality.
Using this epistemological view makes it difficult for the researcher to consider
quantitative methods, which would not allow the researcher to find the sense or the
meaning that the individuals attach to these experiences. Without knowing the
informant’s world, it would have been inappropriate, perhaps invalid, for this researcher
to pose a framework of questions in a survey or a similar instrument. Why do that when

31

the means (simply asking) are at hand to do otherwise—and gain a richer understanding
in the process?
Research Questions
RQ1: What are the information behaviors specific to the research processes of
MA and MDiv students at Highpath School of Theology?
RQ2: How do Highpath School of Theology graduate faculty (teaching in the MA
and MDiv programs) appraise the information behaviors involved in the research
processes of MA and MDiv students?
RQ3: What information behaviors specific to Highpath School of Theology MA
and MDiv students’ research processes do academic librarians see in the Highpath
School of Theology Library and/or on campus?
RQ4: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the role of degree program affiliation in
relation to the information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in
their research processes?
RQ5: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the significance of religious faith in the
information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in their research
processes?

32

Research Design
This study adopted a qualitative research approach to address the research
questions. To address the research questions, this study used intensive interviewing. A
stratified “purposeful sample” (Creswell, 1998, p. 119), was taken in order to select 2-3
MA students, 2-3 MDiv students, 2-3 faculty, and 2-3 librarians with rich (disparate)
backgrounds to interview.
Field Setting
Information sources often differ according to the type of degree pursued (Ocholla,
1999). In order to sample MA and MDiv students whose academic institution offers both
degrees, and whose community (faculty, library, peers etc.) is stratified by degree type,
the researcher interviewed users of the Highpath School of Theology Library.
Highpath School of Theology is a fictitious name, automatically generated by a
web-based fictitious school name generator. The actual name of the institution where data
collection took place has been replaced by the name Highpath School of Theology in
order to protect the anonymity of the research participants.
The seminary or divinity school represented by the name Highpath School of
Theology is accredited by the Association of Theological Schools and its Library
participates in the American Theological Libraries Association. However, Highpath is not
only located in a very demographically diverse region of North America, it is also
considerably more ecumenical than many seminaries and divinity schools in the
Association of Theological Schools. Whereas many member institutions have
homogenous denominational compositions, historically educating future clergy of a
specific theological sensibility, Highpath stands out with a broad denominational

33

composition and outlook. For example, MA and MDiv degrees are offered to students of
many denominations and multiple faith traditions, including Buddhism and Judaism.
Students are taught by faculty affiliated with non-Christian religions and non-religious
faculty. Similarly, its library staff and library collection reflect the ecumenical breadth
that sets Highpath apart as more inter-religious than most North American seminaries and
divinity schools.
Research took place at the Highpath School of Theology Library, where users
include faculty, librarians, and students. The Library’s information seeking population,
the students, are differentiated by the degree program in which they teach or study. The
Master of Arts in Theological Studies (MA) program is an academic degree program that
aims to prepare future faculty for further academic study of religion. The Master of
Divinity (MDiv) program is a professional program designed to prepare students for the
vocation of ministry. Faculty and librarians at Highpath School of Theology may support
both degree programs, but they may cater to one of the degree programs according their
background in theological studies.
To examine the MA and MDiv degree programs, Highpath School of Theology
was chosen specifically because it meets both of the criteria; it has MA and MDiv
programs and specialized faculty and librarians. Using Highpath School of Theology is
appropriate because of the interfaith character that informs its admissions policies and
shapes its student body, thus fulfilling Rubin and Rubin’s (1995) call for study
populations to include “represent[ativeness] of the range of points of view” (p. 66).

34

Units of Analysis
The units of analysis were the users of the Highpath School of Theology Library.
The units of observation were the intensive interview transcripts of the students, faculty
and librarians.
Participant Selection
The broader purpose of Milas’s preliminary content analysis of ThD and PhD
acknowledgements (discussed in Chapter I) was to form an impression of what
information source categories (roles) and relationships (degree type) may be expected to
be present in the population of a graduate school of theology. By knowing what to
expect from the research products of past students, the researcher was able to select for
interviewing those students, faculty and librarians who reflect a wide variety of
information source categories, including, self-reported religious belief and lack thereof
(see Babbie, 2004, pp. 282-283).
Applying Theory to Method
The main part of the theory used in the study is constituted by the sense-making
theory. In essence, this theory generally deals with how an individual makes sense of his
or her environment in a given situation, and specifically how seeking information serves
bridging “gaps” or “discontinuities” that the individual has perceived in reality. In the
case of this study, the problem is about how people make sense of their situation, their
need for sources of information for their theological scholarship, their seeking and/or
finding this information, as well as their use of the information.
Sense-making theory is appropriate for three reasons. Firstly, the theory enables
scrutiny of the meanings that are given to the degree designations MA and MDiv, and to

35

information action – a concept that is anticipated to occupy a prominent position in data
analysis and implications for future study in information behavior generally. Secondly,
the sense-making theory presupposes that information action is not a static state, but a
dynamic process – another important aspect of the current study. Thirdly, the approach
makes it possible to get at a particular, actual situation that a student has undergone.
General background concepts also belong to theory. They have little analytical
value, but knowing them is vital for designing the study effectively. Two concepts that
warrant definition here are “information action” and “thick description.” Information
action is a term that comes from Wersig and Windel (1985); it can be defined as action
that “involves various forms of users’ conceptual and physical contacts with information”
(Raber, 2003, pp. 38-39).
“Information action” is a broad concept that contains the three major stages of an
information process: information need, seeking, and use (see Case, 2002, pp. 146-148).
The term “thick description” derives from the work of anthropologist Clifford Geertz
(1973). Shutt (2006, p. 293) explains, “[c]entral to much qualitative case study research is
the goal of creating a thick description of the setting studied – a description that provides
a sense of what it is like to experience that setting from the standpoint of the natural
actors in that setting.” This study uses a theory-grounded approach to consistently
integrate the ethnomethodology of “thick description” with the sample of subjects, as it is
informed by categories of social networks and roles.
Procedure
The researcher, Patrick Milas, introduced himself as a researcher; the participant
may have assumed that the researcher was simply a visiting scholar to the Highpath

36

School of Theology academic community. The researcher asked if the participant would
submit to a series of questions, and if the student agreed, the researcher obtained
informed consent in writing, and asked questions with consideration of the most
immediate data being provided by the student. The researcher continued with questioning
for up to 45 minutes (Dervin, 2006).
The research questions (see Appendix A) served as a loose guide as the
researcher qua instrument forms questions extemporaneously, according to the responses
of the participant and in order to solicit the most complete account of the information
sources in the research process7 with “grand tour” questions (Schutt, 2006, p. 312). These
questions simply include:
How did you go about your research?
Who was helpful in your research?
How were they helpful?
How did you know them?
Ensuring Valid and Reliable Data
The approach in this study’s qualitative research design corresponds closely with
Schutt’s (2006, pp. 286-356) outline in which he treats qualitative methods and
qualitative data analysis; issues related to the validity and reliability of this study’s data
are addressed at each stage of its research design. For the sake of consistency with the
order in which qualitative research is introduced by Schutt (2006), the most salient

The method of data collection recalls the so-called “micro-moment time-line interview” (see Dervin,
1983; Dervin, 1992) that had been the main method the researcher associated with the sense-making theory
until B. Dervin (personal communication, 2006) suggested the “dialogic interview” for intensive
interviewing, prompting the pre-interview content analysis at “Doing Ethnography”; this interview
technique facilitates the accurate investigation of information action as a process.
7

37

connections between his explanations and this study’s instantiations of the methodology
are addressed in parallel.
Stake (1995) presents a case study as a “study of the particularity and complexity
of a single case […] activity within circumstances […] sequentiality […] and wholeness
of the individual” (as cited in Schutt, 2006, p. 293). In this sense, this study is a case
study of Highpath School of Theology affiliates. The wholeness of the individual was
observed through the intensive interviewing (p. 309).
To develop the best grand tour questions, this study took a stratified purposeful
sample to respond to Schutt’s (2006) suggestion, “to prepare for this active interviewing,
the interviewer should learn in advance about the setting to be studied. Preliminary […]
inspection of written documents should be done to uncover assumptions, to make explicit
what the person might […] have left implicit” (p. 312). The preliminary study of ThD
and PhD acknowledgements’ inspection and coding was conceived according to the
field’s standards of information source type, and the variable of the acknowledger’s
relation to the source.
Thus, the precedent for similar methodology affirmed its reuse for the purposes of
the preliminary study. Becker observes that:
No set standards exist for evaluating the validity or ‘authenticity’ of conclusions
in a qualitative study, but the need to consider carefully the evidence and methods
on which the conclusions are based is just as great as with other types of research.
Individual items of information can be assessed in terms of [various] criteria:
(1) How credible was the informant?
(2) Were the statements made in response to the researcher’s question, or were

38

they spontaneous? (as cited in Schutt, 2006, p. 337)
For (1), the person was new to the researcher and vice versa. The sampling
technique for the preliminary study of Harvard University’s ThD and PhD dissertations’
acknowledgements and the situation of the Highpath research setting legitimize the
“informant’s” credibility. The informants were expected to be able to express themselves
more fully in person given the emic nature (p. 327) of the setting (as opposed to the etic
focus that an analysis of research products [e.g. theses, dissertations] alone would be
limited to). To address (2), the methodology of the open-ended, intensive interviewing
allowed for a high degree of spontaneity.
Limitations
Given the advantage of the representativeness (see Schutt, 2006, p. 276) of
Highpath School of Theology (by degree and denomination), its small population
warranted in-person interviews as much as the research area of interpersonal information
sources warranted intensive interviews. However, since the questionairre was
administered primarily in-person,8 there are low odds of: avoiding social desirability bias;
avoiding interviewer distortion; meeting personnel requirements; implementing quickly;
and keeping costs low. These are all limitations typical of the selected methodology.
Ethical Considerations
Some ethical considerations inherent to this study’s methodology were mitigated
by its field setting (see “field setting” above) and the researcher’s relationship (Schutt,
2006, pp. 310-311) with Highpath School of Theology officials. The situation of research
under the auspices of the Office of the Dean of Faculty ensured willingness to participate.

8

Two interviews were conducted via Skype/tele-conferencing.

39

The Office of the Dean of Faculty served as a mediator on issues of research integrity
(approving and monitoring the research), ownership of data (removing the names and
other identifiers from data collected), and use of results (preventing any profit from
them). The researcher also assured the participants of confidentiality and privacy in
reporting. Schutt (2006) emphasizes “confidentiality is the primary focus of ethical
concern in research” (p. 79).
Other Methodological Issues Related to this Research Area, Questions and
Approach
The units of analysis in the preliminary study were acknowledgements – a genre
which is still not well-known. However, acknowledgements are “not trivial, meta-textual
flourishes, rather they are formal records of often significant intellectual influence”
(Cronin & Overfelt, 1994, p. 183) which point to strong networks of association between
researchers. This study, building on the preliminary study’s findings, examined those
networks of associations among roles (i.e. student, faculty or librarian) and types (i.e.
degree program affiliation [MA or MDiv]) students and their information sources.
Further research could improve validity and reliability by having a larger
sampling frame of graduate students of religion and a research team with more than one
researcher. These two improvements would: (1) provide for greater validity, given a
larger study subpopulation of each degree type for a stratified sample; and (2) enable
intercoder reliability of the information source types attested in interview transcripts.
Key Reasons for a Qualitative Rather than Quantitative Approach
This study is exploratory in nature. It builds on the preliminary study which
investigated a larger set of data and discovered patterns that related the acknowledgees’

40

roles’ (student, faculty or librarian) and types’ (ThD-affiliated or PhD degree program
affiliated) frequency to the author’s situated context - either PhD student or ThD student.
To further explore the research behaviors of graduate students of religion already
evidenced by the content of their completed dissertations’ acknowledgements, this study
focused on the meanings of information sources in research rather than on quantifiable
phenomena.
The research problem lends itself to a qualitative methodology. It collected rich
interview transcripts from two or three research subjects from each role category
(student, faculty or librarian) to enrich the general data collected on the larger population
of the preliminary study. Qualitative methods also afford for unique data of depth
(without predetermined types of responses so common to quantitative/survey
questionnaire approaches, such as the categorization of acknowledgees by role and type
in the preliminary study) that fits the goal of rich or “thick descriptions” of the research
process rather than measurement of specific variables that may be counted (Patton, 2002,
pp. 13-14).
This research design is challenging in that it attempts to inculcate inherently
subjective perspectives on ultimate reality or a “higher power” into individuals’ accounts
of research behavior. Qualitative methods allow for sensitivity to the situation of theses
of theological education, rather than universal generalizations about citation frequency in
theses. Finally, the attention to the impact of my values on the course of the analysis
rather than presuming the possibility of objective investigation is most possible when
employing qualitative methods to address the research questions.

41

Conclusions About the Adoption of the Qualitative Methodology
Qualitative research enabled me to pursue a richer and more intimate
understanding of the MA and MDiv students, faculty and librarians in the processes of
information action than would have been possible with more structured methods such as
true experimental and purely quantitative approaches. The emphasis in qualitative
research on inductive reasoning fit best with the progressive methodology of the
Highpath School of Theology study and the inductive approach to questioning I took in
the intensive interviewing of Highpath School of Theology affiliates; exploratory
research to investigate the uncharted faith settings of the study population and intensive
investigations of the subjective and faith-informed meanings that motivate the
information behavior were particularly well served by the techniques of intensive
interviewing.
Finally, qualitative research involves an approach to questioning and investigating
different from that used in experimental and quantitative research. Qualitative research is
inductive and idiographic, whereas experiments and quantitative (i.e. surveys) tend to be
conducted with a deductive nomothetic framework. Both approaches can help
information scientists learn about the information behavior in the domain of religion; in
later iterations of the research study of faith-related information behavior, I remain open
to incorporating either experimental or quantitative approaches, or both.9

9

Those quasi-quantitative data could also benefit from and be enriched with the documentation of the
qualitative data from the interviews.

42

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
This chapter will present the results of data collected during interviews with four
stakeholder groups: librarians, faculty, MA students and MDiv students. It will proceed
in the order of the research questions and interview questions. Each interview question
corresponds to one of the following five research questions.
RQ1: What are the information behaviors specific to the research processes of
MA and MDiv students at Highpath School of Theology?
RQ2: How do Highpath School of Theology graduate faculty (teaching in the MA
and MDiv programs) appraise the information behaviors involved in the research
processes of MA and MDiv students?
RQ3: What information behaviors specific to Highpath School of Theology MA
and MDiv students' research processes do academic librarians see in the Highpath
School of Theology Library and/or on campus?
RQ4: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the role of degree program affiliation in
relation to the information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in
their research processes?
RQ5: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the significance of religious faith in the

43

information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in their research
processes?10
Results are presented according to the stakeholder groups of interview
participants who responded to the questionnaire: all participants, only Master’s students
(both MA students and MDiv students), only faculty, only librarians, and a combination
of students and faculty.
Demographics
Student participants:
Participant 1: Secularist, MA, white, male
Participant 2: Christian MA, black, male
Participant 3: Buddhist MDiv, white, female
Participant 4: Jewish MDiv, white, male
Faculty participants:
Participant 5: Secularist, white, male
Participant 6: Quaker, white, male
Participant 7: Muslim, Arab, male
Librarian participants:
Participant 8: Christian, white, male
Participant 9: Secularist, Hispanic, male
Participant 10: Christian, white, male

10

The questionnaire in Appendix A details the correspondence between research

questions, interview questions and interviewee roles (i.e. student, faculty, librarian).

44

Data Collected from All Interviewees
Would you be willing to talk about your faith background? [RQ1; all participants]
The students and faculty who were interviewed all responded positively, either
with “yes” or “sure.” The two MDiv students and one MA student all gave a one-word
response. One MA student, Participant 1, elaborated:
I grew up in Church of Christ. I was confirmed and participated but basically in
high school I began to veer away from the Church. Well, really, the main reason
is I moved away from home at that point and went to kind of like a boarding
school type situation. But by college I really began to doubt, um, the worth, of
going to church every Sunday. And then by grad school I pretty much kind of put
organized religion behind me and that has not changed.
Two faculty participants gave one-word answers but one faculty member
specified “I’m a Muslim. Here I teach Islamic philosophy, theology and spirituality.”
Two of the librarians interviewed responded either with “yes” or “sure” whereas one
librarian stated “I don’t know that I would really. Yeah.”
What is your current religious status/practice, if any? [RQ1: all participants]
This question was answered by every participant from all three stakeholder
groups, students, faculty and librarians. The responses ranged from “unaffiliated” and
“non-believing” to “practicing” and “ordained.” The organized religions represented
include: Buddhism, Islam, Christianity, and Judaism.
The MA students interviewed expressed current religious statuses of
“unaffiliated” and “Christian mystic,” respectively. The Christian mystic, Participant 2,
first traced his family’s religious background and then stated “I do identify as a Christian

45

and I will be ordained as a Disciples of Christ minister as well as a United Church of
Christ minister.”
The MDiv student participants identified as a practicing Zen Buddhist and a
practicing Conservative Jew, respectively. The Zen Buddhist student, Participant 3,
articulated that he “practice[s] on a weekly basis with a [Vietnamese] congregation here
in Highpath.” The Jewish MDiv student, Participant 4, first explained how her family
“fluctuated between Reform Judaism and conservative Judaism” and then stated “now, as
an adult I would consider myself a Conservative Jew.”
The faculty stakeholder group was comprised of one practicing Muslim, one nonbelieving Christian (hereafter “secularist”), and one member of the Religious Society of
Friends called Quakers. The Islamic faculty member clarified “it’s more than an
academic subject for me. I take it seriously […] I’m especially interested in spiritual
aspects of the tradition, Islamic tradition.” The Quaker faculty member, Participant 6,
delineated his religious and intellectual biography, stating:
I was raised in an atheist household. I had a conversion to evangelical Christianity
at 14. Also become involved in the Charismatic movement. Over studies at a
Christian college and seminary in California I found myself engaging
contemporary philosophy and science. I studied with a Lutheran theologian in
Germany called Wolfhart Pannenberg […] And I thoroughly imbibed with
Lutheran theology. I did my PhD at Yale in Philosophy and Religious Studies
[…] And over the years, some twenty-five years of teaching, that has sort of
settled into this sort of radical, mystical form of Christian faith and practice,
which the Quakers practice in an unprogrammed means and a theological position

46

that is deeply Wesleyan in orientation. The significance of Wesleyan theology is
that is doesn’t accept a dichotomy between what Americans consider progressive
and evangelical. So personal holiness and social holiness go hand in hand in
Wesley’s thought. A deep abiding presence of God and that God speaks, through
scripture and other sources, goes hand-in-hand with the belief that we are called to
be radical spokespersons for Jesus Christ in the world, including and especially to
the poor and marginalized persons. That’s the beauty of the harmony that
Wesleyan spirituality offers and that in my own spiritual life is central.
Participant 9 stated that he was “not religious. I have no affiliation.” The other
two members of the librarian stakeholder group identified as Christian but each
participant described a different version of Christianity. Participant 8 responded that he is
ordained in the Church of the Nazarene. He described other library staff members’ faiths,
stating, “Highpath doesn’t require any confession of faith from anyone of the faculty or
staff. So on staff here in the Library we have a fairly conservative Baptist, a sort of liberal
Presbyterian, a Buddhist, an atheist, and a Charismatic, among the professional
librarians.” Participant 10, who was hesitant to speak about faith when asked the first
interview question (above), offered a rich response about current religious status/practice:
Yeah, I didn’t want to talk about my faith background, but I guess current is OK. I
occasionally go to church. When I go to church it’s usually to a Catholic church.
So I’ve said I didn’t want to talk about my background but I’ve been considering
becoming Catholic. I grew up in an Evangelical Protestant context and so on. I
happen to work in a Methodist school. That’s more what my background is, more
what I’m familiar with. I occasionally go to church. I was a teacher for ten years

47

and I taught a world religions class. I would take students to various gatherings or
invite speakers in from various world religions. I’m not Greek Orthodox but I
would go to Greek Orthodox services to support a student. I have a PhD in
Religious Studies and I study Early Christianity. So for me a lot of various
Christian traditions are fascinating and the way they’ve preserved those traditions
that have been around for a long time [is fascinating].
Which degree program are you more closely affiliated with? (MA, MDiv) Could you
describe the nature of your association? [RQ4; all participants]
This question was answered by every participant from all three stakeholder
groups: students, faculty and librarians. The responses to the question of which degree
program participants are more closely affiliated ranged from “not close to anything” and
“it’s sort of an evolution” to “more on the MA side” and “both.” The degree programs
identified include: Master of Arts (MA), Master of Divinity (MDiv), Doctor of
Philosophy (PhD) and Doctor of Ministry (DMin).
The MA students interviewed expressed current or recent enrollment in the
Master of Arts in Theological Discipline. Participant 1 was in his final year of the MA in
Theological Discipline program; his concentration was in Religious Education.
Participant 2 had just graduated with the MA degree and had just begun studies in the
MDiv hybrid program. Since his answers to interview questions primarily recall his
experience of theological education and library research as an MA student for the
immediately previous two years, he has been classified as an MA student for the purposes
of this dissertation project.

48

Participant 3 identified as most closely affiliated with the “MDiv in Interfaith
Chaplaincy Program.” Participant 4 first explained: “[i]t’s sort of been an evolution. As a
Jew I never thought I’d be getting an MDiv. But it’s worked out really nicely […]
Basically I was doing the MA in Interfaith Chaplaincy through Highpath Lincoln
University when we had ties with them. Which was a three year program.” After
delineating her academic history in an MA program, the student described the MDiv in
Interfaith Chaplaincy program with which she is currently most closely affiliated. She
related:
Then when the separation of the two institutions happened […] When I became
an MDiv student it was really nice because all of the classes I had taken thus far
already mapped over into this new program […] And so my relationship with the
program is in that regard. It’s one that we’re working to advertise more. I think
we probably have a dozen or [fewer] MDiv in Interfaith Chaplaincy […] Because
it’s different. It’s pretty non-traditional. And I think a good majority of us or at
least half of us are non-Christian. So it’s really neat in that regard.
All of the faculty members interviewed have affiliations with both the MA and
the MDiv programs at Highpath School of Theology. The faculty stakeholder group was
comprised of one faculty member who is most closely affiliated with the MDiv program
and two faculty members who are most closely affiliated with the MA program.
Participant 6 first expressed that his affiliation is “equal between MA and MDiv,”
then later said “possibly more MDiv.” He continued to describe the nature of his
affiliation. He advises students in both programs and offers elective courses in both
programs. However, he teaches the MDiv curriculum core course called Systematic

49

Theology for Ministry. The elective course he currently offered, Wesleyan Theology, was
“mostly for MDiv students,” he said.
Participant 7, like the other two faculty members, first answered “actually both,”
then specified “I am more involved in the Islamic Studies MA program.” He elaborated
that he encounters students from the hybrid and on-campus MA program. His encounters
with MDiv students occur because students have to select a class outside of their own
tradition; he explained:
So if they’re studying Christianity then primarily you are just studying the
Christian tradition. But it is required that they should take a class, which they all
take classes, which deals with other traditions, too. So I am having a lot of
students from that [Christian] tradition. But its primarily Islamic MA students, but
also seriously involved in the MDiv program I can say.
Participant 5’s response to this interview question was particularly expressive. He
talked both about which programs he is most closely affiliated as well as which
programs’ students he typically prefers. He is closest to the PhD students. However, he
leads the MA Colloquium, required of all MA students. A New Testament scholar, he
regrets that more MA students are not interested in studying New Testament. While
MDiv students are interested in New Testament studies, he has issues teaching them. He
reasoned:
Because it’s more of a professional school commitment than it is an academic
commitment and some of these people are quite pious and conservative in their
orientation. And I unabashedly teach critical, historical critical methodologies.
And so that there’s a certain about of alienation that happens in some courses.

50

Especially the introductory course. I know that it’s happening now in the course
that I’m teaching right this term.
The library stakeholders also responded about their degree program affiliations
and lack thereof. Participant 9 answered, “I’m not close to anything since I have no
[theological subject] area of expertise.” Whoever needs help, he helps. Participant 9
provides assistance to both MA, MDiv and PhD students who need help navigating
online resources, learning how to use an e-book, learning how to search through the
database, determining why a database is not functioning properly, and/or discovering
good databases for a given subject.
Participant 8 is most closely affiliated with the PhD program. He facilitates
directed studies for the students in New Testament. He also serves on students’ exam
committees and their dissertation committees. He has far less contact with MA and MDiv
students. He added that there is a Doctor of Ministry (DMin) degree program on campus.
He does not have direct contact with DMin students either.
Participant 10 has both formal and informal affiliations with degree programs at
Highpath School of Theology. The formal affiliation that he has pertains to PhD and
DMin students; he is the thesis secretary. He ensures that dissertations conform to
Highpath’s formatting guidelines. The informal affiliation is with the MA program. He
stated:
So far in what’s happened in day-to-day reality I’ve been more in conversation
with MA students and MA faculty. I mentioned this MA Colloquium. I taught
half of one of the first classes in that colloquium, research methods, and so on.
My sense is, and this isn’t saying much, but research is more of an expectation

51

more with MA programs generally than MDiv programs. And that makes sense
that I would be pulled in to help more with the MA program.
Do you see students working in groups on research? [RQ1; all participants]
The responses ranged from “seldom” and “no” to “sometimes” and “yes.”
Participant 3 reported “no” whereas Participant 4 reported “yes, I see group work but I
typically see them working on a class presentation […] I haven’t seen as much formal
research in a small group.” Participant 1 reported, simply “rarely,” whereas Participant 2
reported “yes […] I take a course on the History of Judaism, and so my partner was a
Jewish student and so we would meet at the Library [and] talk about the articles we read.
And we would do research about that and so that’s one way we would find more
resources in the Library.”
None of the faculty interviewed could affirm that the information behavior of
students included working in groups on research. Participant 5 stated, “I don’t know
about the library. You would have to ask the library staff about that.” Participant 6
replied “rarely.” Participant 7 responded “not that I’m aware of.”
The librarians could affirm that group work happens, though not in the library.
Participant 9 mentioned how “sometimes in the Edgar Center [student community center]
it may not be a group project, but I have seen [students] pool their resources; they do
crowdsource. I do see students actively engaging in that.” Participant 10 shared, “I don’t
think I have seen that yet. I’ve only been here a couple months.” Finally Participant 8
contextualized the various responses from stakeholders and explained the main reasons
for the negative responses: institutional culture and library building design. Participant 8
reported:

52

Seldom. Part of that is that historically the culture was not set up well for that.
We have two conference rooms. And that’s all. And it’s very much set up on a
model of individual research. It’s not designed to encourage [group work]. We are
actually in the process of repurposing an area that would be designed for study but
as of now there’s almost none that goes on in the Library. The group study that
happens on campus happens across the green here at the student center. Students
study in there in groups. But the perception is the Library should be quiet and it
was designed for that in in culture in had been reinforced.
Interpersonal interactions often extend beyond face-to-face encounters. Tell me
about how, if at all, Highpath School of Theology MA and MDiv students' use
digital communication and/or social media as part of the research process. [RQ1;
all participants]
Both MA students interviewed expressed active involvement in digital
communication and social media. Participant 1 said initially that he had nothing to say
about digital communication; he said “I don’t see a lot of Skyping when it comes to
bringing in somebody from the outside for a class topic.” He then offered that he uses
Facebook for social sharing of information. He added that he and a small group of
students are currently developing “an intra-community webpage so people can post art,
articles, ideas, commentary, politics. All through a theological lens.”
Participant 2 explained that students at Highpath School of Theology use a digital
communication and educational technology called LifeSize. He described LifeSize as “a
way into research.” He elaborated:

53

So in my class on the Hebrew Bible we had a tele- or video-conference with
Jewish students at AJR [Academy of Jewish Religion] […] so we were able to
converse back and forth in the text as Christians. And what they saw as Jews and
what lens you use to understand that […] so that’s one way we were able to bring
that color in. Another way is social media, which I know is not a traditional
research source, but, uh, one professor in particular I can think of uses Twitter a
lot to tweet ideas or quotes or an article [and] she’s a practicing Muslim. So I
have used her articles to get a different perspective on an issue, because I know
one as a male I have perspective, as a Christian I have a perspective, as an
African-American and as a Southerner I look at things a little differently […]
looking at her tweets, or reading articles on Facebook that people post is one way
that I can access different information and perspectives on issues […] when I’m
investigating the conflict in Israel and Palestine I can, one, read articles about it,
but also, I can just look on Facebook. And on Facebook I have classmates who
are Muslims and they will post their opinion. And their opinion is their opinion
and that’s a form of research because I can see that is what he think or what she
thinks. I can figure out where that comes from. What is that idea based in? What
theory in the Koran informs this? So it gives order to the questions to inform the
research.
Participant 3 responded that interpersonal interactions, both face-to-face and
otherwise are not part of his standard practice; he summarized his comments, stating,
“I’m a lone wolf.” In contrast Participant 4 reported at length on the role of digital

54

communication in course delivery and research-related interpersonal interactions in the
hybrid MDiv program’s online courses. She explained:
One of the things I like about it is that we’re able to learn with each other through,
doing online, as opposed to face-to-face, is we have the online thing called Sakai
and we’re able to do forums, post forums, and just have general discussions and
talk about the readings and the, just our ideas about the research and for projects
and papers, and we’re able to, a lot of those we’re able to see our peers’ thoughts
and we’re able to comment on each others’ and have, like a forum thread. And
respond directly to each other. And one of the things I like about it is, because it’s
in writing and it’s not face-to-face, you have to be very careful with your words,
for me it helps me to be very deliberate in the words that I use. Because it can’t
necessarily be deleted, sometimes you’re able to edit it, but it’s a little more
permanent than the kind of interactions that we have in the classroom where it’s
real-time, face-to-face, where you can go and explain yourself.
The faculty interviewed fell into one of two categories in their responses to this
question: (1) they expressed either a lack of familiarity with digital communication and
social media, or (2) a strong advocacy for their use in learning, research and community
life. Participant 7 said that he was not familiar with the issue and did not have enough
information to answer the question. Participant 5 responded that he was not the person to
ask about digital communication or social media but that he knows it happens. He
continued to explain that it happens in his own large courses for which he has a teaching
assistant set up and monitor the Sakai system’s online chat rooms for students to connect

55

with each other. Participant 6 was the strongest faculty advocate for digital
communication and social media; he articulated:
Digital communication and social media play a huge role for CST students. They,
in their classes already, are involved in posting responses to a shared site and
sometimes interacting online in their responses to their reading and to their
research. Even in classes that are face-to-face classes [there are] weekly [online]
sessions. Their data acquisition is largely digital, through our Library and through
other sources. Their use of the internet constitutes an increasing percentage of
their reading time and of the sources that they cite. And, finally, they are active
users of Facebook, with a number of Facebook forums where they’ll meet in the
context of their classes and their community life.
The librarians all had unique remarks about interpersonal interaction, digital
communication and social media. Participant 8 reported that he receives “half a dozen
emails a week” primarily about New Testament research (his subject specialty).
Participant 9 put email use into further perspective: “I’ll have five emails for every faceto-face interaction. So they [students] very much embrace the non-face-to-face
interpersonal aspect of working with librarians.” Participant 10 provided the richest
response:
One of the things we’ve tried to do in the last few months is establish a virtual or
online reference presence. So prior to my arrival, people could either email or call
in and now we’ve expanded with a service called Springshare Libanswers so it
allows us to tweet questions or text questions so we’ve established a twitter
account to go with the library. It’s the first one that they’ve had. We don’t have a

56

library Facebook page. This online reference service also allows for chat
reference. So we just tried to expand the different modes that reference services
can be delivered in. And from some what I can tell so far it’s only been in place
for about a month and a half but it seems to be usually we have questions come in
through text while they’re in class, maybe not a good time (laughs). Asking about
their textbooks and if we have them. But we’ve been making announcements once
or twice a week on our Library Twitter page and that’s linked together with the
School’s Twitter page which is very active […] to make sure that library services
are available digitally.
How useful do you think various kinds of information behavior activities are in the
research process? [RQ4; all participants]
Participant 1 addressed the issue of the usefulness of various kinds of information
behavior from his personal perspective and from the perspective of a seminary student.
He explained that he will be interviewing people and asking “not-too-terribly invasive,
but definitely personal questions.” By “personal” he explained he meant “soulsearching.” For his research purposes the various kinds of information behavior he found
useful were the kinds that can take place within different kinds of geographical and
institutional contexts. He stated, “[w]hether you’re talking about a coffee shop or in the
park or maybe after a meditative meet. So I think the behavioral aspect of it would just be
something I’d take as a mental footnote and it’s kind of subjective really.” Participant 1
considered various kinds of information behavior to be especially useful in the context of
“seminar student behavior […] since we’re generally talking about the practice of faith.”

57

The MDiv students interviewed had diverging opinions on the usefulness of
various kinds of information behavior. Participant 3 does not usually discuss anything
about his research with his peers. He instead caters his research to the professor’s
expectations, avoiding informal conversations about research methods or topics with
peers. By contrast Participant 4 considers various kinds of information behavior,
especially unintentional encounters, to be “really useful.” She elaborated:
[w]hen you mentioned that I kind of thought about the kind of conversations I
have socially either in passing or just hanging out with my peers in our apartment
at night or something and we have, we’ll be hanging out in a social setting but
we’ll be having these theological conversations. And it will be really neat, more
likely than not, I’m learning something new every time I interact with them and
so you know they’ll say something that will spark my curiosity and then I’ll ask
them questions about it and then you know later on go look it up and do further
research. But it’s often in those conversations that just sort of, you know, happen
either in passing or just relaxing with friends that really spark some good ideas
and further interests.
The faculty interviewed consider various kinds of information behavior to be
“radically influential” and “indispensable.” Participant 7 found various information
behavior, especially unintended encounters, to be useful in terms of reaching goals in a
timely manner. Juggling priorities including children and the durations of academic
programs is better facilitated by various information behavior. Coming up with an
effective time management plan has been highly effective in his own research. As far as
his students are concerned, his observation has been that it is effective in their research,

58

too. He explained, “[s]o when I see [a] healthy family life or when I see [a student]
having a family […] these informal interactions [with] family are making a person a more
responsible one. So students are having more tendencies to realize their projects in a
more timely and more disciplined manner.”
Participant 6 opined that the greatest challenge is organizing one’s information
acquisitions behavior in a way that is rational, critical and self-reflective. He explained
how the key task for students assigned a sermon or paper is: to recognize what
information she does not yet have, what information is already a part of her tacit
knowledge, how she can acquire the missing information, how she can organize this
information, and then how she can present it for her reader. Given this instance of the
relevance of a task to various kinds of information behavior, seminaries do not do a good
job of assisting students with the process, he said. He explained that he knew about the
shortfall of critical thinking in seminaries because of his prior experience at a state
university philosophy department for twelve years where there was a course aimed
exactly at this interview question – at assisting students in getting better at this process.
He concluded, “[b]ut we offer virtually nothing. Virtually no critical thinking. Direct or
indirect, in the seminary curriculum.”
The librarians interviewed had different perceptions of the usefulness of various
information behavior activities. Participant 9 thought all information behavior activities
are important, “because you can learn anything from anywhere,” he said. He observed
that how people collect data and how they seek information are very diverse. Participant
9 did not think any particular type of information behavior should be more heavily
weighted than others; any kind of information gathering is as important as any other.

59

Although people develop their information seeking behavior in various ways, that does
not mean any particular approach is any less relevant or less important. He summarized
his position, stating, “I think it just comes down to an individual basis. And I think
depending on the person, any different practice can be just as helpful.”
Participant 10 answered, “that’s sort of a ‘both/and’ question for me.”
He also observed that people gain knowledge through a wide variety of sources including
their pastors, family and friends. The way he tries to explain or conceptualize research to
Highpath graduate students in the MA Colloquium is by teaching them how “scholarship
is a community and it’s a conversation and so in order to do good research one has to, in
a way, apprentice oneself to that conversation. Listen to that conservation, find one’s
voice in that conversation.” He elaborated that interpersonal interaction is especially
important in religious studies because there’s an avid belief in major world religions that
certain people are also sources of authoritative knowledge. He tells his bibliographic
instruction students, “It may be best to go to talk to this person in this local community,
you may get more insight into this or that topic than [you would if you only] consulted a
book. So there’s that African proverb, and I don’t know if it’s apocryphal or not, but you
know ‘when an old person dies it’s like a library burns.’ So you know people are walking
libraries so I would like to think that in terms of information behavior and information
seeking people would be open to learning in all kinds of ways.
He also observed that information does not have to be printed to be valid; he endeavors to
teach what information counts as a credible academic source and insure that students are
citing credible academic sources.

60

Do you see any indications that Highpath School of Theology MA and MDiv
students' religious faith or lack thereof matters in the way they go about the
research process? Do you see it in the Highpath School of Theology Library?
Around campus meeting places such as the dining hall, gym, or chapel? [RQ5; all
participants]
There are three components to this interview question. All participants replied to
this question, but not everyone addressed all three components. In general, the
participants did see indications that religious faith mattered in the research process for
students. Most participants did not see much evidence of faith-specific behavior in the
Library, but many saw indications of students’ religious faith at campus meeting places.
Participant 1 responded that if religious faith is not generally apparent, it is
probably because “people are so focused on getting it done and getting it done on
schedule and getting it done the way they intend that maybe faith may potentially slip
back a couple of notches in terms of importance.” Muslims’ religiosity is more visible
and more consistent than that of Christians or Jews who the participant knows personally;
he explained, “with the Christian students I hang out with we tend to be pretty liberal and
as such kind of flexible at the rules, when it comes to the rules – of drinking and just
letting loose a little bit.”
Participant 2 found that religious faith influences what kind of books students buy
and books the Library buys. He said that when he first began his studies there were no
explicit section on Sikhism or Jainism, and although Judaism was represented in the
collection, there was not a robust section on Islam. But, because there are more students
who have different faith affiliations, or people who are more agnostic coming to

61

Highpath, “because they’re humanist or something like that, our collection has to grow,”
he stated. Otherwise they would not be meeting the needs of students. He described
curricular effects the new inter-religious precedent has brought to Highpath. He
explained:
There are classes now that are offered on the Relativity of Religious Truth. Which
in that course you’re going to read everything from William James to John Hick
to Paul Tillich. You’re going to read a breadth of things. You’re going to read
Eastern philosophers. So those things have influenced and so those books have to
be bought now and they need to be on the shelves in order to inform and to meet
the needs of the school.
Around campus Participant 2 saw indications of students’ religious faith. When he served
as the Chairman of the Interreligious Council, one of the biggest qualms was over what
was to be done with the chapel. Because the chapel has a large cross prominently
featured, it is a Christian chapel. And so the questions became: can we have worship
spaces that are hospitable for a myriad of faiths? Do you take the cross down? Do you
leave it up? He explained that Highpath follows the Methodist calendar, with its seasonal
banners. Currently there is an interfaith banner with multiple religious symbols that
always hangs. He understands the necessary compromise.
Participant 2 described the campus prayer room. Formerly a Christian prayer
room, it is now used more by Islamic students. To accommodate Islamic usage Highpath
needed shoe racks and prayer books. “Where is the line between being a mainly Christian
institution and having religious bases that are acceptable to greater faiths?” he asked.
Highpath is now a pork-free campus. When they have a pizza party they have halal meat

62

and kosher meat and a lot of vegetarian fare because there are Jains who avoid harming
animals. They are increasingly aware of intermingling behavior based on religious
beliefs, “not reading in a book, right, but by personal experience,” he said. Religious
beliefs affect the spaces and they affect the conversations. The conversations, the
interpersonal information sources, fraught with a myriad of religious concerns, affect the
students’ research processes.
Participant 3 also found evidence for religious faith impacting students’ research,
particularly in conversations. Unless someone is wearing some demonstrably religious
garb he would have to have a conversation with someone about whatever their religious
identity or practice would be. “There are a lot of assumptions to be made and they’re
usually wrong,” he stated, laughing. He found no difference in the way MA and MDiv
students go about their research.
Participant 4 would not distinguish between MA and MDiv students in terms of
how religious beliefs affect students’ research behavior. Of the religious spaces on
campus she found them all helpful as places for contemplation, prayer, meditation,
worship, relaxation. She elaborated, “I know specifically, for me, as an MDiv student
every Tuesday we have community chapel that is an ecumenical interreligious service. I
really appreciate that forty-five minutes [each] week because it leaves me space to clear
my mind so when I go back to doing my work it can help me focus a lot more.” She did
not see any evidence of religious faith in the Highpath Library. She mentioned the
meditation room frequented by Muslim students and spoke of a Biblical garden in which
there is no religious iconography; it’s intended to be a space for meditation and
contemplation where there used to be a little labyrinth built into the natural grounds (now

63

overgrown). She provided an example of religious life visible on campus: “[s]ometimes
we’ll put a rope labyrinth on the lawn right in front of the chapel and that is often a space
used for labyrinth walking which is a meditative or spiritual practice.”
The faculty members’ responses to the question linking religious faith and the
research process varied considerably. Participant 7 stated that religious commitments are
the main factor that determines the way research will progress. He explained, “[a] lot of
the people as far as I can see are taking their traditions seriously here. And they are
choosing a topic in accordance with that. So I can answer that, yes, it is the majority of
students are being influenced by their religious commitments, in terms of picking a topic,
how to run it and how to finalize it.”
Participant 5’s response was consistent with Participant 7’s comment. He said,
“Oh absolutely. It is, in fact, I think the general ethos of the school,” but he added, “and
I’m not exactly happy about it.” He thought that too many projects are identity-related.
He considers identity and religious commitments to be pastoral care issues, “and I don’t
consider it scholarly” he said. He continued:
So the answer is yes our students are encouraged to own their identity and speak
from it and to research inside of it. But there are some of us who are pushing for a
more humanist and scholarly and even liberal arts way of answering those
questions and push issues of philosophy, inter-religious issues so I get pretty tired
of some of this high-identity research.
Participant 5 also sees the impact of students’ own religious faiths in research
practices in the context of the School of Theology Library. But he does not think it’s
confessional. He clarified, “[t]hat is I don’t the Library has a theological line or

64

denominational pitch. It rather is related to the kinds of students we want to attract. So,
for example, we’ve just inherited a very large Wiccan collection. And that doesn’t mean
we’re interested in having more witches on campus. What we do want is that collection to
be there. And we now will have some students who will come and want to have access to
that.” Another contemporary example he gave is the effort to bolster the Islamic
collection, because Highpath is moving in the direction of a multi-religious seminary.
Around campus Participant 5 sees religious faith among smaller religious groups.
Some of them are more intentional than others. There is a Korean choir. There used to be
a Korean prayer group that met almost every day. There is a Lutheran discussion group
that meets on a regular basis. He observed, “I’m sure that there are a lot of friendships of
people who feel an affinity with each other spiritually for some reason or other. Even
atheists.” He said that the School of Theology almost has two student bodies. One student
body lives on campus and tends to be made up of international students, mostly Asian
students. He opined,
I think our students are oriented not in terms of their religious experience as much
as their ethnic identity. So that our students I think are more conscious of ethnic,
or gender identity, so women’s groups or Korean groups or African-American
groups. You might think that at a theological school that these subgroups are
driven more by faith and so on but I think it’s more by cultural identity.
Participant 6 saw a strong correlation between students’ religious faith and the
research process. His students who come from a very conservative, and often hierarchical
religious background will often approach the research process in a faith-centered manner.
They will ask, “What does scripture say on this topic?” and use the scriptural testimony

65

as the salient information for answering the question or they will ask their pastor, or
bishop or ministry supervisor what is the right answer or ask “how do we answer that
question?” And answer accordingly. Methodists, Presbyterians, and others in the middle
of the mainline spectrum combine scriptural and traditional sources with appeals to their
own thinking and experience, so they would have a blended or hybrid model of
information acquisition and prioritization. And those on the very left end of the spectrum
such as the Unitarian Universalists will make no appeals to authoritative sources and rely
very heavily on individual experience, he observed. He did not observe any evidence of
religious faith inside the Highpath School of Theology Library, but there were indications
that religious faith affects the communications process, thereby affecting the research
process around campus. He explained that the reason why there is more visible religiosity
at the campus level than at the Library level is that they were involved in giving birth to
an interreligious university, which subsequently left. Over the last five years they have
thought very carefully about public spaces being open and inviting to people of multiple
faith traditions, including the chapel. They established a prayer room for the Muslim
daily prayers, a wash room for the purification that comes before that. Spaces that were
not threatening to Jews and Muslims were envisioned. Types of events that were equally
inviting to all were planned. They also have worked on having spaces and types of
meetings that invite in other ethnic traditions in the area which include AfricanAmericans, Asian-Americans, Hispanic-Americans, and the Korean population of
students. All of these are examples of their consciously molding common space to invite
in religious difference, cultural difference.

66

In these spaces with individuals and groups Participant 6 suspects that religious
faith is impacting worldviews and having an effect on the research process of the degreeseeking students. As a Methodist, ecumenical and interreligious school, “that is the water
in which we swim,” he said. Through their dialogue with those of other religions,
professors regularly see the way that Jewish interests and Jewish community formation
influence the students in what they choose to write about, how they gather information
about it and how they produce it. The same is true of Muslim students who approach
questions in a very different way. The same applies to the various members of the
Christian family. He gave one example:
I gave a class, I gave a lecture on Muslim-Christian dialogue. And the assignment
was quote ‘to present the Trinity for Muslims’. And that gave him the chance to
think about how to present this information in a way that Muslim students can
take on, in a way that fosters Muslim-Christian dialogue and helps them to be
strong clergy and laypersons in their congregations and that is all about
information acquisition, organization and presentation.
The Library staff shared their perspectives on students’ religious faith and the
research process. Participant 8 considers that there is a difference in the students in the
MDiv program and the MA program. The MDiv goal is to be ordained and to enter into
full-time ministry. The questions they ask and the kind of answers they want are always
shaped by what they perceive to be the needs of the church. The students in the other
master’s programs are either “trying to work out religious questions of their own and
they’re really not questions tied to the church. Or else they’re preparing for doctoral
programs and they don’t see their career in the church and questions they ask are sort of

67

either of a personal existential nature or their of a strictly academic nature.” It’s
somewhat like the difference between students of theology and religious students; there
are some students even at the master’s level who are not religious at all. They have no
interests in how these texts affect life in the church. There are other students who only
care about learning’s relationship to the church, he said.
So some students are only interested in critical Biblical studies and other students
are really not interested in critical Biblical studies at all; they are only interested in how
to preach the Bible. He stated, “It’s a very different set of questions, it’s a very different
set of resources. I see that on the resource end. They say ‘hey, can we get this thing, this
resource?’ so I see the difference.”
Participant 9’s response to this interview question differed the most from the other
research participants. He does not see any indications “at all” that students’ religious faith
affects the way they go about the research process. He elaborated:
When I’m helping a student I don’t ask them, ‘are you doing it because you
believe or you don’t believe or what’s your angle?’ I don’t ask that or anything
like that. And they don’t divulge that information. But from what I notice, no,
there is absolutely no difference in how they conduct research or do anything like
that. How they seek help.
Near the Highpath School of Theology Library there is the Edgar Center. It’s a
community center where students will gather sometimes for small group class discussion
or just to hang out, and Participant 9 has heard numerous times various religious talks
going on. Whether or not those conversations are taking place in the context of the
classroom or just friendly chitchat because one person is genuinely interested in trying to

68

learn more about another person’s faith, he cannot say one way or the other. He said that
he has never seen a disrespectful argument. It always seems like a genuine yearning for
understanding and knowledge. There are community conversations there as well, where
staff/faculty will get together and discuss various topics about diversity, religion and
sexual orientation. Those are always respectful discussions, he said. He elaborated:
People are always willing to open up and nobody slams anybody’s opinion or
beliefs or anything like that. Everything comes from a good-natured place, a
caring place. And I think that helps, too, with the research, because in those
conversations people are always open and when you’re open you get a lot more
information from people and you understand, rather than just looking directly
from the textbook. When you add, I mean, it’s anecdotal, but sometime anecdotal
information can be pretty helpful in research.
Participant 10 also had thoughtful reflections on master’s degree students,
religious faith and the research process. He gave an example of an MA student for whom
research is not just an academic process, but also a process of personal discovery. The
student really cares about certain topics that are very much related to what he’s practicing
in his life. Thus the reference librarian observed, “I do think I see a correlation between
the two.” They are there because of some kind of faith commitment and faith background
and that is what has led them to Highpath School of Theology. “Whether that makes them
more intense researchers or not, or more than people who are approaching things from a
strictly secular point of point of view, I don’t know,” he said.
Sometimes students’ faith is visible or apparent or stated. Participant 10 cited a
case in which a student identified himself as personally religious. “I don’t see a lot of

69

people wearing faith on their sleeves,” but sometimes they self-identify, he said. He has
had a student he helped who is Muslim make it obvious early on in the conversation that
he was a practicing Muslim. He led an orientation for the Bayan [mainly Muslim]
students. One student who is Jewish happened to be attending that orientation even
though she attends the Academy of Jewish Religion. He does not think it is fair to assume
that anybody is one faith or another. Somebody could be studying at Bayan and not be
Muslim.
Sometimes you can tell from people’s garb: “We do have Muslim students who
where a hijab or a burka and it’s fairly obvious then upfront,” he said. This is not to say
that Christians cannot wear those things; it is just that Christians in the United States tend
to not wear those particular garments. Sometimes people dress in a way that identifies
themselves religiously. At Highpath there is a Jewish student – a rabbi, a chaplain and a
TA – who wears his kippah, his prayer cap. He is not Orthodox, but he always wears a
dark suit. So it is fairly obvious when he comes in that he is Jewish, he said. So religious
behavior being what it is, people self-identify with their clothing.
Data Collected from Student Interviewees
Tell me about a time you talked about a research assignment with a fellow Highpath
School of Theology student that you found useful. [RQ1; students]
This question was asked of the participants from the student stakeholder group,
including two MA students and two MDiv students. Participant 1 did not give a specific
instance of a useful research conversation but generally described types of conversations,
stating:

70

“[i]t's definitely been in the last week of so. Because I'm second year so I'm
working on my thesis right now as well. And, ironically, it is going to involve
interviewing people (laughs) just like you are. This last week, I don't specifically
remember when, but it's just kind of like it happens all the time […] I guess [what
is useful is] just getting feedback. Not necessarily in particular looking for
specific detailed feedback. But just being able to generally tell that someone
understands, generally speaking, more likelier than a non-seminary student. Not
that [a non-seminary student] wouldn’t give valuable feedback. It’s just that we’re
soaked and dumped in this environment, you know, that feedback is going to
come from a place of closer understanding and relation.
Participant 2 provided a specific example of how conversations were in the research
process. He explained that during the last semester of his MA program he wrote a
research paper comparing agape (Greek: love) as defined by Martin Luther King, Jr. to
the concept of taqwa (Arabic: piety) in the Islamic tradition. He elaborated:
I was wondering how they can inform each other in order to have a more
pluralistic society. So I talked with faculty members and fellow students to gain
additional perspective and then I used the Library to find sources, mainly
Christian sources, and some articles were available on taqwa, from an Islamic
point of view. At Highpath we have Bayan, which is an Islamic graduate study
program. So I consulted with Muslims on their understanding of taqwa. Or
basically their understanding of consciousness of God and man, or fellow
humanity. So I would talk to them about their experience of that practically. And

71

the theoretical concept. And then Christians, what is the role of love in your
theology.
Neither of the MDiv students offered a specific example of how a conversation
had been useful for their own research assignments, but Participant 4 articulated how a
conversation she had was useful to another student. Participant 4 described how a fellow
student asked her about a research assignment on interreligious dialogue. The MDiv
student reviewed a paper she had written on the topic and shared her bibliography with
her peer. He was then able to proceed with further research. So in this instance talking
about a research assignment was useful to a student, but not for the purposes of the
interviewee’s own research. Participant 3 responded simply: “Gee. I kind of keep to
myself [laughs]. Nothing comes to mind.”
Could you tell me about a research project on which you are currently or were
recently working? [RQ1; students]
Two MA students and two MDiv students responded to this question. Participant
1 briefly stated that he was currently working on a research project about the religious
and theological implications of dreaming within Islam. Participant 2 understands sermon
preparation to be a type of research project. He had recently preached a sermon on the
gospel of Mark in which Jesus is quoted as having said “there will be no more signs for
this generation” (Mark 8:12). He further recounts aspects of his recent sermon research
process, stating:
And so I consulted some New Testament PhD students about [it], as well as
commentaries in the reference section of the Library. And then I talked to some
students about why you look for signs to get a practical understanding and what

72

that means to them and then I used psychology. So I talked to, um, some
librarians, and found out we had some books on psychology about why we need
such signs for affirmation or confirmation or insights. And so that research took
two weeks to write the sermon because I wanted to be very thorough. I didn’t
want to just go up there and say, ‘oh well I thought about this, and this is my
theoretical, and this [is] what my theology is, and this [is] my exegesis on the
text.’
Participant 3 mentioned how he had worked on a research paper on Buddhist
feminism the previous semester. Participant 4 first explained that her Master of Divinity
(MDiv) with an emphasis of Interfaith Chaplaincy was originally a Master of Arts (MA)
degree program. She added that the new and current MDiv program requires either a
thesis or a case study as a summative exercise. For her degree she chose to conduct a case
study. She elaborated:
So currently I’m working on it. I’m hoping to be finished with it by the end of this
calendar year. It’s a case study that I’m using of my experience this past summer
with CPE which is Clinical Pastoral Education. So I’m doing a unit of CPE in a
hospital this summer and I’m taking an instance that I had with a family in the
hospital and I’m writing up the verbatim encounter and analyzing my social
location and their social locations and I’m using a model from Carrie Doehring
[Highpath faculty member] who does work on pastoral care counseling and using
her format to assess that care and conversations. So I’m looking at a theological
assessment of the encounter and the patient and the family, doing a personal
assessment, like a self-evaluation of how I was able to or not able to provide care

73

for them looking at some of my story, my background and seeing how my social
location and identity was either used as resources or roadblocks for providing
care. So that’s currently this semester’s main project. I don’t know if you’d
necessarily call it research but that’s the main piece that I’m engaged with at the
moment.
What else could you tell me about the role that personal contacts play in your
research in general? [RQ4; students]
This question was answered by the interview participants in the student
stakeholder group. Participant 2 explained that personal contacts play an auditing role for
research and writing. Feedback from both fellow theology students and his research
audience (such as a congregation) help the interviewee to conduct effective research. He
related, “[t]o feel their qualms with the text you will know how to interpret it and
simplify it for the audience.”
Participant 1 framed his response to the questions in terms of his current thesis
project. His work involves interviewing human subjects. He explained:
the people who I’m looking for in my research are people like me. Who, um, who
have some faith in the concept of transcendence whether you want to call it that,
or God, Universe, Spirit, Whatever. Um, but people who also have that, but do not
want and aren’t necessarily looking for a community of fellow believers to share
that belief and faith with. So for me personal contacts are going to be huge.
The MDiv students focused on the roles of faculty contacts in their research.
Participant 3 simply stated, “I usually try to cater my research strategy to what the
professors are expecting. I can sum it up in one sentence.” Participant 4 also

74

acknowledged the importance of professors. She especially appreciates the role her
faculty advisor plays in developing her summative exercise, a case study. The advisor
assists by directing the student to specific information sources, nurturing research skills
and improving writing techniques. Participant 4 also noticed that the professor for her
Pastoral Education Publication class is quick to suggest relevant scholars and their
academic works for students’ further research.
During your Highpath School of Theology degree-seeking research activities do you
think about your own religious beliefs? Do you ever notice them guiding you to a
particular peer or mentor? [RQ5; students]
The four student participants all said that they do think about their own religious
beliefs during degree-related research activities. Whether they noticed religious beliefs
guiding them to a particular peer or mentor varied.
Participant 2 thinks about his religious beliefs in the course of degree-related
research activities. He also notices his religious beliefs guiding him to a particular
mentor, a fellow African-American Christian with whom he closely identifies.
His mentor, Monica Coleman, inspired the interviewee to pursue graduate studies at
Highpath School of Theology. He read her book Making a Way or No Way. He explained
that he is drawn to her because she is an African-American professor who is Christian
and he feels they have similar experiences. Her understanding of process theology is
compatible with the interviewee’s beliefs in mysticism.
Another reason he was drawn to Highpath is an Islamic woman professor. He
stated, “I don’t know if I want to say this in the interview, but I used to joke and call her
‘Yoda’ because I felt like she was a wealth of knowledge and information because she

75

would talk to me and expand my mind beyond just what Christians were doing or what
the theory says. She was a piece of mediation.” The participant described typical
conversation topics that included Sufi writers, Christian mysticism and education. He
called the interactions “life-giving.” They helped to breathe new life into his research.
The participant’s religious beliefs and ethnic worldview guided him to certain mentors.
“One, because of her race and tradition and the other because I think our spirits were
alike,” he said.
Participant 1 thinks “everyday” about his religious beliefs in the course of degreerelated research activities. He also notices his religious beliefs guiding him to a particular
mentor, his advisor. He gave an example of his thinking about religious beliefs during the
course of a class. He was taking a class on Islamic philosophy and theology and the class
was beginning a unit on Sufism and mystical aspects of Islam. In his degree-related
coursework he learned about Al-Jazawi, who broke down three distinctions in the
religious or spiritual path. The course content included learning the three distinctions.
The participant explained:
The first is hearing the Word, which we all do, or have done in some shape or
form. The second is kind of like seeing that which is told to you, seeing it in
practice, so you see people praying and you praying and what the results might be
for that person. But the third is the most essential, which is actually incorporating
what you’ve heard and what you’ve seen into your being so that you’re soaking it
in. The metaphor is you’re walking in the fire. So, for me, I really have to think
about it. Do I really do that third aspect? And I had to answer that honestly, I’d
say most of the time, not. But then that kind of ties into what would be the point

76

of faith or God, at all? What would be the point? If you’re not going to
incorporate this third element? So that third element is something I think about
constantly. Not just on a superficial level. Not just being nice to people. But really
invoking that God-experience within you.
Although the participant thinks about and “lives out” his religious beliefs, he at first
stated that he did not notice them guiding him to a particular mentor or peer. Later in the
interview he changed his mind and said that he chose his advisor because spiritual
formation is what he is most interested in.
Participant 4 thinks about her religious beliefs in the course of degree-seeking
research activities. She does not notice her religious beliefs guiding her to a particular
mentor or peer. She attributes the fact that her beliefs do not guide her to certain peers of
mentors to the lack of Jews in the campus community. She explained,
I don’t particularly seek out people, peers, professors or colleagues from my own
faith tradition. I think I find more guidance and helpfulness from within the
community here. And most of the people happen not to be Jewish. So I don’t
know. Maybe that is my religion dictating that in some strange way.
Participant 3 thinks about his religious beliefs in the course of degree-seeking
research activities. He thinks about them when he is studying something that is part of his
religious belief system. He described being more aware of how critical he should or
should not be about it, and how his beliefs affect what he researches, what he does not
research, and things that he thinks are worthy of his time to research or not, or potential
worth of topics for investigation.

77

He also notices his religious beliefs guiding him to particular peers, fellow
Buddhists. He stated that as a Buddhist he would want to talk with someone who is
conversant in Buddhism. “And someone who is a practitioner even has more insight into
the subject and study as well. But those are few and far between around here,” he said.
Data Collected from Faculty Interviewees
In giving out assignments do you welcome informal research references? [RQ2;
faculty]
All three faculty members interviewed affirmed that they welcome informal
research references. Participant 5 responded simply “that’s very nice. That’s very
valuable, sure” whereas the other two faculty members gave specific details about how
they welcome and encounter informal research references.
Participant 7 assigns research projects that necessitate informal, interpersonal
interactions that will warrant being referenced in the research paper. He not only
welcomes but requires informal research references. He encourages his students to
interact with people outside of library sources, to pursue informal research references
such as “sources, persons, NGOs and institutions. Visiting a mosque, speaking to a rabbi,
chief or priest.”
Participant 6 explained what format he requests students use for informal research
references; he stated:
I ask them to footnote conversations. But I have explicitly said that I invite them
to discuss the questions, say for an essay their writing, with their classmates, with
clergy persons and with others. And to let that inform the answers. The writing
must be their own but the conversations are part of the learning process, including

78

stating in words that what you’re trying to work out for your writing. As long as
it’s footnoted I want them to honor the community of writing that they’re a part
of.
Participant 8, though a librarian, holds faculty status/rank. He is involved with the
review of various research-related student assignments. He addresses informal research
references, stating:
We have a PhD programs in practical theology […] where they do pastoral
counseling and those kinds of degrees. A lot of those have interview components
with [some] interviewing fifty Korean women about their religious experience the
last twenty years […] And since I chair the institutional review board all those
come through me to be sure they protect privacy and all that, but I don’t serve on
any committees. In New Testament studies where I work, the nature of the work
really is a print discipline […] once in a while you’ll find that someone had a
conversation with someone at SBL [Society for Biblical Literature] or something
and it was particularly useful. And once in a while you’ll find a footnote “I’d like
to thank so and so for our personal conversation” or “our email”. But it would be
really rare if a dissertation would have more than one on two of those kinds of
footnotes. And sometimes that would simply be at the front of the, in the preface,
or the acknowledgements, where they thank that person for the conversation and
it wouldn’t even be mentioned later. In the Practical Theology they do that
routinely but I’m not really involved in those dissertations.

79

How do you think your students go about gathering information? What do you see
that process being like? How much do your students talk to each other? [RQ2;
faculty]
There are three aspects to this question and the three faculty members who
answered this question carefully addressed all three aspects. Participant 5 explained that
his students begin gathering information with online resources, including the online
library catalog. Books are more popular than journal articles or reference materials. The
faculty member’s suggestions in class affect which publications students consult. He
elaborated:
I think they’re prone to certain authors. Especially ones that I mention in class or
that they become familiar with. I encourage them, although I don’t known if this
is true, to find one contribution that they very much like and then to bore down on
the bibliography that’s in that work. That’s much more familiar then, for me, than
their going to ATLA or New Testament Abstracts which is my field.
Participant 5 claimed that students talk to each other to a great extent. He thought the
reason why was that students consider it safer for them to get feedback from each other
about their projects.
Participant 6 described the process of information gathering as beginning with
interpersonal interaction. He stated:
So when I end a class it’s not uncommon that nobody moves. Nobody leaves the
room. They turn to each other. They engage in discussions. I’ll hear them
planning to meet over coffee to continue talking. They talk by phone. And again
they use digital communication to collaborate. For example I require them to do

80

student leadership. Each student twice a semester. In groups of two but sometimes
more and I require them to at least to coordinate their presentation so that some
learning goes on in that way.
He also contextualized the communication as community-centered; since many of the
students live in the area it’s possible for them to meet on a more regular basis than at a
commuter institution.
Participant 7 spoke about a common occurrence of teaching Islamic philosophy,
Islamic Judaism or Islamic Christianity to a class with a variety of religious traditions
represented. He provides discussion prompts and intensive dialogue is necessary in the
class. Like Participant 5, Participants 6 and 7 emphatically expressed that their students
talk to each other “in class,” “around the campus” and “continuously.”
As a relevant side note, Participant 7 observed that there are a lot of students who
use English as their second language. He articulated “[i]t may be that there is some
difficulty for them in terms of reaching the material or effectively using the material from
the library although they are willing to do that.”
How useful do you consider students' research approaches? [RQ2; faculty]
Two of the three faculty members interviewed expressed misgivings about the
usefulness of students’ research approaches. The other faculty member, Participant 7,
said that in the previous week students had asked him for book lists and were enthusiastic
about research, but aside from that he was unsure about what else students’ research
approaches entailed.
Participant 6’s misgiving centered around students’ “extremely limited” ability to
move from a classroom assignment to organized research as preparation for the writing

81

process; he said, “I do not give us high marks [for] training them in those skills.”
Participant 5 thought that the usefulness of research approach was related not only to
degree program type, but also to the length of time the had been in the program. The MA
program students’ approaches were more viable than the MDiv students’. Students in the
doctoral program were more successful in research. He stated, “There’s so much remedial
education that is needed to know what the issues are. In fact I encourage them not to be
too adventuresome in a master’s project or in a paper for a class because the chances in
this field of being both novel and correct are almost nil […] I don’t encourage novel
research until relatively late in the career.”
Can you give me an example of a valuable informal research finding? [RQ2;
faculty]
Each of the three faculty members interviewed was able to provide an example of
a valuable informal research finding. Participant 7 answered this question in three ways:
from his history as a former student, from his observations of current students, and from
his current practice as a faculty member. As a student he interacted with his faculty
advisor and cited the interactions during his PhD work. He has observed that current
students cite interactions with their faculty advisors. About the value of informal research
to his work as an assistant professor he stated: “[i]n my own discussions and writing my
own lectures I cite some of the faculty members. So I think I can say effectively that I did
that and that students, they do do that.”
Participant 6 recalled three examples of valuable informal research findings. First,
he spoke about the case of a student speaking with her pastor about the connection
between theology and preaching and how through the conversation she came to a “fuller

82

understanding of the living link between theological reflection and study and rightly
defining the word of God.” The second case the faculty member remembered was a
student who described working in a hospital and moving back and forth between a dying
person (a teenage girl who was estranged from her parents) and her parents in the waiting
room. She values the experience she had as a ministry student helping the family to
reconcile before the teenage girl died. Third, he recalled stories of a student working with
churches, synagogues, and mosques to find housing for homeless people; the way in
which those conversations with rabbis, imams, and the pastors molded his entire
understanding of ministry and his own calling were valuable informal research results.
Participant 5 focused on valuable informal research findings relevant to his own
research agenda. He recounted “Sure, just this summer I was at a conference and […]
heard someone give a paper, and I went to them after the paper and I said […] I’m
interested in pursuing this. Where should I go? […] And they gave me very helpful
suggestions. In fact I probably did that two or three times.” He further elaborated that his
interaction involved asking for links, trading business cards and subsequent web-based
communications.
Data Collected from Librarian Interviewees
Do faculty come to you for bibliographic instruction? What else do you see? [RQ3;
librarians]
All three professional librarians responded to this interview question
affirmatively. Participant 8’s comments give relevant context to all of the librarians’
responses. Participant 8 explained that since there are other professional librarians who
work under him, faculty sometimes contact him for bibliographic instruction. He sends

83

the requests to the reference librarian. He added, “[w]e also have a digital services
librarian who does some of that. Information literacy, instruction, and class. But I don’t
do any of it personally.”
Participant 9 related that faculty go to him to prepare for students’ requests for
assistance; “[s]o the staff don’t ask me directly for help; they ask me for help on their
students’ behalf,” he explained. Faculty ask him to demonstrate bibliography creation, vet
resources, and provide instruction on how to conduct research.
Similarly, Participant 10 mentioned that faculty typically go to him to set up inclass library instruction sessions. He stated:
Bibliographic instruction can be used in a broad sense, and can just mean an
introductory session about how to do research, but if you think of it in terms of
how to discover new tools or introducing people to new tools or databases I’ve
had a few experiences with that so far.
One of the experiences Participant 10 described involved the MA Colloquium, a required
research course for MA students. He was asked to present for an hour and a half about
how to research in the humanities, particularly religious studies. The faculty member who
requested the presentation also attended the presentation and reported having learned a
great deal. The faculty member was particularly impressed with the librarian’s
demonstration of the digital repository Sourca Greca, which includes classical Greek
texts dating to the 6th century C.E.

84

Do students come to you for research assistance? What else do you see? [RQ3;
librarians]
All three professional librarians responded to this interview question
affirmatively. Participant 8’s comments give relevant context to all of the librarians’
responses. Participant 8 explained that since there are other professional librarians who
work under him, he often sends the requests to the reference librarian whose job it is to
answer questions from MDiv and Masters-level students. He added, “[i]f they are a PhD
student in New Testament or in Bible they sometimes come to me because that’s where I
have my graduate research and where I’ve published and got my own research. So PhD
students who are specialists in my area often do. The others don’t. They go with one of
the other librarians.”
The other librarians responded very emphatically that students go to them for
research assistance. Participant 9 referred to digital reference transactions whereas
Participant 10 described more face-to-face reference encounters.
Participant 9 spoke about how he answers research-related questions digitally and
how he answers technology-related questions virtually. He expressed the sentiment that
librarians are expected to know everything; students use the library as a “giant
information hub.” They ask about: events happening on campus; how to procure a student
ID card (business office); where the computer lab is; and how to access and use computer
and printers.
Participant 10 provided a rich narrative describing reference services at Highpath
School of Theology. He explained that some research consultations are five-minute
discussions, others are twenty-minute or thirty-minute scheduled appointments, and yet

85

others are two-hours in duration. He has participated in seven or eight such consultations
during his tenure at the CST Library. One appointment he described was with an
Academy of Jewish Religion (a CST affiliate) MA student; the topic for the two-hour
appointment was conceptualization of a subject for her master’s thesis.
In addition to answering questions from students in the academic master’s
program, Participant 10 assists students in the Course of Study program (ministerial
training). Within the United Methodist Church there are different tracks one can take to
become a pastor. One is an ordination track which requires seminary and another track
involves lay preaching first, followed by what’s called Course of Study or Licensing
School. Besides being a seminary, Highpath is also a Course of Study and Licensing
School. The reference librarian interviewed mentioned that he taught Licensing School
classes in the past at a different Methodist school.
Participant 10 was most enthusiastic about helping students from licensing
classes; he described a recent instruction/reference encounter:
I had four students come in from the Course of Study [program] and I think [that
was] largely because they met me at a library orientation we had at the start and I
made it very clear that I’m here to help you with your assignments, I’m here to
help you with your research, please come in. Students who have never done an
exegetical paper, a paper on a passage of the Bible, were, for the first times in
their lives, pulling books off the shelves, pulling Bible commentaries off the
shelves, we looked at some Bible software that looks up words and Bible lexicons
and those sorts of things to help. So I probably met with those students for
probably altogether about three or four hours.

86

Data Collected from Multiple Groups: Students and Faculty
Do you interact with librarians about research assignments? Do you see other
faculty or students doing so? [RQ2; students and faculty]
Both of the MA students reported that they interact with librarians, whereas only
one of the MDiv students interacts with librarians. The faculty participants were also
asked about interactions with librarians; although faculty interacted with librarians it was
not typically about research assignments.
Participant 2 did not report seeing faculty or other students interact with
librarians, but he gave a rich account of his own interactions. He explained:
There’s a digital librarian that I interact with – reference librarian. Whenever
there’s a question that someone can answer for me. But usually the digital
librarian is the one I use for access to different periodicals and research that I like
and so he’s very helpful in that process. The reference librarian is good for
helping with bibliographies and finding and narrowing my search. Where I
mentioned earlier my topic on taquah and agape there’s a wide breadth of
approaches you can take. So the reference librarian at the time was able to help,
say, well maybe you should consider some sources around this point. And here’s
some authors for you to read. And here are some others so you can get the
opposite opinion on it. It was helpful for the research project.
In contrast, Participant 1 claimed that he was generally very confident about his own
approach to research and interacts with librarians only occasionally.
The MDiv students both mentioned that they work in the library and interact with
librarians. Participant 3 recalled an interaction about how CST [Highpath School of

87

Theology] structures their digital resources. He explained that he was providing a critique
to a librarian about how disorganized the digital resources were. Participant 4 simply
stated she interacts with librarians “on occasion.” Neither Participant 3 nor Participant 4
mentioned anything about seeing faculty or other students interacting with librarians.
Each of the faculty members interviewed had a different reason for interacting
with librarians. Participant 7 contacts librarians to ensure that lists of books for his
classes are available for his students in the library. He also served on a committee that
regulates Library policies; committee work involved interaction with the library director,
a librarian.
Participant 5 consults with librarians about the research projects he assigns as part
of the MA colloquium. He explained how he has Library staff come to his classroom to
talk about online references in particular. About other faculty interacting with librarians
he said,
I don’t think many faculty value the Library. Or there are some, I would say that
more than half the faculty I’ve never seen in the Library. Now somebody else told
me that I need to be careful about that observation because some people have their
teaching assistants or research assistants go the Library to get things for them.
And others are in fields where its not the CST Library that would be most
important. And for others there’s an awful lot of online research. Especially in
things that are more current interests such as ethics or pastoral counseling. But the
Library is very important for a Biblical scholar. You know we have good holdings
that way. I think often students are intimidated and don’t know how to manage
talking to Library staff about how to get their material.

88

He also mentioned that there were other libraries in the area that he and other faculty and
students use. He gives tours of the relevant stacks to doctoral students. He expressed
disappointment that Highpath students do not seem to make much use of other libraries.
He stated, “[s]o I think this brick-and-mortar attitude toward libraries – ‘this is our library
and that’s it’ – is unfortunate.”
Participant 6 answered the interview question about interaction with librarians
from the perspective of his personal habits and he offered observations about other
faculty and students. He related that he is “on the end of the scale for that kind of
interaction” but that he does interact sometimes. He observed that about one quarter of
the entire faculty engage librarians about research projects they are assigning to students.
He added that with a recently hired research librarian and fairly new library director, the
level of engagement of librarians about research assignments is expected to increase.
Finally he explained “I would also add that that kind of interaction is much more
extensive at the PhD level for research projects than in the MA level.”
Could you tell me about anyone with whom you have spoken/ corresponded about a
research project you were assigned or have assigned? [RQ4; students, faculty and
one librarian]
This question was answered by the participants from the faculty and student
stakeholder groups, as well as the librarian who has faculty rank and many faculty
responsibilities although he is not teaching faculty. All except one of the interview
participants provided an example of an interaction related to research. The students
mentioned examples of interactions about projects they were assigned by Highpath

89

faculty. The faculty generally spoke about research projects they had assigned to
students.
Three of the four students interviewed gave examples of instances of asking a
professor about a research project. The other student, Participant 4, cited examples of
when she was asked about research by others (peers). Participant 2 spoke about
consulting his MA thesis advisor about research resources. He explained that after
investigating a topic himself he would next consult a librarian. After consulting a
librarian he would approach a faculty member. He gave two examples. One example
involved approaching the dean of Highpath School of Theology. He recalled:
I looked at [my research topic] from a liberation perspective, I looked at it from a
traditional historical perspective, but then she would say something like “well did
you look at this from a feminist perspective?” “Did you read bell hook’s Book of
Love?” And I would go, “well, no.” And she would go “well maybe you should
read that and that can give you a an different insight.”
The second example involved Neer Sheik, who primarily teaches classes on the history of
Islam. Participant 2 asked Sheik for research assistance and Sheik answered, “Well what
you’re doing is theoretical, but if you look at the legal tradition in Islam you’ll get a
whole bunch on this topic.” The student expressed great pleasure recounting how helpful
the dean and the professor were when consulting about the research project he was
assigned.
Participant 1 responded that he had had three correspondences in the previous two
weeks pertaining to his thesis, also called the integrative seminar project. He stated that
two out of three faculty members consulted about research projects they had assigned

90

gave almost immediate feedback. The student considered the third faculty member with
whom he recently corresponded to be “slow with feedback, but I will always get it back
and it usually tends to be something I’m looking for. I don’t have to [ask] a second round
of questions and I choose these people specifically because they are masters in their area
of the interest that I’m looking to build on.” Participant 1’s concern for the timeliness of
faculty responses to research correspondence was unique among the interview
participants.
Participant 3 remembered asking a Buddhist social ethics professor the previous
semester about what “legitimate resources for a particular project would have been.” The
student was interested to learn which authors he should pay attention to and which he
might skip; he was interested in any insight the Buddhist social ethics professor had into
the credibility of certain authors relevant to his assigned research project.
Participant 4 was the student whose examples involve being asked about her work
rather than asking herself. The previous weekend she was on a panel at the United States
President’s Interfaith Campus Challenge (2014). She had the opportunity to talk about the
work she was doing. She spoke about engaging in the classroom and also on the campus
at large doing interfaith work. She was able to talk to students from various colleges and
universities across the country about what kind of work goes on at Highpath. Another
example of her correspondence is when her friends and family ask her about her work.
She explained, “[b]ecause especially for my friends and family who are Jewish it’s
especially unfamiliar for them. They need further explanation when I tell them what kind
of degree I’m getting. Because it’s very non-traditional.”

91

The three faculty members and the librarian who holds faculty rank all answered
this question. All but one of those four provided a specific example of a research-related
interaction. The one faculty member who did not provide a specific example was
Participant 5. He said that he almost never spoke or corresponded about a research
project he assigned. He could not remember an instance. There were times, he said, that
he has helped a student by connecting them with an expert colleague but those instances
are rare.
Participant 7 gave three examples of “mutually enriching interaction” that he had
at Highpath School of Theology. First, he is in touch with fellow Islamic studies faculty
for moral support since the campus “has a Christian majority.” The second type of
interaction he has is inter-religious; he explained, “[o]ne of the goals that here we are
trying to realize is the interaction between different faiths so faculty members are
interacting with each other, speaking to each other, learning from each other.” A recent
example of such interaction was Participant 7’s service on the faculty executive
committee. He is expected to participate in ongoing discussions on religion and science.
The third way he interacts pertains to his own research agenda. He stated, “I am also
obviously in touch with several faculty here in realizing my own research project and
getting their help and consulting them. I do that too. So at the faculty level, we have, I
would say, serious interaction.”
Participant 6 categorized the types of people he speaks and corresponds with
about research assignments: other faculty, Christian leaders and his students. He speaks
to other faculty, mostly at Highpath but also those who teach similar classes whose
experiences are inspirations for him and vice versa. Since he works with Christian leaders

92

from around the United States he asks them to describe the needs of the Church and new
needs for ministry. Dialogues with Church leaders deeply influence the kinds of
assignments he constructs. With the third category, students, he has had intimate,
intensive discussions inside and outside of class. He reported that whenever he speaks or
corresponds with students about research assignments,
I am soliciting and receiving feedback about assignments and whether the class is
helping them achieve their goals. And that’s feedback in real-time that deeply
influences not only my assignments for a given class but my whole orientation
toward assignments in future classes.
Participant 8 gave two examples of interpersonal interaction about research and
one observation about his own research products. The first example occurred in the
previous week. A New Testament professor in the British Isles, sent him an article to
read. He had submitted it as an article and he was doing a final review prior to
publication. So Participant 8 read it for the New Testament professor and gave feedback.
Participant 8 has a number of friends who are scholars in the field and he does critiques
their work for them. The second example of interaction about research was his active
participation in the Society of Biblical Literature (SBL) conference every year. While
attending he has conversations on whatever he is working on with lots of different
colleagues there. He mentioned that he does not typically send his own writing out for
peer feedback, although he talks to the colleagues in New Testament studies at Highpath
routinely. Finally he observed that, “[while] I’ve published several books, I don’t think
I’ve ever footnoted an informal reference or conversation. I’ve just done the kind of the

93

thing in the preface or acknowledgements saying ‘I’d like to thank say and so for the
conversations we’ve had, but not a specific example’.”
Is this type of informal communication typical of your research and has your
practice changed? [RQ4; students and faculty]
This question was asked of the participants from the faculty and student
stakeholder groups. The responses ranged from “no” and “it doesn’t fluctuate much” to
“yes” and “it’s involved.”
Participant 1 reported that within the previous three years he had rarely engaged
in informal communication, so informal communication was not typical of his research,
nor had his practice changed. Participant 2 answered that it was typical of his research,
but it had not always been typical. He mentioned prior efforts to glean what information
he needed from reading books and subsequently realizing that knowledge is also
contextual. Consulting people in his research field, actual practitioners, was found to be
very effective. He explained, “meeting with people and hear[ing] their actual reactions is
a little different because you can read their emotions [and] theories are often different
than practice.”
Participant 3 chose not to answer this interview question. Participant 4 described
informal research communication as an evolution for her. She partially attributes the
evolution of informal communication practices to her evolving professional aspirations.
She related:
I think the conversations I’m having now are a lot more specific and a lot more
honed in on what chaplaincy is and what I can do with the work. So I think it’s
gone from at least at the beginning of my time at Highpath I had just sort of a

94

general interest in interfaith work and interfaith education and now it’s become
more specific.
Two of the faculty interviewed reported that informal communication is typical of
their research and that their practice has changed. One faculty member, Participant 5, said
that it was not typical. He added, “I’ve always been – you know – there’s a certain about
of hubris in being a professor […] We think we know it all so why would we want to
contact somebody else, especially when we’re shepherding our own, you know.”
Participant 7 shared that he has learned a great deal from informal research
communication. He said that it is now natural for him to integrate informal
communication into his research and into his own teaching style. Participant 6 gave
examples of how informal communication is typical for him. He collaborates on writing
books and writing a number of international projects. The teamwork involved in
collaborative academic writing produces stronger products than solo-authored projects.
He said that he adopted a more collaborative research style during his three years as dean
of the Highpath School of Theology. He finds that his colleagues’ self-understanding and
self-management of duties have increased through the use of informal communication.
He also perceived increased informal communication to be a function of age. He
explained:
you are less anxious about pleasing students or seeming to know everything. And
it becomes easier to say ‘hey, what do you all think?’ And I believe the quality of
my assignments has risen directly in proportion to the amount of dialogue that I
do with students and faculty about it.

95

This chapter presented the results of the interviews with MA students, MDiv students,
faculty and librarians. The following chapter will discuss those results in light of the
research questions that guided the study.

96

CHAPTER 5
DISCUSSION
This chapter will discuss the results presented in the previous chapter. It will
proceed in the order of the research questions:
RQ1: What are the information behaviors specific to the research processes of
MA and MDiv students at Highpath School of Theology?
RQ2: How do Highpath School of Theology graduate faculty (teaching in the MA
and MDiv programs) appraise the information behaviors involved in the research
processes of MA and MDiv students?
RQ3: What information behaviors specific to Highpath School of Theology MA
and MDiv students' research processes do academic librarians see in the Highpath
School of Theology Library and/or on campus?
RQ4: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the role of degree program affiliation in
relation to the information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in
their research processes?
RQ5: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of
Theology graduate faculty) think about the significance of religious faith in the

97

information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in their research
processes?11
RQ1: What are the information behaviors specific to the research processes of
MA and MDiv students at Highpath School of Theology?
Research Assignments
Students in both the MA and MDiv programs received research assignments from
Highpath faculty as part of their degree coursework. Examples of research assignments
present in the data included directed independent studies; dissertation exams; credo
assignment; blog posts; summative exercise; exegetical papers and sermons. An earlier
study of information seeking by Wicks (1999) found that the pastors he studied used
informal sources in care-giving and administrative activities; the use of informal sources
decreased in preaching activities where biblical research would be undertaken. This case
study of Highpath stakeholders found that theology faculty, students and librarians all
considered sermons to be types of research projects.
Information Sources
The information sources that Highpath students use, as reported by the students,
faculty and librarians, included both print and digital resources. Print resources
mentioned include physical books, lexicons, concordances, the Wiccan collection and the
Koran. Digital resources included OCLC’s Worldshare, ATLAS, New Testament
Abstracts, Sourca Greca and e-books readable on Kindles. Highpath stakeholders
expressed no preference for digital resources over print resources or vice versa.

11

The questionnaire in Appendix A details the correspondence between research

questions, interview questions and interviewee roles (i.e. student, faculty, librarian).

98

Gaba (2007) discovered that students indicate using Google, online booksellers’
search-inside-the-book features, and online catalogs more than they use article databases.
In the present study Google was rarely mentioned and booksellers’ search-inside-thebook features were not mentioned at all. It is unknown what “online catalogs” Gaba
(2007) refers to since article databases are themselves largely online. The results of the
present study add to Gaba’s (2007) findings about patterns in students’ informationseeking.
Informal Communication and Interpersonal Information Sources
Informal communication was prevalent among Highpath students. Many
examples of informal communication, both in-person and online, were provided by the
student participants, including: conversations with clergy, academic and professional
conferences, crowdsourcing, shepherding, and various kinds of feedback on research
products. When informal communication impacted the research process directly, the
contact person was cited in the research product (e.g., thesis, summative exercise) as an
interpersonal information source. Interpersonal information sources fell into three
categories, previously conceived by Hyland (2004): moral, academic and technical. In
Hyland’s (2004) analysis of 240 theses and dissertations across six disciplines, the
categories of moral, academic and technical support emerged as the most prevalent
reasons for student’s giving credit in theses and dissertations acknowledgements.
All three of the roles (student, faculty and librarian) and both types of degree
program (MA and MDiv) stakeholders provided interpersonal support of moral, academic
and technical kinds. Moral support for students came from fellow students (regardless of
degree program affiliation), faculty, clergy and librarians. Academic support for students

99

came primarily from faculty, clergy and librarians. Technical support for students came
primarily from faculty and librarians. The present study extends Hyland’s (2004) research
on interpersonal information sources in the domain of graduate theological studies.
RQ2: How do Highpath School of Theology graduate faculty (teaching in the MA
and MDiv programs) appraise the information behaviors involved in the
research processes of MA and MDiv students?
The Highpath School of Theology faculty answered questions about their faith
backgrounds, current religious practice, affiliations with degree programs, interpersonal
information sources and digital communication, informal research references cited in
projects they assign, interaction with librarians, and the usefulness of students’ research
approaches in general.
Highpath School of Theology stands out in the diversity of religious traditions
represented among its faculty. The faculty interviewed included one secularist (atheist),
one practicing Muslim and one Quaker. Although these faculty come from disparate
religious traditions, their appraisals of the information behaviors involved in the research
processes of MA and MDiv students were very similar, with one exception. In general,
the religious faculty (the Muslim and the Quaker) appraised the significance of religious I
faith in students’ research process differently than the secularist faculty member did. I
suspect that the religious faculty are transposing the significance of their own religious
faith onto the significance of religious faith for their students. For example, the Muslim
faculty member, Participant 7, explained, “my religion inspires me in many ways, so yes,
it also affects deeply how I teach the topic, how I see life, how I act in the campus, how I
define the Other, how I interact with it. It is deeply influential, fundamentally I can say.

100

In my personal life and in my scholarly projects.” I suspect that the religiously inspired
information behaviors and worldviews of Participants 6 and 7 influenced their appraisals
of their students’ information behavior. Similarly, Participant 5’s secular perspective may
affect his assumption that religious faith is irrelevant to his students. If it was significant
to the faculty member, the faculty member perceived it to be significant to his students.
The faculty participants had similar or complementary responses to the questions
asked about their perceptions of students’ research practices. They all welcome informal
research references in the research products of their students (e.g., theses, case studies,
sermons). They gave examples of valuable informal research findings, many achieved
through interpersonal interaction with spiritual leaders, academic advisor and ethnic
peers.
The results from the interviews indicate that the faculty highly value their own as
well as their students’ interpersonal interactions. The faculty encourage their students to
cite their informal information sources in their research assignments. The informal
information sources students cite vary greatly, often crossing the boundaries of the
student’s own religion and degree program. One faculty participant, Participant 5,
observed that, “our students are oriented not in terms of their religious experience as
much as their ethnic identity.” Participant 5 explained that most of the community life of
students took place in dormitories and other places he would not be privileged to. From
what he could see on campus, students gathered and studied among students of the same
ethnic background, particularly international students. For example, a Vietnamese
Christian would be more likely to associate with other Vietnamese students (i.e.
Vietnamese Buddhist students) than other Christian students of a different ethnicity.

101

Heinström (2006) studied the patterns of information seeking of students writing
master’s theses at Abo Akademi University (Finland). She concluded that the personality
of students was more influential on their information-seeking behavior than their specific
discipline. The present study adds to Heinström’s (2006) research by providing some
evidence that the ethnic identity of graduate students of religion provides a more familiar
social network and arena for informal communication than students’ religious identity.
Brunton (2005) concluded that students who partnered with librarians and who
attended user training employed more effective search strategies and managed their time
better than others. In the present study, the faculty participants all considered that their
students’ research products were better when they had had bibliographic instruction in
their classes and that researchers who sought assistance from librarians were more
successful generally. Participant 7, a Muslim faculty member stated that students with
family commitments were more likely to manage their time well. Thus the present study
adds to Brunton’s (2005) study of information seeking by identifying family life as yet
another criterion for appraising student’s potential for successful time management in the
research process.
RQ3: What information behaviors specific to Highpath School of Theology MA and
MDiv students’ research processes do academic librarians see in the
Highpath School of Theology Library and/or on campus?
The Highpath School of Theology librarians answered questions about their faith
backgrounds, current religious practice, affiliations with degree programs, interpersonal
information sources and digital communication, interaction with faculty about

102

bibliographic instruction, research assistance to students, and the usefulness of students’
research approaches in general.
The sample of Highpath School of Theology library staff was more religiously
homogeneous than the faculty, MA students or MDiv students interviewed. The librarians
interviewed included one secularist (atheist) and two Christians, one of whom is ordained
clergy and one of whom holds an MDiv, the professional degree for clergy. In general,
the Christian librarians appraised the information behavior of students differently than the
secularist librarian did.
The issue about which the greatest disparity emerged was student research
assistance. The Christian librarians considered both the degree program and the religious
faith of students to be relevant in research consultations and bibliographic instruction.
The secularist librarian responded that “there is absolutely no difference in how they
conduct research or do anything like that.”
This difference in perceptions could be because of the greater familiarity the
Christian librarians had with graduate theological education, they both had graduate
degrees in religion whereas the secularist librarian did not. Two other reasons why the
secularist librarian’s perception stands apart from the other librarians interviewed are that
his upbringing was non-religious and that his primary mechanism for student assistance
and interaction is electronic.
The other two librarians described lifelong religious journeys through various
streams of religious thought and practice. Those biographical perspectives could
contribute to their appreciation of what effect differences in identity, religious and nonreligious, MA affiliate and MDiv affiliate have in the way students go about the research

103

process. One Christian librarian spoke about how the attire of the student can intimate the
significance of the student’s religious identity with their encounters with the world; two
examples were given, one Jewish and one Muslim. The Jewish student was identifiable
by his kippah (Hebrew: skull cap) whereas the Muslim student was identifiable by her
burqa (Arabic: veil). Before beginning the research consultation the students were
already communicating background information about their information needs; each
brought their religious practice to their encounters with the world. The research process
and seeking librarians’ assistance is one such type of encounter. The more the librarians
know about the background of the student seeking assistance, the better s/he can
customize the research consultation.
The electronic research consultation, often simply an email, minimizes obvious
indications of the cultural background of the student asking for assistance; attire, accent,
and body language are crowded out in the virtual reference transaction whereas they are
available for interpretation, possible relevance, and application to the broader context of
information needs the student brings to the research consultation. Since Participant 9, a
secularist, referred more to digital reference transactions whereas Participant 10, a
Christian, described more face-to-face reference encounters, the socio-cultural anonymity
inherent to digital reference may contribute to Participant 9’s opinion that religious faith
and degree program are irrelevant to students’ research process.
The types of questions Participant 9 referred to were also heavily non-academic.
He stated, “[students] ask about: events happening on campus; how to procure a student
ID card (business office); where the computer lab is; and how to access and use computer
and printers.” That these were the types of questions Participant 9 encountered on a

104

regular basis may suggest that the more advanced questions where religious faith and
degree sought would be relevant were asked to the other librarians who have substantial
religious backgrounds and graduate degrees in theology themselves.
One way in which this case study relates to prior research is that it adds to Brink’s
(1995) examination of information-seeking in religion by collecting data about
information sources. Brink (1995) did not look at information sources at all, whereas the
present study’s interview methodology allowed for participants to identify information
sources, physical and digital resources as well as interpersonal information sources. A
survey with only closed-ended questions could not solicit the kind of rich responses that
the open-ended question of “What else do see?” did in the present study.
Extending Brink’s (1995) research on information-seeking in religion, this study
found that print resources remain important to graduate theological research. Participant
10 spoke at length about how, after bibliographic instruction, he saw “students actually
pulling concordances off the shelves.” Digital resources also played a significant role in
Highpath students’ research process as did interpersonal information sources accessed
electronically. Participant 9 put email use into perspective: “I’ll have five emails for
every face-to-face interaction. So they [students] very much embrace the non-face-to-face
interpersonal aspect of working with librarians.” Participant 10 also affirmed how
librarians serve as interpersonal information sources, explaining how students email, call,
and increasingly interact through a service called Springshare Libanswers that allows
students to tweet questions or text questions to the Library’s twitter account.

105

RQ4: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv
students, Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School
of Theology graduate faculty) think about the role of degree program affiliation
in relation to the information behaviors of Highpath School of Theology
students in their research processes?
The Highpath School of Theology stakeholders interviewed answered questions
about their affiliations with degree programs and the usefulness of various kinds of
information behavior activities. The students and faculty were asked to give examples of
their informal communication about research projects, noting whether those examples
were typical of their research practices and whether their practices had changed over
time. The students were also asked about the role their personal contacts play in research
in general.
Informal communication was prevalent among Highpath students. When informal
communication impacted the research process directly, the contact person was cited in
the research product (e.g., thesis, summative exercise) as an interpersonal information
sources. Interpersonal information sources fell into three categories, previously attested
by Hyland (2004): moral, academic and technical. Both types of degree program (MA
and MDiv) stakeholders provided interpersonal support of moral, academic and technical
kinds. The present study extends Hyland’s (2004) research on interpersonal information
sources in the disciplines of applied linguistics, biology, business studies, computer
science, electronic engineering and public administration into the domain of religious
studies and theology.

106

Most participants stated that degree program was relevant to information behavior
of students. Generally MA students were expected by the faculty to perform more
rigorous research in the course assignments than MDiv students. Librarians noticed that
MA students are expected to do more research than MDiv students. Faculty teaching MA
courses request bibliographic instruction more often than for MDiv courses. One possible
explanation for why bibliographic instruction is requested more for MA courses than
MDiv courses is that the MA program is designed as a “feeder” into further graduate
education in religion (i.e. ThD in New Testament, PhD in Interreligious Dialogue etc.)
for which more academic research will be required. The faculty may see bibliographic
instruction as a touchstone for the ongoing development of MA students’ research skills.
The faculty interviewed who teach MDiv courses explained that they require students to
use clergy and community leaders as information sources in their projects. It may be that
the type of research for MDiv courses is more practical and applicable to the ministerial
aspirations of the students. The MDiv is also a terminal, professional degree leading to
ordination rather than leading to a PhD program as the MA program does. Participant 2
and Participant 4, students with experience in both degree programs, also acknowledged
that the MA program is more research-oriented than the MDiv program.
Two participants responded that degree affiliation was irrelevant to the research
process, Participant 3 (Buddhist MDiv student) and Participant 9 (secularist librarian).
It is interesting to note that neither Participant 3 nor Participant 9 attests to a belief in a
deity. There were two other non-believers in the study population, Participant 1
(secularist MA student) and Participant 5 (secularist faculty member) who affirmed that
the research expectations for, and information behaviors of, MA students were more

107

rigorously academic than MDiv students’. That the research process for MA students’
was more rigorous than that of MDiv students was the prevailing perception among the
other stakeholders in the study population. One reason for this perception is that the
participants were all stakeholders in an academic environment where academic criteria
for judgment dominate. If the participant pool were stakeholders from a religious
community for which the MDiv program prepares their members for ordination, the kind
of field research required for MDiv students might be judged to be more rigorous than the
mainly academic research MA students conduct.
RQ5: What do Highpath School of Theology stakeholders (MA and MDiv students,
Highpath School of Theology Library librarians, and Highpath School of Theology
graduate faculty) think about the significance of religious faith in the information
behaviors of Highpath School of Theology students in their research processes?
This case study found that the participants who acknowledged having religious
faith perceived religious faith to be significant in their own information behaviors and
those of others. The participants who identified as “not theist,” “not religious,” and
“humanist” (described elsewhere as “secularist”) did not perceive religious faith to be
relevant to their own information behaviors or those of others. This phenomenon
transcended the categories of types (MA student or MDiv student) and roles (e.g.,
students, faculty and librarian); participants’ perception that religious faith is significant
to students’ research processes was directly related to the faith background of the
participant.
The present study was designed to solicit data from adherents from a variety of

108

organized religions to represent the demographics that comprise “religious faith.”
Highpath School of Theology provided a particularly rich population to study because
graduate theological studies are now (2014) being offered for MAs in both Christian and
Islamic Studies and where MDivs are being granted to Jews, Buddhists, Christians, and
Secular Humanists/Non-theists by faculty who are similarly diverse in their religious
sensibilities and affiliations and lacks there-of. This approach satisfies Strauss and
Corbin’s edict that “[t]he researcher samples places and persons where he or she expects
that differences in the properties of a concept will be maximized” (p. 280).
Limitations
In addition to the limitations brought on by the very nature of qualitative research,
this study had some significant limitations of its own that will need to be addressed in
future research. These limitations relate primarily to three factors, including the fact that
the researcher acted alone throughout the project, thus introducing potential biases and
errors in interpretation; the homogeneous nature of the participant pool with regard to
gender and race, and the minimal nature of demographic data collected, making it
difficult to draw conclusions based on demographic factors.
The most significant limitation of this study is the fact that it was conducted by
one person, the researcher gathering and analyzing the data alone. The lack of input from
others can introduce a significant bias to findings. In addition, errors of interpretation can,
without the input of others familiar with the data, lead to erroneous conclusions. The
study will need to be replicated in order to provide confirmation and refinement of these
findings.

109

Although a very rich quality of data were collected this study was conducted with
a very small sample. This small sampling could be considered a limitation, although the
qualitative nature of the study and the depth and breadth of the data collected argue
against this as a true handicap. Likewise, the study itself was designed to be exploratory
in nature rather than explanatory. More research will certainly be required to confirm and
add to the conclusions here, but even with the small sampling, what has been discovered
and explored at least begins to fill a significant gap in the literature regarding graduate
degree programs, religious faith and theological education.
Another limitation of the study, however, is that except for two participants, all
were white males. The purposeful sample of MA and MDiv students, faculty and
librarians intended to solicit data from both MA and MDiv students and from faculty and
librarians. No effort was made to recruit participants of any particular race, gender or age.
It is unknown why there were not more participants in the demographic categories of
female and non-white among student participants. The library staff and faculty were
observed to be primarily white males, which could suggest why the library staff and
faculty who volunteered to participate were all white males. As a result, no conclusions
can be drawn based on any gender or race-based comparison.
While the findings here can only be said to be true for this select grouping of
theology students, faculty and librarians, it remains to be seen whether the results can
apply not only to other graduate students of theology but also to graduate students in
general. The interest for this particular project was in the faith-informed research and
educational environment of graduate theological education, but these frameworks have
been used in the context of graduate studies in general. This project has demonstrated that

110

at least with a sub-population of graduate theological stakeholders these frameworks
provide a valid lens through which to examine them.
Recruiting subjects was a significant challenge throughout the course of the
project. The first challenge was recruiting a research site. Several non-denominational
and denominational, secular and religiously-affiliated divinity schools and seminaries
were contacted to participate. Some institutions declined to participate, one institution
agreed, but its library staff were unavailable during the period the data was to be
collected. Finally, Highpath School of Theology emerged and agreed to participate,
beginning in September 2014. While it was assumed that Highpath students, faculty and
staff who participate in online education would be eager to conveniently participate in a
Skype interview, the majority of participants preferred in-person interviews, which were
conducted the week of September 15 through September 19, 2014. In future research
projects, on-site recruitment will be utilized more heavily.
Future Research Directions
Further research is definitely warranted. This project should be replicated with the
limitations discussed above addressed in order to confirm the findings independently.
Beyond this, however, several areas of potential interest emerged in the course of
analysis as being beyond the scope of the current study but worthy of future inquiry:
1) How do theologians identify adepts whose feedback they trust in the research
process?
This study solicited feedback from faculty and students about who they recently
interacted with about a research project. The data collected address the who, what, when
and where, but not the why. The most common response from students was that they seek

111

feedback from their professors so that they can meet their professors’ expectations in
their research assignments. It would be beneficial to know how theologians, beyond the
situated context of assigned research projects counting towards an academic degree, go
about selecting adepts for counsel.
2) How does the use of informal communication evolve and change over time?
Participants’ responses to the interview question “Is this type of informal
communication typical of your research and has your practice changed over time?” were
revealing. Some participants did not engage in much, if any, informal communication.
Other participants engage in informal communication constantly and increasingly.
Discovering more about the contours of the development of effective informal
communication over the course of a theological career could reveal its usefulness and
warrant a greater precedent for interpersonal information sources in theological research
processes and their citation in research products.
3) In what ways could curricular design and institutional culture account for
patterns in information behavior among Highpath stakeholders?
This study uncovered anecdotal evidence of the research process of a Muslim
faculty member and Jewish and Buddhist MDiv students matriculated at Highpath, a
school of theology affiliated with a Christian denomination. Further research on the
information behavior of Muslim, Jewish, and Buddhist researchers in a more native
environment where the curriculum and work expectations are prescribed or overseen by
their respective native traditions’ authorities may be beneficial for comparative purposes.

112

4) What does the research process of theology students look like across the degree
programs offered by North American seminaries’, including Bachelor of Arts in
Religion (BA), Master of Theological Studies (MTS), Master of Divinity (MDiv),
Master of Theology (ThM), Doctor of Ministry (DMin), Doctor of Philosophy (PhD)
and Doctor of Theology (ThD)?
This study analyzed data from MA and MDiv students, but graduate schools of
theology, including Highpath, offer additional degrees. Applying the research question
pertaining to the role of degree program in the research process, to the broader study
population of all seminaries and divinity schools accredited by the Association of
Theological Schools, could provide a means through which learning about the research
process in general and degree program relevance specifically might be supported.
Conclusion
Combining previously tested theories and methodologies of social roles/types to
establish the categories of MA student, MDiv student, faculty member, and librarian
proved an effective research design to solicit rich data on the theological research
process. The interviewing component of the methodology, coupled with open-ended
questions such as “What else do see?” enabled the researcher to collect data that was
unpredicted and can fortuitously provide new directions for further research. Because the
research site of Highpath School of Theology not only hosts stakeholders of multiple
religious sensibilities (Christianity, Islam, Judaism, Buddhism and secular humanism),
but also offers both academic degree programs (MAs) and faith-related degree programs
(MDivs), Highpath proved to be a particularly fertile environment for thick descriptions.
This research adds to prior and ongoing research trajectories, including user studies of

113

humanities scholars, interpersonal information sources in the research process, and social
network theory development.

114

APPENDIX A
RESEARCH QUESTIONS, INTERVIEWEES AND INTERVIEW
QUESTIONS
Research Questions

Interviewee Roles

Interview Questions

What are the information
behaviors specific to the
research process of MA
and MDiv students at
Highpath School of
Theology?

all

Would you be willing to talk
about your faith background?

students

Tell me about a time you
talked about a research
assignment with a fellow
Highpath School of Theology
student that you found useful.

students

Could you tell me about a
research project on which
you are currently or were
recently working?

all

Do you see students working
in groups on research?

all

Interpersonal interactions
often extend beyond face-toface encounters. Tell me
about how, if at all, Highpath
School of Theology MA and
MDiv students' use digital
communication and/or social
media as part of the research
process.

How do Highpath School faculty
of Theology graduate
faculty (teaching in the
MA and MDiv programs)
appraise the information
behaviors involved in the

In giving out assignments do
you welcome informal
research references?

115

Research Questions

Interviewee Roles

Interview Questions

faculty

How do you think your
students go about gathering
information? What do you
see that process being like?
How much do your students
talk to each other?

faculty

How useful do you consider
students' research
approaches?

faculty

Can you give me an example
of a valuable informal
research finding?

faculty, students

Do you interact with
librarians about research
assignments? Do you see
other faculty or students
doing so?

librarians

What is your current religious
status/practice, if any?

librarians

Do faculty come to you for
bibliographic instruction?
What else do you see?

librarians

Do students come to you for
research assistance? What
else do you see?

librarians

How useful do you consider
students' research approaches

research processes of
MA and MDiv students?

What information
behaviors specific to
Highpath School of
Theology MA and MDiv
students' research
processes do academic
librarians see in the
Highpath School of
Theology Library and/or
on campus?

116

Research Questions

Interviewee Roles

Interview Questions
to be? Are some more
valuable than others?

What do Highpath
School of Theology
stakeholders (MA and
MDiv students, Highpath
School of Theology
Library librarians, and
Highpath School of
Theology graduate
faculty) think about the
role of degree program
affiliation in relation to
the information
behaviors of Highpath
School of Theology
students in the research
process?

What do Highpath
School of Theology
stakeholders (MA and
MDiv students, Highpath

all

Which degree program are
you more closely affiliated
with? (MA, MDiv) Could
you describe the nature of
your association?

students, faculty

Could you tell me about
anyone with whom you have
spoken/ corresponded about a
research project you were
assigned or have assigned?

students, faculty

Is this type of informal
communication typical of
your research and has your
practice changed?

students

What else could you tell me
about the role that personal
contacts play in your research
in general?

all

How useful do you think
various kinds of information
behavior activities are in the
research process?

all

Do you see any indications
that Highpath School of
Theology MA and MDiv
students' religious faith or

117

Research Questions

Interviewee Roles

School of Theology
Library librarians, and
Highpath School of
Theology graduate
faculty) think about the
significance of religious
faith in the information
behaviors of Highpath
School of Theology
students in the research
process?

Interview Questions
lack thereof matters in the
way they go about the
research process? Do you see
it in the Highpath School of
Theology Library? Around
campus meeting places such
as the dining hall, gym, or
chapel?

students

During your Highpath School
of Theology degree-seeking
research activities do you
think about your own
religious beliefs? Do you
ever notice them guiding you
to a particular peer or
mentor?

118

APPENDIX B
CONTACT SUMMARY FORM12

Contact Type (Check with X):

Visit: _______________

Phone:_______________

Other (Specify)_____________

Contact Date:______________

Today’s Date_______________

Written by__________________

Location: ________________________________________________________

In answering each of the following questions, enumerate as needed, and write on back of
sheet if not enough space.

12

Modification of Miles and Huberman (1994:51‑ 54).

119

1. Are there specific things that you would like to learn at this contact?

2. Who were the actors present at the contact? Provide real names or pseudonyms if
necessary, degree program affiliations (MA, MDiv [or other], and positions (student,
librarian, faculty or other).

3. What were the main issues or themes that struck you in this contact?

4. Were there specific issues that you picked up from your observations that you might
want to explore further at next contact?

5. What new or (or remaining) questions that you have in considering the next research
participant (interview subject)?

120

APPENDIX C
HUMAN SUBJECTS COMMITTEE APPROVAL MEMORANDUM

121

APPENDIX D
HUMAN SUBJECTS COMMITTEE APPROVAL MEMORANDUM
FOR CHANGE IN RESEARCH PROTOCOL

122

APPENDIX E
CONSENT FORM FOR INTERVIEW PARTICIPANTS

123

124

APPENDIX F
HIGHPATH SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY CASE STUDY CODE BOOK
RQ
Acronym for: Research Question

IQ
Acronym for: Interview Question
Note:
1. Some interview questions were asked to all participants interviewed. For example, all
were asked about faith background.
2. Some interview questions were stakeholder-specific. For example, only librarians were
asked if faculty come to them for research instruction.
3. Three distinct interview questions sets were used for students, faculty and librarians,
respectively.
4. The research methodology was semi-structured interviewing. During the interviews the
responses to one question in some cases prompted the interviewer to ask questions
slightly differently and to ask unanticipated follow-up questions. Between the interviews
the interviewer considered the emerging results and re-ordered some question sets.
5. For each interview the IQs are numbered; given notes 1-4, the coder should not assume
that IQ numbers from Interview Transcripts A through J (1 through 10) correspond
directly to each other. [Drawing such correspondences will be required later in the data
analysis]
6. The interview questions invite participants to elaborate on various topics. They also
lend themselves to binary responses in general (e.g. examples from the data: “Not
consciously […] but what we do is [….]”; “A definite yes”).
An attempt was made to determine, if, to any extent, the participant response was
positive. If there was any interpretive margin for answers such as “seldom” or
“sometimes” followed by several paragraphs clarifying the response, the coder interprets
those responses to testify to an information behavior phenomenon sometimes occurring,
and it is coded “positive” and further described it terms of frequency, location, and the
participant’s relation to the stakeholder type (e.g. faculty asked “Do you see student
working in groups on research?”).
ORI
Acronym for: Organized Religion Indicator
Notes:

125

1. This code applies to terms that indicate one or more words in the data set signify a type
of organized religion (e.g. Roman Catholic Church)
2. This code applies regardless of participants’ current religious status or practice.
3. When this code is applied the coder attempts to identify and notate whether the code
refers to an organized religion that the participant relates to from early childhood or
currently (code: native) or has later adopted (code: adopted) or is using to refer to an
organized religion other than his/her own (code: other).
Examples (from the data): Church of Christ; Islam; religious garb; Church of the
Nazarene; Buddhist; Charismatic; Academy of Jewish Religion; Wiccan; pork [religious
dietary laws institutionalized]; interfaith [term for multiple ORIs]; interreligious;
Lutheran; Christian college; Christian seminary; United Methodist; Religious Society of
Friends; Quakers; (radical) Wesleyanism; evangelical Christianity; Protestant
denominations; Methodist district superintendents; para-church organizations; interfaith
collaborations; conservative; hierarchical religious background; mainline spectrum;
Unitarian Universalists; Ecumenical; Anglican; non-believing Christian; Evangelical
Holiness; Disciples of Christ; denomination; Sikhism; Jainism; pork-free; halal meat;
kosher meat; practicing Jew; Reform Judaism; Conservative Judaism; Conservative Jew;
Evangelical Protestant; Catholic; Greek Orthodox; Nation of Islam; kosher laws; burqa;
kippah [Hebrew: skullcap]; Orthodox [Jewish]; Wicca; Wiccan tradition
RFI
Acronym for: Religious Faith Indicator
Notes:
1. This code applies to terms that indicate one or more words in the data set signify
religious faith or lack thereof (e.g. “I believe”)
2. When this code is applied the coder attempts to identify and notate whether an instance
suggests that the participant is (code: positive) or is not (code: negative) indicating
religious faith.
Examples (from the data): “I believe God is still talking to us”; “I really began to doubt”;
ordained; Atheist; DMin; ministry; imams; rabbis; religious experience; “entirely secular
– non-theistic”; confession of faith; creed; spiritual formation; secular schools of
religions; doctrinal statement; personal holiness; “belief that we are called”; credo; nonbelieving Christian; humanist; pious; “I’m not a theist”; Christian mystic; agnostic;
humanist; “not religious. I have no affiliation”; practicing Jew; non-Christian; ordination
track; lay preacher; Licensing School; spiritually powerful experience; Wiccan belief;
practicing Muslim; “it’s more than an academic subject for me. I take it seriously”;
religious commitments
MATTERS
Stands for: related to students’ religious faith mattering (or not) in the way they go about
the research process

126

Examples: “I see a strong correlation”; “they will ask their pastor, bishop or ministry
supervisor what is the right answer”; “hybrid model of information acquisition and
prioritization”; “no appeals to authoritative sources”; “rely very heavily on individual
experience”; “affects how we teach, how we give assignments, how we evaluate them
and how we mentor”; “it is the general ethos of the school […] we want people to know
where they’re coming from”; “He’s in a MA program. I think his research is not just an
academic process for him I think it’s a process of personal discovery. He really cares
about certain topics that are very much related to what he’s practicing in his life and so
on”; “By and large [faith] is what led them here. Whether that makes them more intense
researchers or not than people who are approaching things from a strictly secular point of
point of view […] I am not sure”; “Their religious commitments are the main factor in
this faculty which determines which determines, or conditions seriously, the way their
research will progress. A lot of the people as far as I can see are taking their traditions
seriously here. And they choosing a topic in accordance with that. So I can answer that,
yes, it is the majority of students are being influenced by their religious commitments, in
terms of picking a topic, how to run it and how to finalize it”; “[religious faith’s impact
on social engagement is] part of life on this campus that you see that kind of interaction
between students outside of their faiths. That is part of the reason why this campus is
distinguished”; “As I said I am a practicing Muslim and I do think that my religion
inspires me in many ways, so yes, it also affects deeply how I teach the topic, how I see
life, how I act in the campus, how I define the Other, how I interact with it”; “although in
many places a scholar should put a distance between himself and the subject matter, but
when it comes to religion those boundaries are becoming obscure, vague. So to
understand the religion one also should practice or one should delve into it experientially.
So this experiential knowledge that I value a lot. I trying to combine in my own lectures
and my overall scholarly pursuit I am trying to combine a scholarly objective and a
participant’s subjectivity”; “So that is to say: a big yes to your question. It truly affects,
yes”
SI
Acronym for: Student Indicator
Examples: “Master’s level students”
Degree-specific SI subset:
MASI
Acronym for: Master of Arts Student Indicator
Sub-categories: Religious Education
Examples (from the data): Religious Education; “getting their foot into an
academic track”; “more oriented to doing research [and] deal with things
outside the Christian discourse”; “I have an MA […] so I have an
affiliation with that”

127

MDivSI
Acronym for: Master of Divinity Student Indicator
Sub-categories: Interfaith Chaplaincy
Examples (from the data): Interfaith Chaplaincy; “professional school
commitment”
PhDSI
Acronym for: Doctor of Philosophy Student Indicator
Examples: “different stage in their career and their life typically”
traditional academic reasons
Organized religion-specific SI subset:
CSI
Acronym for: Christian Student Indicator
Examples (from the data): Christian students
BSI
Acronym for: Buddhist Student Indicator
Examples (from the data): Buddhist
JSI
Acronym for: Jewish Student Indicator
Examples (from the data): Jewish students
MuSI
Acronym for: Muslim Student Indicator
Examples (from the data): Muslim students; “can’t be in a position to
question the Koran”
WSI
Acronym for: Wiccan Student Indicator
Examples (from the data): Wiccan student; witches
Course delivery-specific SI subset:
HYBRID
Stands for: hybrid degree program or course related
Examples: hybrid version; most hybrid students are working; “Um, I just had someone
die today, and that’s my job”; virtual students; “tend to email professors”; distance
students; “combination of online learning and interaction as well as face-to-face”
RES
Stands for: residential degree program, course or stakeholder
Examples: “required to do internships or practicum”; “part of the culture”; in-person
classes
CONTRAST

128

Stands for: response that contrasts HYBRID and RES categories
Examples: “if I’m in a class of five people we can dialogue more in person, then go to the
Library and research together”; “[as a hybrid student] I always feel more rushed to
explain the idea, like, get straight to the point”; “From a distance you are more, there’s
time constraints on what you talk about, and so, you’re conversation is rich, but you’re
not going to get the background information that you’re going to get in a classroom
setting every week, which informs bibliographies more and makes them more robust”;
“And you can have a rich email conversation, but it’s an email conversation. You lose an
element I think when you’re just emailing people”; “I like that they have those options
because people […] are able to be on a residential campus can do that and people who
[…] can’t pick up and move, maybe they have families or jobs are able to the hybrid
program and it just makes it a lot more convenient”
COMPARE:
Stands for: response that compares categories/roles or types explicitly
Examples: “MA students tend to have stronger research skills are score higher on that
critical approach to information acquisition, organization and presentation”; “With
weaker educational backgrounds they to struggle more with the basic competence with
acquiring, using and presenting information”; “it really depends on the program”; “[MAs
are] more oriented to doing research [and] deal with things outside the Christian
discourse”; “no, there is absolutely no difference in how they conduct research or do
anything like that”; “[when MA] I was doing a lot more actual research papers and I was
interacting with [librarians more]”; “research is more of an expectation more with MA
programs generally than MDiv programs”; “more on the MA side than the MDiv but
that’s not because I was told that’s my job description its that its the MA faculty who
have asked me to help out with research instruction”; “So yeah I do think I see a
correlation between to the two”
ProgI
Stands for: Degree Program Indicator
Limit to: references to programs where stakeholders are not interviewed nor directly
referred to by interview participants
Examples: DMin; doctoral programs; pastoral counseling; MLS; undergrad; Masters in
Library and Information Science; BA in American Studies; PhD in Religious Studies
FI
Acronym for: Faculty Indicator
Examples: advisor; faculty members; professor; full professor; Professor of Theological
Bibliography; chair; ex officio; teaching faculty; advise; “assembled for publication”; “I
encourage them to bore down on the bibliography”; “have their TAs or RAs go to get
things for them”; Biblical scholar; “I’ve given tours on my own of the holdings”;
shepherding; tenure-track positions; Church Historian; thesis advisor; Dean of the
School; mediation; Islamic woman professor [aka Yoda]; “helpful honing in on my

129

writing”; “helpful pointing me in the right direction for research, and different skills” MA
faculty; “looking like penguins and academic regalia”; assistant professor; “teaching a
class”; “[faculty committee] regulates the policies of the library”
LI
Acronym for: Librarian Indicator
Examples: librarian; staff; professional librarians; reference librarian; digital services
librarian; acquisitions; library director; cataloging; “chief accreditation officer”; support
side; Thesis Secretary; co-teaching research methods; circulation librarian; “nurse maids
[or] midwives [birthing Bayan]”
IS
Acronym for: Information Source
Examples (present in the data): resources; materials; collection; books; authors; info.;
New Testament; Bible; physical book; works; preface; acknowledgements; volume;
chapter; “The Predicament of Belief” (Oxford University Press, 2011); “certain authors I
mention in class”; links; the web; Wiccan collection; Islamic collection; Koran; GrecoRoman religion; multi-thousand dollar series; German titles; French titles; Italian titles;
periodicals; bell hook’s Book of Love; the field; John Hick; Paul Tillich; William James;
Eastern philosophers; Monica Coleman [African-American Christian professor];
Coleman’s book Making a Way of No Way; notes; self [personal assessment or selfevaluation]; patient; social locations; Dennis MacDonald; Greek and Latin texts; Homer;
lexicons; Greek classics; Bible commentaries; African proverb; journal articles; book
reviews; American evangelical songs; Paul [Apostle]; Muhammed; Buddha
DIRE (stands for digital resources [see SOCMED for social media)
Examples: digital resources; catalog; Google; databases; system; discovery tool;
OCLC’s Worldshare; federated searching; internet; search mechanisms; modes of
searching; ATLAS; New Testament Abstracts; e-reserve; JSTOR; kindles;
“resources, digitally and remotely”; HULU; NETFLIX; Internet Public Library;
Sourca Greca; digital repository; Bible software; Wikipedia; OCLC’s Worldcat;
search discovery service
PUBS (stands for publishers)
Examples: “Christian publishers like Kendale or Zondervan or IVP”; “critical
publishers like Fortress, Degroiter, Brill, Europe”; Oxford University Press; YPB
or Yankee Paperback Books
CLERGY
Stands for: religious leader
Examples: pastor; imams; rabbis; bishops; Christian leaders; leaders in the emerging
church movement; “strong [laypersons] in their congregations”; Martin Luther King, Jr.;

130

Methodist pastor; ordination track; lay preacher; Licensing School; United Methodist
Bishop; chaplain; Wiccan priestess
IISI
Acronym for: Interpersonal Information Source Indicator
Examples (present in the data): feedback; “meet and talk”; “conversations with people”;
“faculty contact me but I send them to the reference librarian”; “help guide research”;
ongoing informal discussion; inter-religious […] interaction; [see SOCMED for social
media]; footnote conversations; “utilizing ministry situations”; “level [and] kind of
interaction [with librarians]”; “colleagues engage collaboratively”; “Jewish community
formation influence the students in what they choose to write about, how they gather
information about it and how they produce it”; “[informal research references are] very
valuable, sure”; conference; “[s]ome of our students are wedded, or linked at the hip to
their advisors”; contact somebody else; “say right off the top”; “on Facebook I have
classmates who are Muslims and they will post their opinion […] and that’s a form of
research”; do research together; dialogue; consult; interpersonal; chatting; “virtual
students tend to email professors”; small group class discussion; community
conversations; crowdsourcing; “So they [students] very much embrace the non-face-toface interpersonal aspect of working with librarians”; “working on group projects for,
like, a class presentation”; “talk to students […] across the country about [our] work”;
“Springshare Libanswers […] allows us to tweet […] or text questions”; “scholarship is a
community and it’s a conversation and so in order to do good research one has to, in a
way, apprentice oneself to that conversation; “certain people are also sources of
authority”; “people are walking libraries”; [event] invitation; substantive discussion;
“interaction with sources, persons, NGOs and institutions”; “speaking to a rabbi, chief or
priest”; “So in that [faculty library committee] I see an interaction with faculty and with a
librarian, who is the head, actually, of this library”; “[IISI] I can say it’s radically
influential in my own research”; “[religious faith’s impact on social engagement is] part
of life on this campus that you see that kind of interaction between students outside of
their faiths. That is part of the reason why this campus is distinguished”
Subcategories: moral support, academic support, technical support
MORAL: inspirations; “deeply influences […] my whole orientation”; “I get
letters and comments that their life has changed”; “interactions with their
adjudicatories”; self-understanding; “helped me live out the values of my
community”; shepherding; “to feel their qualms”; “helped me to breathe new life
into my research”; “CST was very kind and generous and basically was able to
take the students who were Highpath Lincoln students and kind of make sure that
they had a program to go into”; “the kind of conversations I have socially either in
passing or just hanging out with my peers in our apartment at night […] having
these theological conversations […] I’m learning something new every time I
interact with them and so you know they’ll say something that will spark my
curiosity and then I’ll ask them questions about it and then you know later on go

131

look it up and do further research. But it’s often in those conversations that just
sort of, you know, happen either in passing or just relaxing with friends that really
spark some good ideas and further interests”; [community chapel] leaves me
space to clear my mind so when I go back to doing my work it can help me focus
a lot more”; “research consultations, where it’s more than a five minute
discussion, where it’s an appointment, you know its twenty, thirty minutes,
sometimes up to two hours of help”; the grapevine; “One of the goals that here we
are trying to realize is the interaction between different faiths so faculty members
are interacting with each other, speaking to each other, learning from each other”;
“I am also obviously in touch with several faculty here in realizing my own
research project and getting their help and consulting them. I do that too. So at the
faculty level, we have, I would say, serious interaction. Mutually enriching
interaction”; “I’ve learned a lot from those interactions and naturally I integrate it
into my research and into my own teaching style”; “These informal interactions
these students that are having a family are making a person a more responsible
one. So students are having more tendencies to realize their projects in a more
timely and more disciplined manner”
ACADEMIC: “soliciting and receiving feedback about assignments”;
“conversations transformed my assignments”; “conversations with my colleagues
were important”; teamwork; “quality of assignments has risen in proportion to the
amount of dialogue that I do with students and faculty”; “I definitely consult with
librarian as I teach the MA Colloquium”; I consulted with Muslims; “So I talked
to, um, some librarians”; give pointers; topic narrowing; “[faculty] don’t ask me
directly for help, they come to me and ask me for help on their students’ behalf”;
“what are good databases for this subject?”; “pull up a previous paper […] and
suggest some directions”; “I was able to utilize that bibliography that I had
compiled as a resource for him. And then he was able to Google some works […]
explore writings […] and using those bibliographies […] find more authors”;
“met with me for two hours to conceptualize what her masters thesis would be
about and how to do research”; “encouraging them to interact with people outside
library sources, alongside with library”; “several of them, came to me and asking
for a book list for there cause for their research topic”; “I cited [my advisor’s]
material as a student”; “And as a new professor here as far as I can observe in
class they [students] do that [cite their professors] too”; “In my own discussions
and writing my own lectures I cite some of the faculty members. So I think I can
say effectively that I did that and that students, they do do that [cite interpersonal
information sources]. Yeah, yes.
TECHNICAL: self-management; “[hybrid students] rely on each other to talk
about technical things like did the portal work for you”; “why a database isn’t
working; “how to use an e-book”; “contact [librarians] for another kindle [book]”;
“make sure dissertations conform to our school’s formatting guidelines”; “I did
interact but not in the way that I consulted them but I with a list of books I
contacted the librarians and we made sure that they have the books here”

132

MI
Acronym for: Metacognitive Indicator
Examples (present in the data): certainty; doubt; faith; assumption; transcendence;
mystical; existential; Atheist; “been conscious to hire”; “religion as a cultural
phenomenon”; observation; orientation; “as you age you a less anxious about pleasing
students or seeming to know everything”; tacit knowledge; critical thinking; “consciously
molding our common space to invite religious difference, cultural difference”;
commitment; self-conscious point of orientation; levels of sophistication; hubris;
evidence; consciousness; insights; liberal; ethos of the campus; theoretical stuff; basic
stuff; introductory level [participant is using judgment]; “analyzing my social location
and their social locations […] using a model”; non-traditional; self-reflection
SNI
Acronym for: Social Network Indicator
Examples (present in the data): community; small circle of people; faculty; staff;
curriculum committee; institutional review board; support service committee; dissertation
committees; dissertation exams committees; culture; group study; Korean women [ethnic,
demographic group studied by CST students according to IRB chair / library director];
Practical Theology [degree program in which interpersonal interaction is common]; board
of ordained ministry; Society for Biblical Literature; outsider; social holiness (cf.
personal holiness); footnote conversations; “ethnic traditions which include AfricanAmerican, Asian-American, Hispanic American, and the Korean population of students”;
trade business cards; Korean choir; Korean prayer group; “people who feel an affinity
with each other spiritually for some reason or other. Even atheists”; pluralistic society;
small groups; cohort; MDiv friends; MDiv colleagues; Interreligious Council; pizza
party; residential campus culture; consortium; “how I affiliate”; friend; family; campus
community; Jewish community; Highpath College Consortium; “eclectic community of
religious persuasions”; Korean student association; subcultures; Korean subculture;
Christian custom; same cultural background; conservative Protestant circles; liberal
Protestant circles; friendships; faculty executive committee
LOC
Stands for: Location
Examples (present in the data): coffee shop; park; Library; City of Highpath; office;
chapel; Bayan University; Academy of Jewish Religion; Special Collections (CST);
conference rooms; green; student center; seminar rooms; Klinebell Institute [offers
pastoral counseling studies]; University of the West [a Buddhist school]; Christian
college; Christian seminary; United Methodist seminary; Div school; University of
Chicago [Div school]; “Harvard Div School”; real estate; building; book warehouse;
Germany; Yale; prayer room; wash room for the purification; “spaces that were not

133

threatening to Jews and Muslims”; Union Theological Seminary; Widener Library
[Harvard]; Butler Library at Columbia; Honald Library at Highpath Colleges; Victorville;
Los Angeles; San Diego; dormitories; Africa; Asia; Hawaii; Alaska; UCLA; Southerner;
the shelves; Phoenix; Virginia; Cal [California] State, Fullerton; San Jose State
University; Edgar Center; community center; computer lab; Conservative synagogue;
hospital; East Coast; Highpath Lincoln University; Washington, DC; Biblical garden;
Ghana; Portugal; UC Irvine; seminary; Licensing School; Kansas; Protestant places; selfstanding institution; United States; rooms
DEITY
Stands for: transcendent entity, source of inspiration, or object of religious devotion
Examples (from the data): Lord; Buddha; God-experience; Jesus
PROJ
Examples: research project; class assignment; thesis; paper; research; directed
independent studies; dissertation exams; graduate research; interview components; data
acquisitions; classes; learning process; writing; core courses; curriculum; credo
assignment; international projects; facing a task; “assignment to present the Trinity to
Muslims […] that fosters Muslim-Christian dialogue […] is all about information
acquisition, organization and presentation”; Master’s project; novel research; language
exams; classical research project; sermons; blog posts; summative exercise; case study;
theological assessment of [social/clinical] encounter; class presentation; twenty to thirty
page research papers; reflective papers; [U.S.] President’s Interfatih Campus Challenge
panel/workshop; Course of Study [ministerial training]; exegetical paper; final papers;
dissertation; discussion prompts
CoP
Stands for: Community of Practice
Examples: meditative meet; congregation; fellow students; peers; staff; cultural shift;
discourse; “spokespersons for Jesus Christ”; community life; community of writing;
classmates; adjudicatories; Christian family; Jewish community; Methodist calendar;
“Just having that positive affirmation from the Jewish community is really helpful in
affirming the work that I’m doing”; “Ask a question or put in a query and get a response
back and it needs to be on the top first page and top five results or it doesn’t really matter.
That’s not research (laughs)”; faith environment
BIBLIO
Stands for: bibliographic instruction
Examples: “information literacy, instruction, and class”; “tour students on how to do
research in the humanities”; “Bibliographic instruction is a fairly, can be used in a broad
sense, and can just mean an introductory session about how to do research, but if you

134

think of it in terms of how to discover new tools or introducing people to new tools or
databases I’ve had a few experiences with that so far”; research consultations; library
orientation
USE
Stands for: FI and LI opinions of usefulness of students’ research approaches
Examples: “spectrum is extraordinarily wide”; “ability [is] extremely limited”; “It really
depends on the program […] not helpful at all until second year of the MA program”;
“pretty useful”; “based on my students behavior, they are using library effectively. But,
we have a lot of students who use English as their second language”
INFOACT
Stands for: responses/perspectives of information behavior activities’ usefulness
Examples: indispensable; information acquisitions behavior; organize; observations;
worst-case scenario; task; science; preparing a sermon; “there be some difficulty for them
in terms of reaching the material or effectively using the material effectively from the
library, although they are willing to do that”
PRAC
Stands for: event of religious or spiritual practice
Examples: (chapel) service; “blessings over events”; religious expressions; “specific
Methodist times”; Muslim daily prayers; “to bond with their particular religious
community”; “Korean prayer group that met almost every day”; “Lutheran discussion
group that meets on a regular basis”; gone to church; preached a sermon; vegetarian;
humanist planetary run; humanist feel the earth under their feet; “every Tuesday we have
community chapel that is a ecumenical interreligious service [JSI]”; contemplation,
prayer, meditation, worship, relaxation; rope labyrinth walking; Korean and go up early
every morning to prayer; Korean Student Association event; American evangelical songs;
circumcision; Wiccan practices; practicing Muslim
EVENT
Stands for: event, social or academic but not overtly religious in nature
Examples: diversity event; convocation; major academic events
LIBWORK
Stands for: library work
Examples: acquisitions; circulating; processing; digital services; “25% […]
responsibilities […] is to teach a course”; hiring; collection development; budget;
personnel; information literacy; cataloging; administration; “modes of conveying
[innovations in online databases] to students”; “laying the foundations for a more organic

135

connection of the library resources with the educational project”; acquisitions policy;
“helping with bibliographies”; “come into classes and show how to vet resources, how to
conduct research”; virtual reference service; “loaded [e-books] with as many of the
course reserve books as we could”; “figure out [hybrid course resources delivery] kinks”;
“People will always be asking us how to print and how to access all the computers”;
make a profile with a bookseller; handle student [book and kindle book] requests;
establish a virtual or online reference presence; Springshare Libanswers; reference
services; “try to tell if a request is coming in from somebody within the student
population or student/faculty community”; “accommodate information seeking
behavior”; migrated our catalog; being adept at print research; [processing] donation;
collection development decisions
CB
Stands for: code book
Examples: in coder’s comments “add to CB”
STUDWORK
Stands for: student work
Examples: texting; preached sermons research; exegesis; reading articles on Facebook;
seminar writing; MDiv research; chairman; Trying to navigate; getting materials;
“figuring out cultural context”; negotiating [online chat] times; “log on and ask a
librarian or they can ask us a question and we can then respond by either text message or
SMS, through email, they can tweet at us”; “contact [librarians] for another kindle
[book]”; send in an interlibrary loan request; watch documentaries; “pull up a previous
paper […] and suggest some directions”; “Google some works […] explore writings […]
and using those bibliographies […] find more authors”; “writing up the verbatim
encounter”; “working on group projects for, like, a class presentation”; “engaging in the
classroom and also on the campus at large doing interfaith work”; “pulling Bible
commentaries off the shelves”; being adept at print research; field trips
SOCMED
Stands for: social media
Examples: Facebook; “posting responses to a shared site”; “interacting online in their
responses to their reading and research”; online chat rooms; SAKAI; twitter; tweet; “one
[Muslim] professor uses Twitter a lot”; “Springshare Libanswers […] allows us to tweet
[…] or text questions”; “We don’t have a library Facebook page”
CURR
Stands for: curriculum
Examples: ministry courses; core courses; Systematic Theology for Ministry; Wesleyan
Theology; theory classes; Old Testament; New Testament; Ethics; History; “second-year
MDiv art of ministry classes”; preaching; pastoral counseling; critical thinking;

136

“Virtually no critical thinking, direct of indirect, in the seminary curriculum”; MuslimChristian dialogue; educational process; MA Colloquium; History of Judaism; Relativity
of Religious Truth; Social Justice; Clinical Pastoral Education; Interreligious Studies
program; Early Christianity; Course of Study; Judaism; Christianity; academics; Islamic
philosophy, theology and spirituality; academic subject; Islamic Christianity; Islamic
Judaism; “it is required that they should take a class, which they all take classes, which
deals with other traditions, too”
EDTECH
Stands for: educational technology/systems to support communications & research
Examples: LifeSize [video-conferencing]; “video-conference with Jewish students at AJR
[Academy of Jewish Religion]”; hybrid program; blog posts; kindles; fully online; Sakai;
Springshare Libanswers; CD/DVD version; online version; Triple Live; Millennium;
“given headphones to wear during the service and then live translation of all the Korean
elements of the service were provided for us as we were participating in the service”
IDEA
Stands for: concept or ideological component of a religious or academic discipline
Example: agape; ahimsa [non-violence]; taqwah; American culture; Muslim studies;
Jewish studies; Buddhist studies; mystical traditions; process theology; interreligious
programming; pluralism; model; pastoral care counseling; publicity; religious studies;
diversity training; intra-Jewish; “thieves on the cross”; “orthodoxy of the Nicene Creed”;
“religion and science discussion”

137

REFERENCES
Allen, T. (1969). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of Information Science
and Technology 4, 3-29.
Atherley, R. and S. Hannabuss. (1996). New Age materials in the public library. New
Library World 97 (1128), 4-9.
Babbie, E. (2004). The practice of social research (10th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Wadsworth/Thomson Learning.
Barry, C. (1994). User-defined relevance criteria: an exploratory study. Journal of the
American Society for Information Science, 45, 149-159.
Barzilai-Nahon, Karine & Barzilai, Gad (2005). Cultured technology: The internet and
religious fundamentalism. The Information Society 21(1), 25-40.
Basker, J. (1984). Philosophers' information habits. Library and Information Research
News 7(25): 2-10
Bates, M.J. (2005). Information and knowledge: an evolutionary framework for
information science. Information Research 10(4), paper 239. Retrieved 6
November, 2011 from http://InformationR.net/ir/10-4/paper239.html
Belkin, N.J. (2005). Anomalous state of knowledge. In Karen E. Fisher, S. Erdelez &
L. McKechnie (Eds.). Theories of information behavior. (pp. 44-48).
Medford, NJ: Information Today.
Brink, T.L. (1995). Quantitative and/or qualitative methods in the scientific study
of religion. Zygon 30(3): 461-75.
Broadbent, E. (1986). A study of humanities faculty library information seeking
behavior. Cataloging and Classification Quarterly 6(3): 23-37.
Broadus, R. (1987). Information needs of humanities scholars: A study of requests
made at the National Humanities Center. Library and Information Studies
Research 9(2): 113-29.
Brunton, C. (2005). The Effects of Library User-Education Programmes on the
Information-Seeking Behavior of Brisbane College of Theology Students: An
Australian Case Study. Journal of Religious & Theological Information 7(2): 5573.
Case, D. (2002). Looking for information: a survey of research on information needs,
seeking and behavior. San Diego, CA: Elsevier.

138

Coser, L. (1965). Men of ideas. New York: Free Press of Glencoe.
Crane, D. (1971). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology 6, 3-39.
Creswell, J. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: choosing among five
traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. Retrieved November 19, 2012, from
NetLibrary: http://www.NetLibrary.com/Reader.
Cronin, B., McKenzie, G., & Rubio, L. (1993). The norms of acknowledgement in four
humanities and social sciences disciplines. Journal of Documentation 49(1), 2943.
Cronin, B., McKenzie, G., & Stiffler, M. (1992). Patterns of acknowledgement. Journal
of Documentation 48(2), 227-239.
Cronin, B., & Overfelt, K. (1994). A survey of acknowledgement behavior. Journal
of Documentation 50(3), 165-196.
Culler, J. (1985). On deconstruction: Theory and criticism after structuralism. Quarterly
Journal of Speech 71(1): 119-31.
Dervin, B. (2006, November 4). Doing ethnography. Lecture presented for the Social
Informatics Special Interest Group at the 69th American Society for Information
Science and Technology Annual Meeting, Austin, TX.
Dervin, B. (1992). From the mind’s eye of the user: the sense-making qualitativequantitative methodology. In J. Glazier & R. Powell (Eds.), Qualitative research
in information management (pp. 61-84). Englewood: Libraries Unlimited.
Dervin, B. (1999). On studying information seeking methodologically: the implications
of connecting metatheory to method. Information Processing and Management,
35, 727-750.
Dervin, B., & Nilan, M. (1986). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of
Information Science and Technology, 21, 3-33.
East, J. (2007). Subject Retrieval from Full-text Databases in the Humanities. Libraries
and the Academy 7(2): 227-241.
Fabian, B. and R. Vierhaus. (1979). The calling and condition of the humanistic
disciplines—The future of the humanities: Report of a conference. Minerva 17(4):
11-26.
Faibisoff, S. G., and Ely, D. P. (1976). Information and information needs. Information
Reports and Bibliographies 5(1): 2– 16.

139

Gaba, R. (2008). Reading Researching and Writing of MDiv Students: a Preliminary
Report, in American Theological Library Association Summary of Proceedings,
vol. 62 (Ottawa: ATLA, 2008), 288-292.
Gaba, R. (2009). Research Habits of MDiv Students: The Tools They Use and What
They Value in a Text, in American Theological Library Association
Summary of Proceedings, vol. 63 (St. Louis, MO: ATLA, 2009), 73.
Geertz, C. (1993). Religion as a cultural system. In: The interpretation of cultures:
Selected essays. Oxford: Fontana.
Halpern, D., & Nilan, M. (1988). A step toward shifting the research emphasis in
information science from the system to the user: An empirical investigation of
source-evaluation behavior information seeking and use. In C. Borgman & E. Pai
(Eds.), ASIS ’88. Proceedings of the 51st annual meeting of ASIS. Medford, NJ:
Learned Information.
Hewins, E.T. (1990). Information need and use studies. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology 25, 145-172.
Hook, W. (2009). Effective Leadership in Tough Times: Three Essays: Essay 1:
Governance. Theological Librarianship 2 (1): 20.
Heinström, J. (2006). Broad Exploration or Precise Specificity: Two Basic Information
Seeking Patterns Among Students,” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science & Technology 57(11): 1440-1450.
Hewins, E.T. (1990). Information need and use studies. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology 25, 145-172.
Hyland, K. (2004). Graduates’ gratitude: the generic structure of dissertation
acknowledgements. English for Specific Purposes 23, 303-324.
In the world of good and evil. (2006, September 14). Economist. Retrieved October 3,
2006, from http://www.economist.com/node/7912626
Krikelas, J. (1983). Information seeking behaviour: Patterns and concepts. Drexel Library
Quarterly 19(2), 5-20.
Lipetz, B.A. (1970). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of Information Science
and Technology 5, 3-32.
Lincoln, T. (2008). Stewardship in education: A world-bridging concept.
Theological Education 43 (2): 1-10.

140

Lonnquist, H. (1990). Scholars seek information: Information-seeking behaviour and
Information Needs of Humanities Scholars. International Journal of Information
and Library Research 2: 195-203.
Menzel, H. (1966). Information needs and uses in science and technology. Annual Review
of Information Science and Technology 12(1), 41-69
Michels, D. (2205). The use of people as information sources in Biblical studies
research. The Canadian Journal of Information and Library Science 29(2): 91109.
Milas, T. (2008a). Patterns of information behavior in theological research: A
bibliometric analysis of acknowledgements in theological dissertations. American
Theological Library Association Summary Of Proceedings, 62 (presented at the
American Theological Library Association, Ottawa: American Theological
Library Association, 2008), pp. 292-299.
Milas, T. (2008b). The role of faith in information behavior: A study of theology
research. 4th Forum on Library Education: The Ph.D. Experience: Research into
Practice. 2008 American Library Association Midwinter Meeting, Pennsylvania
Convention Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, January 11, 2008.
Miles, M. B. & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative data analysis: A sourcebook of new
methods. California: SAGE publications Inc.
Neelameghan, A. (2001). Lateral relationships in multicultural, multilingual databases in
the spiritual and religious domains: The OMinformation service. In Carol A. Bean
& Rebecca Green (Eds.), Relationships in the organization of knowledge (pp.
185-198).(Information Science and Knowledge Management 2). Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Nissan, E, Weiss, H., and A. Yossef. (1996). HyperJoseph: The hypertextual
organization. Epistemological considerations. Knowledge Organization 23(1), 1624.
Nissenbaum, S. (1989). The month before "The night before Christmas." In Humanists at
work: Disciplinary perspectives and personal reflections, 43-78. Chicago:
University of Illinois at Chicago, Institute for the Humanities and University
Library.
Palmer, C. and A. Neumann. (2002). The Information Work of Interdisciplinary
Humanities Scholars: Exploration and Translation. Library Quarterly
42(1): 89-118.
Paisley, W.J. (1968). Information needs and uses. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology 3(1), 1-30.

141

Penner, K. (2009). Information behavior of theologians: A literature review.
Theological Librarianship 2(1): 67.
The power of religion. (2013, July 13). Economist. Retrieved July 16, 2013, from
http://www.economist.com/news/special-report/21580618-islamists-governmentproving-harder-opposition-power-religion/
Rajashekar, T.B., Ravi, A. Sreenivasa & Neelameghan, A. (1998). Designing a
multimedia information service for the Internet and CD-ROM. Information
Studies 4(3), 125-142.
Sievert, D., and M. Sievert. (1989). Philosophical research: Report from
the field. In Humanists at Work: Disciplinary Perspectives and Personal
Reflections, ed. B.P. Lynch, 79-99. Chicago: University of Illinois, 1989.
Smiraglia, R. (2002). The nature of ‘work’: Implications for the organization of
knowledge. New York: Scarecrow Press.
Spradley, J. (1979). The ethnographic interview. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Stern, M. 1983. Characteristics of the literature of literary scholarship. College and
Research Libraries 44(4): 99-209.
Stone, S. (1982). Humanities scholars: Information needs and uses. Journal of
Documentation 38 (4): 292.
Tanner, T M. (1994). What ministers know: A qualitative study of pastors as
information professionals. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press, 1994.
Tanni, M. and E. Sormunen. (2008). A critical review of research on information
behavior in assigned learning tasks. Journal of Documentation 64 (6):
893-914.
Watson-Boone, R. (1994). The information needs and habits of humanities scholars.
Reference Quarterly 34(2): 203-16.
Wiberley, S. and W. Jones. (1989). Patterns of information seeking in the
humanities. College & Research Libraries 50(6).
Wicks, A. (1999). The information-seeking behavior of pastoral clergy: a study of the
interaction of their work worlds and work roles. Library and Information Science
Research, 21(2), 205-226.
Wilson, D. (2002). A survey of higher education in theology. Journal for the Scientific
Study of Religion, 33(2), 132-151.

142

Wilson, T. (2000). Human information behaviour. Informing Science 3(2): 49-55.

143

BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH
THEODORE PATRICK MILAS
EDUCATION
Ph.D., Library and Information Studies, Florida State University, 2015
Doctoral minor: Hebrew
M.S., Library and Information Studies, Florida State University, 2006
Concentration: Knowledge Management
A.B., Religion, Davidson College, 2005
EXPERIENCE
Continuing Education Coordinator, 2014 - present
Bureau of Library Development, Division of Library & Information Services,
Florida Department of State, Tallahassee, FL
Web Design and Web Development Teaching Assistant, 2010 - 2013
Program for Interdisciplinary Computing, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
University Librarian & Director of Information Services, 2008 - 2010
Thomas University, Thomasville, GA
Instruction and Reference Librarian, 2008
Thomas University, Thomasville, GA
Library & Information Studies Teaching Assistant, 2006 - 2009
College of Information, Florida State University, Tallahassee, FL
PUBLICATIONS
Mon, Lorrie; Bishop, Bradley Wade; McClure, Charles R.; McGilvray, Jessica; Most,
Linda; Milas, Theodore Patrick; and Snead, John T. “The Geography of Virtual
Questioning.” Library Quarterly 79, no. 4 (2009): 393-420.
Review of Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the Internet
by Christine L. Borgman. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2007. In interActions: UCLA Journal
of Education and Information Studies, 2008.
Milas, Theodore. (2008). Otlet, Faceted Classification, and Theological Librarianship.
Refereed full paper presented at the American Theological Library Association annual
conference. Ottawa, Canada, June 27, 2008. In 2008 Summary of Proceedings of the
Annual Conference of the American Theological Library Association.

144

