	  
	  

A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY EXPLORING THE
LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES OF
ACADEMIC RESEARCH LIBRARY LEADERS
by
Beth McNeil
A DISSERTATION

Presented to the Faculty of
The Graduate College at the University of Nebraska
In Partial Fulfillment of Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

Major: Human Sciences
(Leadership Studies)

Under the Supervision of Professor Gina S. Matkin
Lincoln, Nebraska
July, 2015

UMI Number: 3715457

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3715457
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  
	  

A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY EXPLORING THE
LEADERSHIP DEVELOPMENT EXPERIENCES
OF ACADEMIC RESEARCH LIBRARY LEADERS
Beth McNeil, Ph.D.
University of Nebraska, 2015

Advisor: Gina S. Matkin
This phenomenological study describes the leadership development experiences
of academic librarians currently working in leadership roles in academic research
libraries to discover their experiences of being a library leader and to explore how they
describe their own leadership development. Study participants identified as having
experienced positive leadership development experiences during their careers as
academic research library leaders and were, at the time of this study, employed and
actively working in leadership positions reporting directly to the head of their academic
research library. The goal of this exploration was to understand what the academic
library leaders had experienced, with regard to leadership development, and in what
context, and to learn how they make sense out of those leadership development
experiences. Understanding academic library leaders’ developmental experiences, and
the meaning they make from those experiences, can shed light on the relative merits of
different types of experiences, and in what context, to help inform future emphases in
academic library leader developmental programming. Findings from this study indicate

	  
	  

that positive leadership development is a combination of people and experiences;
supportive people who provide opportunities, offer direction, and lead by example,
combined with practical on-the-job real life work experience, and purposeful
development through workshops, institutes, fellowships and other leadership
development opportunities.

iv	  
	  

Acknowledgments
Throughout my time in the doctoral program I have received encouragement and
support from many people. My advisor Dr. Gina Matkin deserves much thanks for her
guidance and direction, not to mention her persistence and unwavering belief that I would
finish. She is the best advisor a doctoral student could ask for. I thank her and my
committee members, Dr. Mary Bolin, Dr. Nancy Busch, and Dr. Lindsay Hastings, for
their insights and support as I moved from idea stage to finished study.
Thank you, too, to my mentor and friend, Dr. Joan Giesecke, for her many years
of support and guidance, and for pushing me to pursue the doctoral program in the first
place. If I had not been so worried about disappointing her I might have given up
somewhere along the way. I am grateful to my colleagues and friends at University of
Nebraska-Lincoln and Purdue University, for their support, encouragement, and
assistance. Thank you, too, to the library leaders who responded to my call for
participation in the study and took time to share their compelling stories.
Thank you to my family and friends for sticking with me throughout the program.
Your support came in many forms, from encouraging text messages and phone calls to
offers to watch the boys, and I am so very grateful. And, thanks, too, to my boys, Nick
and Eli, who wondered if I would ever finish this “book report.” And, finally, much
credit is due to my loving husband, Wes Welch, for his constant support, not to mention
everything, and I do mean everything, he took care of while I was studying or writing. I
could not have done it without him.

v	  
	  

Table of Contents
Chapter One: Introduction…………………………………….…………..1
Purpose of the Study……………………………………….………...4
Definition of Terms………………………………………………….5
Delimitations and Limitations……………………………………….9
Significance of the Study…………………………………………….9
Chapter Two: Literature Review…………………………………………11
Leadership Theory………………………………………………….12
Academic Librarians and Leadership………………………………12
Leadership Development Programs and Academic Librarians….....16
Summary……………………………………………………………18
Chapter Three: Methodology…………………………………………….20
Qualitative Methodology……………………………………………20
Phenomenological Inquiry…………………………………….…….25
Origins of Phenomenology…………………………………….……27
Philosophical Assumptions and Worldview……………………..…28
Participants…………………………………………………………29
Sampling Method………………………………………………..….29
Research Questions…………………………………………………30
Data Collection……………………………………………………...31
Data Analysis……………………………………………………….32
Validation Strategies………………………………….…………….34
Ethical Considerations………………………………………………35
Role of Researcher……………………………………….…………35
Pilot Study……………………………………………….……….…37
Chapter Four: Findings…………………………………………..…….…39
Personal Growth Experiences…………………………….…….…..41
Support and Influence………………………………………………49
Exposure……………………………………………………….……60
Personal Responsibility……………………………………….….…66
Recognition of Leadership…………………………………….……72
Summary…………………………………………………………....75
Textural Description…………………………………………….…..75
Structural Description……………………………………………....78

vi	  
	  

Essence……………………………………………………….…79
Chapter Five: Discussion……………………………..………………81
Researcher’s Reflections…………………………………….…81
Discussion of Findings…………………………………………84
Making Meaning……………………………………………….94
Visual depiction of leadership development……………………95
Significance of Findings……………………………………..…97
Implications………………………………………………….…98
Limitations………………………………………………….....101
Future Research……………………………………………….101
Summary and Conclusion……………………………………..102
References……………………………………………………………..107
Appendices…………………………………………………………….115
Appendix A: Informed Consent Form…………………………115
Appendix B: E-mail Invitation to Participate………………….118
Appendix C: Pre-Interview Questionnaire…………………….120
Appendix D: Sample Interview Protocol………………………122
Appendix E: Peer Review Form……………………………….125
List of Tables
Table 1: Qualitative Research Traditions………………….……24
Table 2: Procedures in Phenomenology……………………...…26
Table 3: Participant Demographics……………………………..40
Table 4: Leadership Development Experiences Themes….……41
Table 5: Theme: Personal Growth………………………….…..48
Table 6: Theme: Support and Influence…..................................59
Table 7: Theme: Exposure……………………………………...65
Table 8: Theme: Personal Responsibility………………………71
Table 9: Theme: Recognition……………………………..……74
List of Figures
Figure 1: Leadership Development: Connections, Intersections, and
Overlaps…………………………………………………………96

1	  
	  

CHAPTER ONE
INTRODUCTION
I’ve learned that people will forget what you said, people will even forget what you did,
but people will never forget how you made them feel. –Maya Angelou

Twenty-first century universities and their libraries face unprecedented change, in
teaching, learning, research, and scholarship. The change is constant, rapid, and
unpredictable. For libraries on research university campuses, this means finding new
approaches to meet to the traditional roles that academic research libraries have always
played in the acquisition of, access to, instruction in, and preservation of information, by
providing books, journals, and access to information resources in support of the teaching,
learning, and research missions of universities. The changes have also provided
opportunities for libraries and librarians to take on new roles on campus. As predicted in
2007 (Hufford, 2007), academic research libraries today see increased emphasis on
digitization of collections, preserving digital archives, and improving methods of data
storage and retrieval; intellectual property and ownership has become more complicated;
new requests for technology-related services are constant and expensive; open access to
federally funded research is mandated; distance learning has become an important effort
on many campuses; and faster and greater access to services is a commonly held
expectation of students and faculty.

	  

2	  
	  

In addition to continuing successfully with the traditional and foundational roles of
an academic research library, repositioning an academic research library to meet new
needs on campus, in the areas of teaching and research, requires library leaders to think
differently about the role of the academic research library and how to lead it in a
constantly changing higher education environment.
At the same time, the aging of the profession, particularly of leaders in the field,
has been the focus of several studies (Wilder, 2003; Hernon, Powell, and Young, 2001,
2002, and 2003). During the 1960s librarians joined the academic library workforce in
record numbers to meet the increased demand for enrollment in higher education at that
time (Moran, Marshall, & Rathbun-Grubb, 2010). By the beginning of the twenty first
century, these baby boomer librarians were retiring. Wilder noted that the general
demographic trends of academic librarianship were mirrored in the demographics of ARL
directors and upper level administrators (2003). By 2000, just five percent of Association
of Research Libraries (ARL) member directors were under age fifty. In 2015, 11 ARL
directors have been in their current position more than fifteen years and 19 current
directors have been ARL member representatives for more than ten years (ARL, 2015).
The Association of Research Libraries (ARL) is a nonprofit organization of 125
research libraries at comprehensive, research institutions in the US and Canada that share
similar research missions, aspirations, and achievements (ARL, 214). Each of the ARL
libraries is headed by one individual, with titles such as director, dean, university
librarian, or chief librarian, acting as the top administrator, and all ARL member libraries
	  

3	  
	  

have assistant or associate deans or directors (ARL, 2014). From January 2005 to
September 1, 2014 there were 105 turnovers in the top administrative positions among
the Association of Research Libraries member libraries. Many of these turnovers were
due to retirements. The changing nature of the work of academic librarians and the aging
academic librarian population (Wilder, 1996; Gordon, 2006), have resulted in an
increased interest in and concern for the future of leadership for academic research
libraries.
The leadership development process in general remains rather vague and
unknown, with research in this area fairly new compared to the much longer history of
leadership theories (Day, Fleenor, Atwater, Sturm, & McKee, 2014; Avolio, 2007; Day &
O’Connor, 2003). Leadership development for academic librarians can include
mentoring, ‘learning leadership’ on the job, and development programs. One aspect of
the leadership development process generally assumed to be positive is participation in
formal leadership development programs. In 2013, 39 formal library leadership training
opportunities were offered in the United States, up slightly from 2004, when 31
predominately U.S.-based leadership development programs for librarians were thought
to be in existence (Skinner, 2014; Mason &Wetherbee, 2004). Of these programs, some
are directed at early to mid-career professionals, to those working in public libraries, to
health science librarians, to librarians from diverse backgrounds or underrepresented
groups, Canadian and Australian librarians, and, most pertinent to this study, some
programs are for academic librarians in administrative roles at the assistant or associate
or director or dean level.
	  

4	  
	  

Purpose of this Study
The purpose of this study is to describe the leadership development experiences of
academic research library leaders. A phenomenological design will be used to answer the
central research question, which is: how do library leaders in academic research libraries
in North America describe their leadership development experiences? What did they
experience, with regard to leadership development, and in what context? How do they
make sense out of these experiences?
Little is known about the perceptions of academic library leaders of their own
overall leadership development, of their perceptions of the impact of their participation in
formal academic library leadership development programs, as well as the impact of other
aspects of leadership development. Until recently most of the articles and other
publications written on library leadership development programs had been informal
reports or announcements of programs, and little research-based assessment of library
leadership development or leadership development programs existed (Anderson, 1984).
In 2009, a special issue of The Journal of Library Administration was devoted to
leadership development programs for academic and special librarians, and included
several articles on major programs at that time (Neely, 2009; Lipscomb, Martin & Peay,
2009; Bedard, 2009; Parker, 2009; Webster & Jones, 2009; German, Owen, Parchuck &
Sandore, 2009; Cromer, 2009; Bunnett, Allee, Dorsch, Rios & Stewart, 2009; and
Weiner, Breivik, Clark & Caboni, 2009). The 2009 articles discuss a variety of wellknown and respected library leadership development programs, including the Peabody

	  

5	  
	  

Institute, ACRL Harvard Leadership Institute, and the Association of Research Libraries
Leadership Fellows program.
This qualitative study examines the leadership development experiences of
successful academic research library leaders, all of whom have participated in at least one
of the formal leadership development programs specifically for academic librarians, who
are currently working in leadership positions of associate or assistant dean or associate or
assistant director roles, to discover their leadership development experiences, and to learn
how they describe their leadership development. The purpose of this phenomenological
study was to describe the leadership development experiences of leaders in academic
research libraries.
Definition of Terms
It is important to define key terms used in this study. Also included here are
acronyms from the field of library and information science and their explanations. For
the purpose of this research study of academic research library leaders’ leadership
development, the following terms are defined as:
ACRL – Association of College and Research Libraries is the largest division of
the American Library Association, focused on academic library and information
professionals.
ALA – American Library Association. The ALA is the oldest and largest library
association in the world, with a mission to provide leadership to enhance learning and
ensure access to information for all.

	  

6	  
	  

ARL – Association of Research Libraries. Established in 1932 by the directors
from major university and research libraries, membership now includes 125 libraries at
comprehensive, research institutions in the United States and Canada, which share similar
research missions, aspirations, and achievements (Association of Research Libraries,
2104, para 1).
ARL LCDP – Association of Research Libraries Leadership and Career
Development Program. The ARL LCDP is an 18-month program designed for mid-career
librarians from traditionally underrepresented minority groups for leadership roles in
ARL libraries.
ARL LF – Association of Research Libraries Leadership Fellows. Individuals
who have participated in the Association of Research Libraries Leadership Fellowship
program. The ARL LF program is an executive leadership program designed and
sponsored by ARL member libraries that offers opportunity for development of future
senior-level leaders in large research libraries and archives. The program was previously
named Association of Research Libraries Research Libraries Leadership Fellows
program.
Academic Libraries – ODLIS, the Online Dictionary for Library and Information
Science (http://www.abc-clio.com/ODLIS/odlis_A.aspx) defines an academic library as:
“A library that is an integral part of a college, university, or other institution of
postsecondary education, administered to meet the information and research needs of its
students, faculty, and staff.”

	  

7	  
	  

Dean, director, and university librarian – typically the position titles for the
administrators of academic libraries in North America. Sometimes University Librarian
or Chief Librarian is the title used for the head. For the purpose of this study leader will
be the term used and will include individuals working at the assistant dean, assistant
director, associate dean, or associate director level.
Librarians - individuals working in academic libraries who have earned a masters
degree, sometimes described as an MLS or MLIS degree, in library and information
science.
Leadership – There are many definitions of leadership. The one thing that all of
them have in common is that leadership is about some type of influence. For this study, I
will follow the direction of Hughes, Ginnett, and Curphy (1995) and will use a definition
by Roach and Behling (1984), who define leadership simply as “the process of
influencing an organized group toward accomplishing its goals.”
Leaders – individuals who exercise leadership, i.e.: influence others to accomplish
goals. In this study, leaders are academic library administrators in positions of associate
dean, associate director, assistant dean, or assistant director in academic libraries.
Leadership development –informal and formal educational and/or instructional
opportunities or activities that enhance the leadership qualities of individuals
Leadership development programs or institutes – formal programs designed
specifically to develop leadership skills, sponsored by a professional organization or
higher education institution, often where participants are selected through a competitive

	  

8	  
	  

process. Leadership development institutes may take place sporadically over several
months or through intense programming for one or more weeks.
Academic Librarian Leadership development programs – formal programs,
workshops, and opportunities for engagement around issues related to leadership
development of librarians working in academic libraries, often where participants are
selected through a competitive process.
Phenomenology – The qualitative research design I have chosen for this study is
phenomenology. Creswell (2007) stated that “The basic purpose of phenomenology is to
reduce individual experiences with a phenomenon to a description of the universal
essence” (p.58). Moustakas (1994), in his work, Phenomenological Research Methods,
distinguished phenomenological research design from other qualitative methods.
Phenomenology is the first method of knowledge because it begins with “things
themselves”; it is also the final court of appeal. Phenomenology, step by step,
attempts to eliminate everything that represents a prejudgment, setting aside
presuppositions, and reaching a transcendental state of freshness and openness, a
readiness to see in an unfettered way, not threatened by customs, beliefs, and
prejudices of normal science, by the habits of the natural world or by knowledge
based on unreflected everyday experience (p. 41).
UCLA Senior Fellows – University of California at Los Angeles Senior Fellows.
The UCLA Senior Fellows program is an intense three-week residential leadership
development program, sponsored by UCLA’s Department of Information Sciences, for
senior level academic librarians.

	  

9	  
	  

Delimitations and Limitations
Qualitative research is not intended to be generalizable (Creswell, 2007). There
are hundreds of research library administrators in the United States and many ways to
develop leadership skills, including through participation in one of several academic
library leadership development programs. This study focused on leaders currently
working in academic research libraries in positions of assistant or associate dean/director,
who had experienced positive leadership development and had participated in at least one
formal leadership development program. The sample was drawn from that subset of the
academic library profession.
Significance of the Study
This study is important for several reasons. The academic research library
community needs individuals prepared and ready to lead in the twenty-first century.
Formal leadership development programs have been perceived by leaders in the field of
academic librarianship to be an important aspect of an academic library leader’s
development. A 1984 study suggests that participation in formal leadership development
programs led to more positions of leadership in professional associations and faster
movement into leadership positions at libraries (Anderson, 1984). This
phenomenological study contributes to a greater understanding of the leadership
experiences of participants, including their perceptions of the impact of the formal
leadership development program(s) on their professional careers. Through these leaders’
rich descriptions of the meaning of positive leadership development others in the field of

	  

10	  
	  

academic librarianship, for example practicing librarians, library leaders, and library
association leadership may consider their own leadership development and that of their
employees and members.

	  

11	  
	  

CHAPTER TWO
LITERATURE REVIEW
Nothing ever becomes real till it is experienced. --John Keats
What makes a librarian a leader? How do life and career experiences effect
leadership development of leaders in libraries? The phenomenon includes a number of
constructs. Leadership may evolve from experience on the job, observing role models
over time, interactions with mentors, and experiences in formal leadership development
programs.
For the literature review, I reviewed the literature of leadership and academic
libraries and leadership development programs specifically for librarians. The section on
leadership in academic libraries is a summary of the literature in the field of library and
information science specifically related to the characteristics of, qualities of, or
competencies of library leaders published in studies in the past three decades. The
section on leadership development programs discusses programs in place for the
leadership development of academic librarians.
The purpose of this literature review is to provide a general overview of both
leadership and leadership development related to academic librarians. The review is not
intended to make assumptions about what the findings of this study will be, but rather to
inform the study and its readers generally about the current conditions to provide a
foundation from which to better understand this study.

	  

12	  
	  

Leadership Theory
In the twentieth and twenty-first centuries, leadership has been a popular topic in
management and in other fields. Leadership theories first appeared in the library and
information science literature in the late 1980s (Mason & Wetherbee, 2004). In the
literature of the library and information science field particular leadership theories are
sometimes mentioned, although most often in the context of research and scholarship
calling for more study on a particular topic related to the future of academic libraries. In
the early 21st century Riggs questioned why more had not been written about leadership
in libraries and suggested that librarians must pay more attention to leadership
development to avoid a future crisis in leadership in libraries (2001). Weiner (2003)
posited that while transformational versus transactional leadership has begun to be
studied in library settings, other leadership theories or models have not. Lynch (2004)
noted trait approach, skills approach, style approach, and situational or contingency
approach, and proposes that study around team-based structures may emerge as library
organizational structures change.
Academic Librarians and Leadership
The qualities, competencies, attributes or traits needed for successful academic
librarians in all types of roles in library organizations have been described in many
publications over the past two decades (Giesecke & McNeil, 1999; McNeil, 2002; ALA,
2005; Abels, Jones, Latham, and Magnoni, 2003). Numerous library and information
science-related studies have examined leadership skills for librarians (Hernon, Powell, &
Young, 2003; Riggs, 1982; Sheldon, 1991; Venetis, 2008; Woodsworth & von Wahlde,
	  

13	  
	  

1988). Much of the library and information science scholarship on leadership has
resulted in lists of leadership attributes, competencies, behaviors, and skills. Some of the
listed skills may more accurately be described as management skills rather than
demonstrations of leadership, but Riggs noted that libraries need competent managers as
well as leaders and used Bennis’ distinctions between managers and leaders as support
for his argument that libraries are well-managed but currently under-led (Riggs, 2001;
Bennis, 1989).
Anderson (1984) studied career characteristics of academic librarians, comparing
Senior Fellows with a control group of Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL) members, and discovered that academic library leaders who were Senior Fellows
started their careers earlier, published more, made more presentations and taught more,
and moved positions more often than peers, creating their own ‘leadership image’ in the
way they conducted their careers. Rooks (1994) confirmed three major qualities
identified as required of a director in an earlier study had grown increasingly important:
flexibility, adaptability, and a willingness to accept change as a way of life; a stable
temperament and the ability to maintain an emotion balance under constant tensions; and
endurance.
Mech (1996) reported stories of librarians’ leadership roles evolving as they take
on new opportunities on their campuses illustrates how the profession of librarianship is
changing, and stresses the need for individual responsibility to recognize the changing
environment, seek out new learning opportunities, and willingness to take on leadership
roles.
	  

14	  
	  

In a series of publications in the early 21st century, Hernon, Powell, and Young
(2001, 2002, and 2003) described leadership qualities important for library directors and
also individual or personal leadership traits, in two articles that appeared in College &
Research Libraries in 2001 and 2002. A first study reviewed job position
announcements appearing in College & Research Libraries and resulted in six areas for
attributes desired in job successful candidates: leadership, planning, abilities, skills,
individual traits, and areas of knowledge; Hernon et al also interviewed library directors
as part of the study, who identified attributes which could be grouped into four primary
areas, or meta-competencies, of abilities, skills, individual traits, and areas of knowledge
(Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2001). In a follow up article, the same authors grouped
attributes of future directors of member institutions of the Association of Research
Libraries into three major areas: managerial attributes, including managing, leading, and
planning; personal characteristics, including dealing with others, individual traits
(general), and individual traits (leadership); and general areas of knowledge (Hernon,
Powell, & Young, 2002).
Weiner (2003) provided a comprehensive literature review of the publications on
characteristics and leadership styles of academic library leaders and directors from 1980
to 2003, and included sections on recruitment, potential and career development; roles
and responsibilities; and characteristics and management styles.
Some studies focused on specific roles of leaders and included competencies
needed for these responsibilities. For example, leadership competencies necessary for
informed decision-making, particularly around research methods and statistical analysis,
	  

15	  
	  

was investigated through a review of citation patterns (Williams & Winston, 2003);
leadership competencies and marketing in the graduate school curriculum (Winston &
Hazlin, 2003); competencies related to development and fundraising that are necessary
for a library leader (Winston & Dunkley, 2002). Wang and Su (2006) discussed the
importance of cultural intelligence or cultural quotient (CQ) for academic library leaders,
in addition to emotional intelligence or emotional quotient (EQ) and analytical
intelligence or analytical quotient (IQ).
Ammons-Stephens, Cole, Jenkins-Gibbs, Riehle, and Weare (2009), members of
the 2008 class of the American Library Association’s Emerging Leaders Program,
proposed a model for core leadership competencies for librarians based on four central
meta-competencies: cognitive ability, vision, interpersonal effectiveness, and managerial
effectiveness, and within these four identified a total of seventeen broad competencies.
The seventeen broad competencies were: problem solving, decision making, reflective
thinking, global thinking, creative/innovative, forward thinking, culturally competent,
accountability, team building, development, inspirational/motivational, communication
skills, manage change, resource management, strategic planning, collaboration, and
flexibility/adaptability. A first central category, or meta-competency, of personal
attributes was originally considered for the leadership competency model, but this fifth
category, not focused on behaviors like the first four, was eventually not included in the
model. The personal attributes noted included principled/ethical, honest, humble,
gracious, and teachable, are similar to attributes listed in other articles on library
leadership such as by Hernon, Powell, & Young (2001, 2002, 2003).
	  

16	  
	  

Leadership Development Programs and Academic Librarians
In 2013 nearly 40 leadership programs for librarians were offered (Skinner &
Krabbenhoeft, 2014). The first U.S.-based formal, residential leadership training
opportunities for academic librarians began in the 1980s with the University of California
at Los Angeles (UCLA) Senior Fellows Program in 1982 and the Snowbird Institute in
1989. The UCLA Senior Fellows program is an intensive three-week residential
professional development program for 15 senior level academic librarians, held
biennially in August on the campus of the University of California at Los Angeles.
Programming includes guest speakers, lectures, field trips, and small group study sessions
on management, strategic thinking, and practical and theoretical approaches to the issues
confronting academic institutions and their libraries
(http://is.gseis.ucla.edu/programs/senior-fellows-program). The Snowbird Institute, a
six-day institute for 30 librarians in the first five years of their careers, took place
annually in Snowbird, Utah, from 1990 to 1998. Primary emphasis for Snowbird
Institute was leadership styles, setting vision, creativity, and risk-taking (Mason &
Wetherbee, 2004).
Fellowship programs, distinguished from the residential model by their longerterm programming commitment, began in the 1990s. The Association of Research
Libraries (ARL) Leadership and Career Development program began in 1997 to prepare
mid-career librarians from traditionally under-represented racial and ethnic minority
groups to take on increasingly challenging leadership roles in research libraries. The ARL
LCDP continues and has had 146 participants, in eight iterations since 1997.	  	  One
	  

17	  
	  

hundred and eleven, or 76%, of the LCDP graduates are women. One LCDP graduate
has become an ARL director, and 13 have served as directors in non-ARL libraries, since
participating in the ARL LCDP (M. A. Puente, personal communication, August 22,
2014). In 2004, ARL launched a new fellowship, the Leadership Fellows program, to
develop senior-level research library leaders (ARL, 2014). The Leadership Fellows
program has just completed its fifth cohort. Through participation in the ARL Leadership
Fellows, research library leaders will:
•
•

•
•
•
•

extend their professional skill and experience base, enabling more effective
leadership in a major research library;
engage the major challenges and pressures currently facing research libraries
in concert with some of the major library leaders who are shaping
contemporary responses to these challenges;
better understand the dynamics and politics of campus life in several of the
leading research libraries of North America;
create a network of colleagues to discuss and debate the critical issues and
current trends facing research libraries;
explore the use of innovative and entrepreneurial techniques needed to support
the future direction of research libraries; and
develop a clearer understanding of what it takes to be a successful research
library director. (http://www.arl.org)

Of the four Leadership Fellows cohorts since 2004, not counting the cohort just
completed, 88 fellows have completed the program and one left the program midway as
she was appointed an ARL director. Of the 89 participants in the first four cohorts 46, or
51.6%, have been women. Of the 89, five have been from traditionally underrepresented
racial and ethnic minority groups (M.A. Puente, personal communication, August 22,
2014).

	  

18	  
	  

Summary
In the past ten years there have been 105 vacancies in the top leadership positions
in the 125 biggest academic research libraries in North America, all members of the
Association of Research Libraries. Nineteen of the 105 vacancies, or 18%, were filled by
sitting directors at other ARL institutions; 11 of the 105 vacancies, or 10.4%, were filled
by internal candidates or associate/assistant/deputy directors from the same institution
(M. A. Puente, personal communication, August 22, 2014). At the time of this writing
there are eight searches for Association of Research Libraries top leadership positions
currently underway. Understanding more about the constructs of leadership development
and the leadership development experiences of leaders in academic libraries may be
helpful for the future of leadership in academic research libraries.
Useful informational reports on programs have been written on library leadership
development programs, including the ACRL/Harvard Leadership Institute (Kalin, 2008;
Saunders, 1999), the UCLA Senior Fellows Program (Horrell, 2001; Rumble and
MacEwen, 2008), and the Snowbird Leadership Institute (Neely & Winston, 1999), but
little research-based assessment has been done on librarian leadership development.
Anderson (1984) investigated career profiles of academic librarians and found evidence
that leaders showed a ‘distinctive career pattern’ compared to a control group of
librarians, and that participants in the Senior Fellows program were twice as visible and
twice as mobile, and three times more likely to take positions in leadership. In 2009,
several articles were published in a special issue of The Journal of Library
Administration that report on a variety of well-known and respected library leadership
	  

19	  
	  

development programs, including the Peabody Institute, ACRL Harvard Leadership
Institute, and the Association of Research Libraries’ Research Libraries Leadership
Fellowship program (Neely, 2009; Lipscomb, Martin, & Peay, 2009; Bedard, 2009;
Parker, 2009; Webster & Jones, 2009; German, Owen, Parchuck & Sandore, 2009;
Cromer, 2009; Bunnett, Allee, Dorsch, Rios, & Stewart, 2009; and Weiner, Breivik,
Clark & Caboni, 2009). Another study, on the Senior Fellows program, one of the oldest
academic library leadership development programs still in existence, reports on aspects of
the Senior Fellows program that eleven past participants reported on as most valuable, the
impact on their personal development, and the support received from faculty and cohort
group members (Rumble & MacEwen, 2008). None of these studies specifically describe
the overall leadership development experiences of academic librarians in top leadership
positions from the participating librarians’ perspective.
This phenomenological study describes the leadership development experiences
of academic librarians currently working in leadership roles in an academic research
library to discover their experiences of being a library leader and to explore how they
describe their own leadership development.

	  

20	  
	  

CHAPTER THREE
METHODOLOGY
Knowing is not enough; we must apply. Willing is not enough; we must do.
–Johann Wolfgang von Goethe

This study seeks to describe the leadership development experiences of academic
library administrators. I used a qualitative research methodology to collect data in order
to answer this question of leaders’ experiences, or the “essence of human experience”
(Creswell, 2007), in the process of their leadership development.
Qualitative Methodology
Qualitative research focuses on interpretation of phenomena in its natural setting,
to make sense in terms of the meanings people bring to the setting (Denzin & Lincoln,
1984; Creswell, 2007). In reviewing reasons Creswell (2007) suggests for when
qualitative research methodology should be used I believe a qualitative approach is
appropriate for my study, where I am interested in exploring the leadership development
experiences of academic research library administrators. For example, I perceive an
issue, leadership development, that needs to be explored; I am seeking a complex and
detailed understanding of the issue, leadership development of academic research library
administrators; I want to empower participants, the administrators, to tell their stories
unencumbered by power relationship between researcher and participant that sometimes
exist in research; I want participants to collaborate with me during data analysis and
	  

21	  
	  

interpretation; I want to understand the context in which participants address the issue of
leadership development; and finally, I will use qualitative research design because
quantitative measures and statistical analysis do not fit the question, leadership
development of academic research library administrators, in which I am interested.
Creswell (2007) describes five common qualitative traditions: narrative, grounded
theory, ethnography, case study, and phenomenology, as illustrated in Table 1 on page
24.
In narrative research a researcher explores the life of an individual and narrative
study is best used when it is necessary to tell the stories of an individual’s experiences.
Ultimately, narrative research develops a narrative about the stories that make up an
individual’s life. Because I am interested particularly in describing the leadership
development experiences of several academic library leaders, rather than the overall
experiences of a single academic library leader, I have not chosen a narrative research
approach for this study.
The focus for the grounded theory approach is to develop a theory grounded in the
data discovered. As in a phenomenological study, interviews are the primary method of
data collection and all participants in the study will have similar experiences, but unlike
phenomenology, in grounded theory the researcher develops a theory of the experience
based on the data gathered from a large number of participants (Creswell, 2007).
Because I am interested in the meaning of a particular experience - that of the leadership
development of academic library leaders - and not in developing a theory of leadership
	  

22	  
	  

development based on the participants’ experiences, a grounded theory study is not
appropriate for my study.
In ethnography the focus is most often on a larger group of individuals who share
a culture and where the researcher examines the “shared patterns of behavior, beliefs, and
language (Creswell, 2007, p. 68) of the group. There are many forms of ethnographic
research, as illustrated in Table 1. For my study ethnography is not an appropriate
tradition because my participants, while all members of a profession are not all located in
the same library and do not interact regularly, or in some cases at all, to develop the
shared patterns needed in an ethnographic study. In addition, I do not have the necessary
grounding in cultural anthropology noted by Creswell (2007).
Case study research involves in-depth study of an issue through cases, one or
more, within the same setting or context. Recent research has discussed whether case
study is a research methodology or a choice for what to study (Stake, 2005; Denzin &
Lincoln, 2005), and Creswell defines it as “a qualitative approach in which the
investigator explores a bounded system (a case) or multiple bounded systems (cases),
over time, through detailed, in-depth data collection involving multiple sources of
information (2007, p. 73). Because I am most interested in developing an exhaustive
description of the phenomenon of leadership development, and not in describing the
particular situations, or cases, of my study participants, I have not selected a case study
approach for my study.

	  

23	  
	  

In phenomenology, a description of the essence of the experience of the
phenomenon becomes a phenomenology. I have chosen phenomenology for my study of
the leadership development experiences of academic library leaders. In my study, the
phenomenon is leadership development and therefore the essence of leadership
development experienced will become the phenomenology. In this study I reduced the
academic library leaders’ individual experiences of leadership development to a
description of the universal essences, what van Manen (1990) describes as a “grasp of the
very nature of the thing (p. 177).
The description of the universal essence includes what the academic library
leaders experienced and how they experienced it, and through the significant statements,
meanings of those statements, themes of the meanings, to develop an exhaustive
description of the phenomenon of leadership development (Moustakas, 1994).

	  

24	  
	  

Table 1: Qualitative Research Traditions
Tradition

Types of Tradition

Unit

Origin
discipline(s)

Purpose

Narrative

Biography,
autobiography, life
history, oral history

Traditional, a
single
individual

Humanities and
social sciences,
including
anthropology,
literature, history,
psychology, and
sociology

To explore
the life of
the
individual

Phenomenology

Hermeneutical,
transcendental.
Describing what all
participants have in
common as they
experience a
phenomenon

Several
individuals

Psychology and
philosophy

To
understand
the essence
of the
experience

Grounded
Theory

Systematic,
constructivist. To
generate or discover
a theory

Several
individuals’
experiences

Sociology

To develop
a theory
grounded
in data
from the
field

Ethnography

Confessional, life
history, autoethnography,
feminist
ethnography,
ethnographic novels,
realist ethnography,
critical ethnography

Entire cultural
group

Anthropology
and sociology

To describe
and
interpret a
culturesharing
group

Case Study

Single instrumental
case study, collective
case study, intrinsic
case study

One issue,
through one or
more cases in a
bounded
system

Human and
social sciences,
and applied areas,
i.e.: evaluation
research

To develop
an in depth
description
of a case or
cases

Adapted from Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among
five approaches (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage

	  

25	  
	  

Phenomenological Inquiry
I employed a phenomenological design to answer my study’s central research
question: how do library leaders in North American academic research libraries describe
their leadership development experiences? A phenomenological study, which is designed
to describe experiences and the contexts of those experiences, is the qualitative approach
I chose to use for this study of the leadership development experiences of academic
research library leaders because it is the qualitative method best suited to my research
question: a phenomenological study describes the meaning for several individuals of their
lived experiences of a concept or a phenomenon Creswell, 2007). Phenomenology was
selected due to my desire to describe the ‘essence’ of the phenomenon, the experiences of
leadership development, shared by participants and to surface what participants may have
in common in their leadership development (Creswell, 2007). Phenomenological inquiry
holds the assumption that there is an essence or essences to shared experience (Patton,
2002). With phenomenology, the purpose is to reduce individual experiences with the
phenomenon, in this study the leadership development experiences of academic research
library administrators, to a description of the universal essence of the phenomenon (van
Manen, 1990). What did they experience, with regard to leadership development, and in
what context, or how, did they experience leadership development?
In phenomenology, researchers have outlined specific, structured methods of
analysis (Moustakas, 1994; Creswell, 2007). Table 2 outlines the procedural steps in
phenomenology and how I mapped these steps in my study.

	  

26	  
	  

Table 2
Procedures in Phenomenology

1. Determining approach

I selected phenomenology as approach for describing
leadership development experiences of academic
research library administrators

2. Determining phenomenon

Common experiences of leadership development for
academic research library administrators

3. Recognizing philosophical
assumptions

I was guided by a social constructivist worldview
because the study will focus on the participants’ views,
voices, and their multiple realities. I will attempt to
bracket my own experiences and at the same time
remain reflective, fully present, and engaged
(Moustakas, 1994).

4. Determine individuals who
have experienced the
phenomenon

I identified 14 academic research library administrators
to participate

5. Collect the data

I followed Moustakas’ recommendation of two broad
questions, to describe experiences and to describe the
contexts of those experiences (1994)

6. Analyze the data

I analyzed the data from the interviews with 14
participants (Creswell, 2007)

7. Write description of
participants’ experiences

I described the themes or “meanings” that emerge.

8. Write composite or
‘essence’ of the phenomenon

I synthesized the above descriptions.

Adapted from Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design:
Choosing among five approaches (2nd ed). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage

	  

27	  
	  

Origins of Phenomenology
The Oxford English Dictionary notes the term phenomenology was mentioned as
early as 1797 in the Encyclopedia Britannica entry on philosophy. Early twentieth
century phenomenological research continued to have strong philosophical
underpinnings, drawing from philosophy, psychology, and education, based on the
writings of the German mathematician Edmund Husserl, 1859-1938 (Creswell, 2007). In
2015 the Oxford English Dictionary defines phenomenology as:
A method or procedure, originally developed by the German philosopher Edmund
Husserl (1859–1938), which involves the setting aside of presuppositions about a
phenomenon as an empirical object and about the mental acts concerned with
experiencing it, in order to achieve an intuition of its pure essence; the
characteristic theories underlying or resulting from the use of such a method. In
more recent use: any of various philosophical methods or theories (often
influenced by the work of Husserl and his followers) which emphasize the
importance of analyzing the structure of conscious subjective experience
(http://www.oed.com.ezproxy.lib.purdue.edu/)
In 1928, Husserl wrote an invited article on phenomenology for the fourteenth edition of
the Encyclopedia Britannica, where he hoped to explain what “his new phenomenology
was all about” (Kockelmans, 1994, p. ix). Husserl, with influence of Descartes,
developed the concept of Epoche, which “requires the elimination of suppositions and the
raising of knowledge above every possible doubt” (Moustakas, 1994, p. 26). Both
Descartes and Husserl “recognized the crucial value of returning to the self to discover
the nature and meaning of things as they appear and in their essence” (Moustakas, 1994,
p. 26).
While Husserl’s ideas were considered abstract during his life, and different
philosophical arguments for the use of phenomenology have been made since his death in
	  

28	  
	  

1938, the philosophical arguments themselves rest on common ground: the study of lived
experiences (Creswell, 2007), that the experiences are conscious experiences (van
Manen), 1990), and the development of descriptions, not explanations or analyses, of the
essences of these experiences (Creswell, 2007). Stewart and Mickunas (1990) emphasize
four philosophical perspectives of phenomenology: Return to traditional tasks of
philosophy, a philosophy without presuppositions, the intentionality of consciousness,
and the refusal of the subject-object dichotomy (Creswell, 2007).
Today, phenomenology is popular in social, human, and health science
disciplines, including nursing, sociology, education, and psychology (Creswell, 2007;
Moustakas, 1994).
Philosophical Assumptions and Worldview
Creswell (2007) notes that scholars’ paradigms or worldviews are part of the
discussion of their research. This study was guided by a constructivist paradigm because
I relied as much as possible on the participants’ unique views of their leadership
development situation (Creswell, 2007; Hatch 2002). In a constructivist worldview I can
acknowledge as the researcher my own background and how it shapes my interpretation
in the study, and as the study progressed I continued to develop my own knowledge and
self-awareness as Moustakas suggests researchers do as they begin to more fully
understand the phenomenon (1994). My own work as a leader in an academic research
library drives my interest in the experiences of my study participants. The focus of this

	  

29	  
	  

study was on the participants’ views, voices and their multiple realities, and so a social
constructivist worldview is appropriate.
Participants
Careful attention to selecting participants for this study was important. Creswell
(1994), states “the idea of qualitative research is to purposefully select informants . . . that
will best answer the research question” (p. 148). In my study I used criterion sampling. It
was not necessary to narrow the sample through maximum variation sampling as the
number of respondents was not too large. For this study, fourteen fit within the range of
appropriate participant numbers for a phenomenological study.
This study engaged willing participants from the member libraries of the
Association of Research Libraries (ARL), who are working in leadership positions
reporting to the head of the library, for example: assistant deans, associate deans,
assistant directors, and associate directors, at the time of this study, and who have
participated at some point in their career in leadership development.
Sampling method
With criterion sampling all subjects meet some criterion, which in my study was
their leadership position in an academic research library, their participation in leadership
development, and their self-identification as having had positive leadership development
experiences. Participants were identified by their positions through ARL library
organization charts and solicited for participation through email. A copy of the email
script is located in Appendix B. The email included a description of this study and
	  

30	  
	  

requested that those willing to participate complete a confidential questionnaire. The
questionnaire included demographic questions (e.g.: gender, race/ethnicity, age) and
academic/research library leadership experience (e.g.: years in current position, etc.) and
about leadership development experiences (e.g.: institutes, fellowships, and other
programs in which they might have participated and the year(s) of participation).
Interview participants were selected based on four criteria: first, they confirmed
they were working in the position of assistant or associate dean or director at an academic
research library. Second, in order to be included in this study participants must have
participated in at least one selective formal leadership development program, institute, or
fellowship targeted to academic librarians. Third, participants identified as having had
positive leadership development experiences. Fourth, participants demonstrated
willingness to participate in this study through responding to the email solicitation
(Richards and Morse, 2007; Bodgan & Biklen 2003; Gravetter & Wallnau (2009).
It was not necessary to narrow the sample by maximum variation sampling due to
too large a number of respondents. Variation was present in geographic location, gender,
private and public universities, and years in position. With just one African American
respondent it was not possible to achieve variation in ethnic/racial diversity.
Research Questions
Creswell (2007) wrote that lived experiences are the direct experiences and
perspectives the participants have with the central phenomenon. Moustakas (1994)
declared two primary questions in phenomenological research, about experiences and the
	  

31	  
	  

context for the experiences. The central question for this study was: How do library
leaders in North American research libraries describe their leadership development
experiences? What did they experience, with regard to leadership development, and in
what context, or how, did they experience leadership development?
Data Collection
I obtained approval through the University of Nebraska-Lincoln’s Institutional
Review Board to conduct this study. I contacted participants via email to solicit their
participation. A copy of the informed consent form is located in Appendix A. A copy of
the email invitation is located in Appendix B.
In qualitative design, a researcher uses certain techniques to collect data
(Creswell, 2007). For this study, I collected data through pre-interview surveys,
interviews, and observations.
Pre-interview surveys. Each participant completed a pre-interview survey. A
copy of the pre-interview survey is located in Appendix C. I anticipated that the preinterview survey would provide me with additional information about the participant,
such as time in current position, years in field, number of administrative positions held,
and participation in formal leadership development programs to ensure that I described
my sample accurately and that I was getting ‘maximum variation’ in my sample
(Creswell, 2007). As noted previously, maximum variation was achieved except in
racial/ethnic diversity.

	  

32	  
	  

Interviews. As the primary source for data collection in phenomenology, the
interviews provided the most data for the study (Creswell, 2007). Semi-structured
interviews were conducted for this study. An interview protocol was developed and is
located in Appendix D, and, consistent with semi-structured interview techniques, was
used to guide but not restrict the interviews. The questions and the protocol were
informed by both the tradition of phenomenology and lessons learned from a case study
conducted as part of a qualitative research design course. I conducted the interview by
phone. Interviews were anticipated to last approximately 60-75 minutes, although none
lasted more than 60 minutes, and were audio-recorded with participants’ permission.
Prior to the interview participants were asked to complete a brief pre-interview
questionnaire.
Observations. In phenomenological research, the researchers’ own reflections
are a part of the research process (Polkinghorne, 1989). Prior to the interviews I had not
noted my own reactions as part of the research process for this study. Once IRB was
approved I began to collect my reflections on the process of the interviews and the
participants to document my experiences as a researcher with the participants.
Data Analysis
Phenomenology, in contrast to other qualitative traditions, has a fairly structured
method of analysis, as advanced by Moustakas, (1994). Creswell described a simplified
version of the Moustakas’ Steick-Colaizzi-Keen modification (2007). In this approach,
the researcher:

	  

33	  
	  

1. describes his or her own personal experiences with the phenomenon ,
2. develops a list of significant statements,
3. groups the significant statements into larger units of information
(“meaning units” or themes),
4. writes descriptions of what participants experienced with the phenomenon
(textural description) and includes verbatim examples,
5. writes description of how the experiences happened (structural
description),
6. and writes a composite description of the phenomenon including both
textural and structural descriptions (the essence of the experience – the
what and how).
I followed this modified method, as described above and by Creswell (2007). I organized
and prepared the data for transcription. The audio recordings and transcripts were stored
on my personal laptop with a back-up on my home workstation, both password protected.
I analyzed transcripts by hand and coded manually.
For the second step I developed a list of significant statements, treating each as
having equal worth, and then in the third step grouped the statements into larger themes
or ‘meaning units’. I used “in vivo” codes, using participants’ actual words, when
possible.
In the third step, interview transcripts were each initially analyzed individually,
then sorted into one file and analyzed again, for the purpose of surfacing any additional
themes or ‘meaning units’.
	  

34	  
	  

For the fourth step I wrote a description of what the participants experienced with
the phenomenon, the textural descriptions, and included verbatim examples. In the fifth
step I wrote the description of how the experienced happened, or the structural
descriptions. And finally, I wrote the composite description, which became the ‘essence’
of the experience. A discussion of the findings is found in Chapter Five.
Validation Strategies
Creswell (2013) recommends engaging in at least two validation procedures when
conducting qualitative research. This study will use several validation procedures,
including triangulation of interviews, pre-survey, and observations; member checking;
thick and rich descriptions; and peer review for validation.
Triangulation. Denzin (1978) noted four types of triangulation, data
triangulation, investigator triangulation, theory triangulation, and methodological
triangulation. I used methodological triangulation, gathering data by more than one
method, although primarily through interviews; my observations and pre-interview
surveys were used for cross checking to increase credibility and validity. In the interview
transcripts I looked for common statements among participants.
Member checking. Member checks were done post-interview and analysis for
verification and to establish credibility. Follow-up questions, asked for clarification
purposes, were used in the member checks to confirm intent of information in transcripts
from study participants (Neuman, 2006).
	  

35	  
	  

Thick, Rich Description. I used participants’ own words as much as possible in
my findings section, to include as much detail, context, emotion as possible to enable the
reader to more fully understand the experiences of the participants with the phenomenon
(Denzin, 1989; Creswell, 2007).
Peer Review. I worked with a colleague at Purdue University to review my
research. I had discussed my study with him throughout the past year, during discussions
of his own qualitative research. After he agreed to serve as peer reviewer we met
formally to familiarize him with the purpose of the study and the overall research
question. He then reviewed two of the transcripts which I had coded for themes. To
maintain confidentiality, I removed all identifying names of individuals and institutions
from the transcripts prior to his review. We then met twice, first to discuss my process
and coding procedures and then again to discuss the themes that emerged. A copy of the
peer review form is located in Appendix E (Matkin, 2014, personal communication).
By conducting these four procedures for validation, I ensured my study was well
grounded and well supported, terms Creswell uses when describing Polkinghorne’s
notion of validation (Creswell, 2007; Polkinghorne, 1989).
Ethical Considerations
All participants were treated in accordance with the University of Nebraska
Institutional Review Board (IRB). Although no known risks were associated with this
study, there are several considerations. Confidentiality throughout the process and
	  

36	  
	  

anonymity, through pseudonyms, was used to protect participants’ identifies. All
participants were assured of anonymity in the initial contact invitation to participate;
reminded during the follow up contact to schedule the interview that the interview would
be audio-taped, transcribed verbatim, and that their anonymity would be assured; and
reminded again at the beginning and conclusion of the interview. To ensure the
anonymity of participants, identifying characteristics such as their names, names of
universities where they currently work or have worked in the past, and other proper
names they mentioned during the interviews were removed or changed in situations
where removal would hinder presentation of the results, as suggested by Richards and
Morse (2007).

Role of Researcher
Husserl uses epoche, a Greek word meaning “to refrain from judgment, to abstain
from or stay away from the everyday, ordinary way of perceiving things”, to explain how
in phenomenological research a researcher must put aside his or her own understanding,
to become free from suppositions (Moustakas, 1994, p 85). As Creswell (2007) notes,
the ability of a researcher to bracket one’s own lived experiences and biases is key when
conducting phenomenological research.
My role in this research study is based on my personal experience as a leader in
academic libraries. I have been in leadership positions in university libraries for almost
two decades. During my career I have participated in several leadership development

	  

37	  
	  

programs for academic librarians, including the Snowbird Leadership program, the
ACRL Harvard program, the UCLA Senior Fellows program, and the ARL Leadership
Fellows program. With each new experience I continue to grow and develop as a leader.
My beliefs about leadership and my methods and strategies for leading have changed
over the years. I am interested in leadership development for academic librarians and the
developmental paths taken by librarians into leadership roles.
As I began my study I was conscious of my experiences as a library leader, and
aware of my potential bias and the need to bracket my own perspectives (Moustakas,
1994). I engaged in bracketing or suspense of my beliefs about the leadership
development experience for academic librarians, as much as possible during the
interviews and data analysis (Moustakas, 1994; Creswell, 2007).
Pilot Study
Previously I conducted a case study research project as part of the requirements of
a qualitative research methods course for my doctoral program. The central research
question for that study was: how do academic librarians describe participation in the
UCLA Senior Fellows leadership development program. Semi-structured interviews,
lasting 45-60 minutes, were conducted with five participants. Three main themes
emerged from the coding of the transcripts: uniqueness of the program,
personal/professional development, and supportive relationships. A strong sub-theme
emerged in the uniqueness of the program theme, regarding concern for the future of the
program. In both themes of uniqueness of the program and personal/professional
	  

38	  
	  

development coding surfaced two similar and related areas: content/curriculum and
experts/visiting faculty.
While this case study focused specifically on the five participants’ experiences in
one leadership development program, the UCLA Senior Fellows program, all participants
elected voluntarily to reveal information about other leadership development programs
and other developmental experiences they had experienced during their careers as part of
their responses, leading me to consider the broader question of leadership development
experiences of academic library leaders (McNeil, 2010).

	  

39	  
	  

CHAPTER FOUR
FINDINGS
If opportunity doesn’t knock, build a door. –Milton Berle

This study focused on 14 participants, all of whom shared positive leadership
development experiences they had experienced during their careers as academic research
library leaders and were, at the time of their interview, employed and actively working in
leadership positions reporting directly to the head of their academic research library.
Participants came from a variety of backgrounds and experiences, some having spent
their entire professional life in academic libraries while others were experiencing second
careers in academic research libraries. At the time of this study participants ranged in age
from 41 to 59, had between 15 to 34 years in the field of librarianship and self-identified
as having been in academic library leadership positions for seven to 30 years. In these
roles they led units or departments in academic research libraries and had been in their
current positions for between one to 19 years.
All 14 participants mentioned formal leadership development programs, institutes,
and fellowships as important to their overall leadership development. Twelve had
participated in Association of Research Libraries (ARL) leadership programs, with 11 of
those as ARL Leadership Fellows and one in the ARL Leadership and Career
Development Program (LCDP). Five had participated in the University of California Los
Angeles (UCLA) Senior Fellows Program. Three had participated in both an ARL
leadership program and the UCLA Senior Fellows Program. Participants noted having
	  

40	  
	  

participated in at least six other formal leadership development programs, institutes, or
fellowships. Through these participants and their rich descriptions of their experiences as
leaders I was able to discover a more complete meaning of the phenomenon of leadership
development for academic research library leaders.

Table 3
Participant demographics
Pseudonym
Adam
Bella
Caitrin
Damon
Evan
Fiona
Gina
Hannah
Ivan
Jack
Karl
Laura
Mary
Nora

Gender
Male
Female
Female
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female
Male
Male
Male
Female
Female
Female

Institution
Private, East coast
Public, West coast
Public, South
Private, East coast
Public, Southwest
Public, West coast
Public, Midwest
Public, Midwest
Public, South
Public, East coast
Public, South
Public, Midwest
Public, Midwest
Public, West coast

Years in field
23
29
34
26
20
23
17
21
24
32
15
22
25
27

Years as
leader
13
22
30
21
17
22
8
7
20
20
14
12
18
17

All participants were frank, candid, and animated during their interviews. In some
cases participants became emotional while describing very personal experiences they had
had. All participants had many leadership development experiences to share. The
purpose of the study was to explore positive leadership development experiences and
participants were invited to participate based on their willingness to identify as having

	  

41	  
	  

positive leadership development experiences. Unsolicited, they also provided some
indication in their stories about less-than-positive experiences they had had, most usually
with a supervisor, at some point in their careers. Without exception, these less-thanpositive experiences were described as learning experiences.
Five themes emerged from the data to describe the phenomenon of leadership
development experiences: Personal Growth Experiences, Support and Influence,
Exposure, Personal Responsibility, and Recognition of Leadership. Subthemes emerged
for four of the themes. Table 4 shows the five themes related to leadership development
experiences and their subthemes.
Table 4
Leadership Development Experiences Themes and Related Subthemes
Theme
Personal Growth Experiences
Support and Influence
Exposure
Personal Responsibility
Recognition

Related Subtheme
Childhood and Early Experiences
On-the-Job Experiences
Mentors
Formal Leadership Development Programs
Mentoring

The five themes, and related subthemes, include some overlap, or connections and
intersections, which are presented throughout the findings in this chapter and discussed
further in chapter 5.
Personal Growth Experiences
When I asked participants to tell me the story of the first time they thought of
themselves as a leader immediate responses were mixed. Some participants gasped or
	  

42	  
	  

laughed and shared they were not anticipating that question and needed a few seconds to
collect their thoughts, and then described childhood experiences; times when they were
recognized by an authority figure, for example a teacher or from a professional
association, for their leadership; and early job experience, in college or in
paraprofessional or staff positions in libraries while they were in graduate school. These
participants assumed I also wanted an example from their careers and went on to provide
those stories, as well.
Childhood and early experiences. The construct childhood and early
experiences emerged as a subtheme of personal growth experiences. Childhood
leadership experiences included involvement with girl scouting, being selected for the
school safety patrol, playing point guard on an elementary school basketball team, being
the oldest sibling in a large family, recognition on a 4th grade report card for leadership,
and as a young adult leading a moving crew for a start-up moving company as a summer
job during college. As a Girl Scout, which she described as a ‘defining element’ of her
childhood, Fiona discovered she liked working with groups, coming to consensus on
which things to work on, letting everyone have say, and then moving people toward a
common goal. Later, in high school, she used the same skills to form a community
theater group. She said, “I’m not sure I thought of it necessarily as being a leader as
much as I was willing to take on these kinds of projects and work with other people.
That has definitely been true for a long time.” Gina described being selected for the 5th
grade patrol as her first experience as a leader. She said, “I thought it was great [to be

	  

43	  
	  

selected] because even then I knew everybody didn’t do it. Only a certain select people
got to take that responsibility.” She had been encouraged to apply for the patrol position
and after it began she realized quickly that she did not like doing it, but she continued in
the role. Ivan told me he played a lot of sports as child and his earliest memory of being
a leader was probably his 3rd grade basketball team. He said,
I was the point guard on my team, sort of running the team, and I would say I was
probably a sort of a mediocre leader in terms of, I mean, I was good, but when I
was that age I could be harder on people who weren’t as good, so I sort of have
memories of that.
Mary reported reading comments from her teacher on a grade school report card,
and said, “I was in 4th grade, I think, and a teacher wrote on my report card a comment to
my parents, mentioning my leadership potential or skills or aptitude or something like
that.” She shared that it had surprised her, and made such an impact that she had
remembered it. Hannah mentioned that she was the oldest child in her family and often
expected to be a leader and set a good example for the other children, and while she
resisted this role at home with her family, she, like Fiona, was a Girl Scout and liked
organizing a community around an activity to achieve a goal. Hannah also shared
examples of other times in high school and her youth group, and said:
I could see opportunities to get a group to make a decision around the topic and I
liked doing that. I think that teachers and parents and church leaders and staff
who recognized that in me and kind of encouraged it. They never said, “oh,
you’re going to be a leader,” but they did say things like “you see what you did
there, that was an important thing to do” or “you see what you did there, that’s a
sign of success” and so they encouraged me to develop in that way.

	  

44	  
	  

Participants also mentioned times early in their careers when they realized they
were in leadership roles, even though they were in entry-level or early positions. Adam
explained that in his first position he was working with a new area in the library, and that
was the first time he felt like a leader, although he did not recognize it at the time. Bella
described her many early temporary professional positions, all managing people and
projects, as the first time she thought of herself as a leader. Damon, Jack, Evan, Karl,
Laura, and Nora all described times in their professional careers in libraries, when they
were leading groups of people or handling challenging personnel situations, as the first
time they thought of themselves as a leader. Caitrin defined the first time she felt like she
was a leader in the context of how her current director runs the library. The director’s
style and approach, along with the collegial atmosphere among Caitrin’s colleagues,
creates an environment in which Caitrin knows she is and can be a leader.
On-the-job development. The construct, practical on-the-job experiences emerged as a
subtheme of personal growth experiences. Participants were universal in agreement that
on-the-job experiences were instrumental in their own growth as leaders. During my
phone calls with these library leaders I heard many details about their careers in libraries,
from earliest positions to their current roles. Hannah stated,
So, for me, I feel like leadership development for me is very much trial and error,
in the moment, experiment with it, learn from it, once you’ve done something you
know, take a moment to reflect and then keep moving on and trying things out.
She went on to share that she did not think her development path was the correct way,
and said, “when I think of how our leaders should develop, I would never think that that’s
	  

45	  
	  

[her way] a very successful way of doing it. I would say you’ve got to read stuff and
you’ve got to take an MBA, you’ve got to have mentors.” She laughed then, and said, “I
guess my way is working ok.”
Nora told me the story of a time when she mandated a change in scheduling for a
service desk, without discussing it with any of the stakeholders beforehand, and the
ensuing anger and frustration of her employees. What had seemed like a simple solution
to an obvious problem backfired, and ultimately she realized that she was “trying to fix
this problem without actually stating what the problem was,” and when the affected
individuals proposed an alternative solution she agreed. She said,
In that moment being able to adjust my own thinking and listen carefully to what
was being said to me, made me feel like a true leader, like its ok if I’m wrong
from time to time. It’s so important to be flexible, to see someone else’s point of
view, and to give the idea of the group a try before deciding my idea is absolutely
right.
For Karl, on-the-job experiences were also important to his development. When
describing an early career experience he tackled because coworkers did not want to do it,
he said,
They were all older and primarily focused on instruction and reference, they
didn’t really want to do any of the planning or leadership, that was kind of the
dark side of things, they just didn’t wanted to go there and so they asked me if I
would do the planning for it and coordinate the movers and all that stuff, and they
thought that it would be a good experience for me so I jumped in and did it and it
turned out pretty well.
Participants shared that often organizational structure changes in their libraries
resulted in changes to their positions, where they took on additional responsibilities as a

	  

46	  
	  

result of colleagues leaving the library, ultimately gaining them more on-the-job
experiences. Laura stated about her position, “It’s grown, evolved, changed, morphed.
There’s no department at my library that I haven’t been the administrator for, you know.”
For Laura, additional responsibilities contributed to her growth and development as a
library leader. The same was true for Fiona, who shared that becoming an associate dean,
her current role, was a very big change from her previous position. Over the past several
years Fiona has had shifting duties and areas of responsibility due to vacancies in the
libraries at her large university, moving from five associate deans to just two in a short
period of time. She stated that there were a lot of initiatives underway at the time and
that leadership of the initiatives needed to be divided up. She enjoyed this time period,
even though she was very busy, because “it was a lot easier to get things done and no
need to negotiate,” but it did mean that she had more areas to cover. She described the
whole experience as “diving into the deep end” and admitted to learning much about
herself and her own style during that time.
Participants mentioned needing to gain on-the job skills quickly as their roles
evolved. Adam described a time of much change, when “there were plates on sticks that
were spinning and you had to keep them from falling down,” and that he had to be “really
conscious of, mindful of, the fact that [he] needed to polish some skills quick,” due to the
evolving nature of his job.

	  

47	  
	  

For Nora, experience as a supervisor in a variety of positions and her personal
development or growth in those roles has been a big part of her development as a leader.
She described it this way:
To be able to face people's upsets and unhappiness, their disagreement with me
and not take that personally has been such an important aspect of my ability to
really lead well. There were other things that were especially important to me but
honestly, partly because it was such a failing of mine, like I just did not know how
to be in an effective conflict with another person. Because I was so terrified of it,
and I was so bad at it.
She described a similar developmental experience from her time in nursing school, when
she was learning to give someone an injection and was reluctant to do it because she
knew it was going to hurt. She said, “Learning how to do that quickly and effectively
made my nursing career much happier. It was a similar thing.” Other participants also
touched on learning to face difficult situations head-on and learn to do them well as
important developmental experiences in their careers. Similarly, Laura recommended
delivering bad news to employees quickly and not on Fridays.
Participants also mentioned learning from their colleagues in their current
position, other associate deans or associate directors. Bella, who has worked at the same
library, in a variety of roles, for several years mentioned that she continues to learn as
people come in and out of the organization, stressing that she has learned that people are
different and said, “so, I'm seeing different perspective, different styles, and continue to
learn.” In addition to learning from colleagues through observation, participants also
mentioned having close working relationships with colleagues and that they relied on
colleagues for advice, as well as to share the administrative or leadership load.
	  

48	  
	  

One participant described an impactful time in his career, when he had a
challenging supervisor with whom he had a less-than-ideal relationship, as a great
learning opportunity. He said, ‘in way that led to true independence where you were on
your own and nobody is really watching and yet we had to make the place work.” Caitrin
described a time when she was offered a position she did not expect to get because she
did not feel she had the experience for it. She said,
I got that job. That job, right away, put me in a role of being a supervisor of a
couple of permanent staff, as well as students, and including a couple of problem
employee situations. So right away, I kind of was dealing with managing people.
Caitrin said her experiences in that role shaped her development as a supervisor and
leader for many years. Table 5 shows the participant theme personal growth and selected
significant statements related to the theme.
Table 5
Theme: Personal Growth
Theme

Significant statements related to the theme

Personal Growth

“I’m not sure I thought of it necessarily as being a leader as much as I was
willing to take on these kinds of projects and work with other people. That has
definitely been true for a long time.”
“I thought it was great [to be selected] because even then I knew everybody
didn’t do it. Only a certain select people got to take that responsibility.”
“I could see opportunities to get a group to make a decision around the topic and
I liked doing that. I think that teachers and parents and church leaders and staff
who recognized that in me and kind of encouraged it.”
“So, I'm seeing different perspective, different styles, and continue to learn.”
“I got that job. That job, right away, put me in a role of being a supervisor.”

	  

49	  
	  

The theme personal growth, with the subthemes of childhood and early experiences and
on-the-job influences, has some overlap with theme support and influence, when personal
growth experiences are initiated or driven by supportive individuals in the lives of the
study participants.
Support and Influence
All participants mentioned individuals who had been instrumental in their
leadership development and who had influenced them during their career. Mentioned
often were current and past supervisors, as well as colleagues working in similar roles, as
noted in the previous section with on-the-job development. In some cases participants
had remained in contact with influential individuals over many years of their careers.
Damon stated,
I have been lucky that at the right moments in life where I say, you know, I just
need to jump to the next level, somebody has been there to catch me and help me
to go through that that transition.
Similarly, Laura said, “I think one of the things that I’ve been very, very fortunate
in is from the time before I became a librarian, I had people who were watching my
career.” Participants noted that these individuals often encouraged them in their
professional growth and leadership development, served as sounding boards, and also
provided praise and recognition for major successes.
Hannah told a story of a former colleague and supervisor, who now heads a major
research library, and said,

	  

50	  
	  

What he did for me was to help me be able to put in context sort of, if you want to
make a difference here is how you could make it. He let me do a lot of trial and
error.
Adam also described a mentor who was “very encouraging of me trying things,”
and who “made it very easy to build things and try things.” Participants acknowledged
that these influential individuals were busy people and participants were appreciative
when these individuals find time to talk with them. Adam stated, “This is somebody I am
quite comfortable talking with about things in confidence and who, even though this
person is very busy, finds time when I need to catch up with him.”
Participants noted how working with strong leaders early in their careers
influenced their decisions to remain in the field and on their career paths. Adam said,
I certainly wouldn’t have carried on in the profession, I suspect, if my first mentor
hadn’t been so terrific, he gave me space and one of the things that I learned from
him was that you can often get very good results from somebody who is
enthusiastic and relatively smart, if you give them some direction and give them
space.
Gina noted that she learned early in her career that it is important to have
someone you can trust to give you good information. She talked about her relationship
with an early supervisor who has since retired who she described as “the number one
most influential person career-wise”. Gina said, “I was a big fan of hers and she was
very helpful and gave me so much advice. She was very patient.” Although this
individual has retired, Gina would reach out to her if she really needed some information.
Gina said, “If I really had to, I’d hate to bother her, but if I needed some information I
would call her, like, right now.” Gina went on to say that she feels she could also reach
	  

51	  
	  

out to her most recent former supervisor, now a retired dean of libraries, even though
they were not personally close, “to get her advice on certain things and I would get
honest information to help me make decisions.”
Some participants mentioned former supervisors and colleagues reaching out to
them after their formal work relationships had ended to ask them to consider coming back
to work with them. Jack related the story of an early supervisor he had when he was
working as a library staff person who reached out to him years later and from a distance
to encourage him to apply for a position in which she thought he might be interested. He
said,
She actually helped me get started in the library world and gave me opportunity to
do things because she saw that I was interested in things outside the scope of my
LTA [library technical assistant] level position and she gave me the permission to
do those things and, you know, I talked to her about career progression and things
like that. And then she was the one who hired me later on. So I kind of
maintained that relationship and she was very much a mentor, would give me
guidance on which way to go and what she felt that it was important and all of
that. So she was very influential. She saw that I was interested in those things
and really tried to nurture me through out.
Jack’s experience is not dissimilar from experiences mentioned by other
participants, including Evan, who described what he had learned from a colleague with
whom he had worked long ago. He said,
She was very helpful in giving feedback and something I learned from her that I
still remember is one of my own personal development issues that I had to work
on is I have a tendency to assume everyone knows the same stuff I know. That
we’re all starting at the same baseline here. She was very helpful in helping me
understand that certainly in those leadership roles, people did not have the same
	  

52	  
	  

baseline in understanding and access to information that I had. That’s been
something that I’ve continued to remember and try to be sensitive to.
Some participants mentioned having ‘strong female’ influences throughout their
library careers. Data from the Association of Research Libraries 2014-15 salary survey
indicate that 59% of the associate and assistant deans and directors working in ARL
libraries are female. Laura, after describing her current dean as “very caring and sharing
colleague who has given tremendous advice,” continued to list several names all of whom
were women who had been influential, and after a slight pause reflected, “It’s interesting
that most of the wonderful deans I have had have been female.” After describing one
particularly supportive female mentor Jack went on to say,
And that was kind of a pattern. Typically these strong female administrators have
taken a shine to me and have recognized something in me, usually tried to help
me along and tried to mentor me. I usually work with more females in general
than males but it’s usually been some strong female administrator that has helped
me to figure out which way to go, to talk about things that are important.
Laura described similar experiences, where supervisors from her past have
reached out to her to encourage her to apply for new positions. In her case, however,
these individuals were encouraging her to apply for the positions they were about to
vacate. A supervisor from early in her career said to her, “I’m changing career focus.
I’m going to [a new role in same institution]. Why don’t you apply [for my position]?”
Laura applied, was offered and accepted the position. A similar circumstance led Laura
to her current role as associate dean. The incumbent, whom she had worked for
previously called her and said, “I’m going off to be the dean [at state university]. I think
you should consider applying for my job.” Laura said, “And so I did. And here I am.”
	  

53	  
	  

Similarly, Nora had been encouraged to apply for her current position by a member of her
leadership development program cohort, who was in a leadership position at the same
institution. She said,
[He] gave me a call and said, “Hey, you should really consider this, we’d really
love to have you, please think about applying.” And so I did, I applied probably
because I really like [colleague]. He’s really great to work with and I thought it
will be just, honestly, be fun to work with him. I never thought [location city]
would be the place that I would ever end up.
Looking back on her career Bella noted that she has worked for some people that
were great mentors, who offered encouragement and support, by saying things like “here
are some programs you should attend” and “here’s a great opportunity for your next
career step.” Bella stated that while she has always looked for the opportunities that will
help her to continue to grow and develop as a leader, her mentors were really the focus
that put her on the path to leadership. Of these former supervisors who are now her
mentors she said:
They have very different perspectives and are different kinds of people. [First
one] is the university librarian at [a major research library]. She was my first
supervisor in a management position, and it was her style that was really attracted
me to how she led the department at the time. She never came out and said do it
this way, or don't do this, or do that. It was really mentoring by role modeling,
and she was just incredible at it. You wanted to grow up, and be her, basically.
She is still a great mentor to me, when I apply for jobs, or when I'm looking at
what should I do next, she is someone I go to always on, can I just talk to you
about this and what do you think. She is very analytical, but also very human in
her approach. It's not all about reaching the end. It's about the balance. So she
has been amazing in that, the whole person approach.
And [second one] my other mentor was another AUL, who was actually the
deputy university librarian here at [same research library where Bella works].
	  

54	  
	  

She has since retired and I have lunch with her once a month, still. Fortunately,
she is still in the area. She was a more kind of nut and bolts: here is how you deal
with it. What she taught me most was really the politics of the campus, and who
you needed to know, what kind of meeting you should go to, how you represent
the library, how to deal with people. Unlike [first mentor], she is more matter of
fact, and so it's like when you go to her with a personnel issue, she should say,
“Well, here is what you tell them, here is how you deal with them.” I didn't
always follow her advice but she really provided a sounding board and I could say
now I see where I want to go.
Bella remains in touch with both of these individuals, even though the second has retired.
Both were originally supervisors of Bella and have remained connected and supportive
since moving on, providing an example of the intersection between support and influence
and on-the-job personal growth experiences. Bella noted she appreciates that they had
both worked with her earlier and know her, and that they bring different perspectives and
approaches. She then mentioned a third mentor, someone from another similar institution
with a similar career path, with whom she has been friends for 20+ year. They have
never had a reporting relationship. Bella described this third mentor as,
Another one who has been very critical to helping me to determine where to go
next, how to do my job. What issues I should be looking at. But more on a larger
system wide level than individually in my own institution.
Bella continues to meet with this mentor at annual conferences to talk about what is
happening at work and in life.
Participants praised their current leaders (deans or directors) for their support and
influence. Caitrin said, “I’m just going to give a lot of credit to my director. She is very
invested in her associate directors having as much exposure to leadership and as many
opportunities as she can provide.” Hannah noted the thoughtful approach her director
	  

55	  
	  

takes when Hannah asks questions about next career steps and what they might look like
and what she ought to consider. She said, “Being able to understand the broader
university dynamics is something that I’m really learning from her.” Evan described his
current dean as a “major influence” in his leadership development, and stated,
I think that the opportunities that she’s given me and the mentoring and the
encouragement to develop and to take on new challenges was absolutely
instrumental in keeping me here. If she had not assumed those roles and done
some of those things, I think I’d probably [significant pause] when I came here I
wasn’t planning on being here more than three or four years.
While all participants noted influential individuals to their library careers, other
influences mentioned included colleagues, parents and grandparents, and individuals
outside the library profession. Gina stated that she thought she had, in many ways, more
influences outside of the work place. She said:
So, as a coach I learned a lot that I bring to work every day because in coaching a
lot of what you do is motivating people and inspiring people. That’s what
coaching is and then try to get the best out of your team. So my training as a
basketball coach working with everyone from 6-year olds to 17-year olds has
been really beneficial to me because I’ve had some very good mentors. One
woman, in particular, taught me how to coach, taught me how to manage as a
game, how to manage people, how to think on your toes, how to prepare for
games. That was really critical to helping me be a better leader because when
you’re out there and your team is not doing well and you call a time-out, you
better have something to say. I remember the first time I called the time out and I
was just, “I don’t even know what I’m, what do I say to this group?”
For Gina, what she learned from a strong influence during her coaching days continues to
resonate today in her professional life. In coaching and in library leadership, “you have

	  

56	  
	  

to be able to explain. You have to give them reasons to not do what they’re doing. That’s
what leadership is.”
Mentors. The construct of mentors emerged as a subtheme of support and
influence. The term mentor proved to be a complicated word for some of the
participants. When prompting for information about individuals who had been influences
in their careers, I asked the questions, “who was influential to your leadership
development? What situations or people stand out for you?” I did not use the word
mentor. Some participants immediately used mentor and mentoring as terms in their
descriptions of relationships with particular influential individuals. The terms mentor,
influencer, supervisor, leader seemed to be used seamlessly and interchangeably by some
of the participants. Three participants, who had many examples of people who had been
incredibly supportive and influential for them, stated that they did not have mentors, at
least not in the formal sense. Ivan described himself as “not a huge process person” and
explained that he did not know a lot about formal mentoring, but from what he
understood about formal mentoring sort of relationships, there is an agreed upon set of
ground rules and sometimes even contracts, rights and responsibilities, and documents to
be signed. He described this as, “more mechanical than anything” and suggested he
prefers when “a relationship kind of develops and evolves and there is a chemistry there.”
He had already described relationships he has currently with three individuals he
considers to be influential and when I followed up to ask about them, he replied:

	  

57	  
	  

I guess I would describe all three of them as mentors, but not in any sort of text
book sense of the word, right, there has never been a formal agreement, we don’t
have regular phone calls or any of that kind of stuff, but they all three have had
huge influences on my career and with all three of them I can and will call or
consult and talk with them. So, I guess I can call them mentors. Yeah, I will.
They’re my mentors.
Hannah agreed that individuals had been influential for her development, but said,
“I don’t think I have any really enduring, what you would call, ‘mentor relationships,’ but
I certainly have been…well, [pause] mentored, I guess. No, I’m not sure that I really can
even say that.” She went on to explain.
So this is a sort of a personal thing but I think I’m [pause] unmentorable. I think
people [pause] there have been many people who would be potential mentors in
my life and I don’t reach out to them the way I should and I don’t [pause] when
they reach out to me I don’t usually react and grab that opportunity. I look back
later and I think, oh gosh, I should have taken that extra time; I should have taken
that extra moment. So when people ask me, “who are your mentors?, I’m like, “I
don’t think I have any mentors.” But when you asked it the way you asked it,
clearly I have people who have played key roles in my leadership development. I
think of the people I mentioned already, [early supervisor] stands out most as
mentor. Mostly because he was willing to get into it with me and sort of, the dirty
work of working with a young whippersnapper, you know he worked with me
when I was difficult, he worked with me when I was growing, he worked with me
when I was grown, that sort of thing.
She continued,
I think some of those Association of Research Libraries trainers, like DeEtta
Jones and maybe a little bit earlier on Maureen Sullivan, were influential for me.
They know who I am, I know who they are, but I don’t call them up on the phone
for advice, things like that.
Fiona stated that she could not think of an example of somebody that she thought of as an
on-going mentor, although during our conversation she had mentioned individuals that
had been influential at various points in his career. While she was working as a graduate

	  

58	  
	  

student her supervisor provided a “really fabulous first introduction to the profession,”
and “was one of those really balanced people.” Later in her career, Fiona worked for a
supervisor with a “management style that was hands off” but “he made sure he knew
what was going on and he made really inspirational comments.” She appreciated that his
inclusive style and his sense of humor, and later published with him when she was
“relatively new to the library and that was a great way of, you know, modeling.”
While most of the experiences with influential individuals mentioned had been
positive, participants did offer some negative examples. Laura described an academic
research library leader who by most accounts she considered as “an example of a really
great university librarian who sometimes did clueless things, too.” She said, “He had
great ideas but just went about them in the wrong way. Like abolishing the [major unit]
department. Three minutes after telling the head of [the major unit].” Nora, after
speaking at length and in glowing terms about the supportive actions of her current dean,
went on to describe some of her earlier supervisors.
Those were tough people to work for. There is this wonderful Khalil Gibran
quote, it goes something like this: “I have learned silence from the talkative,
toleration from the intolerant, and kindness from the unkind; yet, I am ungrateful
to those teachers". I think those three women, in their mentoring of me, taught
me a lot about leadership in an opposite sort of way.
Damon described a supervisor early in his career as “the opposite of a mentor.”
Damon and others in the unit did not like how she supervised the department and felt that
she did not value her employees. He said, “It was kind of a struggle to get her into the
office at all and a struggle to get her to listen to issues.” Damon noted, though, that the
	  

59	  
	  

experience “led to true independence where you were on your own and nobody is really
watching and yet we had to make the place work.” For Damon, working for this leader
was an impactful learning experience.
All participants valued having individuals who are or have been influential to
their development during their careers and acknowledged that some of the relationships
are long-term and on-going and some are more situational, sometimes related to the place
one is in his or her career. Jack noted,
It’s kind of an adjustment, I think, when you make the jump from being a middle
manager within the same organization to executive leadership team. There’s a
transition there and in the beginning, I think it’s a little hard to figure out who,
know how, who do you talk to about things now because you’re now on the other
side.
Table 6
Theme: Support and Influence
Theme

Significant statements related to the theme

Support/Influence

“I have been lucky that at the right moments in life where I say, you know, I just
need to jump to the next level, somebody has been there to catch me and help me
to go through that that transition.”
“I think one of the things that I’ve been very, very fortunate in is from the time
before I became a librarian, I had people who were watching my career.”
“…clearly I have people who have played key roles in my leadership
development.”
“…What he did for me was to help me be able to put in context sort of, if you
want to make a difference here is how you could make it. He let me do a lot of
trial and error.”
“You know, especially, my current boss [dean at a major research university
library]. Holy cow, is she fabulous!
“…it didn’t really matter if I screwed up. He always encouraged me.”

	  

60	  
	  

Table 6 shows the participant theme support and influences and selected
significant statements related to the theme.
Supportive individuals surface as important in the next theme exposure, where
participants described being exposed to influential individuals through opportunities
provided to them by their current leader or supervisor and through participation in formal
leadership development programming, often due to the encouragement and support of
their supervisor and institution. A related subtheme, mentoring, comes up in the
personal responsibility theme, discussed later in this chapter.
Exposure
Participants mentioned exposure as pivotal to their leadership development
experiences. Exposure to new experiences within the libraries where they worked,
exposure to library leaders and campus leaders, and exposure to leaders in the field of
academic research libraries were all mentioned.
Taking on interim roles due to vacancies was noted as increasing exposure.
Caitrin described serving for six or eight months as interim when her library had a
vacancy, and said, “That was a good piece of exposure to another side of the organization
and some responsibilities.” Ivan noted that he been in an interim role for more than two
years when he was appointed permanently, saying he had “stuck it out” because he really
wanted to have the additional experience.
Damon looked back to an earlier position in a large academic research library and
described the dean, the leader of the library, as “great at floating through like a dean does,
	  

61	  
	  

saying hi as she walks by the circulation desk and the reference desk and checking in
from a distance every month or so,” where he was working as a department head. He
shared how surprised but delighted he was when she opened up her management team to
two department heads, of which he was one. He believed this was unusual, that it is
usually just associate deans and the dean. He said, “I was able to sit at the table with ten
other people and really talk about problems and issues at the library that had nothing to
do with my department, but they still wanted me to contribute.” To Damon, this
exposure was “priceless” and “instrumental” to his leadership development.
Participants shared times from early in their careers when someone, usually at the
dean or director or associate dean or director level, invited them into a conversation or
meeting on a particular subject. The said, “I had never gone above to the next level and
had a non-problem related conversation with somebody and so that was nice,” and “I
don’t think I had even been in an office with a couch before. They always had a desk, and
maybe chairs and tables, but never a couch. So that was a very different environment for
me.” Damon shared a story of a time he was given responsibility for all aspects of [a
major renovation project]. He said,
So I was sitting there with the dean and a few of the AULs and a couple of other
department heads and the construction crew and the facilities leaders on campus
and contractors and it was just bigger than my department. It was big, it was
campus, everyone was watching it and I enjoyed that quite a bit.
Participants mentioned the increase in exposure they noticed as they began to report to
individuals higher up in the library. At one point fairly early in his career Adam reported

	  

62	  
	  

to the deputy director due to the new and experimental project he was leading. He
described this reporting structure as a “great luxury” and that it provided him with the
opportunity and “license to do a lot of things”. Early in his career, Jack worked with an
assistant dean who invited him to sit in on licensing and contract negotiations with
vendors in her office, even though he did not report to her. He shared how valuable that
experience was, how useful it had turned out to be, and that he particularly valued that
she had asked him participate. Ivan, who has worked at several large academic research
libraries during his career, credits the exposure that came from moving around as a
positive in his own development. However, he says:
I don’t tell this to people who are really talented because we don’t want them to
leave, but…they don’t have to have their whole career here at [large state
university]. I don’t say this to them because I don’t want them to leave, but I do
think there is a lot of value in at least spending time in at least one other
organization and experience another organizational cultures. I have been, except
for one position at [large academic research library] where I was there not very
long but it had a lot of impact on me, I have spent at least three years in different
research library organizations and that exposure has really been very beneficial
for me.
Formal Leadership Development Programs. The construct, formal leadership
development programs, emerged as a subtheme of exposure. All participants noted that a
primary benefit of participation in formal leadership development programs and institutes
was exposure to campus leaders and a broader perspective on issues campuses face today.
Adam described his experience with the Association of Research Libraries (ARL)
Leadership Fellows program as the “most formal program” he had been through and said
that it had broadened his view. He believed that the program is intended to prepare
interested individuals to become directors, but found it also useful for “those of us who
	  

63	  
	  

aren’t necessarily director bound” and said, “It gives a lot of exposure to what’s going on
in different organizations and different ways that directors have of accomplishing their
roles.” Hannah, who participated in both an Association of Research Libraries leadership
program and the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA) Senior Fellows noted that
the programs are similar and participants are exposed to leaders in the field and in both
programs you join a cohort of other “developing leaders” who you can learn from and
who you can reach out to later. She considered her cohort from both programs to be
important and ongoing contributors to her broadened perspective. Evan agrees and
describes his cohort as “a tremendous source of peer learning.”
Damon described his experience with the Frye Institute as “pivotal” and said it
made him realize, “I’m not working for the library I’m working for the university.”
Prior to attending he felt he had been focused just on the library or the department and the
project in front of him, and after attending he had a much better “understanding of the
whole machine of a higher education institution.” The experience helped him to see how
his work and the work of the library fit into the overall campus goals and organization.
Damon also participated in the Association of Research Libraries Leadership Fellows
program and described that experience as also very meaningful because he and the
fellows were treated as colleagues by the directors and deans with whom they met. He
described it this way:
They were looking at you as if you already were the director or these are things
you will need to know as a director. So in that way it was almost like those
	  

64	  
	  

conversations you might have with your parents about when you were in college,
there is no expectation that it would be anything but that.
Damon felt that because the deans and directors treated the leadership fellows as peers he
and his cohort gained access to the very personal aspects of what it is like to be the dean
or director of a major academic research library. Damon said,
And so you felt a little more like a peer, you saw much more open personalities,
people were more candid, we had directors cry, we were sitting at their table at
restaurants and talking with them about their career paths and the issues that they
are having and just meeting so many different directors and seeing how they lead
differently. How different their problems were and how similar they were and
then how they approach them all, very different personalities, very different
approaches, but they all worked and so it helps to flatten out any anxiety that
people might have [about becoming a director] that they are a good enough
speaker or they are not a good fund raiser or they are whatever they concerns
might be. And, the thing I think I really got out of that is that I wasn’t sure I even
wanted to be a director.
For Gina, participation in the Association of Research Libraries Leadership and
Career Development Program (LCDP) was her first exposure to deans outside of the ones
where she had worked, and with whom she had had little interaction. At the time she
participated in LCDP she was in a middle-manager role but not yet at the associate dean
or associate director level. At that time in her career, the LCDP gave her exposure to
deans from many institutions, at a much greater level than she had had in the institutions
where she was working or had worked previously. She said, “I never sat down and talked
to these library deans until I got to the LCDP. It was really helpful to hear them talk
about their work.” She said that participating in the ARL LCDP program made the idea
of considering leadership roles in libraries finally ‘click’ for her.
	  

65	  
	  

Participants also noted that participating in the formal leadership development
programs brought another type of exposure in that they were now on all the lists that
recruiters use when trying to fill top leadership positions in academic research libraries.
Participants expressed mild frustration with this repeated contact, but also noted that
participation in these formal leadership development programs, either from recruiter
contacts or the deans and directors they had met while participating, had led to new
opportunities and career progression for many in the programs cohorts.
Table 7 shows the participant theme exposure and selected significant statements
related to the theme.
Table 7
Theme: Exposure
Theme

Significant statements related to the theme

Exposure

“…a good piece of exposure to another side of the organization”
“…really talk about problems and issues at the library that had nothing to do
with my department, but they still wanted me to contribute.”
“They were looking at you as if you already were the director or these are things
you will need to know as a director… there is no expectation that it would be
anything but that. And so you felt a little more like a peer.”
“And, the thing I think I really got out of that is that I wasn’t sure I even wanted
to be a director.”

Exposure intersects with support and influence, through the roles that mentors,
supervisors, and other colleagues play in broadening the experiences and people
connections of study participants.

	  

66	  
	  

Personal Responsibility
Participants universally expressed that they hold themselves responsible for their
own leadership development, no matter how much support, mentoring, guidance, and
influence they receive from others. This sense of personal responsibility ranges from
putting oneself out there, literally and figuratively, to mentoring those who come after
you. When discussing their own mentoring participants also mentioned, unsolicited,
stories about whom they currently mentor or that they know they ought to be doing more
mentoring then they are currently.
Thinking about his own experiences, Karl suggested that recognizing that leaders
in your institution are not mind readers is important because they may not realize you
have an interest in doing something. He said, “that’s a thing that I would always try to
tell anyone that I mentor, you know, you got to put it out there and let people know that
you’re interested in those things otherwise they don’t think about you.” He credited a
former dean with whom he had worked as the one who helped him to see this, as she put
him in positions where he gained the confidence to talk with individuals, like herself,
about things in which he was interested. Ivan told me that he realized in his first job out
of graduate school that he wanted to be a manager or an administrator and after moving
to a new position he let his supervisors know that and that helped him to get some
different opportunities where he was working. He said,
I’ve sort of always known I wanted to it, I let people know without being pushy
that I was interested and I had some, I think, natural capabilities and then I was

	  

67	  
	  

fortunate enough to end up in situations where I could learn a lot and have
opportunities.
Jack noted that putting yourself out there means that you gain experiences that
then help you become a better mentor. He said, “I am much better at looking out for
opportunities for our staff here to engage in various sort of management and leadership
training than I suspect I would have been if I hadn’t had these experience myself.”
Both Laura and Adam mentioned that leaders need to make sure that they are
doing mindful listening. Adam said, “I really had to learn to be much more mindful
about communicating.” And Gina noted that it is important to not treat everyone the
same, and to recognize when someone does not yet have the skills but “has heart” and
take care to “not to write those folks off.” Being mindful of potential is an important
leadership skill.
Fiona said she tries to take initiative whenever she can, even if she is not sure
about it or knows what she is doing, and she encourages others to do the same. It is
Fiona’s opinion that “fortune favors the bold.” Ivan agrees with Fiona, as evidenced in
this story Ivan told me:
I tell you this story not to be melodramatic or anything but, so my dad died about,
wow, it has been 8 years or so since he died. When he passed away the song that
he asked us to play at his funeral is a song called I hope you dance. I have to tell
you, yeah, [sung] by Lee Ann Womack, who is like a country music star. I
couldn’t believe it, I didn’t know that he liked the song and I had never really
heard of the song. When I was a kid he liked Three Dog Night and Creedence
Clearwater Revival. Anyway, the point of it is, and maybe I am overthinking it,
but I have two older brothers, so there are the three of us, I think it [the song] was
one last message or lesson to us, essentially the short of it is to get out there and
	  

68	  
	  

dance. I think she is singing to her children, like put yourself out there, do it
right, try, don’t sit in the chair in the corner of the wall. All three of us [brothers]
have innately probably had that reticence in us, my brothers and I, we all had that
hesitation about putting ourselves out there. So obviously it makes me a little
emotional talking about it now.
Ivan went on to relate this story to his professional life and leadership path, saying:
You have got to put yourself out there. If you want to be a leader you have got to
give it a shot. I have been really lucky, but part of it is I put myself out there in
some ways, not in an obnoxious way and but I have given it a shot and I have
tried. So, I have always tried to remember this last message from my dad, which
is to give it a shot, put yourself out there, right. I was interim in this job for two
years and I really wanted it so I stuck with it and when it came up I applied.
Yeah, anyway, so you have got to put yourself out there. You have got to make it
known in a subtle way, but you have got to make it known that you want to do
this and you have got to put yourself out there and work hard and sort of go after
it. People are not just going to give you leadership opportunities.
For Gina, maintaining her integrity continues to be an important personal
responsibility. As in the experience she relayed about being in 5th grade, when she
realized the student patrol job was not fun, she also realized there was no way to get out
of it. She said,
I knew enough that when you have an honor and responsibility you need to do it
whether or not it’s fun or not. Because I remember telling my mom, “This is not
fun. I rather be doing something else than standing at a cross walk or standing at a
school bus.” She said, “You’re not quitting. You’re going to do this because
your teacher selected you to do it. She selected you and she thinks you can do it
and you can’t let her down.”
Now, in Gina’s current organization they are focused on change management, giving
people reason to change, how to communicate with people effectively when you are
making changes, and also focused on integrity and following through with what you
	  

69	  
	  

communicate you are going to do. She noted that to maintain your integrity as a leader,
“You have to do what you say you’re going to do.” In her organization, she says:
We always talk about integrity, integrity, integrity and this right at the end of the
day, it always comes to integrity. You either have it or you don’t. And if you
jeopardize that, and if you keep on saying you’ll do things that you don’t, no one
is going to follow you. No one cares what kind of a leader you are.
Bella is currently mentoring one of the other participants from a leadership
development program in which she was also a participant. Bella describes being able to
talk to this person about where she is going and then to give back to her, advise her on
her career and recruitment and different positions and how to deal with situation, as
having “been really rewarding.” Damon describes being a mentor to someone who was
working with him in a previous job. Damon says, “With some issues and things going on
she’s been emailing me quite a lot, like several times week in the last couple of months.”
Damon is mentoring her during a time of great change in her career. Laura shared that
her experiences with “having people care about me and my career and giving me a start
has really helped me become a leader who pays attention to others and their careers, and
tries to foster them and give back.” Laura is grateful to her mentors and feels a sense of
responsibility for mentoring others.
Nora noted that she finds people, overall, fascinating and that’s what brings joy to
her job. She felt responsibility for the success of people she works with, and stated:
I think just being truly curious about how the people see the world, how they see
themselves in it, how they manage their world, and their life and how they think
that through, I just find that fascinating and that’s what keeps me truly engaged in
	  

70	  
	  

wanting to ensure the success of those people who are working with me. And
really be a force of good in the world, I think that’s really important to me, and I
do that no matter what job I'm doing, by being truly interested and curious about
how people see themselves in the world that they live in.
Evan mentors one of his department heads who is now very serious about wanting
to move to an associate dean position. He talks to her about that every once in a while
and she brings him the position announcements of the positions she’s interested in and he
talks to her about them. He related that sometimes he has information about the
organizations she’s looking at or knows people there so he can tell her something about
it. Sometimes they discuss what the associate dean position entails and how that’s going
to be different than being a department head. Karl described a time when he invited a
junior colleague to coffee to discuss why the colleague had declined chairing a
committee. Karl explained to me that he had never chatted informally with the
colleague, but during the discussion was able to discern that there had been a
misunderstanding and resolved it right there. Karl then took advantage of the situation
and began talking with the junior colleague about his aspirations and where he wanted to
go, etc. Karl said,
I put it out there that if he had any interest in leadership to go for [a program] and
he was saying that he thought he [didn’t qualify] and I said, “no, you’re ready to
go. Apply, do it, get it done early, so that you can go on to other opportunities.”
Karl went on to state that he is becoming more natural at mentoring, although it is outside
his natural comfort zone, and he continues to look for informal opportunities to reach out
to librarians at his library. He shared that he thinks it is an expectation and responsibility

	  

71	  
	  

when you get to the senior level that you do try to grow people from within and that has
been a focus for him throughout his career.
Table 8 shows the participant theme personal responsibility and selected
significant statements related to the theme.
Table 8
Theme: Personal Responsibility
Theme

Significant statements related to the theme

Responsibility

“…you got to put it out there and let people know that you’re
interested”
“Fortune favors the bold.”
“…give it a shot, put yourself out there”
“I put it out there that if he had any interest in leadership to… Apply,
do it, get it done”
“You have to do what you say you’re going to do.”
“…having people care about me and my career and giving me a start
has really helped me become a leader who pays attention to others and
their careers.”

Feeling personally responsible for others, through mentoring and supervisory
responsibilities in participants’ current roles, has some intersections with exposure and
support and influence. Their recognition of the benefits of their own positive experiences
leads to recognition of the responsibility for mentoring others and to identification of
positive opportunities for those they mentor. Personal responsibility also intersects with
personal growth experiences, along the lines of the “fortune favors the bold” example
stated by one of the participants. Taking responsibility for one’s own development
surfaced as an important aspect of study participants’ leadership development.
	  

72	  
	  

Recognition of Leadership
Participants, currently leaders in their libraries, told me about their career paths.
Some shared that there was not always a plan they were following and that at times their
successes felt more like good luck than recognition for a job well done or success. Some
expressed occasionally feeling surprised at their success or surprised that they are
perceived as leaders. I interpreted all instances of the stories and descriptions of this
incredulity and bafflement as honest and genuine feelings about themselves. Damon
expressed a similar sentiment to other participants when he told me:
I’m sometimes surprised that I’m here, sometimes, especially when people say,
“well why don’t you apply for this job or that job.” I’m like, “well, I’m glad that
you think that I could do that.” I’m not really sure that I’m, well, I know that I’m
not ready to leave this one because there is just so much more that I need to learn.
And then there are days where you say, yes, I can do that job, a director or
something, but I just don’t want to, versus days that you ask yourself, am I even
ready to do the job that I’m in?
Nora, thinking back on her career, described her very first interview after graduate
school, and her doubts about being invited to the interview in the first place, not to
mention doubts about getting the position. She told this story.
This was my very first interview, I was flown out to Washington DC and I was
kind of just laughing the whole way, because I really, I was like there is just no
way that I'm ever going to get this job, so I'm just going to have a great time and
enjoy this day, because this is pretty cool. So there I am, and I’m early and it’s
DC and it was actually much colder than I had anticipated, so I was standing at
the front door of this amazing building shivering, not realizing that there was a
back door that I could easily have gotten in to. But in any case there I was at the
front door, the front door didn't open till 8 and I’m staring at the gold letters of

	  

73	  
	  

[national library] and I'm like, this is it. This is as good as it gets. I am never
going to see this door again.
As it turned out, Nora was offered the position, accepted it and worked there for several
years. For Damon, an early leadership experience felt not quite legitimate. He said,
I think probably, though, the first leadership position I was in was that very first
job I had when they dumped [project] on me, but I didn't feel like it was right, I
didn't feel like I was ready for it, it felt very odd being, what, 22 years old and
supervising people who were 50 to 60 years old, it felt like I was acting.
He went on to then tell me about what he considered the first real leadership role he had,
when he was charged with planning and managing a major renovation project. Although
his early “not real” project experience was similar in nature to this renovation project he
considered the later one, when he was more established, as more legitimate.
For Mary, her 4th grade report card, where a teacher clearly recognized her
leadership potential and noted it in a comment to her parents, prompted Mary to tell me,
“I remember being surprised, like, really? Leadership was not a word I had associated
with myself.”
Both Ivan and Gina had been encouraged by older siblings to get jobs at the
library as undergraduate students and told that it was pretty easy to succeed at these jobs:
show up on time, do the work well. Gina and Hannah both resisted librarianship as a
career after working in libraries in high school and during their undergraduate studies. In
both cases, a teacher or librarian saw something in them and encouraged them to consider
a career in libraries, but they ignored that encouragement and tried another field first.

	  

74	  
	  

Their initial impressions of library work, based on student worker positions, had led them
into other areas.
Ivan recounted a story from his 5th grade year, when his teacher complimented
him for being brave during a class project. He said, “I’ve always been sucker for that
kind of feedback,” but mentioned that was maybe when he really knew he had leadership
ability. He could step back and see the big picture, and try to organize people towards a
common goal right or better sort of outcome.
Table 9 shows the participant theme recognition and selected significant
statements related to the theme.
Table 9
Theme: Recognition
Theme

Significant statements related to the theme

Recognition

“I’m sometimes surprised that I’m here…”
“…this is it. This is as good as it gets. I am never going to see this
door again.”
“it didn't feel like it was right, I didn't feel like I was ready for it, it felt
very odd being, what, 22 years old and supervising people who were 50
to 60 years old, it felt like I was acting.”
“I remember being surprised, like, really? Leadership was not a word I
had associated with myself.”
“…I’ve always been sucker for that kind of feedback,”

Recognition of their leadership, or potential for leadership, by others, including parents,
teachers, supervisors, or other influential people is a valued, but perhaps slightly

	  

75	  
	  

uncomfortable, feeling for study participants. The intersections between the people who
provide support and/or influence and the recognition they provide is an uneasy
intersection for many of the participants in this study.
Summary
Academic research library leaders who participated in this study suggested that
leadership development experiences consisted of the following themes: Personal Growth,
Support and Influences, Exposure, Personal Responsibility, and Recognition of
Leadership. Subthemes included childhood and early experiences and on-the-job
experiences in the theme personal growth; mentors in the theme support and influence;
formal leadership development programming in the theme exposure; and mentoring in
the theme personal responsibility. Overlap among themes was common. Both Creswell
(2007) and Moustakas (1994) described phenomenological study as concluding with a
composite textural and structural description of the participants, then merging the
descriptions to form the essence, invariant structure of the phenomenon.
Textural Description
Textural description is a discussion of the “what” of the phenomenon experienced
(Creswell, 2007). In this study, academic research library leaders experienced leadership
development in several ways. Through connections with others, including supportive
supervisors, co-workers and colleagues, and mentors and leaders in the library field,
participants developed their leadership experiences and skills.
Participants experienced leadership development when presented with
opportunities to take charge of a situation or group and mobilize others to action. For
	  

76	  
	  

participants, successfully organizing others toward a shared goal provided leadership
development. Fiona said,
I think in all kinds of positions I have had with different types of organizations
throughout my life I’ve often felt willing to be on a leadership group or board or
with a project and so I like that sense of being able to shape something.
They experienced leadership development working for supportive deans and
directors who were leaders in their libraries and in the field of academic librarianship,
and who modeled exceptional leader behavior. Nora said,
I’ve had several women who were my bosses, who have been fabulous, who were
interested in my success. You know, especially, my current boss [dean at a major
research university library]. Holy cow, is she fabulous! She is constantly saying,
“Hey, have you thought about publishing on that,” or “you should really give a
presentation on that topic.”
At the end of her interview, Nora said to me, “I am so happy here and working for the
amazing woman that I get to work with. I wish you could use her name and say how
fabulous she is.” These supportive supervisors provided opportunities and resources for
leadership development and gave participants latitude and space to learn and grow in
their leadership. Adam described an early career supervisor giving him freedom to try
things and said that, “it didn’t really matter if I screwed up. He always encouraged me.”
They experienced leadership development in relationships with other leaders in
the academic research library field, whom they had worked for or with in previous roles
or met through professional association committee work. Bella said, when describing a
former supervisor with whom she has had a long-term mentoring relationship, “You
wanted to grow up, and be her, basically. She is still a great mentor to me.” These
supportive mentoring relationships, sometimes short-term and sometimes ongoing over
	  

77	  
	  

several years, provided meaningful developmental experiences for the participants.
Damon described the support he has felt throughout his career, from a number of
supervisors and colleagues, “I have been lucky that at the right moments in life where I
say, you know, I just need to jump to the next level, somebody has been there to catch me
and help me to go through that transition.”
Finally, participants experienced leadership development as their perspectives
broadened with each new professional and personal experience. Terms such as
“exposure,” “intensive,” and “incredible opportunity” were often used to describe
participation in the formal leadership development programs. Bella said, “What I got
most out of the Harvard program, was really the concept of reframing and looking at
situations from different perspectives.” Caitrin mentioned that after experiencing a
variety of management and leadership training opportunities through her career she had
come to realize that:
It isn’t just a little side line. It’s not like, I’m really a reference librarian and this
management supervision stuff is just another add on, a bother, something I don’t
really have to learn about. I think when I came to understand…that management
was a discipline and…I had a certain approach. It was something I could be
conscious of. It was something that I might not always want to overuse, my own
style. That was all really eye opening for me.
Karl jokingly described his career as one of the “utility outfielder,” stating “they put me
where they need me.” He noted that by being willing and interested in the variety of
experiences it allowed him to try new things and that this had been a big benefit to his
career as well as his development.

	  

78	  
	  

Structural Description
Structural description is the “how” it happened, a discussion of the context or
setting in which the phenomenon happened (Creswell, 2007). The “how” in this study
included through taking on new roles or responsibilities, participation in childhood clubs
and sports, and formal leadership development programs, institutes, and fellowships.
Participants in this study experienced leadership development when taking new
positions, adding responsibilities or projects to their current positions, tackling difficult
projects or tasks in their jobs, and working through difficult personnel situations. All 14
participants noted examples of development ‘on-the-job’ as their careers progressed.
Laura noted the many roles she has held at her current library, not to mention at previous
institutions. Adam, Mary, and Nora mentioned the need they had had to develop their
supervisory skills and gain experience to manage tricky personnel issues.
Participants in this study experienced leadership development as participants in
formal leadership development programs, through the intense experiences and exposure
the programs provided. Having university library deans, provosts, and presidents devote
time on busy schedules to meet with formal program participant cohorts to discuss big
picture issues on campuses was impactful for all participants. Library deans sharing
personal stories about work-life balance and other real-life issues of leaders was
developmental for participants. Participants also experienced leadership development in
unexpected ways, through opportunities they had not planned for or in situations which
did not turn out as expected, such as when Laura received a major career achievement
award from a professional association and when Nora interviewed for the position she
	  

79	  
	  

was certain she would not get. Leadership development also took place when
participants observed leader behavior that they did not value, as Nora, Laura, and Damon
mentioned when describing past supervisors.
Essence
The essence is the culmination of a phenomenological study, a composite look at
the textural and structural descriptions (Creswell, 2007). For leaders in academic
research libraries who participated in this study, the essence of leadership development
was a combination of supportive people, interesting and varied work, and taking personal
responsibility for their development. Study participants experienced leadership
development when they were supported or influenced by a respected leader, had
opportunities to lead others in accomplishing a goal, and received recognition for their
accomplishments.
Participants in this study told stories of their experiences as leaders, where they
observed a situation, discovered a need or problem to tackle, engaged others to help them
with it, took a risk, and accomplished the task. Their narratives included mention of
many individuals who had been influential, mostly for the better, to the story and often
included reflection on what the participant learned from the situation. Through their
stories participants were able to convey their own positive leadership development
experiences.
These experiences changed them as leaders, broadened their perspectives and
helped them to grow and develop their leadership in the academic research library
community. Meaning I believe we can derive from the data of this phenomenological
	  

80	  
	  

study is that personal relationships and early experiences, both in childhood and early
career, were formative experiences for the participants. The relationship experiences, as
reported by my fourteen participants, were crucial to their leadership development.
Through personal relationships with mentors, supervisors, colleagues, cohort members,
and other leaders in ARL member libraries my participants changed and developed as
leaders, becoming better mentors themselves and better leaders in their roles in academic
research libraries.

	  

81	  
	  

Chapter Five
Discussion
Tell me and I forget, teach me and I may remember, involve me and I learn.
–Benjamin Franklin

The purpose of this study was to describe the positive leadership development
experiences of academic research library leaders. While the history of leadership theory
goes back more than a century, research on leadership development is much more recent
(Day, Fleenor, Atwater, Sturm & McKee, 2014; Avolio, Reichard, Hannah, and
Walumbwa, 2009). The constructs of leadership development, leadership qualities,
leadership competencies, and leadership attributes and traits of academic librarians have
been reported in the professional literature. Yet not much is known about the perceptions
of library leaders themselves of their own leadership development. Today’s higher
education environment demands that leaders in academic research libraries flexibly and
readily adapt to the constant, rapid, and unpredictable changes happening in research and
scholarship, in teaching and learning, to lead their libraries to meet the needs of the
research university. And, to successfully do so academic research library leaders must be
cognizant of the need to continually develop as leaders.
Researcher’s Reflections
I have always loved a good story, whether I am myself reading or listening
to a storyteller. In fact, I took a 3-credit-hour storytelling class as part of my first graduate
program in library and information science. The ability to tell a good story and the skills

	  

82	  
	  

to plan a storytelling program are important aspects of children’s librarianship. I knew
when I took the storytelling class that I was probably going to work in academic libraries
and not likely to find myself telling stories to college students. I really just wanted to
take that class so I could listen to classmates tell their stories.
Fast forward twenty years. When I began coursework in the doctoral program I
had initially intended to study formal leadership development programs and institutes for
academic library leaders and their impact on participants’ leadership development for my
dissertation. At that time I had been a participant myself in two of the established and
well-regarded leadership development programs for academic libraries and had found
both experiences to be meaningful but very different. As I made way through the doctoral
program I began to reconsider my research question, until it evolved finally into a central
research question of: how do library leaders in academic research libraries in North
America describe their leadership development experiences? What did they experience,
with regard to leadership development, and in what context? How do they make sense
out of these experiences? I was confident about my decision to take a phenomenological
approach to my research, because phenomenology was the most appropriate qualitative
tradition to use with my research question around library leaders’ leadership
development. A phenomenological study describes the meaning for several individuals
of their lived experiences of a concept or a phenomenon (Creswell, 2007). The work I
had done for my earlier pilot case study project, including conducting interviews and
analyzing the data, had been intellectually rewarding and interesting. I realized at that
project’s conclusion how much I had enjoyed the interview process and my interactions
	  

83	  
	  

with the participants, so for my dissertation study I selected phenomenology because I
wanted to describe the ‘essence’ of the phenomenon, the experiences of leadership
development, shared by participants and to surface what participants may have in
common in their leadership development (Creswell, 2007).
Following good qualitative researcher practice I faithfully and purposefully
devoted time to the process of bracketing my own experiences. But, I do love a story and
it turns out that I have trouble not jumping in to empathize or to share a similar story. I
did not anticipate with this study was how challenging it would be for me to just let my
participants tell their stories and not interrupt to agree or share about my own similar
experiences. To be non-reactive, as Creswell (2013) suggests, was difficult. As a library
leader myself, I have had many positive leadership development experiences and some
quite similar to those shared by my study participants. I had anticipated that, and
prepared myself. What I had not expected, though, was to want to share back with the
participants, to mention how much I had loved being a Girl Scout or that I was a pretty
good point guard on my 5th grade basketball team or experiences from my first position in
a university library, and just how hard it would be to stop myself.
In order to remain objective, I set aside my own perspective and focused instead
on my participants. This became easier to do as I conducted more interviews and gained
more experience. After the second interview, when I had finished writing down my
observations about the experience, I took some time to jot down notes about my own
related experiences. While this is probably not good qualitative research practice, it did
allow me to get it out of my system, so to speak, but also helped me to maintain the
	  

84	  
	  

bracketing process and future interviews went more smoothly. It was easier to be nonreactive because I knew I had an outlet for my personal reactions, separate from the
research study, immediately following the interview. Only after transcribing and
analyzing all of the interview data and grouping significant statements into themes did I
revisit my post-interview personal experience notes.

Discussion of Findings
During interviews for this study participants told me their stories of leadership
experiences and helped to describe the meaning of the construct of leadership
development with their rich descriptions. Comments about supportive influences
included, “…a big part of my own leadership development was based on my relationship
with my boss here,” and “[mentor] gave me all sorts of opportunities for participation,” as
well as, “I’ve worked with some organizational development consultants….who were
very important in helping me understand leadership in the organization, and helping me
develop my skills and my thinking about leadership.” As participants described their
careers they said things like, “I could see the library from different vantage points…it
was during an interesting time where the technologies were really shaping on how
research could be done in new ways and it was that that inspired me,” and “it was a really
interesting and unique time at this organization,” and “…so I applied for it because it
would give kind of a generalized experience, where you could affect change across a
wider variety of the aspects of the organization, not just cataloging,” about the varied
opportunities they had experienced. “I got that position and…they kept rewarding me
	  

85	  
	  

with more work and responsibility and stuff so I became assistant, then associate director,
which were titles basically created for me,” and “I felt keenly the responsibility of …,”
and, “I did want to have some kind of greater responsibility,” and “I realized it [my
leadership development] was important especially as I got more responsibility, and more
people who I was responsible for, that I wasn’t quite so clueless about my own drivers.”
Five themes emerged from the participants’ stories: personal growth, support and
influence, exposure, personal responsibility, and recognition.
Theme 1: Personal growth experiences. Participants in this study shared stories
and details of their personal leadership development from childhood through their
careers. Two subthemes emerged from the personal growth experiences theme: early
experiences and on-the-job experiences. The construct of early experiences included
examples when study participants described times they led groups to achieve a common
goal, for example in scouting or sports. While discussion of the antecedents of leadership
of famous individuals in history is reported in the literature, until recently little research
on developmental psychological aspects of leaders had been conducted (Popper and
Amit, 2009). Sternberg (2008) discussed the development and application of a variety of
skills starting at a young age. A 2011 research study which examined leadership
potential and the direct and indirect effects of adolescent personality and intelligence on
adult leadership potential found a specific developmental pathway to adult leadership
potential across the first three decades of life (Guerin, Oliver, Gottfried, Gottfried,
Reichard, and Riggs, 2011). That same year Gottfried, Gottfried, Reichard, Guerin,
Oliver, and Riggio (2011) reported on their study of how motivation from childhood
	  

86	  
	  

through adolescence relates to motivation to lead in adulthood and found that “adults
with a greater enjoyment of leadership per se, and who are motivated to lead without
regard to external consequences, were significant more intrinsically motivated from
childhood through adolescence.”
The subtheme on-the-job experiences described by this study’s participants
included many descriptions of things learned on-the-job, throughout their careers.
Learning on the job is an established construct for leadership and managerial
development (Yip and Wilson, 2010). Job variety as a positive experience surfaced as
part of the on-the-job experiences shared by participants. Participants valued the
opportunities for variety in the positions they had held throughout their career, and
described times when they had many opportunities to play a variety of roles with
statements such as, “I like to jokingly say I’m the utility infielder…they put me where
they’ll need,” and “...it’s [her position] grown, evolved, changed, morphed. There’s no
academic department that I haven’t been the administrator for,” as particularly
developmental. Day described leadership as a “complex interaction between people and
their social and organizational environments” and suggested correlating time in position
with performance cannot describe the full effect of experience (2014, p.65). Similarly,
Betten and Kennedy (1990) studied work history and work experiences versus time in job
with a similar conclusion. The descriptions by the participants in my study of the varied
and variety of experiences they have had, in some cases over not that much time in their
career or in a particular position, are similar to the results of those studies.

	  

87	  
	  

Theme 2: Support and influence. Participants’ stories about supportive
supervisors being the reason they stayed at the same library, included comments such as,
“The support, the leadership that I’m getting from my current supervisor is key to
retaining me in this organization,” and “Honestly, I love it here. It's fantastic. I'm so glad
I made the move,” combined with examples participants shared of specific projects they
had tackled at the request of their leaders support research that has suggested that
personal growth and developmental opportunities lead to organizational commitment
(Freund & Carmeli, 2003).
Overlap is apparent in themes of support and personal growth experiences. One
participant described his experiences this way:
When she recruited me here, I had initially declined the offer and she spent an
hour and a half with me one evening, persuading me that I should come to work
for her. She talked me into it. She said, “I promise you, I will give you
opportunities you will not get anywhere else.” She really was very committed to
living up to that. It was certainly my experience in the years that I’ve been here,
that she was committed to giving me opportunities I probably wouldn’t have had
elsewhere.
Research has shown the benefits of mentoring related to role modeling and
offering support and encouragement (Phillips-Jones, 1982; Kaufmann, Harrel, Milam,
Woolverton, and Miller, 1986), which supports the descriptions of roles played by
mentors who were mentioned by participants in this study who described mentors as
“mentoring by role modeling,” and “very analytical, but also very human in her
approach.” Scandura and Landau (1996) described positive learning environments as
facilitators of high quality relationships in leader-member dyads and Galli and Muller	  

88	  
	  

Stewens (2012) discussed leadership development practices as important for social
capital practices such as mentoring, similar to the relationships with mentors that were
described in my study.
Horrell, describing his own experience in the Senior Fellows program and as a
library leader, observed that for ongoing education of a library leader a network of
colleagues ties together all other leadership development, including “coursework,
professional reading, or ‘on the job’ experience” (2001, p.8). Participants in this study
had many favorable comments about their cohort members from formal leadership
development programs, as well as colleagues in the academic library field and coworkers
working with them at their institutions. They said, “the relationships that I built at UCLA
[UCLA Senior Fellows program] and LCDP [Association of Research Libraries’
Leadership and Career Development Program] were just so critical,” and “when you have
a problem ….you can reach out to that group and say, hey, anybody else having trouble
with…?” and “I had a really wonderful, phenomenal group of people in my cohort, a
number of which I talk to on occasion and get advice from or share ideas with, things like
that.”
Colleagues working in the same institution and in similar roles are also a source
of support and influence for participants in this study. One stated,
I have always said that that’s what I love about my group of ADs [associate
deans] here, because I would actually go to my colleagues, as well. I don’t want to
paint this picture too rosy but I’ve got like the best of all worlds here.

	  

89	  
	  

Another described three colleagues at her institution whose varied backgrounds and
experiences provide a strong source of support to her. She said,
I’m working with [colleague] who has seen library directors and ADs [associate
directors] come and go and operate together in the world and make a lot of
difference and make a lot of mistakes. She also worked at the [another ARL
university library] where she had a different kind of experience, and so as I think
about leadership growth in this profession in particular, her opinion is really
valuable to me. I’m working with [colleague] who started out [at another ARL
university library] and has relationships with university library leaders all over.
Our [another colleague] came to us out of the commercial sector and so she thinks
the world should work a different way and quite often we get into conversations
about like, so why does things work in academia the way they do and if we want
this organization to be more efficient, stream lined and accountable then we
should be thinking this way, and that’s really helpful to me as I think about the
skills I need to move from an associate director position to director position.
In support and influence theme there is overlap with the third theme of exposure,
as demonstrated above with colleagues, where the experience of working with a
colleague from another background, “came to us out of the commercial sector” brings a
another perspective, “she thinks the world should work a different way,” to the work of
the academic research library.
Theme 3: Exposure. Research has indicated that exposure to role models
support development (Davidson, 2004). In the theme exposure participants all mentioned
being exposed to leaders in the field and in higher education, on-the-job on their
campuses and through formal leadership development programs. Of the UCLA Senior
Fellows program, one participant said,
The biggest thing for me is that it reminded me of stuff that I just had been doing.
Not any of it was really new. But it’s that reminder, of the public speaking,
feedback, visioning. All those different things are so important. I think the most
important thing [about UCLA Senior Fellows] is just the networking and being
	  

90	  
	  

introduced to people from different institutions and leaders that you would never,
otherwise, have exposure to.
About the Association of Research Libraries Leadership and Career Development
Program (LCDP) another stated,
LCDP was very impactful because it taught me I could do it. I could be a dean,
and there aren’t a lot of back deans out there, but I could still be one. I remember
[leadership program director] saying he would love to go to ARL meetings and
see more brown, yellow, and red faces.
When study participants described their interactions during the Association of
Research Libraries (ARL) Leadership Fellows program with ARL leaders, influential
individuals who are the directors or deans leading the major research university libraries
in North America, the terms they used were “open,” “genuine,” and “trusting.” These
leaders opened themselves up to prospective future leaders, sharing the very personal
stories of their experiences in their leadership roles in a very trusting and revealing way,
leading to increased exposure for my participants as well as an intense and supportive
mentoring experience. The terms used to describe those interactions mirror terms used
by Avolio and Gardner who described authentic leadership as creating “open, transparent,
trusting and genuine relationships, which in part may be shaped and impacted by planned
interventions such as training” (2005, p.322).
A 1984 study determined that participants in the UCLA Senior Fellows Program
were “twice as visible, nearly twice as mobile, and three times more likely to assume
management and leadership positions” than were a control group of academic librarians
(Anderson, p.331). The issue of mobility and leadership turns up in the internal conflict
described by one of my study’s participants, where he described wanting to retain
	  

91	  
	  

excellent librarians at his institution while at the same time recognizing how his own
career had benefitted from the additional exposure of moving up and on to new positions
at other libraries.
The overlap in the themes exposure and support and influence, is particularly
noticeable in examples in sub themes of mentors, mentoring, and formal leadership
development programs.
Theme 4: Personal responsibility.
When describing her library’s recent training efforts around change management,
one participant stressed integrity and the importance for leaders of doing what they say
they will do. This example of authentic leadership is how she and the other leaders in her
library are enacting a major organizational change effort through their motivation, as
leaders, to act with authentically and legitimately (Michie & Gooty, 2005; Eagly, 2005).
Authentic leadership involves positive role modeling and can lead to higher levels of trust
in the leader, workplace engagement and well-being, and sustained performance
(Gardner, Avolio, Luthans, May, & Walumba, 2005; Ilies, Morgeson, & Nahrgang,
2005). Participants also described next steps for their careers in terms that suggest they
have learned from their experiences, working with supervisors and mentors, participation
in developmental programs and the exposure to other leaders and a broadening
perspective about leadership the experienced, and have a better idea of what is best for
them to do next. Knowing oneself and being true to oneself are essential qualities of
authentic leadership (Luthans & Avolio, 2003).

	  

92	  
	  

Successful leaders recognize their own areas for growth and take personal
responsibility to address these areas (George & McLean, 2007). Participants in the study
described being responsible for their own development, with statements like, “By
stepping forward and putting that idea forward, I was seen as a leader,” and “I felt like a
leader and then that led to future leadership roles,” and “I had to be really be conscious of
mindful of the fact that I needed some skills,” and “Frankly if I hadn’t had that
experience I wouldn’t be an associate director today, so there you go.” This sense of
responsibility for their self-development is related to the work orientation, mastery
orientation, and career-growth orientation described by Boyce, Zacarro, and Wisecarver
(2010).
Participants also suggested they feel some responsibility for the development of
others through mentoring and in their supervisory roles. Phrases used included, “paying it
forward,” and “become a leader who pays attention to others and their careers,” and “it’s
our job to be extremely supportive.” These comments, plus the importance of integrity of
leaders are examples of the theme of personal responsibility which surfaced in my study,
are confirmed by research on authentic leadership and behavioral integrity as related to
follower organizational commitment (Leroy, Palanski, & Simons, 2012).
Theme 5: Recognition. The academic library leaders in this study valued being
recognized for their contributions and successes in their life experiences and in the
workplace, so much so that some of the stories they told me are decades-old but were
very fresh in their memories. My study participants mentioned childhood experiences
when they had been praised for their behavior or performance, with phrases like “I’ve
	  

93	  
	  

always been sucker for that kind of feedback,” and for their leadership ability, "“I
remember being surprised…Leadership was not a word I had associated with myself,”
which provide examples similar to what was described from situational leadership theory
with explicit focus (Clark, 2011). In their professional careers participants noted being
given new projects and areas of responsibility as recognition for their good work, where
respect for accomplishments is implicit and demonstrates the competence in task
achievement (Bass, 1985; Yukl, 1981; Clarke, 2011). The description one participant
shared about being a ‘utility infielder,’ the baseball player who can play any position, is
an example of the recognition of his ability to take on new roles successfully. For
participants in this study the recognition or respect they received for leadership behaviors
served as a reward and motivator. This result is supported by research that has been done
on recognition and its impact in the studies of motivation, transactional leadership, and
transformation leadership. Praise for work well done, as suggested by Bass (1985) is an
example of contingent reward behavior. The literature on workplace motivation includes
research that suggests that people can be motivated by extrinsic rewards (Leonard,
Beauvoais, and Scholl, 1999). In their review of transformation leadership research
Rafferty and Griffin identified personal recognition as a sub-dimension of transformation
leadership and defined it as, “the provision of rewards such as praise and
acknowledgement of effort for achievement of specified goals” (2004, p.334).

	  

94	  
	  

Making Meaning
In qualitative research, participants and researcher are often seen as “coresearchers.” As such, the findings are not simply a descriptive analysis, but in fact allow
the researcher to share her own perspectives and experiences. Even though I attempted to
bracket my own experiences with leadership development, I am part of the world that I
have described in this study. The filter I bring from my own experiences cannot
completely by removed. Sharing the descriptions of the phenomenon in this study
provided a first order analysis of this data. My own interpretation of the meaning of these
lived experiences provides a second order analysis that brings additional meaning to the
findings.
As a member of the academic research library community, I have observed and
experienced both formal and information leadership development. The words of these 14
participants often mirrored my own experiences or those of others I supervised or works
with. My own interpretation of this data is that the personal relationships and early
experiences, both in childhood and early career, planted the seeds of leadership in my
fourteen participants. These early experiences seemed to be at least as influential in their
positive leadership development experiences as did participation in formal leadership
development programs. Through personal relationships with people who encouraged
them, saw them as leaders, and helped them see themselves that way, my participants
changed and developed as leaders.
.

	  

95	  
	  

Visual Depiction of Leadership Development
For the participants in my study, the themes of personal growth, support and
influence, exposure, personal responsibility, and recognition surfaced as significant
aspects of their development as leaders. As noted above there were overlaps among the
themes and sub themes in my study. These overlaps are apparent in the connections and
intersections between the themes, from personal growth intersecting with support and
influence, support and influence overlapping with exposure, exposure connecting to
personal growth experiences, and personal responsibility overlapping with personal
growth. Like the intersecting and overlapping words that complete a crossword puzzle,
leaders develop and positive leadership development occurs when these intersections or
connections happen. Figure 1 offers a visual depiction of the positive leadership
development experienced by academic research library leaders.

	  

96	  
	  

	  

97	  
	  

Significance of Findings
This study is significant for several reasons. While the research on leadership and
academic libraries has covered constructs of leadership development, leadership qualities,
leadership competencies, and leadership attributes and traits needed by academic
librarians, the experiences of academic research library leaders, as described themselves,
their perceptions of their own leadership development, give scholars a new construct to
explore as they relate to future leaders and leadership needed in academic research
libraries (Riggs, 1982; Woodsworth & von Wahlde,,1988; Sheldon, 1991; Giesecke &
McNeil, 1999; McNeil, 2002; ALA, 2005; Abels, Jones, Latham, and Magnoni, 2003;
Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2003; Venetis, 2008).
In my study all the leaders I spoke with had participated, at some point in their
career, in a formal leadership development institute, fellowship, or program targeted to
academic librarians. Formal leadership development programs have been perceived by
leaders in the field of academic librarianship to be an important aspect of an academic
library leader’s development, supporting a 1984 study which suggested that participation
in formal leadership development programs led to more positions of leadership in
professional associations and faster movement into leadership positions (Anderson,
1984). This study confirms that participants perceive their participation in a formal
program or institute to be impactful to their leadership development and that being
‘named’ as a participant in these formal programs led to nominations for other leadership
positions. This study contributes to a greater understanding of the positive
developmental experiences for these academic research library leaders and knowing more
	  

98	  
	  

about these positive experiences may be of interest to academic librarians interested in
furthering their own leadership development and to experienced academic library leaders
in administrative or supervisory roles or mentoring relationships seeking to assist
librarians whom they lead and mentor.
Implications
All participants in this study have participated in at least one formal leadership
development program over the course of their career and several had participated in two
or more. For my participants the experiences these programs afforded them, particularly
the exposure to leaders in the field and in higher education, were for the most part
considered valuable. One participant told me that she was now purposeful in seeking out
a new formal developmental opportunity every few years because she realized during her
second formal opportunity that she needed both the mental space and time for reflection
as well as the reminders of what she had learned previously during her earlier formal
programs.
Timing during career and cohort cohesion were two aspects of the formal
leadership development programs mentioned that might warrant further consideration by
organizers of formal programs. Two of my subjects, both of whom had participated in
two formal programs, had very positive things to say about the programs but also
mentioned that they wished they had attended one of the programs earlier in their career.
In both of these cases these individuals have been in their current position for a number
of years and noted they had already developed on-the-job and through other
programming the skills that the ill-timed program offered. For my participants, cohort
	  

99	  
	  

cohesion, when it worked or clicked, was described as a powerful part of their formal
program participation. Participants described catching up with their cohort for a meal and
conversation at various annual conferences, group email lists, and developing very close
relationships with individual members of their cohort. For participants who stressed the
beneficial aspects of getting to know their cohort(s) at programs both the UCLA Senior
Fellows and ARL Leadership Fellows programs were noted where the cohort experience
was particularly meaningful to their development. I believes this suggests that program
intent, content, audience, and type of program, for example residential or fellowship, are
important variables to consider for programming planning and participant decisionmaking regarding participation.
For participants in this study, formal leadership development programing and
participation is important. As established programs change, evolve, or discontinue, it is
important to consider some sort of leadership development, particularly related to time
for reflection and renewal.
For all participants, supportive individuals have been strong influences in their
careers and leadership development. It is clear that for the participants in my study
mentors and mentoring-type relationships have been important to their development.
Some participants mentioned having mentors almost immediately in our conversation,
others described individuals with whom they have strong, sustained support relationships
but did not use the word mentor to describe the experiences. Regardless of terms used
these supporting relationships were described in much detail.

	  

100	  
	  

The findings of this study may prove valuable for current leaders in the field of
academic research libraries who are concerned with the future of the field and struggle to
identify librarians interested in moving into leadership roles in their organizations. Deans
and directors of academic libraries may find this study valuable as they consider
succession planning. Mentoring relationships and formal program participation were
valuable for the participants in this study, and may be worth considering as deans and
directors identify funding for participation by individuals in their organizations in
leadership development opportunities, both formal and informal.
The findings may be of interest to professional and membership associations, for
example the American Library Association (ALA), the Association of College and
Research Libraries (ACRL), and the Association of Research Libraries (ARL), which
currently offer developmental opportunities ranging from virtual webinar programs to
one-day workshops to several-months-long fellowships to intense week(s)-long onsite
experiences. Leaders of formal academic librarian leadership development programs,
more typically the fellowships and residential programs which are more expensive and
time-consuming efforts, may find this study valuable as they consider the value and
sustainability of the programs currently administered.
The findings may be of use to educators in the graduate schools of library and
information science, who are asked by practitioners to help educate and train future
leaders. And, finally, social science researchers considering leadership development may
find this study of interest.

	  

101	  
	  

Limitations
Participants in this study were all working in leadership positions in Association
of Research Libraries (ARL) member libraries in the United States at the time of the
study and had all participated in at least one formal leadership development program,
institute, or fellowship during their career. Participants from other types of academic
libraries or from other countries might reveal different themes, as well as might leaders
who have not had formal leadership development experiences. This study consisted of a
good mix of participants by gender, six men and eight women, who self-identified as
having held leadership positions in academic libraries for 7 to 30 years. There was less
variation in age, with participants ranging in age from 41 to 59, which may be explained
by the level of their positions in academic research libraries, with support of research
suggesting that it takes 10 years or 10,000 hours to become an expert in a field (Ericcson
& Charness, 1994). Of the 14 participants, 13 are white and one is African-American.
More variety in age and race/ethnicity might offer alternate themes.
This qualitative research study cannot be generalized beyond the 14 participating
academic research library leaders, although the study attempted to reveal participants’
shared experience with leadership development, the particular phenomenon studied.
Future Research
Future qualitative studies into leadership development of academic library leaders
are needed. Qualitative studies might focus on the themes that surfaced in this study:
personal growth experiences, support and influence, exposure, personal responsibility,
and recognition, as they relate to other librarian populations such as mid-career managers,
	  

102	  
	  

‘emerging leaders’ as identified by American Library Association, or librarians from
underrepresented groups, for example. A study from the academic research library
perspective on Scandura and Lankau’s (1996) work in the area of gender and race in
leader-member exchange (LMX) quality could be of interest to the profession as
mentoring initiatives or programs are developed. Study into perceptions of barriers to
moving up to leader roles for librarians from underrepresented groups could be of
interest. Further study of the subtheme of early leadership experiences of current
academic research library leaders, from their childhoods to early career experiences,
would contribute to the literature around the antecedents of leadership as well as
literature of academic libraries leadership. Sternberg describes the development of
wisdom, intelligence, and creativity, in early experiences, which might be worth
investigating in the early work experiences of academic research librarians (2008).
Research into the subthemes of practical on-the-job experiences and formal leadership
development programs may be of interest to leaders considering developmental needs of
and opportunities for the librarians working in their organizations. The question of
gender and mentors warrants further investigation. Why did some participants in my
study mention gender, noting strong female leaders, as their mentors? Do female leaders
mentor differently, more or less often, than male leaders? I believe this finding is
interesting and deserves further investigation.
Summary and Conclusion
The purpose of my study was to describe the positive leadership development
experiences of academic research library leaders. I used a phenomenological design to
	  

103	  
	  

answer the central research question, which was: how do library leaders in academic
research libraries in North America describe their leadership development experiences?
What did they experience, with regard to leadership development, and in what context?
How do they make sense out of these experiences?
Five themes emerged from the interview data that describe the phenomenon of the
library leaders’ leadership development experiences: personal growth experiences,
support and influence, exposure, personal responsibility, and recognition of leadership.
Subthemes emerged for four of the themes. Table 4 shows the five themes related to
leadership development experiences and their subthemes. Overlaps, intersections, and
connections were readily apparent in the themes and are represented visually in Figure 1.
Participants’ stories of their leadership development were very similar in content,
if not in delivery. Some walked me through their careers and mentioned influential
individuals and important events along the way, others described specific events and
important people in order of magnitude of importance rather than chronologically. My
open-ended questions allowed them to take any path to their tale, and they did so. One
participant, Damon, described his own leadership development representation and
concluded with the following:
It’s [own leadership development] hard to quantify. I think it’s just been a very
natural growth. I have gone to management classes and I have read some books
and actually I have gone to workshops and things like that, and different
leadership institutions and each one has certainly given me information and I have
grown through them. But it’s really probably experience and mentorship,
watching what people do around me that I either agree with or disagree with and
then make a conscious effort to model myself off that person or the opposite and
	  

104	  
	  

then having the work recognized. So, it’s hard to say, there wasn’t any plan, I
guess, there wasn’t anything that I was expecting, it just sort of happened and so I
don’t know how to describe it except to say just that.
Damon’s statement touches on all five themes and provides a fairly accurate, if not
succinct, representation of the other participants’ stories.
Adam described the benefits of having throughout his career a variety of
developmental experiences, and said:
….one of the benefits of being, I think, exposed to library leadership and business
leadership isn’t just that you learn more about yourself, and hopefully in doing so,
have better success in the various settings you operate in. I think one side benefit
is to realize that it [leadership development] wasn’t a search for perfection, the
aim wasn’t to negate all of your bad habits, it was to understand them, and more
importantly, work out which one you simply couldn’t do anything about. And
make sure you can be in a setting where you can compensate for those by
surrounding yourself with the right people. But one of the other benefits is that
you become a better mentor yourself, so I am much better at looking out for
opportunities for our staff here to engage in various sort of management and
leadership training than I suspect I would have been if I hadn’t had these
experiences myself.

Additional discussion and research are needed in the academic and research
library community around the concept of positive leadership development. This research
may help the library associations and graduate schools of library and information science
to create new or further develop existing programs, institutes, fellowships, and graduatelevel coursework on leadership development for library leaders. As a library leader I am
compelled to ask myself about the practical things we in the field of academic research
libraries might take away from this study. Relationships with supportive individuals have
been very influential for my study participants, leading me to consider whether enhancing
	  

105	  
	  

our mentoring efforts would help the field to recruit more leaders. Exposure, to more
people, opportunities, etc., was also quite powerful, and so I ask, how can library leaders
broaden the perspectives and experiences of librarians on their campuses? Formal
leadership development programs are resource-intensive, but clearly impactful. Is there a
more cost effective way to provide the same experiences?
Near the end of the final interview for this study, in response to my question
asking if she had shared everything she thought might be relevant with regard to her own
leadership development, Nora said:
I think one of the things maybe I haven't mentioned is, how much I enjoy people.
I find people overall fascinating and I think that’s what brings joy to my job.
Despite the difficulties, I think just being truly curious about how the people see
the world, how they see themselves in it, how they manage their world, and their
life and how they think that through, I just find that fascinating and that’s what
keeps me truly engaged in wanting to ensure the success of those people who are
working with me. And really be a force of good in the world. I think that’s really
important to me, and I do that no matter what job I'm doing, by being truly
interested and curious about how people see themselves in the world that they live
in.
She went on to say:
I am so happy here…and working for the amazing woman that I get to work with,
I wish she could use her name and say how fabulous she is, but in any case, she
has plans to retire in the next five or six years, and at that point, I need to make
some decisions. And some of that might be based on whether or not I apply for
the dean position. At that point, I may be ready to do that or I might be interested
in moving somewhere else. Moving into a dean position, I think, would be an
exciting next step. But I'm not interested in doing that until my current boss
leaves. I'm too happy to mess with it.
For Nora and the other participants in my study, positive leadership development
results from a combination of people and experiences: supportive people who provide
	  

106	  
	  

opportunities, offer support and direction, and influence and lead by example, combined
with practical on-the-job real life experience and purposeful development through
workshops, institutes, fellowships and other leadership development opportunities.
Positive leadership development for academic research library leaders deserves further
study and research, for the benefit of leaders themselves as well as for the organizations
in which they lead and the universities in which they serve.

	  

107	  
	  

References
Abels, E. Jones, R., Latham J., Magnoni, D., & Marshall J.G. (2003). Competencies for
information professionals of the 21st century. Information Outlook 7(10), 12-14,
16-18.
American Library Association. (2009). ALA’s Core Competencies of Librarianship.	  
Retrieved November 22, 2014, from
http://www.ala.org/educationcareers/sites/ala.org.educationcareers/files/content/c
areers/corecomp/corecompetences/finalcorecompstat09.pdf.
Ammons-Stephens, S., Cole, H. J., Jenkins-Gibbs, K., Riehle, C. F., & Weare, W. H.
(2009). Developing core leadership competencies for the library profession.
Library Leadership & Management, 23(2), 63-74.
Anderson, D. J. (1984). Comparative career profiles of academic librarians: Are
leaders different? The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 10(6), 326-332.
Association of Research Libraries. (2015). ARL member representative list by first year
as an ARL member representative as of April 2015. Washington, DC: Author.
Association of Research Libraries. (2014). About. Retrieved November 22, 2014, from
http://www.arl.org/about#.VHDUkGfRh8E
Avolio, B. J. (2007). Promoting more integrative strategies for leadership theory building.
American Psychologist, 62(1), 25-33.
Avolio, B. J., Gardner, W. L., Walumbwa, F. O., Luthans, F., & May, D. R. (2004).
Unlocking the mask: a look at the process by which authentic leaders impact follower
attitudes and behaviors. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(6), 801-823.
Bass, B. M. (1985). Leadership and performance beyond expectations. New York: The
Free Press.
Bedard, M. (2009). Introduction to our commitment to building leaders: programs for
leadership in academic and special libraries. Journal of Library Administration,
49(8), 777-779.
Bettin, P. J., & Kennedy, J. K. (1990). Leadership experience and leader performance:
Some empirical support at last. The Leadership Quarterly, 1(4), 219-228.
Bogdan, R. C., & Biklen, S. K. (2003). Qualitative research for education: An
	  

108	  
	  

Introduction to theories and methods (4th ed.). New York: Pearson Education.
Boyce, L.A., Zaccaro, S. J., & Wisecarver, M. Z. (2010). Propensity for self-development
of leadership attributes: Understanding, predicting, and supporting performance of
leader self-development. The Leadership Quarterly, 21(1), 159-178.
Bunnett, B., Alleen, N., Dorsch, J., Rios, G., & Stewart, C. (2009). The National Library
of Medicine/Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries (NLM/AAHSL)
Leadership Fellows Program: A Year in Review. Journal of Library
Administration, 49(8), 869-879.
Clark, N. (2011). An integrated conceptual model of respect in leadership. The
Leadership Quarterly, 22(2), 316-327.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cromer, D. E. (2009) Special Library Association: The importance of leadership.
Journal of Library Administration, 49(8), 887-893.
Davidson, P. (2004). Role models and perceived social support. In W.B. Gartner, K.G.
Shaver, P.D. Reynolds, & N.M. Carter (Eds). The handbook of entrepreneurial
dynamics: The process of business creation in contemporary America. (pp. 179
-185). Thousand Oaks: Sage.
Day, D. V., Fleenor, J. W., Atwater, L. E., Sturm, R. E., & McKee, R. A. (2014).
Advances in leader and leadership development: A review of 25 years of research
and theory. The Leadership Quarterly, 25(1), 63-82.
Day, D. V., & O’Connor, P. M. G. (2003). Leadership development: Understanding the
process. In S. E. Murphy & R. E. Riggio (Eds.), The Future of Leadership
Development (pp.11-28). Mahway, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates Publishers.
Denzin, N. K. (1978). Sociological methods: A sourcebook. 2nd ed. New York: McGrawHill.
Denzin, N. K., (1989). Interpretive interactionism. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

	  

109	  
	  

Denzin, N. K. & Lincoln, Y. S. (2005). The Sage handbook of qualitative research. (3rd
ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denzin, N. K. & Lincoln, Y. S. (1984). Handbook of qualitative research, Newbury
Park: Sage Publications.
Ericsson, K. A., & Charness, N. (1994). Expert Performance: Its Structure and
Acquisition. American Psychologist, 49(8), 725-47.
Galli, E. B., & Müller-Stuwens, G. (2012). How to build social capital with leadership
development: Lessons from an explorative case study of a multibusiness firm. The
Leadership Quarterly, 23(1), 176-201.
Gardner, J. W. (1990). On leadership. New York: The Free Press.
Gardner, W. L, Avolio, B. J., Luthans, F., May, D. R., & Walumba, F. (2005). “Can you
see the real me?” A self-based model of authentic leader and follower
development. The Leadership Quarterly, 16(3), 343-372.
George, B. & McLean, A. (2007). Why leaders lose their way. Strategy and Leadership,
35(3), 4-11.
German, L., Owen, V., Parchuck, J., & Sandore, B. (2009). RLLF in the rear-view
mirror: a report on the impact and value of the ARL Academic Library
Leadership Fellows Program. Journal of Library Administration, 49(8), 795-809.
Giesecke, J. R. & McNeil, B. (1999). Core Competencies and the Learning Organization.
Library Administration and Management 13(Summer), 158-166.
Gordon, R. S. (2006). Secure our professional future. Library Journal, 131(3), 50.
Gottfried, A. E., Gottfried, A. W., Reichard, R. J., Guerin, D. W., Oliver, P. H., & Riggio,
R. E. (2011). Motivational roots of leadership: A longitudinal study from
childhood through adulthood. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 510-519.
Gravetter, F. J., & Wallnau, L. B. (2009). Statistics for the behavioral sciences. Belmont,
CA: Wadsworth.
Guerin, D. W., Oliver, P. H., Gottfried, A. W., Gottfried, A. E., Reichard, R. J., & Riggs,
R. E. (2001). Childhood and adolescent antecedents of social skills and
leadership potential in adulthood: Temperamental approach/withdrawal and
extraversion. The Leadership Quarterly, 22, 482-294.
	  

110	  
	  

Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing qualitative work in education settings. Albany, NY: State
University of New York Press.
Hernon, P. (2011). Becoming a university library director. Library & Information Science
Research, 33(4), 276-283.
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P (2001). University library directors in the
Association of Research Libraries: The next generation, part one. College and
Research Libraries, 62(2), 116-145.
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P (2002). University library directors in the
Association of Research Libraries: The next generation, part two. College and
Research Libraries, 63(1), 73-90.
Hernon, P., Powell, R.R., & Young, A.P (2003). The next library leadership:
Attributes of academic and public library directors. Westport, Conn: Libraries
Unlimited.
Horrell, J. (2001). Leadership development in libraries: theory and practice. ILA
Reporter, October, 6-8.
Hughes, R. L., Ginnett, R. C., & Curphy, G. R. (1995). What is Leadership? In J. T.
Wren (Ed.), The leaders companion: Insights on leadership through the ages (pp.
39-43). New York: The Free Press.
Ilies, R., Morgeson, F. P., & Najrgang, J. D. (2005). Authentic leadership and
eudaemonic well-being: Understanding leader-follower outcomes. The
Leadership Quarterly, 16(3), 373-392.
Kalin, S. W. (2008). Reframing leadership: The ACRL/Harvard Leadership Institute for
academic librarians. Journal of Business & Finance Librarianship, 13(3), 261
-270.
Kaufmann, F. A., Harrell, G., Milam, C. P., & Woolverton, N. (1986). The nature, role,
and influence of mentors in the lives of gifted adults. Journal of Counseling and
Development, 64(9), 576-578.
Kockelmans, J. J. (1994). Edmund Husserl’s phenomenology. West Lafayette, IN: Purdue
University Press.

	  

111	  
	  

Leonard, N. H., Beauvais, L. L., & Scholl, R. W. (1999). Work motivation: The
incorporation of self-concept-based processes. Human Relations, 52, (8), 969998.
Lipscomb, C. E., Martin, E. R., & Peay, W. J. (2009). Building the next generation of
leaders: The NLM/AAHSL leadership development fellows program. Journal of
Library Administration, 49(8), 847-867.
Luthans, F., and Avolio, B. J. (2003). Authentic leadership development. In K. S.
Cameron, J. E. Dutton, & R. E. Quinn (Eds.), Positive organizational scholarship
(pp. 241-258). San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler.
Lynch, B. P. (2004). Theory and practice. Library Administration and Management
18(1), 30-34.
Mason, F. M. & Wetherbee, L.V. (2004). Learning to lead: An analysis of current
training programs for library leadership. Library Trends, 53(1), 187-217.
McNeil, B. (2010). Icing on the cake: a case study exploration of the experiences of
participants in the UCLA Senior Fellows program. Unpublished manuscript.
McNeil, B. (2002). Core Competencies: A SPEC Kit. Washington, DC: Association of
Research Libraries.
Mech, T. (1996). Leadership and the evolution of academic librarianship. The Journal of
Academic Librarianship, 22(5), 345-353.
Moustakas, C. (1994). Phenomenological research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mullins, J. L, Allen, F. R., & Hufford, J. R. (2007). Top ten assumptions for the future of
academic libraries and librarians: A report from the ACRL research committee.
C&RL News, 68(4), 240-246.
Neely, T. Y. (2009). Assessing diversity initiatives: The ARL Leadership and Career
Development Program. Journal of Library Administration, 49(8), 811-835.
Neely, T. & Winston, M. D. (1999). Snowbird leadership institute: Leadership
development in the profession. College and Research Libraries, 60(5), 412-425.
Neuman, W. L. (2006). Social Research Methods: Qualitative and quantitative
approaches. (6th ed.). Boston: Pearson Education.
	  

112	  
	  

ODLIS. (2013). ODLIS: Online dictionary for library and information science. Retrieved
August 31, 2013, from http://www.abc-clio.com/ODLIS/odlis_a.aspx.
Parker, C. A. (2009). Leadership development programs for law librarians. Journal of
Library Administration, 49(8), 881-885.
Patton, M.Q. (2002). Qualitative research & evaluation methods. (3rd ed.). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Phillips-Jones, L. (1982). Mentors and protégés. New York: Arbor House.
Polkinghorne, D.E. (1989). Phenomenological research methods. In R.S. Valle & S.
Halling (Eds.), Existential-phenomenological perspectives in psychology (pp.4160). New York: Plenum.
Rafferty, A. E., & Griffin, M. A. (2004). Dimensions of transformational leadership:
Conceptual and empirical. The Leadership Quarterly, 15(4), 329-354.
Richards, L., & Morse, J. M. (2007). Readme first for a user’s guide to qualitative
methods (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Riggs, D.E. (2001). The crisis and opportunities in library leadership. Journal of Library
Administration, 32(3/4), 5-17.
Roach, C.E. & Behling, O. (1984). Functionalism: Basis for an alternate approach to the
study of leadership. In J.G. Hunt, D.M. Hosking, C.A. Schriesheim, & R. Stewart
(Eds.), Leaders and Managers: International Perspectives on Managerial
Behavior and Leadership. Elmsford, NY: Pergamon.
Rooks, D. C. (1994). Terms for Academic Library Directors. Library Trends, 43(1), 6061.
Rumble, J. & MacEwen, B. (2008). The UCLA Senior Fellows program. Journal of
Business & Finance Librarianship, 13(3), 271-286.
Saunders, L. (1999). ACRL/Harvard leadership institute: professional development at
its best. College and Research Libraries, 60(8), 645-647.
Scandura, T. A., & Lankau, M. J. (1996). Developing diverse leaders: A leader-member
exchange approach. The Leadership Quarterly, 7(2), 243-263.

	  

113	  
	  

Sheldon, B. (1991). Leaders in libraries: Styles and strategies for success. Chicago, IL:
American Library Association.
Simmons, L., Palanski, M. E., & Simons, T. (2012). Authentic leadership and
behavioral integrity as drivers of follower commitment and performance. Journal
of Business Ethics, 107(3), 255-264.
Skinner, K. & Krabbenhoeft, N. (2014). Training the 21st Century Library Leader: A
Review of Library Leadership Training, 1998-2013. Atlanta, GA: Educopia
Institute.
Sternberg, R. J. (2008). The WICS approach to leadership: Stories of leadership and the
structures and processes that support them. The Leadership Quarterly, 19(3), 360371.
Stewart, D., & Mickunas, A. (1990). Exploring phenomenology: A guide to the field and
its literature (2nd ed.). Athens: Ohio University Press.
Van Manen, M. (1990). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action
sensitive pedagogy. London, Ontario, Canada: The University of Western
Ontario.
Venetis, M. J. (2008). Identification of Remote Leadership Patterns in Academic and
Public Libraries. Denton, Texas. UNT Digital Library. Retrieved May 18, 2014
from http://digital.library.unt.edu/ark:/67531/metadc9017/.
Wang, X., & Su, C. (2006). Develop future library leaders with global literacy in the
context of cultural intelligence. Chinese Librarianship: an international
electronic Journal. Retrieved August 27, 2008, from
http://www.iclc.us/cliej/cl22WangSu.htm.
Weiner, S.A., Breivik, P.S., Clark, D., & Caboni, T. (2009). Understanding the higher
-education context: The Peabody Academic Library Leadership Institute. Journal
of Library Administration, 49(8), 837-846.
Weiner, S.G. (2003). Leadership of academic libraries: A literature review. Education
Libraries, 26(2), 5-18.
Wilder, S. (1996). Generational change and the niche for librarians. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 22(5), 385.

	  

114	  
	  

Williams, J. F., II & Winston, M. D. (2003). Leadership competencies and the
importance of research methods and statistical analysis in decision making and
research and publication: A study of citation patterns. Library & Information
Science Research, 25(4), 387-402.
Winston, M. D. & Hazlin, G. E. (2003). Leadership competencies in library and
information science: Marketing as a component of LIS curricula. Journal of
Education for Library and Information Science, 44(2), 177-87.
Winston, M. D. & Dunkley, L. (2002). Leadership competencies for academic librarians:
The importance of development and fundraising. College & Research Libraries,
63(2), 171-82.
Woodsworth, A. & von Wahlde, B. (1988). Leadership for research libraries: A
festschrift for Robert M. Hayes. Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press.
Yip, J., & Wilson, M. S. (2010). Learning from experience. In E. Van Velsor, C. D.
McCauley, & M. N. Ruderman (Eds.), The Center for Creative Leadership
Handbook of Leadership Experience (3rd ed., pp. 63–96). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Yukl, G. A. (1981). Leadership in Organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.

	  

115	  
	  

Appendix A: Informed Consent Form

	  

116	  
	  

	  
	  

	  

117	  
	  

	  

118	  
	  

Appendix B: E-mail Invitation to Participate

	  

119	  
	  

E-mail Invitation to participate
Hello, [participant name],
I am studying the positive leadership development experiences of academic library
leaders who are currently working as assistant or associate deans/directors for my
dissertation. I’m writing now to ask if you would be willing to participate in my study
and if selected allow me to interview you on this topic. If so, please reply to this message
by March 6 to indicate your interest in participating.
If you indicate interest in participating I will send you a brief pre-interview demographic
questionnaire and request that you return it to me prior to scheduling an interview. The
interview will take approximately 60-75 minutes and will be audio-taped. Interviews will
be transcribed and analyzed, and reported on in my dissertation and subsequent
publications. Participants and the institutions where they work will be given
pseudonyms. All records will be confidential. The data gathered will be reported in my
dissertation and possibly included in future publications and presentations. Every effort
will be made to keep participants identity anonymous.
Thank you for considering participating in my research project. I would appreciate your
response by March 6, 2015. Interviews will be conducted by phone during March. Your
assistance in completing the interview will greatly strengthen my data collection efforts.
Thank you in advance.
Participation is voluntary and there are no known risks associated with this research. You
are free to decide not to participate in this study. You can also withdraw at any time
without harming your relationship with the researchers or the University of NebraskaLincoln. However, if you have any questions as to your rights in filling out this survey,
you may contact the University Nebraska-Lincoln Institutional Review Board at 402-4726965.Please feel free to contact me by phone at 219-669-3525 or by email to
memcneil@purdue.edu or mcneil.m.e@gmail.com if you have questions or concerns.
Thank you in advance, Beth McNeil
Graduate Student, PhD Human Science, Leadership Studies focus,
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Phone: 219-669-3525
email: mcneil.m.e@gmail.com
Gina S. Matkin, PhD
Secondary Investigator
Agricultural Leadership, Education, and Communication
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Phone: 765-472-4454
email: gmatkin1@unl.edu
IRB Approval #20150215095 EX
	  

120	  
	  

Appendix C: Pre-Interview Questionnaire

	  

121	  
	  

Pre-Interview Questionnaire
Pre-Interview Demographic Questionnaire for: A Phenomenological Study Exploring
the Leadership Development Experiences of Academic Research Library Leaders
Name
Date
Age. In what year were you born?
Race. Please specify:
American Indian or Alaska Native
Asian
Black or African American
Native Hawaiian or Other Pacific Islander
White
Prefer not to answer
Ethnicity. Please specify:
Hispanic or Latino
Not Hispanic or Latino
Gender . Please specify:
Female
Male
Prefer not to answer
Degrees attained:
Years of experience in field of librarianship:
Years of experience in leadership roles in academic libraries:
Years in current position:
Participation in formal leadership development programs
Please check all that apply and note year of participation:
ACRL/Harvard Leadership Institute
ARL Leadership and Career Development Program (LCDP)
ARL Leadership Fellows
Frye Institute
Northern Exposure to Leadership Institute (NELI)
Peabody
Snowbird Leadership Institute
UCLA Senior Fellows Program
Other:
Other:
Please return to Beth McNeil, memcneil@purdue.edu
	  

122	  
	  

Appendix D: Sample Interview Protocol

	  

123	  
	  

Sample Interview Protocol
Title: A Phenomenological Study Exploring the Leadership Development Experiences of
Academic Research Library Administrators
Date:
Participant Assigned Pseudonym:
Interview Location: via telephone
My dissertation research involves exploring academic research library leaders’ beliefs
about their own leadership development. The interview will take approximately 60-90
minutes and will audiotape it. In the final study you will be given a pseudonym. Do you
have any questions before we begin?
Question
Tell me the story of the first time
you thought you were a leader?

You’ve been __(title)___ at
__(Library/Univ)__ since (year)_.
Tell me about a little about your
career. How did you choose
librarianship? And why did you
decide to become a leader?
Thinking back please tell me about
your own leadership development.
Please tell me everything you can
about your own leadership
development experiences.

	  

Notes

124	  
	  

Prompting questions, if necessary, to
elicit more information:
Are there experiences that were
particularly impactful? How so? Who
was influential to your leadership
development? What situations or
people stand out for you?

You participated in __(name of
leadership development program)_.
Please describe that experience. What
role, if any, do you think participation
(in above program) played in your
development as a leader?
Have you shared everything you think
might be relevant with regard to your
own leadership development?

Thank you for taking time to participate in this interview and study. Your answers will be
transcribed verbatim, as will the other interviews I am conducting. Your confidentiality
will be maintained in the summary of my findings. If you are interested in seeing a copy
of the results, or have any questions, please let me know. Thank you again.
Record my observations and thoughts about the interview.

	  

125	  
	  

Appendix E: Peer Review Form

	  

126	  
	  

	  
	  

