GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURES, SOCIAL INCLUSION, AND THE DIGITAL DIVIDE:
A DISCOURSE ON THE AFFINITY BETWEEN THE EFFECTS OF FREEDOM AND
ACCESS TO ONLINE INFORMATION RESOURCES

by
Christopher A. Cunningham
Bachelor of Arts
University of North Carolina - Charlotte, 2002
Master of Library and Information Studies
University of North Carolina - Greensboro, 2007

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in
Library and Information Science
College of Mass Communication and Information Studies
University of South Carolina
2015
Accepted by:
Kendra Albright, Major Professor
Samantha Hastings, Committee Member
Paul Solomon, Committee Member
Lee Walker, Committee Member
Lacy Ford, Vice Provost and Dean of Graduate Studies

UMI Number: 3704316

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3704316
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Christopher A. Cunningham, 2015
All Rights Reserved.

ii

DEDICATION
This dissertation is dedicated to the many folks without whom I would not be at
this point. First, to my family, especially my wife Andrea, and my boys, Caelin and
Conner, who have all encouraged and strengthened me through this process. It has been a
colossal group effort and without them, I would not have succeeded.
And finally, my utmost gratitude to my Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, through
whom all things are possible.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I also wanted to acknowledge the vast amount of energy and support of my
friends, especially Jeremiah Nelson, Tim Carmichael, Robyn Mahoney, Robin Boswell,
Deon Ritchie, Jackie Harper, Bill and Becky Bragdon, and Jon Finn. It is with great
sadness that I realize that Finn will not be with us to celebrate this achievement. Your
presence is missed every day, Finn.
My many thanks go to my committee, Dr. Sam Hastings, Dr. Paul Solomon, and
Dr. Lee Walker, as well. You guys are awesome. I greatly appreciate the words of advice
and encouragement as this process has taken place. Your words of wisdom were always
helpful and I greatly appreciate all of the work that you did for me.
An unspeakable amount of thanks goes to Kendra Albright as my advisor. I could
not have asked for a better advisor. Your advice and encouragement were always
welcome and I cannot thank you enough for all the hard work that you put into this in
order for me to achieve the level of excellence for which I was aiming.
My gratitude also goes to the faculty and staff at the University of South Carolina.
All of you have made what often seemed an insurmountable task into an achievable
project.
Finally, my thanks go to all of the doc students at USC, both new and former.
Your friendship and support have helped me achieve what often seemed an unattainable
goal. I hope that the idea of stone soup continues long after I am gone.

iv

ABSTRACT
This study discovers the level of relationship between democracy and access to
online information. It defines democracy using freedom ratings from Freedom House, as
well as economic factors, such as Gross Domestic Product and Foreign Direct
Investment. The model also included a data set from Geddis, Wright and Frantz, who
used a finer grained scale for autocratic countries.
It then explores the relationship between democracy and the level of access to
online information using an ordinary least squares regression model. The level of access
to online information was defined as the number of the internet users per capita within a
country. The strength of the relationship indicated that this definition explained ~57% of
the interaction between these variables.
In addition, the civil liberties ranking of a country was determine to have a
statistically significant relationship to the number of internet users while the political
rights of a country did not have a statistically significant relationship to the number of
internet users.
By determining this level of relationship, policy makers can then make a better
informed decision while deciding on methods to bridge the digital divide. In determining
which factors can be adjusted by outside stakeholders, such as access to technology, and
those factors which cannot, such as levels of democracy, policy makers can determine
methods to increase their impact in narrowing the digital divide.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION ....................................................................................................................... iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................................................................................ iv
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................................v
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................................. vii
LIST OF FIGURES ................................................................................................................ vii
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS ..................................................................................................... ix
CHAPTER 1: DEMOCRACY AND THE DIGITAL DIVIDE ..............................................................1
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE DIGITAL DIVIDE ......................................................33
CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY TO DECODE THE DIGITAL DIVIDE ............................................99
CHAPTER 4: RESULTS........................................................................................................126
CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION .................................................................................................142
REFERENCES .....................................................................................................................150

vi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 2.1 Matrix of Articles about the Digital Divide .......................................................98
Table 3.1 Freedom Housing rankings of countries, based on freedom status, political
rights, and civil liberties ...................................................................................................107
Table 3.2 Percentage of individuals using the Internet (2006–2011) ..............................118
Table 4.1 Results from the regression model...................................................................129
Table 4.2 Results of the linear regression ........................................................................132

vii

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.1 Freedom House world freedom status rankings ...............................................25
Figure 1.2 Freedom House world political rights rankings ...............................................26
Figure 1.3 Freedom House world civil liberties rankings..................................................27
Figure 3.1 Gross domestic product (GDP) worldwide, 2010 ..........................................115
Figure 3.2 Global foreign domestic investment, 2010 .....................................................117

viii

LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
DSL .................................................................................................. Digital Subscriber Line
FCC .......................................................................... Federal Communications Commission
FEMA ................................................................. Federal Emergency Management Agency
GDP................................................................................................ Gross Domestic Product
ICT .............................................................. Information and Communications Technology
ISP ................................................................................................. Internet Service Provider
IT .................................................................................................... Information Technology
LIS..................................................................................... Library and Information Science
NGO ..................................................................................Non-Governmental Organization
ROI...................................................................................................... Return on Investment
UN ................................................................................................................. United Nations

ix

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Democracy and the Digital Divide
The purpose of this study was to ascertain whether the level of democracy a
country possesses affects the digital divide and whether a person in a country considered
free has greater levels of access to information than a person in a country considered not
free. The research question being answered is whether levels of freedom affect the level
of access to online information. The hypothesis being that as levels of freedom increase,
the number of internet users per capita increases as well. In addition, this relationship has
statistical significance.
Democracy is the rule of a country by its people, either directly or through a
representative structure. Given that a country is run by the people, it would stand to
reason that a highly democratic country would want its citizens to be well informed in
order to make the best possible decision in regard to government policy. However, it is
unclear whether this is actually the case. Some countries are like the United States, where
the government is often restricted from providing access due to conflicts with corporate
America. As part of its broadband plan, issued in 2010, the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) plans to “ensure universal access to broadband network services”
(“Executive Summary,” n.d.). However, Internet Service Providers (ISPs), such as
Comcast, have already filed written complaints to the FCC, stating that the
implementation of this new broadband access infrastructure would have significant,

1

detrimental effects on their businesses. It is assumed that if any of these plans actually
begin to move forward, then numerous lawsuits will follow shortly thereafter.
While the FCC has shown that it is concerned with the digital divide, the agency
must also walk a fine line between providing access to those who need it while not
interfering with businesses making profits from those people who can already afford such
access. In addition, once such infrastructure is built, it is unclear as to who will actually
own it. To combat the FCC’s plan, “six of the nation’s largest ILEC/wireless/broadband
providers—AT&T, Verizon, CenturyLink, FairPoint, Frontier, and Windstream—offered
what they described as a comprehensive plan for reform of universal service and
intercarrier compensation…” (Selwyn, 2011, ¶ 3). Selwyn (2011, ¶ 3) continued, “These
seemingly ambitious goals aside, the ILECs’ ‘ABC Plan‘ is in reality a gambit aimed at
protecting its sponsors’ subsidized monopoly status and embedded investments in legacy
technologies that are actually at odds with the FCC’s stated goals.”
Even in the United States, one of the most democratic countries in the world, the
digital divide represents a complex situation with no easy answers. If a country with one
of the strongest economies in the world is unable to solve the issue of the digital divide,
what chance do countries with some of the weakest economies in the world have in
addressing this divide?
One way for all countries to address the divide is to begin looking at what effects
are present in the digital divide. By trying to sort out what has a significant effect and
what does not, countries could then begin to focus their policy into ways that would have
the greatest impact and then begin to work their way down the list of factors. By looking
at the variables that come into play, a country could review the real costs associated with

1

the divide and look at how much impact an investment would have if they addressed a
specific variable. This could be done by reviewing job opportunities between different
groups that had access to online resources and those that do not.
This review would also allow a better understanding on some of the effects of the
divide itself. If some investments give a significant return in a shorter amount of time, a
country may be well advised to follow that investment first in order to provide funding
for future development. As Mathur and Ambani (2005) stated, “The new technologies
being developed can help surmount barriers present in providing information resources at
a low cost and make applications feasible and profitable” (p. 345). Budhiraja and
Sachdeva (2002) also state,
ICT (Information and Communications Technology) is a key weapon in the war
against world poverty. When used properly, it offers a tremendous potential to
empower people in developing countries to overcome development obstacles; to
address the most important social problems they face; and to strengthen
communities, democratic institutions, a free press, and local economies (p. 3).
Opesade (2011) stated, “The World Bank reported that the ‘knowledge gap’ in
many developing countries is a contributory factor to poverty and that there is no better
way to bridge this divide than through the use of ICTs” (p. 102). By investing financial
and administrative resources into the infrastructure needed for access, countries are able
to not only combat the digital divide but also to use those resources to combat poverty as
well. Opesade (2011) also mentioned the United Nations, “The United Nations
Commission on Science and Technology for Development (UNCSTD), while
acknowledging the predicament that most African nations face, warned of further

2

isolation if priority is not given to ICT strategies” (p.102). Without access to these online
technologies, countries that are already behind in terms of development will fall even
further behind the rest of the world.
Development is also increased by further investment in ICTs. This development
would address some of the issues with the digital divide, such as the need for additional
infrastructure. As Cieslikowski et al. stated, that developing countries have opportunities
to use ICT’s to gain greater levels of development. Mobile banking, job searches, price
tracking and market demand are just a few examples of how mobile services can be
leveraged in order to improve their daily lives (Cieslikowski, Halewood, Kimura, &
Qiang, 2009).
From the mundane need for current weather conditions that could affect the
planting decision of a farmer to the life-or-death need of a doctor to know the most
current techniques being used to combat an illness, access to the Internet can help a user
to make a more informed decision, which could have a lasting impact. Cieslikowski et al.
further said that technological convergence could help increase productivity, increase
trade, lower the cost of transactions and increase tax revenue. In addition, villages with
access to broadband service can gain access to better market prices for their goods as well
as job training (Cieslikowski, Halewood, Kimura, & Qiang, 2009).
The Impact of the Digital Divide
The digital divide is often defined as the demarcation between those with access
to technology and those without such access (McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994;
McConnaughey, Nila, & Sloan, 1995). The developed world is quickly adopting a
knowledge based economy. This economy is based around quick, reliable access to
information at the touch of a button. The sheer volume of information readily available
3

online is staggering, with estimates reaching over 672 exabytes of accessible data
available on the Internet in 2013 ("Size of the Internet," 2013). One exabyte is equivalent
to 1,000,000,000 Gigabytes. However, what happens to those groups that do not have
such readily available access to online resources? How can a developing country begin to
reach developed status when one of the primary factors in the knowledge economy is
unavailable to them?
It is becoming more common for information to be published in digital formats.
Many museums and libraries have begun to digitize their collections for outside use, and
many journals have adopted a completely digital format. This shift to a digital format will
cause a greater demand among those on the wrong side of the digital divide for greater
levels of online access. As it becomes apparent that ICT growth helps to spur
development, many more developing countries will begin to work on long-term ICT
growth plans in order to reap the benefits, financial and otherwise, from those
investments.
According to Mark Zuckerberg, the founder of Facebook, whose company has
spent over $1 billion investing in Internet and communication technologies in developing
countries:
The story of the next century is the transition from an industrial, resource-based
economy, to a knowledge economy. An industrial economy is zero sum. If you
own an oil field, I cannot go in that same oil field. But knowledge works
differently. If you know something, then you can share that—and then the whole
world gets richer (Levy, 2013, ¶ 6).

4

For much of the developed world, the Internet is an invaluable tool. We can check
the weather, follow our retirement funds, catch up on the news, and stay in touch with
friends almost instantaneously. Instructors do not think twice about uploading large
article files or links to streaming audio or video sites for their students to peruse. Students
can enroll in online courses, regardless of their physical location or proximity to the
school they are attending, due to the level of connectivity prevalent in their daily lives.
For those without access, however, such opportunities are not available.
Researchers must rely on print versions of journals, which often lag months behind their
online counterparts. While collaboration is possible, it is typically focused more on local
peers who are readily available as opposed to peers who may have a greater
understanding of the research being done.
“Today’s world is divided not by ideology but by technology” (Sachs, 2000, ¶ 1)
is a profound statement in our information society. As more reliance is given to digital
resources and opportunities, those groups with little or no access to technology will fall
further and further behind. However, for groups that have not been exposed to
technology, they are at a disadvantage in both skill sets and opportunities.
In 1989, The World became the first commercial Internet service provider (ISP)
(The World, 2006, ¶ 1).This new service let anyone, regardless of their affiliations or lack
thereof, to gain access to the information being shared online. A new world of data and
information was now available to anyone with the ability to connect to this network.
However, the early Internet was often difficult to navigate. Users had to know
specifically where they wanted to go and how to get there. Software for this connectivity
was often expensive to access, and at times, required some significant knowledge of

5

programming to fully use the functionality of the software. Once again, a divide was
apparent between those who had the technology to access the network and those without
it. Computer literacy rates were very low with only 35% of the workforce using
computers in the workplace (Lowe, 1997, p. 30). Thus, the digital divide began. In
addition, while some users had the technology, they did not have the skill set required to
actually access the information available to them, widening this divide.
Digital Content and Access
New technological improvements gave users access to a large amount of
information easily and made sure that it was at least somewhat relevant to the term for
which they were searching. However, much of this information was only available in a
digital format. Therefore, if a person did not have access to the World Wide Web or the
Internet, they had no access to this information. In addition, many materials that were
held at physical locations were often scanned and shared in a digital format, thus
allowing those with access to online resources to use those materials regardless of their
physical proximity to the original document. However, people without such electronic
access were once again denied access to this material unless they went to the physical
location of the document owner. For example, while South Sudan has a National Archive,
with “documents in the Archive, which number tens of thousands, date from the colonial
era up to the 1980s” (National Archive of South Sudan, n.d., ¶ 1 ), these documents are
not digitally available. The only access to these records is to physically visit the storage
facility.
Much of the world has continued on this path of digitization. In fact, many
governments are now no longer printing many of their documents and instead are posting

6

electronic copies on their websites and letting users download them at their convenience.
However, for those people without such access, they were beginning to be completely
shut out of such a system. Many employers posted jobs only on their electronic job
boards and encouraged prospective employees to submit their applications in a digital
format.
Unfortunately, during the initial research into the digital divide by the National
Telecommunications and Information Administration, the starting point was whether a
person had the technology to access the Internet (Brown, Barram, & Irving, 1995).. It
could be answered simply yes or no. If a person had a computer with a modem, then they
were considered able to access the Internet. However, as technology continued to grow,
the gradations of the digital divide grew as well. In addition, many scholars began to
recognize that possession of the required technology did not equal actual access to the
information available on the Internet. As Boris (2005) quoted from Hollifield and
Donnermeyer (2003), “Past policy simply assumed that if information technologies were
available, they soon would be adopted. But particularly with complex, high-cost
information technologies, this ‘field of dreams’ approach is untenable” (p. 17).
Three Primary Factors of the Digital Divide
The question then began to slowly shift away from those with access and those
without it toward the ways to address the digital divide. As scholars began to do further
research into the digital divide after the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration’s initial inquiry (Bertot, McClure, & Fletcher, 1997; Bertot & McClure,
2000; Bell, 2001), several factors began to be apparent that affected the ability of a user
to actually access the information on the Internet. The three primary factors were access

7

to technology, an infrastructure in place that supported the technology, and users’ skill
sets that allowed them to use this technology to their advantage.
Access to technology.
The first factor that was the impetus for the initial National Telecommunications
and Information Administration study was that of access to technology. In the 1995
study, the main variable was whether a person had a computer with a modem. At that
time, while modems were gaining in popularity, it was not assumed that a networking
device, such as a modem, would be included in the system specifications that included
network interface cards and modems to gain access to a local area network or wide area
network. Today, while it is mainly assumed that a system has some form of network
device installed, not all socio-economic groups can afford a computer. Thus, while the
gap between computers that have connectivity and those that do not has been bridged,
there is still a significant gap between people who have access to a computer at home and
those who do not. Another shift from the 1995 study is whether a person had access to a
computer. As of 1994, according to later research by the National Commission on
Library and Information Science (NCLIS) only 20.4% of libraries had Internet access
(McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994). However, by 1997, the study by the NCLIS found
that 72.3% of libraries had Internet access (Bertot, McClure, & Fletcher, 1997), and by
2000, 94.5% of all public libraries in the United States not only had access to the Internet
but also provided access to the public (Bertot & McClure, 2000).
The US Congress passed the Telecommunication Act of 1996, which was the first
telecommunications legislation since the 1930’s. This act was designed to reform the
telecommunications, as well as information, landscape in the US. With the intervention

8

of Congress via the Telecommunication Act of 1996, libraries made tremendous gains in
getting and sharing access to the Internet with the public. Specifically, libraries gained
federal funding through the advent of the e-rate, which was included as a provision in the
Telecommunication Act of 1996. The e-rate program was designed specifically to
subsidize the cost of broadband internet access for schools and libraries. School and
libraries can apply annually for funding that can range from 20 to 90 percent of the cost
associated with gaining internet access (E-Rate Program - Discounted, n.d.).
The inclusion of the e-rate program helped to drastically offset the expense of
Internet access and is still in use today to offset the cost of access to broadband for many
public libraries. While by 2000, a person could enter almost any library in the United
States and have a terminal that accessed the Internet, libraries failed to capture all of the
population in their area of influence. Many rural libraries service a significantly large
geographic space, thus limiting the ability of their patrons to visit the library. In addition,
even those people who have a library nearby often do not take advantage of its resources.
A number of users are unaware of these resources or often do not have the skills to use a
computer to find the information that would benefit them. “Half the adults in America do
not have Internet access and 57% of those non-users are not interested in getting online”
with “36% of those not online express concern that the online world is a confusing and
hard place to negotiate.” (Lenhart, 2000, ¶ 5).
The focus of research began to shift from having any source of access to actually
having a source of access that one would use. This often shifted the focus to a person’s
home and work environment. While the prices of PCs have dropped significantly since
their debut, there is still a significant cost associated with a computer that will be relevant

9

for a year or two. While some areas have made inroads in trying to provide Internet
service to the community for free, this is typically not the case. For most people, in order
to access the Internet from home, they must have a subscription to a local ISP. As with
many services, price ranges differ greatly, depending upon location, speed, and
competition. Unfortunately, many of these ISPs rely upon nearby high-speed cables,
which are typically not available in most rural areas. While some service providers are
installing wireless connectivity, the process has been slow and costs are usually more
than that paid for traditional wired service. This often leaves groups in lower socioeconomic brackets left without the means to access the Internet. For example, one project
of the FCC was to bring fiber optic to rural New Hampshire. Several ISP’s, including
Fairpoint, objected to government intervention in a free market. However, local residents
state ” that the DSL over copper lines was much slower than fiber to the home, and that
FairPoint showed no signs of ever bringing anything faster to Rindge” while one resident
pointed out that “getting rid all those other systems means his monthly connectivity
charges have dropped from a total of $268 a month to "a little over $100." (Brooks,
2014).
Technological skill sets.
Another significant factor that has a considerable impact upon the digital divide
and people’s access to the Internet is a person’s skill set. Oftentimes, many people fail to
realize the impact of even being able to use a mouse effectively. Many people, especially
those in older demographics or with less education, have not gained even rudimentary
skills for using computers. Loading a program using a graphical interface is often an
intimidating task, much less actually opening a web browser and finding a search engine

10

to run a query for specific information. Simple routines, such as including a Boolean
operator in a search query, are often something outside of these people’s ability to
perform. Even if they can do a simple query, the relevance of the returns on their searches
may be so low as to make them wonder why they tried to perform this operation in the
first place. As of 2000, “87% of those 65 and over do not have Internet access and 59%
of those between the ages of 50 and 64 do not go online. In comparison, 65% of those
under age 30 have Internet access“ (Lenhart, 2000).
As an additional obstacle involved in skill sets, researchers have found low levels
of information literacy in even the most prolific groups of Internet users. Many users feel
that if a query result is at the top, it must be the most relevant to exactly what they were
looking for. In addition, many users do not look at the source of the information being
provided or the age of the material that is available. Many websites may not be updated
for weeks or months, if ever. Thus, the information presented on these sites may be
outdated at best and completely erroneous or dangerous at the worst. Information literacy
has become a topic of research in its own right, as many researchers have realized the
importance of gaining a deeper understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of online
resources and the ability to find scholarly works as opposed to many opinion pieces that
have proliferated on the Internet. Ferro, Helbig, and Gil-Garcia (2011) stated, “While IT
literacy is an important factor in digital divide research, and studies examine user
characteristics with respect to IT literacy, few studies make the process of basic IT
literacy acquisition their main focal point” (p.3).
With the phenomenal growth in blogs and wikis in recent years, the amount of
information stored online is growing at a colossal rate. However, many of these pieces of

11

information are hearsay or a person’s opinion. However, without an understanding of
how websites are built and who can build them, a newcomer to the Internet may assume
the information posted is completely correct or unbiased. This could lead to poor
decisions based upon this erroneous or highly biased information. By learning more
about being information literate, an Internet user would be equipped to at least be aware
of the potential for bias and error on these websites and make sure that if the information
they are using is not a scholarly work to look for additional sources of information to
corroborate the accuracy of the information. “The Web has potential to fuel anxieties in
people who have little or no medical training, and the large volumes of medical
information, some of which is erroneous, may mislead users with health concerns”
(Murphy, 2010, ¶ 7).
Information literacy, however, is often well past the point where many users are.
Many users struggle with basic word processing and spreadsheet programs, such as those
in the Microsoft Office suite. Even such simple exercises as opening a web browser may
be foreign to them. Several researchers started studies on information searches only to
discover that the respondents to their survey did not even possess the rudimentary
computer skills beyond turning on their PCs (James, 2001a; Hargittai, 2002; Stern 2010).
As an additional challenge, if the user does not read English, he or she may be
blocked from accessing the content due to the language barrier. In a 2006 survey, “32
percent of the websites loaded in English, fully 69 percent either loaded in English or
offered English translations” (Does the Internet, 2006, ¶ 3). Therefore, a user has over a
one in three chance of being unable to decipher the information even with access as it
may not be in a language he or she can read. Many lesser developed countries do not

12

even have a presence online thereby denying support for the given language of their
people. In 1997, researchers “found that English was the principal language on 82.3% of
these pages, followed by German (4.0%), Japanese (3.1%), French (1.8%) and Spanish
(1.1%).” (Grefenstette & Nioche, 2000, p. 1).
As an added challenge, many of the very people who would benefit the most from
access to the Internet are illiterate, thus stacking the deck even further against them.
According to the Central Intelligence Agency, “Extremely low literacy rates are
concentrated in three regions, the Arab states, South and West Asia, and Sub-Saharan
Africa, where around one-third of the men and half of all women are illiterate” (The
World Factbook, 2013, ¶ 1). These are the very regions that would benefit the greatest
from increased access to information.
Technology infrastructure.
A third factor that has been discussed in depth has been the need for the
infrastructure to support access to the Internet. Many developed countries had a
significant portion of their country wired via telephone lines. This cabling allowed earlier
access to the Internet, as telephone lines were the primary method by which Internet
connections were made to ISPs. Even the digital subscriber lines (DSLs) that allowed for
even faster connection speeds were originally based upon the use of telephone lines.
“The most popular way is to have your telephone line (also known as a ‘landline’)
converted to broadband so that it can carry normal phone calls and internet data at the
same time” (Syrett, 2013, ¶ 2).
Many lesser developed countries, however, have not had the opportunity or
budget needed in order to extend copper lines throughout their countries. In addition,

13

numerous wars and conflicts have further slowed progress, as many areas that did have
the necessary cabling in place were often some of the first targets in an insurrection, thus
destroying what little infrastructure was in place at the time. Similarly, many lesser
developed countries have very narrow methods of connection to the outside world. If
those connections are damaged, this often has a huge impact of the entire country’s
access to the Internet. This was highlighted in 2009, when the SAT-3 cable connecting
most of Nigeria to the Internet was cut: “Around 70% of Nigeria’s bandwidth was cut,
causing severe problems for its banking sector, government and mobile phone networks”
(Cable Fault Cuts, 2009, ¶ 4).
Many countries have begun introducing computer skills into the education
system. In addition, several groups, such as the One Laptop Per Child organization, have
been working steadily to try to address the issue of having access to the technology
required to use the Internet. However, the issue of infrastructure has been plagued with
many problems that have slowed progress.
Throughout Sub-Saharan Africa, clear limitations to productive Internet access
and use exist, and overcoming them will require appropriate investment in both
infrastructure as well as demand side factors such as access, affordability,
awareness and attractiveness of solutions (noted as ‘conditions for use’). Poor
performance on these core conditions, comprised of indicators on physical
infrastructure and general business environment, cannot be leapfrogged (Impact of
the Internet, 2013, p.4).
One such issue is that of funding. Many of the very countries that would benefit
the most from gaining access to the Internet are the very same countries that are unable to

14

afford the cost of the infrastructure needed to support access to the Internet. “Policymakers should remove roadblocks that deter investment in and use of terrestrial fibre,
including: lack of liberalisation; high cost of licences; challenges accessing rights of way
for deployment within countries and across borders; and high taxes on equipment and
services” (Schumann & Kende, 2013, p. 3).
As an added hurdle, while some companies often offer to install and maintain the
needed infrastructure, those companies gain a monopoly on access to the infrastructure.
In addition, any profits that are generated are typically moved out of the country.
Currently, nearly all developing countries suffer from Internet connectivity that is
expensive and slow, in comparison to developed countries. To a large extent, this
is the result of the fact that virtually all developing country Internet networks and
service providers rely - directly or indirectly - on international satellite links to
larger foreign upstream providers (BOLD 2003: Development, 2003, ¶ 1).
These two issues have a significant impact on a country’s ability to maintain long-term
access to the Internet.
Another significant issue is the physical accessibility needed for the
infrastructure. Much of the developing world, as well as many areas in developed
countries, has a sparse population density. This leads to concerns about being able to
even reach many of these groups, much less install cabling that would reach that far
without a significant loss of signal strength. One method by which this obstacle is being
addressed is by the use of mobile technologies. By installing wireless access towers on
high viewpoints, ISPs are able to spread access to the Internet over a broader area without
having to run physical lines to them, thus decreasing much of the cost of fixed lines.

15

However, adoption of this process is still slow. As the International Telecommunications
Union stated,
A number of developing countries have been able to leverage mobile-broadband
technologies to overcome infrastructure barriers and provide high-speed Internet
services to previously unconnected areas. In Africa, mobile-broadband
penetration has reached 4%, compared with less than 1% for fixed-broadband
penetration (“Europe Leads the Broadband,” 2011, p. 5).
Is Internet Access Important?
One question that often arises is whether access to the Internet is important, as
groups or individuals often only see the commercial side of the Internet and not the full
gamut of opportunities that it can present in terms of educational opportunities. A number
of non-governmental organizations agree that Internet access does have a significant
positive impact on a society. The United Nations lists access to the Internet as an
important portion of Goal 9 of its Sustainable Development Goals ("Goal 9. Build," n.d.).
The United Nations indicated that,
Many of the most effective development applications of ICT, such as
telemedicine, e-commerce, e-banking and e-government, are only available
through a high-speed Internet connection. But a significant divide exists between
those who enjoy fast access to an online world increasingly rich in multimedia
content and those still struggling with slow, shared dial-up links“(The Millennium
Development, 2010, p. 72).
Research into the digital divide has been somewhat slow, especially in some of
the developed countries. The initial definition of the digital divide focused on whether a

16

person had access to the technology or not. This definition has often been the focal point
in much research as an agreed-upon starting point. However, this starting point often
blinds researchers to other areas that have an impact upon the digital divide. By focusing
on this singular issue, there have been several recommendations made about ways in
which the divide could be addressed, such as providing low cost laptops to developing
countries or donating slightly older technologies to developing countries. Unfortunately,
these recommendations failed to address other issues that could also impact the digital
divide. Boris (2005) quoted Schement, stating that “policy makers should concern
themselves with the diffusion of Internet services and seek policies to support its
widespread availability” (p. 307), adding “presumably rather than with providing the
devices themselves.” In addition, “As a ‘public policy problem, the digital divide shifts
from a matter of pure social inequality to a matter of strategic importance in a global race
for competitiveness’” (Ferro, Helbig, & Gil-Garcia, 2011, p.3).
Knowledge Is Power.
Sir Francis Bacon said it most succinctly that knowledge is power (Bartlett,
2002). The Internet is currently the largest storehouse of knowledge that mankind has
ever accumulated. In an article discussing the explosion of information, Vellante (2010)
stated, “The amount of digital information grew 62% over 2008 to 800 billion gigabytes
(0.8 Zettabytes)” (¶ 2). The amount of information being generated has never been seen
before, and that amount continues to grow each year. However, for many governments,
that very knowledge is one of the keys used to maintain power.
In China, the government keeps tight controls on the levels of access permitted to
the average citizen. As part of its ability to do business in China, Google agreed to

17

modifications such that “the Chinese government blocks access to certain search results
for users in mainland China” (Guynn, 2010, ¶ 11). By controlling what information that
their people can see, the Chinese government is better able to control their decision
making. By limiting what information is available, people are only shown one choice in
what might otherwise be an involved discussion. In terms of the electoral process, if only
one person is on the ballot, then it is easy to control who will win the election. In the case
of information, if only one side is shown, it is easy to control how people will react to a
given situation. The Arab Spring has been fueled by the distribution of information of the
inequalities of the people and the ruling class in many Arab countries and how the people
have risen up to change their country. By using the Internet as a focal point for
disseminating information, dissidents were able to spread information quickly to a large
number of people and gain a better level of organization for their movement than may
have been available otherwise.
In an article on the Slate website, there was a discussion about how being online
gave the people access to ideas that they may not have been exposed to previously.
William Saletan is a political writer for Slate. During the Arab Spring, Saletan reached
out to bloggers in order to discover how they located information and why they had
begun to look for the information in the first place.
Once online, he met bloggers outside Saudi Arabia, learned about politics, and
developed an interest in human rights. He said the same thing has happened to
other bloggers in the region. Merlyna Lim, a scholar of social transformation at
Arizona State University, described a similar dynamic in Egypt: Young people

18

went online to keep up with their friends and youth culture. In doing so, they
became politicized. (Saletan, 2011, ¶ 4).
In addition, Saleton (2011) wrote,
In Tunisia, according to exiled blogger-activist Sami Ben Gharbia, the
government blocked YouTube and Flickr but didn’t block Facebook because too
many Tunisians had already gathered there, and cutting them off seemed too
risky. As a result, more Tunisians converged at Facebook, which became the hub
for mobilizing the rebellion (¶ 5).
Democracy
One of the factors that may have an impact on the digital divide is democracy.
Does freedom allow for greater levels of access or do we see similar levels of access even
in those countries that are not considered as free or do these less free countries allow even
more access?
Democracy is defined as “government by the people; a form of government in
which the supreme power is vested in the people and exercised directly by them or by
their elected agents under a free electoral system” (Democracy, n.d.). A truly democratic
country is one that listens to its citizens and allows them to vote, directly or via
representation, on the major issues that affect their society. As Kim et al. stated, in the
case of local elections, the winner of the election is often based on preference rather than
an actual informed decision. This uninformed decision then has a social impact as well.
Therefore, the digital divide has not only an impact on an individual life, but on society
as well (Kim, Lee, & Menon, 2009).

19

Therefore, it would stand to reason that a democratic country would want the
greatest levels of access to information, so that the people could make the most informed
decision available. However, no studies have looked for such a link. As Bertot (2003)
said succinctly, “The foundation to a democratic society is free and unencumbered access
to information” (p. 186). While some studies have looked at some of the major factors
discussed and debated, many other factors have been left out of the discussion. However,
the digital divide continues to grow even as more research is done to try to address it. As
more research is done, more factors are brought to light that have an impact on the divide
and change the way future researchers approach it. James (2008b) discussed the difficulty
of closing the digital divide due to the fact that the equation being used is flawed. He
stated that previous analysis of the digital divide approached technology access, skill set,
and infrastructure as being an additive process. Thus, a country could offset a weak area
by increasing its score in a different area. James argued that this is not the case as seen
when there is an absence of one of these factors. If a country has no infrastructure needed
to access the Internet, then no amount of technology will be able to offset that. James
stated that the equation to measure the divide needs to be a multiplicative one, reflecting
the realities of being shut out of access if any of the major factors are not available. This
has been demonstrated throughout Africa, as many countries simply do not have the
infrastructure in place to support the technology being adopted.
Policy analysis research has begun in an attempt to address the digital divide.
However, not much headway has been made in this regard. One issue is that the initial
attempts often look at different variables or only at the level of technology itself as
discussed by Çilan et al. In an article by Çilan et al. (2009), the discussion on the digital

20

divide and policy is focused only on member and candidate countries of the European
Union. As they stated, “Previous studies in this area focused primarily on measuring the
level of Information Technology/Information Systems (IT/IS) utilization in different
countries, and very few focused on the digital divide itself” (Çilan, Bolat, & Coşkun,
2009, p. 101).
The digital divide is a complex issue that has gone far beyond the initial study of
whether a person had access to a computer that had a modem or not. However, many
facets of that complexity are still unexplored. As a researcher begins to gain a grasp of
one area, he or she often realizes that there is a whole new dimension to the problem that
has not been explored. In the case of the digital divide, researchers are seeing finer
distinctions and more variables that impact the divide. This has been exemplified by
research on the digital divide, as the initial studies focused simply on access to
technology. However, as time passes, it was discovered via research, that other factors
played an important role in the divide as well. These include such ideas as skill sets,
education, and socio-economic status.
As technology continues to accelerate at a faster and faster pace, the effects on the
digital divide continue to grow. For example, as connection speeds have increased, many
technologies have fully embraced those new speeds. However, for a person still using a
dialup connection, perusing a database based on the assumption that the user has a highspeed connection is a painful and frustrating experience. If the exercise was not a
required one, such as for work or class, the user would probably decide that the
information was not worth the hassle required to get to it.

21

E-Government.
In recent years, a large number of governments have begun moving towards an egovernment model. This model entails making more of their resources available online
and sometimes exclusively online. While this model is typically a cost-savings model for
the government, it often locks a person out of government affairs if he or she does not
have access to these digital resources.
Many governments also use their online tools as a method by which to
communicate to their citizens and keep them up to date on the decisions being made by
their representatives or leaders. However, this often leaves many of the people unable to
keep up with this news as they do not have online access. They are also often unable to
make informed decisions when it comes to choosing new leaders or representatives, as
currently most information is posted online. As Kim et al. stated Internet users seek out
more new sources each day than those with slow or no internet access. This allows
Internet users to gain more information about key issues and make more informed
decisions in their daily lives (Kim, Lee, & Menon, 2009). By these numbers, a person
with high-speed Internet access uses almost twice as many sources for information than a
person without access to online resources.
Hirwade (2010) said that by providing resources electronically, such as
government information and services, a wider audience can be reached and greater levels
of transparency can be achieved. In addition, citizens can access these resources at more
convenient times that fit their schedules and gain greater opportunities to participate in
government decisions.

22

In addition to providing a tool for use by the citizens, ICTs also provide a tool for
the legislature that enables the representatives to communicate better with their
constituents and keep them informed of the issues that are being debated. As Griffith
(2010) said, “More members, party leaders and senior administrators have begun to
understand the potential of new technologies to enable legislators to fulfill their
legislative, oversight and representative roles in much more effective ways than in the
past.” Griffith also stated that by using technology to manage information, governments
can operate more efficiently and effectively by allowing greater levels of transparency to
hold governmental officials accountable (Griffith, 2010).
In addition, this new form of governance adds additional levels of transparency
that would help to reduce corruption that is often rampant in many developing countries.
According to Bertot et al., “ICTs can reduce corruption by promoting good governance,
strengthening reform-oriented initiatives, reducing potential for corrupt behaviors,
enhancing relationships between government employees and citizens, allowing for citizen
tracking of activities, and by monitoring and controlling behaviors of government
employees” (Bertot, Jaeger, & Grimes, 2010, p. 265). One example is seen in the EMexico website, “In 2002, a team of journalists searched Compranet and discovered
authorizations of more than US$1 million for upgrading the presidential residence,
including US$500 bath towels—this lead to “Towel–gate,” the first major scandal of the
Fox administration (Scheeres, 2005)” (Curry & Kenney, 2006, ¶ Mexico’s government
and the Internet). Researchers Curry and Kenney found that “Using the Internet for
government-citizen exchanges is not only potentially more efficient, but also eliminates

23

direct contact, which provides the opportunity to solicit bribes (Curry & Kenney, 2006, ¶
Conclusion).
E-government also directly affects democracy, hence its importance to this study.
Schuppan (2009) stated that e-government is not only focused on providing service but
also allows greater levels of participation within the government, thus strengthening a
democracy.
E-government allows for an additional method by which citizens can keep track
of their government and the decisions it is making. Schuppan (2009) also stated that
ICT’s allow new methods of participation which contributes to greater levels of
legitimization of the government. Such participation can include feedback on budgetary
decision or on land-use plans (Schuppan, 2009).
Next Steps
The direction of this study was to build a multivariate regression model that ties
together the concepts of democracy with those concepts of access to information. This
study discovered whether a relationship exists between those variables, and if so, how
strong such a relationship is.
The basis of the model for democracy will be the Freedom House scores of
democracy. Freedom House ranks every country in the world based upon survey data
encompassing two primary categories: political rights and civil liberties. These two
categories then are weighted in order to determine the status of a country. “The status
designation of Free, Partly Free, or Not Free, which is determined by the combination of
the political rights and civil liberties ratings, indicates the general state of freedom in a
country or territory” (Introduction, 2011, ¶ 2). The two categories, political rights and

24

civil liberties “contain numerical ratings between 1 and 7 for each country or territory,
with 1 representing the most free and 7 the least free” (Introduction, 2011, ¶ 2).
Freedom House was chosen as the primary source due to its status as a nongovernmental organization (NGO), which would keep it from being biased by its parent
country. In addition, Freedom House has been in existence for 70 years, lending historical
weight to its status as a data provider. Freedom House’s list includes 194 countries and
14 territories, making it one of the most comprehensive lists available.

Figure 1.1 Freedom House world freedom status rankings
Freedom House World Freedom Status Rankings
As shown in Figure 1, while most developed countries are in the Free rankings,
many developing countries are in the Not Free rankings. This may have an impact upon
the ability to gain access to information and what that access looks like. Many countries
that are ranked as Not Free but do possess significant access often have that access
limited or filtered in some manner. As previously discussed, as the unrest in Tunisia took
place, the government authorities began to shut down many forms of access to social

25

media in an attempt to curtail the spread of information. However, they left Facebook
open due to its significant popularity, which was then used as the primary means of
coordination between groups.

Figure 1.2 Freedom House world political rights rankings
Freedom House World Political Rights Rankings
Political rights rankings are also an important indicator when it comes to digital
divide issues (Figure 2). As a country gains greater levels of freedoms, it would stand to
reason that greater levels of access to information would be desired in order for the
citizens of that country to make more informed decisions. Based upon the rankings of
political rights, most developed countries rank the best in comparison to the rest of the
world. However, does this political freedom translate into greater levels of access?

26

Figure 1.3 Freedom House world civil liberties rankings
Freedom House World Civil Liberties Rankings
Civil liberties also form a crucial element in the levels of freedom and democracy
in a country. As shown in Figure 3, most of the developed world ranks high in civil
liberties. However, do these liberties translate into access? Do countries that give their
citizenry greater levels of latitude in their civil abilities also give it greater levels of
access above that possessed by those countries that are ranked lower in their civil
liberties? As Freedom House stated:
The political rights questions are grouped into three subcategories: Electoral
Process (3 questions), Political Pluralism and Participation (4), and Functioning of
Government (3). The civil liberties questions are grouped into four subcategories:
Freedom of Expression and Belief (4 questions), Associational and Organizational
Rights (3), Rule of Law (4), and Personal Autonomy and Individual Rights (4).
(Introduction, 2011, ¶ 11)

27

Accessibility
In the digital divide, the primary means of access to online information is
obviously by using an Internet connection. As part of its Millennial Development Goals,
the United Nations began to track the estimated number of Internet users in each country.
The Millennial Development Goals are the world's time-bound and quantified
targets for addressing extreme poverty in its many dimensions-income poverty,
hunger, disease, lack of adequate shelter, and exclusion-while promoting gender
equality, education, and environmental sustainability. They are also basic human
rights-the rights of each person on the planet to health, education, shelter, and
security“("What They Are," 2006, ¶ 2).
The UN’s approach was that Internet access can be used to further the development of a
country and aid it in battling poverty. The UN took such a strong stand on the topic of
Internet access that it labeled this access as a basic human right. In a recent statement on
the Arab Spring,
The United Nations counts Internet access as a basic human right in a report that
bears implications both to on-going events in the Arab Spring and to the Obama
administration’s war on whistleblowers. Acting as special rapporteur, a human
rights watchdog role appointed by the UN Secretary General, Frank La Rue takes
a hard line on the importance of the Internet as ”an indispensable tool for realizing
a range of human rights, combating inequality, and accelerating development and
human progress (Estes, 2011, ¶ 1).
In addition, the UN Secretary General stated that blocking access to the
Internet should not be used as a method to prevent debate and that a government should

28

respect an individual’s right of free expression and free assembly using whatever
methods they have available, including digital methods (“UN Against Censoring,” 2011,
¶ 1).
As a method by which to measure levels of access, the dependent variable to be
tested against the variables based on freedom will be that of number of Internet users per
country. While this number is somewhat questionable, no other international body is
tracking this number in detail. Thus, the number of Internet users proposed by the UN is
currently considered one of the better choices.
These data can be obtained through the International Telecommunications Union
(ITU): “ITU is the United Nations’ specialized agency for information and
communication technologies—ICTs” (Overview, 2008, ¶ 1).
Moreover,
ITU is committed to connecting all the world’s people—wherever they live and
whatever their means. Through our work, we protect and support everyone’s
fundamental right to communicate. Today, ICTs underpin everything we do. They
help manage and control emergency services, water supplies, power networks and
food distribution chains. They support health care, education, government
services, financial markets, transportation systems and environmental
management. And they allow people to communicate with colleagues, friends and
family anytime, and almost anywhere (Overview, 2008, ¶ 1).
ITU is considered to be the world’s foremost experts in research on Internet
access. Its current membership consists of 193 countries, academic institutions, and over
700 private companies. All of these organizations work to “develop the technical

29

standards that ensure networks and technologies seamlessly interconnect, and strive to
improve access to ICTs to underserved communities worldwide” (Overview, 2008, ¶ 1).
By reviewing these data procured from a variety of non-governmental sources, it
is hoped that as little bias as possible will be introduced into the model. In addition, by
using a variety of data sources, any bias that is introduced by a single source should be
kept to a minimum. While this data is secondary data, it is the best available.
Bridging the Divide
While this model will not solve the problem of the digital divide, it will give other
researchers additional insights into some of the variables that affect the digital divide and
that impact the amount of access that certain groups have to information. While no single
study will solve the digital divide, as each researcher takes an aspect of it and learns more
about it, over time, each of these insights will begin to build upon one another and allow
for specific policy suggestions to be made that will have a direct impact in bridging the
divide.
By reviewing the research currently being done, leaders of developing countries
could make better budgetary decisions about where to invest their governments’ funds as
they try to improve their countries. By looking at which issues, if solved, would provide
the best return on the investment, these leaders can begin to build comprehensive, longrange ICT programs that make deep inroads into addressing digital divide issues within
their countries.
While the path to finding a solution to the digital divide will be as long and taxing
as that required addressing other social issues, such as illiteracy, there is still hope that it
can be addressed. As more information is published in digital formats, as more museums

30

and libraries digitize their collections for outside use, and as more journals adopt a
completely digital format, the push for greater levels of access will increase among those
on the wrong side of the digital divide. As it becomes apparent that ICT growth helps to
spur development, many more developing countries will begin to work on long-term ICT
growth plans in order to reap the benefits, financial and otherwise, from those
investments.
As more people gain access to information, this may have an even more profound
effect, as seen by the recent events surrounding the Arab Spring. As people begin to
realize the power that they possess as individuals and find ways to use information to
leverage that power towards change, the face of the world as we know it could begin to
change for the better. As people begin to see that they can band together to make changes
in their governments, whether it be local, national, or international, more groups will
begin to do so in order to make the world a better place for not only themselves but also
for the future.
Technology has provided people with tools that have made profound impacts on
our society, from the introduction of papyrus to the distribution of the PC. Technology
will help us to gain a better understanding of the ways our universe works and give us the
ability to reach beyond what our eyes can see and into areas that our imaginations can
barely comprehend. Yet, for those without the access to this technology or the ability to
use it to its potential, it is another object taking up space on a desk that is already
overloaded. Denying any group access and the ability to know how to use that access also
denies them the most precious of commodities—the hope for a better future.

31

The fundamental question of this study is whether the level of democracy a
country possesses affects the digital divide and whether a person in a country considered
free has greater levels of access to information than a person in a country considered not
free. The hypothesis for this study is that there is a statistically significant relationship
between levels of freedom and access to online information. The statistical methods used
will test this hypothesis, as well as indicate the strength of the relationship.
The limitations of the study include several factors, such as the use of secondary
data as the primary source of variable data for the regression model. In addition, the data
being used are repurposed data, as the original purpose of these data was not to ascertain
the relationship between the variables used in the regression model. Another limitation is
that statistical methods are not 100% accurate, although accuracy levels of 95% or more
are not uncommon. Finally, while every measure has been taken to ensure accuracy, there
is always the opportunity for human error to enter into an equation.

32

CHAPTER 2
A BRIEF HISTORY OF THE DIGITAL DIVIDE
The concept of the digital divide has begun to be researched in greater depth as
society becomes more interconnected. As society begins to realize the full potential of
this interconnectedness, it has also begun to realize that this connectivity was not all
inclusive. A larger number of lower socio-economic groups have been left out, thus often
causing their voices to be left out. In addition, as technology has expanded, greater levels
of granularity have begun to be researched as those with high-speed connections have a
significant advantage over those Internet users using slower connections, such as a dialup connection.
The preliminary discussions about the digital divide were much more broadly
based, as the Internet had not gained such a significant foothold. The initial factor
discussed was whether someone had access to the Internet, regardless of how that access
was achieved. However, throughout the literature, a number of themes emerged that
encompassed most of the research that had been done up to this point. While some of
these themes were fairly specific, such as the physical infrastructure available in a
country or the skills possessed by citizens within a country, a number of them, such as
definitional work, were somewhat broad. However, even though a significant amount of
research has been done, there are still significant gaps in the information currently

33

available. In this chapter, the current research will be discussed, and the gaps in the
research will be highlighted.
While a number of authors disagreed on various topics, very few disagreed over
whether the digital divide actually exists or the importance of discovering the variables
that affect the divide as well as ways to bridge the divide.
Categories and Themes
Over the course of this literature review, each resource was analyzed and a main
theme was identified. These resources were then separated based upon their overarching
theme. However, many of these resources did have a significant amount of overlap in
terms of their discussion points, research question, literature review, and findings.
Therefore, while each resource is primarily included in a specific category, this does not
indicate that the resource does not also contain relevant information for other themes as
well.
After an intensive review of the current literature, a number of themes became
visible. These themes varied from somewhat broad, such as those resources primarily
discussing the definition of the digital divide and ways to quantify that definition, to
articles that were much more focused, such as articles discussing social inclusion and the
effects that the digital divide is having upon that inclusion or lack thereof.
As James (2008b) stated, the digital divide can be defined by analyzing the
variables of human capital, skills, and infrastructure. Utilizing this definition gives a
structure by which to contain the subthemes presented in much of the literature. This
assumption works well in terms of grouping the vast amount of information into similar
categories and building upon each to highlight its strengths and weaknesses. In addition

34

to these three main categories, a fourth category was added based upon articles that were
primarily focused on defining the digital divide. This definitional category was important
in order to give a starting point for the literature, as well as verify that all of the articles
included were using the same sets of assumptions in describing digital divide issues.
The category for definitional articles included articles that tried to define what the
digital divide was and its impact on society and specific socio-economic groups. In
addition, articles discussing the variables that have been discovered to affect the digital
divide and the search for others were also included in this category.
The category for skills includes articles involving the following themes: digital
divide and e-government, libraries, the divide and education, and skills or the lack
thereof. The category for infrastructure includes articles involving the following themes:
open-source materials and their effects on the divide and ICTs. Finally, the category for
human capital includes articles involving the following themes: social inclusion, rural
versus urban environments, a focus on people, and democracy and the divide.
Categories
Definitional. The initial research done on the digital divide was based upon trying
to define the divide. This discussion continues today as researchers have begun to realize
the level of impact that the digital divide has on a population. The initial definition was
someone who had access to online resources through the use of a computer with a
modem (McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994). Today, the divide has become more
granular, including subdivisions for those with access and their type of access (broadband
or narrowband), whether access should be based on access from anywhere or only from
home, and whether it is more of a policy concern than a technological one.

35

Another overarching theme that was present in the literature was research into the
variables that affect the divide. The initial research in the United States was based on
whether a person had a computer and, if so, whether that computer had a modem. Today,
research includes reviewing variables such as age, socio-economic status, education,
infrastructure availability, and more. Even now, researchers continue to discover more
variables that have a significant impact on the divide and those with or without access to
online resources. One such example is the available amount of broadband within an area
or region and its impact on increased investment by businesses (Brooks, n.d.). Also
included in this research focus were discussions on the digital divide not only between
countries but also within countries by reviewing variables that could affect a country
internally (Çilan, Bolat, & Coşkun, 2009, p. 99).
Skill sets. In terms of skill sets, the lack of skills in using Internet technologies
was also a theme that encompassed a number of articles. One of the concerns often
discussed while defining the digital divide was the need for skills as part of the definition.
In today’s world, there are a significant number of voices talking through online
mediums. A user with no background in vetting all of this information is more likely to
be misdirected than a more experienced user. For example, the ability to recognize
authoritative sources or to recognize that some web addresses, such as those with an .edu
domain are typically more reliable than a .com domain. In addition, users without the
proper skill set to fully utilize online resources are often presented with an additional
barrier to entry and participation in the online discussion, whether it is in terms of
government participation or ICT investment in their area.

36

Another main theme that became apparent through the review of the literature was
that of the use of e-government. In an effort to cut costs, many governments have begun
to shift many of their resources into a digital format. For many of these resources, this is
now the only method by which the resources can be accessed. A number of researchers,
including Helbig, Gil-García, & Ferro, discussed the beneficial impact of e-government,
but also the threat of excluding many groups from being able to participate in government
due to their inability to access online resources. The inclusion of e-government in the
section on skills was partly due to the fact that, without the necessary technology skills
needed to access this material, even the best-built websites will be significantly
underutilized if the citizens within a country do not have the necessary skill sets to
capitalize on its use. These skills include concepts as computer literacy, information
literacy, and general searching skills.
An additional theme that was involved with skills was the impact of the library on
the digital divide and the impact of the divide on the library. This was included in the
skills category as the library is often the forerunner in teaching people the skills needed in
order to capitalize on the materials and resources available online. With the advent of the
e-rate in the US, libraries were mandated to allow public access to the Internet. In
addition, libraries offer a number of programs aimed at educating their patrons in best
practices in using the Internet. Also, in the U.S., public libraries are one of the
cornerstone institutions in the battle to bridge the divide. However, libraries are often not
funded adequately enough to make significant inroads in addressing digital divide issues
in the very areas that need help the most. In addition, libraries are often burdened with

37

additional restrictions, such as filters, that add an additional level of inequality between
users who have access at home and those who do not (Callison, 2004).
Another theme that was discovered was that of the digital divide and education.
Education impacts and is impacted by the digital divide. Many researchers have reviewed
both sides of this interdependent relationship in order to discover ways to address the
divide. Public schools are another cornerstone in battling the digital divide in the U.S. as
mandated by the Telecommunications Act of 1996. Yet, similar to libraries, schools are
often burdened with additional restrictions, such as filters or a lack of access to
equipment, which further exacerbates the digital divide. This has an impact throughout a
student’s academic career, including secondary education (Brown, 2002; Jones, 2002;
Eamon, 2004).
Infrastructure. One theme for infrastructure that emerged was the impact of
open-source materials. Open-source materials are those where the author or copyright
holder allows anyone to freely access and use their material (Open Collaborative Design,
n.d.). While many groups may have access to the Internet, many of the most useful
resources are gated. These gates are often fee-based subscriptions, which are then a
significant barrier to entry for many developing countries (James, 2003; Björk, 2004).
The cost of Internet access alone is often a significant expenditure for a person or an
institution. An additional cost for access to the information is often an insurmountable
burden. This lack of access further fragments the divide, not only between those with
access to technology and those without it but also between those with access to certain
resources and those without it (Usova, 2009; Herb, 2010).

38

An additional theme that emerged was the discussion on ICTs and their impact on
the digital divide. Part of defining the divide has included a focus on the physical
infrastructure, or lack thereof, that a country or group possesses. Many authors are
concerned that investment into ICTs is viewed as the best method to address digital
divide issues without looking further at the specific community or groups being affected
by that decision (Law, 2004; Haider, 2007; Usova, 2009; Herb, 2010). In addition, ICTs
have been found to actually exacerbate social inclusion issues rather than help to solve
them, such as participating in discussions that have moved to completely digital formats
or debates on the current political candidates.
People. Social inclusion was another overarching theme that was prevalent in
many articles discussing the digital divide. A number of articles were concerned that the
divide was exacerbating many of the issues that individuals in lower socio-economic
groups were already struggling with (James, 2001a; LaRose, Gregg, Strover, Straubhaar,
& Carpenter, 2007). Today, many employers only accept applications for jobs through
their online resources. This is a double blow for many individuals as they neither have the
access needed to use such resources nor do they have the skills necessary to use those
sites even if they were able to gain such access. These skills include computer literacy
skills, knowing how to make the computer do what you want it to do, and information
literacy skills, knowing which sources of information are authoritative and which may
simply be opinions. In addition, many groups, such as older individuals, have additional
barriers that are often overlooked, such as the lack of exposure to the technology that is
often prevalent in younger people’s daily activities. “Today’s teenagers grew up with
digital machines and — to a certain degree — with many binary options, with a visual

39

culture of images and their rapid procession.” While “the elderly are more used to
reasoning, systematic and logical thinking, linear step–by–step processes which are good
for formal learning but turn out to be an obstacle when dealing with new technologies”
(Paul & Stegbauer, 2005).
Another theme was a discussion between rural and urban users. Even in
developed countries, rural users are often at a significant disadvantage compared to their
urban counterparts. Most rural areas do not possess the infrastructure needed for
broadband access, forcing them to rely on significantly slower methods to use online
resources. In addition, rural communities are continuing to fall even further behind in
terms of access and speed in relation to urban communities (Hollifield & Donnermeyer,
2003). While Malecki (2003) did discuss how rural communities can greatly benefit from
the application of ICTs to diminish the effects of distance, even his article acknowledged
the issues, such as points of presence and digital telephone switches that rural areas must
overcome in order to begin to catch up to their urban counterparts.
An additional theme was a focus on people and what they needed for their lived
experience. Some authors, such as Loosen (2002), discussed educating people on the fact
that while their access may be “free,” there is still a cost associated with that information.
In addition, some authors, including DiMaggio, Hargittai, Neuman, & Robinson (2001),
discussed a more focused response to the digital divide with an emphasis on specific
groups’ and communities’ needs rather than a one-size-fits-all approach that is typically
touted.
Democracy. This was the final theme that was prevalent in the literature. This
was a theme that was approached in a number of ways, although no articles followed

40

through with work similar to that presented in this paper. Most of the research, such as
that done by Herb (2009), Moss (2002), or Webster (1999), focused on whether the
digital divide affected democracy and the democratization of a country or area. While
many of the articles looked at the broader picture, most looked at qualitative factors.
This gap in quantitative research presents an opportunity to review democratic variables
that impact the digital divide on a global scale. While most research looks at the effects
of the digital divide on democracy, very few review the effects of an open society on
levels of access to information.
Conceptualizing the Digital Divide
The preliminary study of the digital divide in the United States was commissioned
by the National Telecommunications and Information Administration. This study, Falling
Through the Net, sought to see where the lines of the digital divide fell in order to find
the most appropriate methods to address this divide between those who have access and
those who do not. The initial findings indicated that
Generally, the less that one is educated, the lower the level of telephone,
computer, and computer-household modem penetration. For a given level of
education, however, central city households generally have the lowest penetration
for both telephones and computers, while rural households with computers
consistently trail urban areas and central cities in terms of modem penetration.
(McConnaughey, Nila, & Sloan, 1995)
The basis of the survey was whether a household had a computer and, if so,
whether that computer had a modem installed.

41

An additional factor that was included in this research was whether the household
owned a telephone. The telephone access question was an important aspect of the
research at the time, since in 1995, Internet access for households consisted of using dialup access. While other forms of access were being developed, they were typically not
available on the open market. Thus, the telephone was the only option for gaining access
to the Internet.
This initial survey was fairly simplistic in its approach. Due to the infancy of the
Internet as a resource for all people, the concept of providing access to everyone was only
slowly becoming a policy issue. As stated in the article,
The broad policy implications for these findings should not be overlooked. By
identifying those who are truly in need, policymakers can prudently and
efficiently target support to these information disadvantaged. Only when this
point is reached can all those who desire to access the NII (National Information
Infrastructure) be possibly accommodated. However, connectivity to all such
households will not occur instantaneously; rather, there is a pivotal role to be
assumed in the new electronic age by the traditional providers of information
access for the general public—the public schools and libraries. (McConnaughey,
Nila, & Sloan, 1995)
This idea of using traditional information providers had already been suggested
by the National Commission on Libraries and Information Science (NCLIS) a year earlier
in its report titled Public Libraries and the Internet: Study Results, Policy Issues, and
Recommendations. This report, authored by Charles McClure, John Carlo Bertot, and
Douglas L. Zweizig (1994), was the first of an ongoing series of reports concerning the

42

ability of libraries to provide access to the Internet. McClure and Bertot (1997, 2000,
2005), along with various additional authors, wrote several follow up reports. The NCLIS
report was initiated at the Library of Congress at a policy meeting, where then Vice
President Al Gore began a discussion concerning the digital divide and whether public
libraries could be used as a safety net to assist those groups that had no other means of
accessing online resources (McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994, p. 2). This initial report
had dismal news in regards to the level of accessibility available through libraries to the
Internet. The initial report showed that only 20.9% of all public libraries were connected
to the Internet. An even smaller number of libraries made that connectivity available to
the patrons of the library. This lack of access raised concerns about how these excluded
groups could gain access to online resources.
The Internet had already become known as an incredible source of information
that could bring additional benefits to those that were able to access it. However, it was
obvious that socio-economic factors limited many people’s ability to access the Internet.
The cost of computers alone often put accessibility well outside of their reach. Moreover,
the additional fees incurred by factors, such as the cost of the phone line and the monthly
fees for using an ISP added an additional barrier to entry. As stated in the New York
Times, “the problem is about affording unregulated high-speed Internet service —
provided, in the case of cable, by a few for-profit companies with very little local
competition and almost no check on their prices” (Crawford, 2011).
These initial findings highlighted the fact that, while some libraries did provide
access to the Internet, this was the case in less than one in five public libraries in the
United States and was typically available in those areas that already had the greatest level

43

of Internet adoption in households (McClure, Bertot, & Zweizig, 1994). This helped to
underscore the fact that access to the Internet was sporadic at best and that those groups
that would benefit the most from access to the Internet are also the groups with the least
amount of access.
Since these initial studies, the concept of the digital divide has grown and
expanded. This greater awareness has been achieved as to the benefits of Internet access
and the costs of not having such access. The Library and Information Science (LIS) field
has been particularly focused on research on the digital divide, primarily since libraries
are often seen as one of the primary means to narrow the divide.
Bertot et al. continue this line of studies with many of the same themes emerging
throughout the years. The primary change that occurred is that libraries began to adopt
technology at a faster pace and gained levels of access at a phenomenal speed, thus
shifting the discussion away from providing libraries with access and more toward a
discussion on what that access looks like and how it is being used. Concepts of increased
e-government use through libraries, both nationally and internationally, began to emerge
through the studies, especially as more agencies moved to a completely online format
(Bertot, Jaeger, McClure, Wright, & Jensen, 2009; Mutula, 2005).
Definitional
Construing the Digital Divide
The digital divide has been defined in a number of ways. The initial definition in
the United States was based upon whether an individual had a computer and, if so,
whether that computer had a modem. As research has evolved in regards to the digital
divide, so too has the definition. In addition, many researchers use their own specific

44

definition as the basis for their research. Each definition has made profound changes on
what is being studied and what recommendations are being made to help narrow the
divide. As the definition has widened, the boundaries of simple technological
determinism have faded and discussions have begun to include societal and individual
factors (Lynch 2000; Gurstein, 2003).
Some authors discuss how technology itself is not necessarily valuable, but what
that technology gives users access to is valuable. However, if a person does not see the
value of that access, then it will go unused. It is stated that knowledge is what is truly
important, but the focus on access has occluded the argument (Fallis, 2004). This
argument is succinctly stated that “Simple quantities of information are often irrelevant to
its value” (Foster, 2000, p. 442). This was a fundamental shift away from the initial
definitions based solely upon access to technology.
The initial conclusions from the original research were to provide access to the
technology. However, as further research was done, this conclusion was found to be
lacking (James, 2001), and the discussion shifted to one about technology access and
teaching users the skills necessary to make the most use of the resources to which they
have access (Dewan, Ganley, & Kraemer, 2005). In addition, the focus on ICTs is too
narrow and detracts from the argument on the digital divide (Warschauer, 2000; Lor &
Britz, 2007). Financial barriers were no longer seen as the only obstacles to accessing
information, as governmental barriers also kept information from being readily available
to the population.
Some authors, including James (2008), Jung, Qiu, & Kim (2001), and Gurstein
(2003), define the digital divide based upon four pillars of an information society:

45

content, physical infrastructure, ICTs, and human capacity. While the initial idea of
technology still plays a significant role, it is not the only factor for bridging the divide.
However, others, such as Vehovar, Sicherl, Husing, & Dolnicar (2006), use the
traditional factors of infrastructure, skill set, and access to technology in order to measure
the digital divide. Each of those three variables is given a specific score, typically from 1
to 100 which is then added together to form an overall score for a country. However,
current research has begun a discussion about whether this additive formula is actually
relevant to the discussion or whether it should be changed to a multiplicative formula.
The argument for this change is that a country can manipulate its score by significantly
increasing one of these factors, while the other factors greatly lag behind. By using a
multiplicative formula, the rating for a country would reflect a substantially lower score
much more so than an additive formula (James, 2008).
Another concern with defining the digital divide is exactly what variables to use
while trying to determine a way to measure it. This measurement is one of the major
points of contention while trying to define exactly what the divide looks like. The
discussion on measurement has seen many researchers build their own models in order to
remove some bias from many of the standard models currently being used. James
discusses a method where in scores are multiplicative rather than additive, which forces
countries to work on all measures rather than just greatly strengthen one aspect (James,
2008). One of the primary concerns is that some of the factors, such as the availability of
infrastructure, being used in some of the indices are added to the score, even though their
impact is already included as part of other measurements. This double counting often
raises the scores of many countries that are actually in worse shape than is indicated by

46

their score. An additional concern in measurement is that the tools being used are
Western constructs, thus introducing a Western bias into the model being used (James,
2008; Jung, Qiu, & Kim, 2001; James, 2007).
Another concern in defining the divide is that the frame of reference being used
often changes how the divide looks, thus changing the types of measurements that need
to be made. For example, an international study often looks much different than one for a
single country as the divide changes significantly when looking within a country or
comparing countries, especially when using the same tools for measurement. This
concern for some standard form of measurement has often muddied the argument in
terms of how poorly a specific country may look (Corrocher & Ordanni, 2002; Vehovar,
Sicherl, Husing, & Dolnicar, 2006; Barzilai-Nahon, 2006; Çilan, Bolat, & Coşkun, 2009).
Many authors continue this discussion by describing ways that the divide can be
measured differently by using different variables that have a significant relationship to
the divide (Selwyn, 2011; James, 2005; Sciadas, 2002).
Included in the discussion on defining the divide are also some methods by which
it can be addressed. While no author has claimed to be able to solve the divide itself,
many have postulated methods to decrease the divide based upon how they define the
divide. Many authors state that one of the primary tools to combat the divide is through
increased policy changes. These authors include Billon, Marco, & Lera-Lopez, 2009,
Shuler, 2007, and Verdegem & Verhoest, 2009. These policy changes include
“deregulation, liberalization, and competition measures in telecommunication
infrastructures and services as well as attractive prices through flat-fee subscription
models and local subsidies in urban areas” (Billon, Marco, & Lera-Lopez, 2009, p. 608).

47

These policy changes are meant to encourage ICT growth and increased levels of
affordable access as well as greater opportunities for market forces, such as increased
competition, to work to increase quality.
Variables to Address the Divide
While the digital divide itself is challenging to define, it becomes even more so
when actual variables began to be included in the models used to measure the divide. The
initial NTIA study was based upon only two factors, 1) whether a person had a computer
and, 2) if so, whether that computer had a modem. It became obvious very quickly as
researchers began to study the divide that this model was exceedingly simplistic in its
approach. Many authors began to discuss going beyond simple technology access and
including innovation as a key component of digital divide issues (Drori, 2010;
Baker,2001). Technology is allowing those with access to it much greater possibilities for
innovation and thus much greater avenues for economic gain (Drori, 2010). This is
reflected in the significant increase in patents being issued in countries with much higher
ICT growth. This is discussed in the study by Çilan, Bolat, & Coşkun who studied the
digital divide within and between member and candidate countries of European Union.
They found that with greater levels of ICT use, a country also reflected greater levels of
patent applications.
In an attempt to determine ways to bridge the divide, many authors began to build
quantitative models in order to discover what variables have the greatest impact on
whether an individual has access to online resources and whether he or she used those
resources. The early models quickly found many similar factors, including age, level of
education, socio-economic status, and race (Blau, 2002; Cooper, 2002; Cullen, 2003;

48

Vail, 2003; Fairlie, 2005). These factors all contributed to the digital divide. For example,
typically as education levels increased, the use of the Internet also increased. As age
increased, the use of the Internet decreased. Those with lower socio-economic status
typically had lower access to the Internet.
Another factor that was discovered was the presence, or lack thereof, of a physical
infrastructure. Many developed countries already had an extensive telephone service in
place prior to the development of the Internet. This telephone infrastructure was used as
the primary means by which data signals could be sent to other computers. However, this
was not the case in most developing countries. These countries had little to no physical
infrastructure in place, thus they had no physical method by which data could be sent. For
example, “in Ethiopia, about 60% of telephones and 94% of the 6,000 internet accounts
are concentrated in the capital, Addis Ababa. This is due to the limited telecom
infrastructure, low levels of computerisation outside the capital and lack of human
resources” (ICT in Developing, 2006). Infrastructure has become one of the primary
variables used to calculate a score on most of the indices used to measure the divide
(Dragulanescu, 2002; Rice & Katz, 2003).
As technology evolved and progressed, the discussion of infrastructure also began
to evolve. With the advent of broadband, the discussion on infrastructure began to
include the differences between those with broadband access and those with narrowband
access. This further split among groups with access to online resources helped to
illuminate the complexity of the divide and how challenging it is to begin to formulate
any sort of approach to bridge it. This new variable of access speed has led to models
with finer levels of granularity in studying variables that affect online access. Prieger and

49

Hu describe a model that would include variables such as “a database of ZIP + 4 codes
and locations, a telecommunications wire center locations database, the FCC local
telecommunications competition database, various sources for cable modem coverage,
and the US Census Bureau for household demographic information (Prieger & Hu, 2008,
p. 156). In addition, many authors are now calling for measures to track broadband
speeds and broadband dissemination in order to make studying access easier for
researchers, see, for example, Flamm, Friedlander, Horrigan, & Lehr, 2007, Prieger &
Hu, 2008, Bouras, Giannaka, & Tsiatsos, 2009, and Oyana, 2011. These measures
include “The type of internet experience the end-user has at the desktop depends on “last
mile” infrastructure availability, users’ awareness of it, and capacity to securely and
skillfully take advantage of online connections” (Flamm, Friedlander, Horrigan, & Lehr,
2007, p. 3).
Some authors, such as Sawada, Cossette, Wellar, & Kurt and Grubesic & Murray,
began using geographic information systems as methods to track this broadband
deployment and look for areas that could benefit from broadband access more than other
areas. This broadband access also included access to wireless technologies. This leap
from wired connections into wireless connections often give regions with little physical
wiring in place greater levels of access to online resources by circumventing the need for
physical landlines. Areas that had once been too geographically distant from landlines are
now being included in the information revolution with the assistance of these new
wireless technologies (Campbell, 2001; Grubesic & Murray, 2002; Sawada, Cossette,
Wellar, & Kurt, 2006).

50

This use of wireless technologies also led to an additional variable—the use of
mobile phones—that has begun to have a significant impact in many developing
countries (Dasgupta, Lall, & Wheeler, 2001). Mobile phones have greatly expanded the
reach of online resources to many groups that might otherwise not be able to access them.
Through the use of mobile phones and wireless technologies, many groups are able to
pool their resources in order to purchase a smart phone and gain access to the online
world regardless of their distance from a wired connection. Satellite phones have even
further expanded the reach of online resources, allowing users to access resources from
almost anywhere in the world. Some governments have even begun subsidies in order to
make access to these satellite phones affordable for lower socio-economic groups (The
Satellite Phone, 2012). This was done specifically in Australia in order to reach several of
the lower socio-economic groups that were very distant from any urban centers (The
Satellite Phone, 2012). This has also affected how infrastructure is now measured,
moving from the traditional viewpoint of physical access and expanding the variable to
include any type of access (Chen & Wellman, 2004; “The Real Digital,” 2005). In the
United States, a goal of the National Broadband Plan is to provide for mapping and
further planning for methods to expand online access, especially to groups that have
significant geographical barriers that limit physical access (Hudson, 2011). In the U.S.,
some limited programs along these lines have begun with great success, allowing the
hurdle of geographic limitations to be overcome and allowing groups that are physically
distant from centers of power to be able to still have their voices heard. Rowe describes
how “in Montana, for example, rural carriers have deployed DSL in roughly 150

51

communities, including deployments on American Indian reservations” (Rowe, 2003, p.
89).
Another variable that is often reviewed is the methodology by which a country is
addressing digital divide issues. Many authors find that while developed countries work
on a spectrum of levels of access, developing countries run into walls with significant
barriers to entry in order to make significant gains in access. These barriers to entry are
often based on significant financial costs that are associated with gaining access to the
Internet and gaining access to the current information and research, which are often
locked behind subscription-based services (Foulger, 2001). The implementation of a
wired network is often the basis for researching how a country is trying to bridge the
divide. Some authors suggest following a route similar to that taken when the NSFNet
was introduced in developed countries. By following a similar route for dispersing the
connectivity, the developing countries could achieve access much quicker and easier than
if an entirely new plan was designed (Press, 2004).
Another important variable that is studied is that of information literacy, which is
defined as “the set of skills needed to find, retrieve, analyze, and use information”
(“What Is Information,” n.d.). Without this skill set, users can find themselves inundated
with personal opinion and rumors presented as fact with no way of knowing which
resources have been vetted and which resources are hearsay. Technology itself is not
necessarily valuable, but what that technology gives users access to is valuable. However,
if a person does not see the value of that access, then it will go unused. The knowledge is
what is truly important, but the focus on access has often clouded that factor
(Gebremichael & Jackson, 2006).

52

Government intervention in digital divide issues is also a variable that was
included by many researchers (Mathur & Ambani, 2005; Jaeger & Bertot, 2009; Helbig,
Gil-García, & Ferro, 2009 ; Hirwade, 2010). Some governments have used very directed
resources in order to help bridge the divide. In the case of the U.S., the federal
government offers a subsidy for libraries and schools in order to help them gain
broadband access and make that access available to their communities. “To address the
critical need for Wi-Fi networks in schools and libraries, the Order sets a target of
providing $1 billion in annual support for internal connections” ("Funding for
Broadband," 2014). As discussed earlier, the Australian government recently
implemented a program to subsidize satellite phones for groups that live in extremely
remote areas. However, not all governments are able or willing to do so. “Government
monopolies of telecommunications systems and broadcasting networks in some SubSaharan nations limit the possibility of outside investment by restricting ICT
sustainability in the private sector” (Gebremichael & Jackson, 2006, p. 272). This control
over such resources exacerbates the divide and puts many countries even further behind
in terms of access.
Some researchers have gone even further afield in terms of variables that could
affect the divide. These include such variables as language, psychological factors, and
cultural identity (Worcman, 2002; Kebede, 2004; Fairlie, 2004). This expanse of
variables represents some of the richer fields of study in terms of variables that affect the
digital divide. The core variables of race, education, socio-economic status, and age have
been pored over in exhaustive detail by numerous researchers such as Cooper, Cullen,
Press, Dragulanescu, Gebremichael and Jackson, and Blau. The divide continues to

53

present a problem and the gap between those with access and those without continues to
grow. More specific variables need to be researched in order to present a wider field of
effects. These variables include items such as specific skill sets, benefits of broadband,
and proximity to wireless hubs as well as the effect of levels of democracy. By
discovering which variables carry the greatest weight on access, policy makers can begin
to build specific policies at the national, regional, and local levels in order to help bridge
the divide.
Skill Sets
E-Government and the Digital Divide
An important theme that was prevalent in digital divide literature was that on egovernment, defined as:
the use by government agencies of information technologies (such as Wide Area
Networks, the Internet, and mobile computing) that have the ability to transform
relations with citizens, businesses, and other arms of government.... The resulting
benefits can be less corruption, increased transparency, greater convenience,
revenue growth, and/or cost reductions. (Definition of E-Government, n.d.)
A number of authors agree that e-government has a number of benefits both
nationally and internationally (Fang, 2002; Snellen, 2002; Chadwick & May, 2003;
Helbig, Gil-García, & Ferro, 2009). These benefits range from increased transparency to
a decrease in corruption. Services are able to be presented and made available to a much
larger geographic area with little to no time lag involved. People no longer have to
physically go to a specific office during specific times of the day and week in order to get
work done with the government. Applications, waivers, and payments could all be

54

submitted to the government regardless of the time of day or where the user might be
located.
In addition to allowing greater flexibility in terms of access to governmental
resources, the transition from paper resources to digital resources is also seen as a costsaving measure. Currently, most documents begin in a digital format and are then printed
out for dissemination. Since these documents are already in a standard digital format, it
was the next logical step to post these digital resources onto governmental websites for
easier access. As these digital documents began to grow in popularity and use, many
agencies began to reduce the amount of printed resources available, with some going so
far as to only provide digital copies with no physical copies available (Singer, 2004).
While this benefits the government in terms of cost savings, it has had a
detrimental effect on those groups with little to no access to online resources. For lower
socio-economic groups, this has presented them with a large barrier in order to be able to
access the materials that they typically need the most. As Kuk stated, “From the inception
of e-government, the aim of encouraging disadvantaged groups (those with low incomes,
the elderly, and individuals with disabilities) to take up the online services is more
rhetoric than a reality” (Kuk, 2002, p. 361). In the event of natural disasters, such as
hurricanes or floods, when there is a longer-term loss of power, large groups of people
are often cut off from many governmental agencies that have moved to a completely
digital format (Kuk, 2002; Bertot, Jaeger, Langa, & McClure, 2006).
A number of authors describe the benefits of e-government and how libraries can
step into this void being left by many of these agencies in terms of access. Libraries can
then use that role as provider to teach many of the skills needed to become adept users of

55

online resources. These skills include basic computer literacy skills and information
literacy. Libraries can also begin to address the divide within their specific community,
using more targeted programs in order to reach out to those groups that have been left out
of this new information society (Mutula, 2005; Jaeger, 2003; Jaeger & Thompson, 2003;
Cordella, 2007).
In addition, e-government has been shown to help increase the effects of
democracy within a country. One way it does so is by alleviating geographic factors in
countries with a widespread population or significant geographic obstacles, such as
mountains or deserts or large physical distances that separate some regions from the seats
of government. In Australia, “a technology gap of major proportions has long existed
between remote Indigenous and other Australian’s, continuing well into the Twenty First
Century. The numbers around this were so stark that they approximated the contrasts seen
between Third World and developed nations at the turn of the last century” (Taylor, 2012,
p. 61). People can follow the actions of their representatives and make sure that their
representatives are being the voice for their constituents (Rose 2004; Jaeger, 2005).
E-government is gaining fast adoption around the world. Even in non-democratic
countries, e-government services are being offered in order to reach more groups of
people by using cheaper resources. However, e-government does allow a more direct path
for citizens to be able to communicate with their government (Åström, Karlsson, Linde,
& Pirannejad, 2012).
In addition, e-government is seen as a portal by which the government can reach
out to groups in order to address the digital divide. In many countries, while there is an
official language, there may be multiple official languages or multiple languages spoken

56

by groups that are not considered the official language. Oftentimes, the governmental
websites are only published in the official language or even in English, regardless of
whether English is an official language of that country. Governments can modify all of
their websites in order to capture more linguistic groups in order to make these resources
more available to those linguistic groups (Hirwade, 2010, Bertot, Jaeger, Wahl, & Sigler,
2011). For example, the website for the Ontario Ministry of Labour in Canada offers
resources by language which includes not only English, but Chinese, Dari, Urdu,
Vietnamese and many others (Other Languages, n.d.).
Governments also use e-government websites as lines of communication between
other governments, both nationally and internationally. In terms of certain
intergovernmental entities, such as the European Union or the African Union, egovernment websites can be used to discuss with other members the various projects of
each member and ways that other member nations could participate and benefit from
these projects (Chadwick & May, 2003). “The ADEN project (“supporting digital
disenclavement”) was set up by the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs to help improve
access to digital communications in certain African countries… In Burkina Faso, it was
established in collaboration with the government” (E-governance and Citizen, 2011).
E-government websites could also be used to facilitate the development of a
national information policy. By reviewing how people gain access to those sites, what
that access is used for, and the methods by which these services are found, agencies can
begin to discuss national information policy changes that could have a much broader
beneficial impact on the people they are trying to reach. Many times, the actual
stakeholders in the divide conversations are the very people who are left out in terms of

57

consideration for their wants and needs. For some developing countries, Internet access
may not be the top priority and individual access may not be the best fit at this point to
have the biggest impact to bridge the divide (Wade, 2002; Bertot, 2003; Choemprayong,
2006; Yu, 2006).
In the U.S., many government agencies, such as the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), have adopted this digital provider role and have begun to
reach out to libraries to assist in bridging the divide and making their documents more
readily accessible to those without home access. In addition, feedback from users allows
agencies to make adjustments based upon the access speeds that are being used to access
their materials. If the majority of their materials are being downloaded via narrowband
access, it is to their benefit to make sure their materials are as compact as possible,
keeping graphics and charts to the bare essentials in order to make it quicker and easier
for people to download (Jaeger & Bertot, 2009).
Libraries and the Digital Divide
In the field of Library and Information Science (LIS), it was not surprising to
discover that much of the literature about the digital divide also included research on
libraries. In the U.S., this was also a theme that was expected to be apparent, given that
libraries are one of the cornerstones of national policy, such that it is, in terms of
addressing the digital divide. In addition, in terms of e-government, many agencies are
now incorporating library access into their information policies (Bertot, Jaeger, Langa, &
McClure, 2006).
Several authors write on the digital divide with an appeal to librarians to take a
proactive role in combating the digital divide. In many communities, librarians are often

58

ideally placed in order to reach out to their community and teach them how to utilize the
resources readily available to them by using online access available through the library
(Aqili & Moghaddam, 2008). In addition, some authors, such as Hargittai, Stern, and
Ferro, Helbig, and Gil-Garcia, frequently chastised librarians for not doing enough to
teach rudimentary computer skills to their communities. Oftentimes, most librarians are
given significant training in terms of computer use and access. This is easily translatable
into programs for the community in order to learn basic computer and information
literacy. Simply providing computers is no longer a sufficient answer to combat the
digital divide. In addition, libraries have the ability to build significant social capital with
their community and allow them to offer specific examples of the return on investment
(ROI) into the library (Kargbo, 2002; Bourke, 2005; Omekwu, 2006; Yamazaki, 2006).
As Wilhelm stated,
Libraries and museums have a central role to play in ensuring that all Americans
are able to access and use effectively emerging communications tools, such as the
Internet. These institutions are key pillars of the public sphere of communications,
the realm of civil society independent of government and commercial forces that
provides citizens the tools to become full participants in republican selfgovernment (Wilhelm, 2001, p. 1).
A number of articles were written based upon the perspective of the librarians and
what the digital divide looked like to them. Many librarians struggled with trying to come
terms with the low level of technology skills possessed by the members of their
community in a world where technology is an integral part of most lives (Wilhelm, 2001;
Callison, 2004; Moe, 2004).

59

Libraries are often the only place where many patrons are able to gain access to
the newest technology (Wilhelm, 2001; Hayden, 2003; Umbach, 2004; Kinney, 2010).
For many patrons of the library that are well past school age, the library also represents
one of the only venues for learning how to use computers, including even basics skills.
Omekwu (2006) describes how the skills of librarians can easily translate into
information technology (IT) skills that can be used to assist patrons in finding online
resources quickly and efficiently. He stated that “librarians can help network users build
and maintain personal information systems, which provide access to the subset of
networked information sources relevant to each user’s work” as well as “to identify and
where appropriate, archive authoritative versions of electronic information” (Omekwu,
2006, p. 852).
Technology has fundamentally changed how many people communicate as well
as how many people learn. These technological changes, however, have not reached
everyone, causing a discrepancy and further separation between those groups that use this
technology and those that do not. The Internet allows a user to participate in his or her
community locally, nationally, and internationally and that those without access to this
global perspective will be much more limited in their ability to find and analyze
information.
In general, several studies found a correlation between income and public library
computer use. As income levels increased, the use of the Internet moved from solely a
form of entertainment and more towards a tool used for finance or learning (Howard,
Rainie, & Jones, 2001; Moe, 2004).

60

Almost four out of five children access the Internet from home out of those who
access the Internet. For many disadvantaged groups, the only point of access available to
them for Internet usage is in school or at the library (Callison, 2004). This presents the
librarians with a captive audience to build programs around that include information
literacy and computing skills.
Many authors take the approach of how librarians can be active participants in
addressing digital divide issues and how ICTs can be used to strengthen communities and
provide a means by which to overcome socio-economic disadvantages (Aqili &
Moghaddam, 2008).
Librarians are often the primary agency that sees how the issue of equitable
access looks on a daily basis and the impact that access can have on an individual and a
community. Libraries are well positioned in order to help achieve that level of equitable
access, but they must be proactive in trying to make that a reality (Berry, 2002; Hayden,
2003). The library should be an integral part of its local community and should therefore
have a better understanding of the needs of its community in terms of access. This
integration is necessary in order to build the bridge across the divide within a specific
area and community (Umbach, 2004). In addition, while local libraries are often well
positioned to help address digital divide concerns, Lor (2003) stated that national libraries
can play an integral function in addressing digital divide concerns. By assisting local
libraries while also being national advocates for digital divide concerns, national libraries
are well positioned to use their status and social capital in order to spread awareness of
the digital divide and the detrimental impact that it has at the local, state, and national
levels (Lor, 2003).

61

One important discussion that was frequently addressed by several authors was
the fact that, while many libraries were the primary means to combat the digital divide
within their community, they often were not given enough resources to do a
comprehensive job due to shortages in finances, manpower, and/or technology access
(Bertot, McClure, & Jaeger, 2005; Mandel, Bishop, McClure, Bertot, & Jaeger, 2010). In
addition, as the recession deepened in 2009 and unemployment rose, libraries began to be
inundated with patrons in need of electronic access to resources while, at the same time,
struggling with shrinking budgets that often put the library in an even greater shortage of
finances, manpower, and/or technology access. Libraries were caught up in a perfect
storm of ever-decreasing funding sources while struggling to cope with ever-increasing
numbers of patrons in desperate need of online access (Becker et al., 2010). Becker et al
find that “although demand for library computers is high and continues to grow, since
2001 the number of librarians available to assist patrons has not grown at the same pace
as the rapid increase in visits, circulation, and availability of public access computers.
Further, the number of hours libraries are open has remained flat or in some years fallen.
Supporting these observations further, the latest Public Library and Internet Study for the
American Library Association (Clark et al., 2009, p. 8), shows that 81 percent of libraries
cite insufficient availability of workstations, time limitations are being placed on the use
of work stations, and that 63 percent of libraries rely on nonprofessional IT staff or
library directors to carry out technical support” (Becker et al., 2010, p. 17).
Several articles also research the return on investment of libraries, with particular
notice given to electronic access and digital divide issues. Internet access has become one
of the greatest draws for many patrons, especially those who do not have access at home.

62

By giving unfettered access to online resources at significant speeds, typically using
broadband access, libraries are able to give opportunities to the community that might
otherwise be lost. Many corporations only accept online applications for jobs. By
allowing patrons access to the Internet, libraries are often able to increase the economic
situation of patrons who might otherwise be locked out of employment opportunities. “In
the study, 40 percent of the respondents (30 million people) used library computers and
internet access for employment or career purposes. Among the employment users, 76
percent used a library’s computers or Internet connection specifically for their search for
job opportunities” (Becker et al., 2010, p. 6). However, many funding agencies prefer to
see quantifiable returns on the investments made. By quantifying the return on the
investment made to libraries, Bertot et al. hope to present tools to libraries that will assist
them in requesting the additional funding needed to expand their online presence and
activities. He, along with several co-authors, expound upon the importance of libraries in
the battle to bridge the digital divide and present libraries as the forerunners in allowing
access to socio-economic groups that would otherwise be completely left out of this
information society (Bertot, Jaeger, Wahl, & Sigler, 2011; Jaeger, Bertot, Kodama, Katz,
& DeCoster, 2011). Examples include amount of use of licensed databases, number of
participants in IT training, number of job recipients that specifically used library
resources, and number of users that were assisted with using government Web resources,
applied for government services or were assisted with completing government forms
(Bertot, Jaeger, Wahl, & Sigler, 2011, p. 11).

63

Education
Education, while at first glance may not appear to fit well in the skills category, is
actually one of the prevalent themes in much of the literature. This is due, in part, to the
fact that education is often seen as one of the primary methods that will be effective in
bridging the divide. By educating people in effective use of online resources, as well as
teaching them how to evaluate the materials presented online, many disadvantaged socioeconomic groups will have a path available to use online resources and use them well
(Brooks, Donovan, & Rumble, 2005).
Many schools in lower socio-economic neighborhoods are often the very schools
that have the least amount of access to online resources. This lack of access is a huge
disadvantage as schools are typically one of only two primary access points that many
lower socio-economic groups use to gain access to the Internet (Thicksten, 2003). In
addition, this lack of access sets a routine in terms of locating information and resources
that often follow students throughout their academic career. This typically leads to a gap
between the students entering college who have had access to technology and online
resources and those who did not have similar access (Eamon, 2004).
Students who are familiar with online resources and technology are significantly
more likely to begin doing research and studying using online materials and resources
than are their peers who are not as familiar with the materials and technologies available
online (Levin & Arafeh, 2002). Many college courses make general assumptions about
the students’ ability to locate and use online resources. However, some earlier research
indicates that as much as 49% of college students did not begin using the Internet until
they arrived at college (Jones, 2002). Unfortunately, the remainder of students who did

64

grow up with online access readily available often do not realize that their peers are at
such a significant disadvantage. One study discovered that many students entering
college often feel that the Internet is as common as television channels and that all people
have easy and equal access to it (King, 2002). In 1999, “roughly 94% of American
households with telephone, 37% with PC, 26% with modem, 19% with internet access may not raise immediate alarms, a different presentation of the same numbers - 6%
without telephone, 63% without PC, 74% without modem, 81% without internet” (King,
2002, p. 67).
Millennials are defined as “a person born in the 1980s or 1990s, especially in the
U.S.; a member of Generation Y” (Millennial, n.d.). This generation is one where access
to the Internet was always available as they grew up. Unfortunately, many observers
assume that most Millennials are very technology savvy. However, this assumption
concerning Millennials often put those groups that did not have access at an even further
disadvantage, as little to no formal training is available at the college level (Stoerger,
2009).
Research has shown that this discrepancy between assumed skill sets and actual
skill sets has a detrimental effect on academic performance, especially by those students
who have had no access to online resource prior to entering secondary education (Huang
& Russell, 2006). Huang and Russell state that in their research, they found that the
school “that has the highest technology accessibility for its students both at school and at
home ranks the first in all test subjects“(Huang & Russell, 2006, p. 167). In addition,
while computers may be available, often little to no classroom time is set aside
specifically to teach students how to use the computers or the online resources that makes

65

the Internet such a powerful tool. “For instance, although most classrooms have
computers with internet connection, 12 percent of the teacher responses say that they are
not available for student use on a daily basis. 84 percent of the teachers reported that
classroom computers were used less than one hour per day by students” (Huang &
Russell, 2006, p. 167).
Research has shown, however, that the school media center can be used as a
positive tool to teach students how to effectively use technology and online resources and
methods to evaluate the materials they find online to determine whether they are
appropriate. School media personnel are often well trained via their degrees in the use of
IT and can translate those skills into teachable units to bring their students up to speed on
the newest technologies and resources that are available (Omekwu, 2006; Franklin &
Stephens, 2009).
Technology has changed education and provided a medium that can address a
variety of learning styles. It has also changed how society views literacy:
The new literacy, beyond text and image, is one of information navigation. The
real literacy of tomorrow entails the ability to be your own personal reference
librarian-to know how to navigate through confusing, complex information spaces
and feel comfortable doing so (Brown, 2002).
This new form of literacy, though, is only useful to those groups with access to
technology and who possess the skills needed to efficient and effectively use that access.
Some researchers tackle these ideas by looking at the way teachers are addressing
technology in the classroom. While teachers often discuss ways to learn with technology,
it is also imperative that they teach about the technology as well. While the Internet is a

66

prodigious source for information, it is also a massive source of misinformation. Students
who have little to no skills in evaluating the information being presented online may
erroneously accept opinions or even propaganda as facts because they found the
information online (Gillan, 2003; Doyle, 2006). Many instructors take the approach that
the technology can act as a replacement teacher, whereas the reality is that students need
guidance and supervision in order to be successful at learning through the use of
technology (Gillan, 2003).
Even prior to the acknowledgment of the digital divide, Martinez (1994)
discussed the benefits of increased technology in the classroom to students. He stated that
technology can be used as method to provide greater levels of equality to all in terms of
materials that are available in the classroom or as another means to polarize socioeconomic groups between those with access and those without access to those materials
(Martinez, 1994). This leads to another aspect of the digital divide that was studied by
several researchers; the divide between the teachers’ knowledge of technology and their
students’ knowledge. Unfortunately, many primary school teachers are often not as
knowledgeable about the use of technology and view it as a disruption to their teaching
curriculum (Gillan, 2003). This often leads them to dismiss the use of technology in the
classroom or the use of technology only in very limited amounts.
The developing world is taking this issue to heart as they begin to see themselves
falling further behind in terms of development. The internet and the resources available
can provide excellent teaching tools to anyone that gain access to them. Many developing
countries are taking advantage of these resources by providing as much technology
access as possible in the classroom and at as early of an age as possible. “Many teachers

67

in developing countries are trained through distance education projects” using technology
(Tiene, 2004, p. 94). This also includes allowing the teachers to buy into the adoption and
integration of technology into their classrooms. “The most dynamic applications of ICT
are those facilitated by a teacher who is prepared to take full advantage of its potential”
(Tiene, 2004, p. 92).
Current research shows that pedagogy that includes technology has a significantly
beneficial effect on students who are preparing for secondary education. Teachers must
be up to date on their content areas and on the pedagogical methods that best relay that
content. “Such knowledge includes how to use various software packages, peripheral
devices, and Web sites, expanding, then, to effectively selecting those resources that
would most powerfully support the learning goals of the classroom” (Banister &
Reinhart, 2011, p. 9).
Skills
The final theme that emerged in the literature in the category of skill sets was that
of skills themselves. Oftentimes, in an attempt to help, organizations will introduce new
technologies to help groups better themselves. Unfortunately, the groups that would
benefit the most from the use of this technology are often the ones with the least amount
of skills available to make use of the technologies. Research has shown that when a group
does not possess the skills needed to use technologies effectively or efficiently, group
members do not use the technology, relying instead on methods with which they are
familiar (Grabill, 2003; Hargittai, 2002; Hargittai, 2010; Stern, 2010).
Many groups’ reticence is affected by an actual lack of skills and their perceived
lack of skills. Many groups are often intimidated by technology, given their lack of

68

formal training or experience with technology previously. While the skills they possess
might often translate well into a digital environment, such as skill with typewriting,
translating directly into successful use of a keyboard, the new environment often causes
significant confusion and allows the user to make the decision not to use the technology.
“The Internet requires development of a further set of skills that, to the novice user, at
least, may be daunting. These include establishing and maintaining a stable Internet
connection, learning how to navigate on the Internet, and searching it for relevant
information” (Eastin & LaRose, 2000). While education is often the key to changing this
attitude, the groups are often still behind in terms of adoption of new technologies due to
this perceived barrier to use (Eastin & LaRose, 2000).
Some research discovered that on a day-to-day basis, the lack of technology skills
has a detrimental effect. For example, any groups, while interested in technology, have
no background by which to even begin learning how to make use of the technology that
may be available to them. People may often pass over opportunities, such as the chance at
a new job, due to the fact that a significant amount of it involves the use of technology,
often including the application process itself (Dewan, Ganley, & Kraemer, 2005). In
addition, some groups see no incentive to make use of new technologies or resources.
Their current skill set is sufficient in order to maintain the status quo of their lives and
they see no reason to expend the resources need in order to learn new skills (Ferro,
Helbig, & Gil-Garcia, 2011, p. 8).
Some groups are so marginalized, such as the homeless, that they possess little to
no skills that might translate into use with technology. This keeps them at a further
disadvantage in terms of socio-economic growth due to the growing adoption of digital

69

access even to job boards. An issue that many homeless in the U.S. must contend with is
“whether they were able to determine which information sources could provide
information that led to the gaining or maintaining of needed resources” (Hersberger,
2002, p. 55).
An added benefit of the introduction of technology is that productivity and
efficiency have been shown to improve as a greater level of technology literacy is
introduced (Goss & Phillips, 2002). Wages increase as greater levels of technology skills
are present in the workforce and greater levels of production have been shown to be
achieved. For example, “employees who used a computer at work earned 10 to 15 percent
more than workers who did not” (Goss & Phillips, 2002, p. 464). This presents a path for
lesser developed countries to better their productivity and improve conditions for many of
their citizens as well as be able to increase services based upon increased tax revenues
from these higher wages. By pushing for greater levels of education on technology skills,
lower socio-economic groups have the opportunity to better themselves and their
communities by gaining better jobs and increasing their wages (Chabran, 2000) For
example, “using data from the French labor market each year of computer-based
experience increased wages by approximately 1 percent…, even after controlling for this
selectivity bias, the authors estimated that on average, those who use technology earned a
wage premium of approximately 16 percent (Goss & Phillips, 2002, p. 465).
In some areas of the world, this lack of technology skills presents a significant
barrier to be able to spread new technology skills. With little to no formal training
available, many sub-Saharan countries are not even keeping up with the growth rate of
the rest of the world, much less making any gains to bridge the divide (Oyelaran-

70

Oyeyinka & Lal, 2005). “Current estimates show that Internet use in Africa lags behind
that of other regions. Regional distribution of the Internet users… shows that in the first
quarter of 2002 worldwide users of the Internet reached 580.78 million with only 6.31
million in Africa, only about 1% of world total” (Oyelaran-Oyeyinka & Lal, 2005, p.
508). While the lack of infrastructure and human capital are also persistent issues, the
lack of skills was the biggest concern. Without the necessary skills to even maintain a
network, the introduction of a complex infrastructure would not alleviate many of the
divide problems that were rampant in many sub-Saharan countries.
One of the strengths of the Internet is that it not only stores information and
allows others to access it. It also allows people to generate their own knowledge, building
on materials already present and increasing the store of knowledge within a society. For
groups and countries, such as sub-Saharan Africa, that do not have access to the
information readily available on the Internet, they are not able to make these leaps in
knowledge as they are not exposed to the information necessary to help in that process
(Oyelaran-Oyeyinka & Lal, 2005). Students are able to stand on the shoulders of those
researchers and instructors who have gone before them and reach new heights of
discovery. The Internet greatly enhances this process as much of this information is
readily available through databases and data sets. Therefore, instead of starting from
scratch, other researchers are able to analyze the findings made by previous researchers
and learn from their successes and failures. This allows for a huge savings in time and
resources as researchers are able to see what others had already discovered and use those
successes as a starting point to begin new lines of inquiry. However, many of these

71

resources are not readily apparent to new users, thus denying them the ability for this
jump start in their research (Ojala, 2002).
Another point of concern among many of the articles is the lack of literacy skills
needed to make the most efficient use of the materials available online. While the Internet
possesses a tremendous amount of information, not all of this information is vetted for
accuracy or balanced against bias. This allows for the introduction of erroneous
assumptions into research that could otherwise greatly benefit a country or institution
(Debono, 2002; Mitchell, 2002; Kornblum, 2005; Fourie & Bothma, 2006).
Many authors, for example, Cullen, James, and Peter & Valkenburg, have found
that by teaching information literacy skills, patrons are more confident in their use of
technology and more likely to begin to experiment in using technology that they
previously would not have used. While there have been many studies looking at various
variables that have an impact on the divide, teaching skills to each of those groups was a
universal method to help bridge the divide. While some personalization was
recommended, oftentimes, programs were open to all ages, allowing for some more
advanced users to assist novices (Cullen, 2003; Peter & Valkenburg, 2006).
As technology continues to grow, many socio-economic groups are unable to
keep up with the newest innovations in hardware or software. Therefore, the skills they
possess may quickly become outdated. A user who is skilled in the use of Windows 3.1
may not be able to translate those skills easily into the use of Windows 8. Students who
are able to learn technology skills while in primary school are better positioned to
continue with the use of technology. “Most people will have technologies at their
fingertips not only to communicate but to create, to manipulate, to design, to self-

72

actualize. Children learn these skills as part of their lives, like language, which they learn
without realizing they are learning it” (Jones-Kavalier & Flannigan, 2006, p.8).
Infrastructure
Open-Source Software
The decision to include open-source software in the literature was twofold. One
primary reason was the fact that open-source software is often touted as one method to
bridge the divide (Herb, 2010). Another reason is that open-source software is another
form of access to technology that is greatly beneficial to lower socio-economic groups.
One of the main premises of open-source software is that allows for much greater
levels of access to all groups. To be officially defined as open source, one of the criteria
is that the software be open to all groups, regardless of race, ethnicity, or any other form
of discriminatory labeling. This allows any group to freely download and use the
software.
Open source also removes a significant barrier to entry in gaining access to online
resources. Programs such as Open Office allow users to open and modify a large number
of proprietary formats, such as those found in Microsoft Office products, without being
forced to purchase expensive software. In addition, many web browsers are open source,
allowing for greater flexibility in terms of use and access (James, 2003).
In developed countries, libraries are often able to adopt a large number of opensource programs, as many librarians are already familiar with many of the IT skills
necessary to use the programs. With ever-shrinking budgets, open-source programs
present a cost-savings opportunity for libraries while also allowing them to introduce the
software to groups that might be unable to purchase the corresponding proprietary

73

software packages. This presents an opportunity of synergy between the needs of the
library and the community it serves. It also presents developing countries the opportunity
to use software with fewer constraints than the proprietary software packages. It also
gives them the opportunity to develop their own solutions to problems that may be
specific to their particular application (Usova, 2009).
A number of authors discuss using open-source software to develop open-access
journal databases. Another significant barrier to entry to access many online databases is
that most professional journals are only available through prohibitively expensive
subscriptions. In 2013, the average price per journal for a Chemistry journal was ~$4450,
with Physics close behind with an average price of ~$3893 per journal (Bosch &
Henderson, 2013). Many developing countries are unable to justify the costs necessary to
gain access to these journals. By building open-access databases, many countries would
be able to begin to gain access to vast repositories of knowledge and information that is
often taken for granted by more developed countries (Björk, 2004; Law, 2004; Haider,
2007).
Internet and Communication Technologies (ICT)
ICTs are one of the cornerstones in terms of infrastructure needed to fully access
the Internet. ICTs provide a direct economic benefit, as research has shown that ICTs
generate a significant number of well-paying jobs (Antonelli, 2003). Gross domestic
product (GDP) has been linked directly to growth or stagnation in the ICT sector. The
greater the growth in ICTs, GDP has a correspondingly greater rate of growth. This is
trend is not a short-term gain, but it holds true over long-term GDP growth as well
(Norris, 2000).

74

This growth is not only economic success at the national level, as it also impacts
the economy at the state and local levels. ICTs can bring much-needed economic and
educational opportunities to communities that desperately need them. For ICTs to grow,
investments in human capital must be made, thus increasing the level of education in an
area as a direct result of the introduction of the ICT. ICTs can help to strengthen a
community as they often become a community-wide project to gain the skills necessary
to support and maintain the ICTs (McLaren & Zappalà, 2002).
In terms of ICT growth, there is a significant divide even among developed
countries. Europe is quite diverse in the levels of access to ICTs in terms of national
differences and state levels within a country. There are also significant differences
between Europe and the U.S. in terms of access and availability. Scandinavian countries
have made marked strides in providing access to anyone who wants it. This access is
prescribed even further by legislation that contains specific lower limits on access speeds.
In Finland, anyone in the country who wants access is guaranteed access to broadband
via subsidies between the government and the ICT companies (Sicherl, 2000).
Research has shown that ICTs have greater economic benefits than is apparent by
calculating the return on investment that was put into the ICTs. Angelou and Economides
(2009) discuss how similar methods for investments using game theory and real options
theory, as opposed to return on investment, can be applied to the investment into ICTs
and give a much better estimate on the long-term benefits of that investment.
In addition, several authors, such as Opesade, Raju, and Kiiru and Mburu, discuss
how ICT investments can be designed to bridge the digital divide. Opesade (2011)
discusses how digital divide issues in specific geographic areas should be included as part

75

of the overall discussion on ICT investment. Lower socio-economic communities, such
as those in rural areas or developing countries, should be given greater priority as
investments are made, as these communities will gain the greatest benefit from the
investment. By introducing greater levels of education and skills into the community,
people will begin to gain access to the tools they need in order to get better jobs and
increase their quality of life.
This investment in rural areas will also benefit the communities by providing a
direct route for communications. Current news and events could quickly and easily be
sent to towns and villages using the newly introduced ICTs (Raju, 2004). Farmers would
have up-to-the-minute prices available for their crops, allowing for greater equity in
pricing. In rural Africa, ICTs are used by farmers and distribution centers to quickly
weigh and process their goods, calculate the wages for the farmers, and to send payment
to the farmers in a timely fashion. This process dramatically decreases the amount of time
it takes for farmers to get paid for the products, freeing up significant amounts of their
capital that they can reinvest. Microfinance transactions are also becoming possible
through the introduction of ICTs into rural areas. These are small, short loans that are
typically not worthwhile for banks to process or handle. With ICTs, farmers and small
business owners are able to take out short-term loans for small amounts to get them
through times where they are between processing and selling their products. These small
loans help them to keep their heads above water financially while they conclude the sale
of their products. ”43% of the poor will take the loans with a major objective of first
meeting the basic needs, mostly providing food for the family with an intention of
investing the remaining money” (Kiiru & Mburu, n.d.).

76

One point of concern about ICT investment and growth is that oftentimes the
same strategy is applied universally without looking at national or local conditions. While
this may work in some areas, in other areas, these strategies do not work, wasting much
of the investment and giving little to no return from that investment. In many African
countries, ICT access looks and works much differently than it does in Europe or the U.S.
When making investments in ICT infrastructure, often the same strategies for introducing
the ICTs are used. However, a viable access strategy be only developed by looking at the
specific community and area. This would give a significantly greater return on the ICT
investment as well as bring greater benefits to the community. For example, “Africa’s
first NEPAD e-school was launched in Uganda in July 2005. The project included
equipping the school with computers and accessories, a server, the internet, electricity, a
mobile telephone booster mast, computer desks, DSTV, an e-health facility, and trained
teachers” (Mutula, 2008, p. 478). This school was built specifically with the needs of
Uganda in mind and programs in place to address the specific needs of the community.
While many researchers agree that ICTs increase economic opportunities (Norris
2000; Antonelli, 2003; Meso, Datta, & Mbarika, 2006), there is also a cost associated
with ICT growth. Some research has shown that ICTs exacerbate social exclusions
problems, such as marginalization and lack of access to public services. This, however, is
not a symptom of the introduction of ICTs but a symptom of the inequality of ICT
distribution. Often, ICTs are introduced into urban, more affluent areas first. These areas
typically have a higher socio-economic status than their rural counterparts. Also, the
groups that are already marginalized are typically the same groups that cannot afford to
pay for the access that the ICTs introduce. These factors amplify already existing social

77

problems. As Warren stated, “those with high levels will gain more than people with
lower initial levels (Warren, 2007, p. 378). In addition the productivity paradox between
increased technology use still persists. With greater levels of technology adoption, there
is typically not a correspondingly increased level of productivity.
Many databases have begun to move to single providers. This gives the providers
a monopoly on the information available in those databases. This also gives the providers
the ability to set prices anywhere on the spectrum that they choose. This can present an
overwhelming barrier to entry for lesser developed countries (Bell, 2001; Brooks,
Donovan, & Rumble, 2005). Given the increased costs that many lesser developed
countries pay in relation to the developed countries, the additional cost of access to these
databases is often more than they can fit into their budget. As Bell stated, “Whatever
these libraries hope to save in the short run may be lost in the long run, as publishers and
aggregators combine to break this model with higher database licensing fees and
embargoes in their efforts to recoup lost revenue” (Bell, 2001).
Human Capital
Human capital is defined as “the collective skills, knowledge, or other intangible
assets of individuals that can be used to create economic value for the individuals, their
employers, or their community” (Human Capital, n.d.). Human capital is also one of the
factors included in measuring the digital divide within a country.
In order for a community to make the most efficient and effective use of an ICT,
they will need to have the education and skills necessary to do so. This includes such
skills as literacy, mathematics, and some level of programming skills, as well as some
grasp of the physical infrastructure itself.

78

Much research has been done on reviewing other human capital topics that affect
the divide. Several themes became apparent as the literature was reviewed in terms of
communities and their social capital. These themes include social inclusion, rural and
urban users and ultimately people’s lived experiences.
Social Inclusion
Social inclusion was an important theme found in the literature. ICTs have the
potential to exacerbate many of the social issues prevalent in a society. One of these
social concerns is that of social inclusion. Some research has found that the digital divide
exacerbates social problems that have been in place for years (Agosto, 2005; Saleh,
2009).
Several researchers discussed how much of the research on the divide had been
too narrow. Many of the solutions presented by earlier researchers had focused only on
the technological aspect of the divide. By giving the most current technologies to
communities, these communities should be able to join the information society and
partake of all the benefits derived from it. However, this is not the case. Many groups do
not have the skill sets needed to fully make use of those technologies. Many communities
do not even have the basic literacy skills necessary to effectively use much of the
technology (Bucy, 2000; Ono & Zavodny, 2007).
A number of researchers also discuss the idea of the information poor. These
researchers include Chatman, Hersberger, and Britz. These are groups that have been
marginalized by their community and thus lack many of the traditional forms of
information access that others may have. One of the seminal works on the information
poor was by Chatman (1996). Chatman researched how people deal with information, or

79

the lack thereof, within their own lived experiences. While at the time, this was not a
discussion on the digital divide, her insight into the transfer of information is highly
applicable to divide issues.
Several researchers, such as Britz, Hersberger, and Saleh, continued this idea of
the information poor by using the digital divide as the backdrop. Their research of the
information poor reviewed the effects that the digital divide has on their continued socioeconomic status. With no access to the Internet, many were unable to fill out applications,
much less find job postings that had no print equivalents. They were not able to do cost
comparisons using company websites or look for alternatives for transportation other than
what they already knew about (Britz, 2004; Powell, Bryne & Dailey, 2010). Finer
granularity was applied in terms of access, such as using broadband access instead of
narrowband access. This research found that those with broadband access were able to
use more resources in less time, thus greatly increasing efficiency. Even this difference
between levels of access magnifies the factors of exclusion. “Broadband networks will be
as critical to the 21st Century as roads, canals and railroads were to the 19th Century and
the Interstate Highway System and basic telephone networks were to the 20th Century“
(Bouras, Giannaka, & Tsiatsos, 2009, p. 795).
This social exclusion was reviewed by Ferber, Foltz, & Pugliese (2008). Their
review was done by analyzing the methods used by state legislature websites in
presenting information. They found that many websites exhibited a form of exclusion
based on language and style of the websites. This idea was approached by also reviewing
digital inclusion and discussing whether digital inclusion is also equivalent to cultural
inclusion (Worcman, 2002). “It is necessary to first make computers and their use

80

meaningful to the people who will be using the computers. Communities need to be
engaged in the digitization of their own stories as a means of social affirmation”
(Worcman, 2002).
One idea was that innovation is often diffused into a culture differently.
Communities should be studied in order to understand how technology is adopted and
diffused throughout the population. By determining which factors present the greatest
appeal to a certain community, these factors could be used to help introduce more
advanced technologies (Kaye & Little, 2000). One such factor is the language in which
information is presented. Research found that a culture often identifies itself through
language. However, in the current online environment, individual language is often lost,
causing many communities to dismiss new technologies (Warschauer, 2000). The
“Internet highlights the role of language while simultaneously masking the role of other
identity markers such as race, gender, or class” (Warschauer, 2000).
Many communities are focused more on local concerns than national or
international ones. However, for many rural communities, little to no information is
readily available about their local concerns. This lack of local information often
discourages rural communities and groups from engaging or participating in the online
discussion (Lazarus & Mora, 2000). In addition to the lack of local content is the lack of
use of a local language. The language used to present the information is often a barrier to
entry for many non-English speakers. The vast majority of websites are written in
English, even websites that focus on non-English speaking communities (Fairlie, 2004).
Social exclusion is a problem that afflicts a variety of socio-economic groups.
Research found that social implications of the divide are spread across the spectrum of

81

users and often have a detrimental effect on the continued use of technologies (Kim, Lee,
& Menon, 2009). Some research analyzed the differences between some of the groups
that have access and those that do not, and some of the factors that influence the decision
to gain access (van Dijk, 2006). This is seen not only in developing countries, such as
Kenya, but in disenfranchised groups in developed countries, such as the homeless
(Hersberger, 2002).
Research also found that digital exclusion is highly correlated to social exclusion
for most groups. Therefore, for most marginalized groups, their exclusion socially will
also include exclusion from the digital discussion as well (John, 2009). From a economic
perspective, research found that the digital divide follows similar exclusive patterns as
social justice and social exclusion (Duff, 2011).
Another concern that was examined was who, if anyone, benefitted from the
digital divide. One point of concern was that ICT penetration was also being used as a
new form of colonialism. By keeping certain groups from gaining access to information,
such as current market prices, some countries and groups were able to gain access to
cheap labor and materials. “Just as mercantile capitalism coveted the raw materials of
Africa, Asia and Latin America; and industrial capitalism increasingly used it as a
manufacturing platform; informational capitalism has plans of its own for the South as a
market and a site for offshore informational processing“ (Luyt, 2004). This capitalistic
policy was followed by external groups within a country as a way to work as
intermediaries between their countries and the local populations. Thus, they were able to
benefit both socially and economically by providing outside groups with cheap resources
while internally providing a market for local community resources, although at

82

discounted prices. “In the case of India and the Philippines, data processing work is
complemented by a focus on contact centres“ (Luyt, 2004).
Some researchers were concerned that those groups best poised to assist with
bridging the divide were also the ones that helped to create the divide in the first place.
By creating gaps in technologies, some companies were able to prolong the shelf life of
older technologies by selling them to lower socio-economic groups. This kept these
groups in the technology game but at a disadvantage by not having access to the newest,
more efficient technologies that were available (Houston & Erdelez, 2004; Fuchs &
Horak, 2008). As Houston and Erdelez state “perhaps they imply that the digital industry
applies pressure on legislators to purchase and distribute machines that would be
unmarketably slow by the time a government had evaluated, legislated, funded, and
purchased the machines, eliminating at profit an embarrassing inventory of obsolete
machines” (Houston & Erdelez, 2004, p. 28).
Just because a group is not included in the digital discussion does not mean they
are not producers of information. “I use zones of silence, to mean the unseen, seemingly
quiet, technology–sparse spaces of the digital divide. Mansell and Wehn (1998), writing
about developing countries and the international governance system, use the phrase to
mean the places, found in the developing world, where communities are effectively
“silent” because of a lack of access to ICTs.” (Potter, 2006). However, this assumption is
erroneous (Potter, 2006). These groups often produce as much as information and
knowledge as other, more connected communities; they have no method by which to
share that information other than more traditional methods, such as print or oral
traditions.

83

While socio-economic groups are often the focus of social exclusion, much
research has also been done on the “gray” digital divide. This research focuses less on
socio-economic status and examines differences based on age (Morris & Brading, 2007).
One example is the lack of instructions available on even basic computer use. With the
advent of the Millennials, many groups assume that everyone possesses the rudimentary
knowledge needed to use a computer. For many older adults, this is not the case, as they
never received even basic training in the use of a computer. During their primary and
secondary education, computers were only available to those in specific research fields.
Their professions may not have included any computer use prior to their retirement, thus
leaving them with little to no opportunity to interact with technology. As Fox stated, “Just
29% of Americans age 65 and older uses a computer on at least an occasional basis.
Many of these Americans were probably not in the workforce when computers became
standard issue at offices, schools, factories, and other work sites” (Fox, 2004, p. 11).
“While many retirees are not connected, the generation soon to be in retirement is much
more net savvy and more likely to adopt new technologies (Fox, 2001; 2004). “While
today's senior citizens are the least likely to go online, the cohort behind them is among
the most wired. Those aged 50-64 are likely to keep their Internet access even after they
retire. An American between 50 and 64 years old is three times more likely to have
Internet access than someone over the age of 65 “(Fox, 2001, p. 12). In contrast, for the
current retirees, their level of access is often much more limited.
One point of concern is that this gray divide is increasing in terms of access to
technology. Costs such as those associated with mobile phone use or broadband adoption
are often well outside of the ability of many retirees to be able to afford (Paul &

84

Stegbauer, 2005). Research has found that even for those who possess the monetary
means for access, psychological factors hinder many older adults, those 65 and older,
from using newer technologies (Broos & Roe, 2006). “Those who under-estimate their
competences will be more easily discouraged when something fails while those who
believe more firmly in their self-efficacy will persist even when, at first, the expected
result is not reached, i.e. they will tend to continue until they succeed” (Broos & Roe,
2006, p. 308).
Also, many older adults have only seen the Internet as a venue for entertainment.
This experience is included as a factor that often causes many older adults to discount the
usefulness of the Internet (Loges & Jung, 2001). “People older than 65 report much less
agreement with some attitude- and goal-related questions regarding the Internet than do
people younger than 30. Seniors are about half as likely as younger respondents to agree
with such statements as ‘The Internet would help me find things’” (Loges & Jung, 2001,
p. 541). Given the amount of misinformation and noise often associated with the Internet,
the message concerning the usefulness of the Internet is often lost. Many older adults
only hear about the misuses of the Internet in terms of fraud or about the volume of adult
material that is readily available online. They often miss the messages concerning the
usefulness of the Internet, such as the ability to research drugs reactions or the ability to
have greater control over investments using online trading companies.
Another group that was studied by some researchers was women. Studies
analyzed examined the frequency and scope of Internet use by women to determine
whether gender played a role in digital divide issues (Wasserman & Richmond-Abbott,
2005). Some inequality was found to be present between the levels of access women had

85

in comparison to their male counterparts. “Consistent with previous studies, it is found
that women use the Internet less frequently than men” (Wasserman & Richmond-Abbott,
2005, p. 261). How the Internet was being used also differed between the two genders.
“Men were more likely to use websites that provided financial information, government
information, news and current events, and sexually explicit information. By contrast,
women were significantly more likely to use religious and church sites, as well as
cooking and recipe sites“ (Wasserman & Richmond-Abbott, 2005, p.263). This raised
some questions as typically males used the Internet for more business applications.
Research was also done analyzing the long-term effects of this digital exclusion.
One conclusion was that the ability to participate and prosper in the new economy may
be permanently impaired if some long-term gains are not made to bridge the divide
between those with access and those without (Cooper, 2002b). “If a household is cut off
for a decade, its ability to participate and prosper in the new economy may be
permanently impaired. If a group is not well represented as the architecture of the Internet
becomes defined and the patterns of deployment established, the needs of the group may
never be well represented in cyberspace” (Cooper, 2002b, p.3).
Rural vs. Urban Populations
There is a significant difference between the levels of access available to rural
communities and their urban counterparts. Faster levels of access speeds are much more
readily available in urban areas as is a greater selection of providers from which to
choose. This lack of access in rural areas is often exacerbated by providers as they are
able to charge more and provide less for the services offered in rural communities
(Grubesic, 2003). “Many residents say they have just two options for Internet service.

86

They can choose between a satellite connection, which they say is more expensive and
less reliable than wired Internet. If they can’t afford satellite, they are stuck with dial-up,
which most Americans replaced years ago with Internet speeds that are more than 20
times faster” (Smith, 2012).
This gap of access and services between rural and urban communities is in place
and widening. ISPs are introducing faster services at better rates in urban areas due to
increased competition. However, this increase in services and decrease in cost is not
always passed on to the rural areas (LaRose, Gregg, Strover, Straubhaar & Carpenter,
2007). This gap between rural and urban areas is not just increasing but increasing
rapidly. As LaRose et al state “only 24% of rural adults living outside of Metropolitan
Statistical Areas (MSAs), compared to 39% of urban and suburban adults in MSAs had
broadband Internet in their homes” (LaRose, Gregg, Strover, Straubhaar, & Carpenter,
2007, p. 360).
Due to the wider spread of rural populations, new technologies often diffuse into
the population at a much slower rate than in urban areas. This exacerbates this gap
between services, as even when services are available, it takes longer for these groups to
begin to adopt their use and integrate them into their daily lives (Hollifield &
Donnermeyer, 2003). “Adoption levels in rural areas have tended to lag those in urban
areas, compounding the problem of demand aggregation. Studies of adoption patterns
among rural residents showed rural adoption rates lagged even where access to the
Internet was available and despite the widespread conviction among rural residents that
these technologies were critical to their communities’ and their own futures” (Hollifield
& Donnermeyer, 2003, p. 136).

87

These conditions begin to bring adverse circumstances to rural areas, as they are
not able to react to changes as quickly as their urban counterparts. As market prices
fluctuate, those with access to this newest information are able to capitalize on it
immediately. However, for groups that are not aware of changes in market conditions,
they may agree to sell products or services at a much lower rate than what the market is
currently offering. Sadly, this scenario happens frequently at the local, national, and
international level. Rural areas have always lagged behind urban areas in terms of access
and this trend continues and worsens as better products and services are introduced into
urban markets (Kastsinas & Moeck, 2002). “Only 12.2% of rural Internet households had
broadband connections in 2001, compared to 21.2% of urban, noncentral city Internet
households and 22% of central city households.7 The use of slow-speed connections to
the Internet makes it difficult, if not impossible, to use effectively information networks
for business applications” (Hollifield & Donnermeyer, 2003, p. 136).
Some researchers actually voluntarily unplugged themselves and experienced life
being completely distanced from most technologies, including in one case, still using a
rotary phone. The vast discrepancy between those with access and those without were
immediately apparent, both socially and financially (Cart, 2005; Cisler, 2005). Even such
ordinary activities as placing an order through the phone became impossible with the use
of a rotary phone. Many businesses assumed that everyone had some level of technology
and built their services accordingly. For those without such access, these services became
exceedingly more difficult to procure.
As newer technologies were introduced, research was performed on the impact on
the digital divide. One such article analyzed the differences between urban and rural

88

communities in the US as 2G wireless was first introduced. As faster and better
connectivity was made available using mobile devices, greater levels of access were
much more easily achievable. However, this only effected those socio-economic groups
that could afford such services and in areas where 2G service was available, almost
inclusively in urban areas (Wareham, Levy, & Shi, 2004).
As new technologies are introduced, however, they make a significantly greater
impact due to the level of inaccessibility in place in rural areas. One study analyzed the
impact that tribal libraries in New Mexico had on their community as they adopted and
then loaned out newer technologies. The libraries were the first and only source of access
to broadband speeds and were able to share that accessibility via adoption of wireless
technologies (Dorr & Akeroyd, 2001).
Research studies also included ways indicating how rural communities can greatly
benefit from the application of ICTs to diminish the effects of distance (Malecki, 2003).
As discussed earlier about e-government, users of technology are no longer constrained
by geographic distance in order to make their voices heard. This is even more apparent to
rural communities that often lose their voices in larger debates. By using technology,
rural communities can keep current on the latest news and events and have a forum to
discuss their issues and concerns to bring them to the attention of policy makers.
However, if rural communities do not have such access, they are excluded from this
conversation, thus adversely affecting those communities (Mathur & Ambani, 2005).
In rural Africa, the introduction of ICTs provided a significant benefit through
telemedicine in areas that had little to no healthcare available at all (Mbarika, 2004). With
the introduction of broadband service, rural communities were then able to gain access to

89

medical information that had been readily available online for years. Rural medical
personnel were able to collaborate with peers anywhere in the world instantly, gaining
new insight into medical procedures that were more cost effective while maintaining high
levels of effectiveness. Experts could weigh in on difficult cases without ever having to
leave their office. For rural Africa, which was struggling with having little to no trained
medical personnel, telemedicine provided a quick, efficient method by which the best
doctors and specialists from around the world could be consulted and a diagnosis made
quickly. This would give access to vetted specialists within their field, without resorting
to additional sources that may not have been vetted by an outside agency.
Some research has begun in analyzing methods to provide greater levels of access
to poor and rural areas. With greater adoption of wireless technologies, many areas
surrounded by significant geographic barriers are now able to gain access at an affordable
rate. Moreover, broadband speeds are often available through this wireless connection
(Dang, 2008).This is described by Dang in Bangladesh, where the Grameen Village
Phone was introduced to connect rural areas that are significantly far from an urban
centers.
Boris approached this access between rural and urban areas as the key definition
between whether the digital divide is closing or widening. As rural areas catch up to their
urban counterparts, the author felt that this was indicative of the divide itself and whether
true gains were being made or whether it was the same story with the technology haves
still outpacing the technology have-nots (Boris, 2005). “One of the major reasons that
large portions of the rural population did not have early access to high-speed Internet was
due to the limitations of the type of broadband service originally available (Boyce, 2000).

90

The rural telephone company could not extend this technology more than three miles
from a switching station without a tremendous investment in equipment” (Boris, 2005, p.
15).
People
As the discussion on human capital expands, another area of interest is the
consideration of shifting the primary focus of digital divide issues from a technology
focus and towards a focus on the people affected by the divide. By shifting the focus
towards communities and people, the hypothesis is that better solutions will be
discovered instead of trying a one-size-fits-all solution that is often used when the focus
is only on technology (Salinas, 2003).
As discussed earlier, communities and people adopt technology differently.
Research was done in order to highlight this fact and recommend that the discussion
include people and the divide issues that they are facing instead of merely reviewing what
technology is currently available and ways that it can be made readily available
(Bonfadelli, 2002). As this shift occurs, better solutions will often be found that address
the divide at the intersection between people and technology instead of merely providing
people with technology and calling it a solution.
Several researchers discuss how even for people that have access, they should be
made aware that information is not free. There is some form of cost associated with the
production of information, whether it is human capital, financial, or the opportunity cost
associated with producing the information. Unfortunately, many people never stop to
count the cost associated with gaining access to online resources and with producing
those resources and making them available (Chabran, 2000; Loosen, 2002). By informing

91

people of the costs associated with producing information as well as making it available
online, it is hoped that those groups with access will realize the resources that it takes to
produce information and the value, whether intrinsic or extrinsic, associated with these
online resources.
Some researchers have gone so far as to say that the focus on purely technological
methods to bridge the divide has been a deliberate move away from focusing on the
people (Stevenson, 2009). By keeping the discussion in the purely technological domain,
groups are able to minimize the true costs associated with not having access to online
resources. Keeping the discussion focused on technology also allows groups to postulate
much easier solutions in bridging the divide than would otherwise be formulated. By
introducing people and their communities into the equation, simplistic formulas and
solutions become much more convoluted and the divide begins to take on an aspect that
is much more harmful to those groups that do not have access.
By focusing on people, other social inequalities begin to emerge that exacerbate
digital divide issues. One such study reviewed demographics as a path to determine
whether an individual would have access to online information. This idea, similar to
social exclusion, allowed for different variables to emerge in terms of what impacts the
level of access that many groups possess (Selwyn, 2004). Taking it one step further, some
research polarized the issue by examining the gap between whites and non-whites in
eastern North Carolina and used a bivariate regression model to look for the relationship
between race and those with or without access (Wilson, Wallin & Reiser, 2003).
As these ideas began to be disseminated, other researchers began to do additional
studies to follow up on the earlier works. One such study examined what kinds of

92

technology would be most useful to specific groups and specific cultures. By addressing
the issue of people where they live, more specific concerns and possible solutions were
able to be postulated (Berube, 2006). By including the idea of the community, people
could then become part of the solution. Instead of merely making educated hypothesis
and applying the results, researchers recommended actually approaching people in the
community and including them in the discussion from the start. This allowed for both
realistic approaches into what the problems actually looked like at the ground level while
giving the community the opportunity to buy into the solution, so that the people became
part of the process used to discover that solution (DiMaggio, Hargittai, Neuman &
Robinson, 2001). Additional research on the interactions between technology and
communities examined methods by which technological advances could be made
available to the widest group for the smallest investment (“Behind the Digital,” 2005).
Included in this discussion was how the younger generation adopts technology
quickly and learns to work around issues such as filtering (Farrelly, 2011). When
analyzing a community at the ground level, methods for the introduction of technology
will vary significantly. “Today, kids are walking around with more computer processing
power in their phones than I had in my library school-era laptop. A young adult who can't
access a site on a library computer need only pull it up on a 4G network with comparable
speeds and perhaps (depending on the library) better audio and visual options” (Farrelly,
2011, p. 28). Libraries can use this information and build educational programs
accordingly. If their community consists of greater numbers of young adults, then the
library staff may be able to do much quicker introductions to the technology and build
ways to introduce better or more advanced computer skills.

93

Another method of research into people is an analysis of how they are accessing
online resources. For those most connected, research has found that many of the
advanced technology users’ connect from at least two different locations (Harwood &
Rainie, 2004). However, for many users, the number of connections was even greater.
These findings indicate that multiple methods of access should be made available in order
to increase the amount of use made of online resources. One of these connections should
be available at home. Research found that a person with access at home was much more
likely to use that connection than someone who used a connection at a library or school
(Hassani, 2006). “By a large margin, users who connect at home, work, and at one or
more other places have the greatest odds of searching for health information, searching
for product information, banking, and making purchases online” (Hassani, 2006, p. 261).
In terms of solutions, several researchers focused on small, specific communities,
such as those in India, in order to ascertain some possible solutions (James, 2001a;
James, 2001b; Curry & Kenney, 2006). Much of this research was done globally, as the
divide is much more significant in lesser developed countries. Many of the findings
revealed that even when the focus was small, the impact could be significantly larger.
One method to increase the impact of local solutions is to develop small-scale projects
that can be networked. For example, small internet centers could be developed within a
small town, which could then be used as a connection point to another small town. This
gives a greater benefit to the local community while providing a longer-term solution for
the region, and ultimately, the country.

94

Democracy
Democracy is the key idea within this paper, and while it is often discussed, it is
rarely used in conjunction with analysis in terms of the impacts on the divide. This
presents an opportunity for further discussion and analysis into the variables that affect
the digital divide and could have future policy implications.
A number of studies discuss democracy and the digital divide. However, most of
them take a qualitative approach and look at more loosely associated variables (Jaeger &
Burnett, 2005; Curry & Kenney, 2006; Herb, 2010). Only two studies were found that
used a quantitative method when discussing democracy and the digital divide, Guillén
and Suárez (2005) and Robison and Crenshaw (2010), and neither of these studies was in
the LIS field. Guillén and Suárez were from Sociology whereas Robison and Crenshaw
were from Political Science. Both of these studies did, however, use a very broad
definition of democracy, thus impeding the parsimony of the regression models they
used. While similar variables were present, such as the number of Internet users and
Freedom House scores, other variables were not, such as foreign direct investment (FDI).
The gap in research presents an opportunity to study the relationship between democracy
and the divide in more detail while keeping the model in a simple form.
When some authors approached the idea of democracy, they shifted their focus to
broader topics. One such discussion was on power—political, social, and cultural (Moss,
2002). The article approached the digital divide in terms of power and how the divide is
often yet another manifestation between those with power and those without it. As Moss
stated a person’s power is their ability to improve their future by using their current

95

advantages (Moss, 2002). The power of online resources is the power to improve a future
outcome using technology.
Other discussions focused on the impact that the digital divide had on democracy.
One such article stated that an individual, at minimum, must have enough information to
determine which choice in elections is preferable for his or her situation. Many groups
that are far from the centers of government with no access to online information are often
bereft of enough unbiased information resources to be able to make an intelligent
decision on which candidate fits most closely to their ideals and morals. Voter’s guides,
such as the one built by the Office of the Secretary of State in Washington, lists which
candidates are running as well as some links to information about them (Voters' Guide,
n.d.). While libraries can be used as mediums to disseminate information in an unbiased
manner, in many rural communities, especially in developing countries, a library is not
accessible or does not have any connectivity to online materials (Webster, 1999).
The relationship between democracy and the digital divide is important. As
Dervin (1994) stated, “Good democracy is critically dependent upon having access to
good information” and yet one of the greatest channels for information is unavailable for
much of the world. By being denied access to the plethora of information available
online, governments are able to silence or marginalize dissidents before they have an
opportunity to make their voices heard. One of the first acts of governments under siege
after the Arab Spring was under way, such as in Tunisia and Egypt, was to turn off ICT
access. By silencing one of the largest forms of communication via use of the Internet,
the governments hoped to curtail the spread of information and thus contain the spread of
the uprisings (Labovitz, n.d.).

96

On the evening of January 27, 2011 Egypt—a population of 80 million, including
23 million Internet users—vanished from the Internet. The Egyptian government
ordered a complete Internet shutdown amidst popular anti-government protests
calling for the resignation of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak. (Dainotti et al.,
2011, p. 1)
Additional research is needed to examine what other factors significantly impact
the divide to find ways to address divide-related issues on an international platform.
Where conditions prevail that are outside the ability of NGOs and governments to
address, there may need to be indices built that indicate what the best solution to address
the divide may be based upon outside assistance. This could lead to better use of
resources as some areas and groups would benefit more from outside assistance than
other groups, thus giving investors a greater impact from their investment. Such impacts
could include greater levels of accessibility for rural communities, greater access speeds,
and greater economic benefits for local businesses. As one author stated, a multitude of
voices is necessary in order to fully engage in a pluralist democracy (Lievrouw, 1994).
This study will fill the gap left by the previous research. This study will build a
statistical model to determine the strength of the relationship between democracy and
access to technology. The results of the findings could be used to affect policy making
decisions in terms of the digital divide. By determining which variables have the greatest
impact on the digital divide, policy makers could make better informed decisions on
where to invest resources to help bridge the divide. With some variables outside of the
control of outside investors, it will be helpful to find which variables have the greatest

97

impact and which ones can be impacted by outside forces, such as access to technology
or improved infrastructure, and which ones cannot be impacted, such as democracy.
The following table reflects the amount of research that has been done in the
different areas and highlights the lack of research done in regards to democracy and the
digital divide.
Table 2.1Matrix of Articles about the Digital Divide

Democracy
People Focus
Rural
Social Inclusion
ICT
OSS
Skill Sets
Education
Library
E-government
Variables
Definition
Seminal

Series1

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

This dearth of research into the effects of democracy on the digital divide
provides an excellent research opportunity. By building a mathematical model, the
strength of the relationship between freedom and internet access will be explored. This
relationship will assist in explaining additional variables that impact the number of
internet users within a country as well as the strength of that impact.

98

CHAPTER 3
METHODOLOGY TO DECODE THE DIGITAL DIVIDE

The digital divide is a highly complex issue, with a number of variables involved
in its measurement. Measuring the digital divide is a controversial topic in and of itself,
with little theoretic direction in many studies. This lack of theoretical guidance
exacerbates an already contested discussion. A general theme has been agreed upon—
though some authors disagree with the methodology currently being used; for example,
James’s discussion on shifting the discussion from using an additive formula to a
multiplicative one (James, 2008b)—and the fundamental variables that have been
discovered. Previous research has found that age, socio-economic status, race, and gender
have significant impacts on whether an individual has access to online resources or not.
However, the research has not been broken down to look at other factors that
affect the digital divide. The focus still hangs on the question of whether an individual
has access to technology or not, with little other research being discussed. Some
researchers have begun to discuss other outside factors that have an impact on the divide
and the ways to make small changes that could have a positive impact on making
information available via online resources. One such factor is making more information
available via open access. “Open access journals and repositories empower libraries with
free access to a broad scope of current research materials and data and ensure that local
content is widely distributed around the world” (Usova, 2009, p. 247).

99

This study uses a quantitative methodology, as the answers from this study are
important for application to the general public. While the digital divide is an issue that is
heavily involved with people and could use qualitative methods, the focus of this study is
best served via quantitative methods. The primary model will use an ordinary least
squares (OLS) regression model, including variables such as number of Internet users,
mobile phone users, levels of democracy, socio-economic status, and education levels
within a country. The use of an OLS model will be the primary vehicle to determine
statistical significance due to its smaller levels of error compared with other regression
models.
The primary variables used to determine access will be numbers of Internet users
and mobile phone users. The number of Internet users is the primary variable being
researched, but given the widespread use of mobile technology to connect to online
resources, the number of mobile users will also be included in a regression model. This
model will test our hypothesis that as levels of freedom increase, the number of internet
users per capita increases. In addition, this relationship is statistically significant.
Regression Models
A regression model was chosen in order to test for statistical significance between
independent variables and a dependent variable. While a stronger level of significance
does not indicate an absolute correlation between the variables, it is typically assumed
that such a correlation is indicated by the findings and that the findings can be applied to
the general population. A regression function is defined as “a mathematical function that
describes how the mean of the response variable changes according to the value of the
explanatory variable” (Agresti & Finlay, 2009, p. 267).

100

Specifically, the regression model to be used will be an OLS regression model.
Statistical significance, or α – level, is a value where if the P-value is less than or equal to
H0, then we reject the H0. Statistical significance is determined using mathematical tests
to discover whether the sample estimate could have occurred regardless of our population
value, including a value of zero. “The P-value is “the probability that the test statistic
equals the observed values or a value even more extreme in the direction predicted by Ha.
It is calculated by presuming that H0 is true” (Agresti & Finlay, 2009, p. 145). In these
definitions, H0 is the hypothesis being tested by the regression model. In this case, the
hypothesis is that the level of democracy within a country does not affect the level of
access to online resources. The alternative hypothesis, denoted by Ha, is that the level of
democracy within a country does affect the level of access to online resources. A
regression model only tests against the primary hypothesis and its alternative. An OLS
regression model is also one of the best estimators as long as some basic assumptions are
followed.
An OLS regression model will return a coefficient of determination, or R squared,
where the value is representative of the strength of the relationship between the
independent and dependent variables. The coefficient of determination is the ratio of the
explained sum of squares to the total sum of squares. The equation for R2 is : R2 =
ESS/TSS. The explained sum of squares is “the summation of the squared values of the
difference between the predicted Ys (Y - ê) and the mean of Y (µY, a naive estimate of
Y)” (“4- How to Evaluate,” n.d.). The total sum of squares is the “summation of the

101

squared values of the difference between the actual Ys and the mean of Y” (“4- How to
Evaluate,” n.d.).
As R2 is a ratio between two different values, the value for R2 ranges between 0
and 1. This value is typically reported as a percentage value. The value of R2 explains the
goodness of the fit of the regression model being used. A higher R2 score indicates that
the regression line being used is a good estimate of the real data points. As Nagelkerke
(1991) stated, “Its definition as the proportion of variance ‘explained’ by the regression
model makes it useful as a measure of success of predicting the dependent variable from
the independent variables” (p. 691).
Stata 12/IC will be used as the regression software to run the model. This
software package is one of the more popularly used programs in terms of regression
analysis, such as those performed by Robison and Crenshaw (2010) as well as Guillén
and Suárez (2005). It allows for robust regression analysis, as well as tests for
heteroscedasticity and a number of graphical plots. The test for heteroscedasticity is
important as one of the primary assumptions in using an OLS model is that there is no
heteroscedasticity present in the model. In addition, another assumption is that the
variables follow a linear progression. By using the plotting tools readily available within
Stata, this assumption was verified as well.
Model Assumptions
An OLS regression model must follow a specific set of assumptions in order to
give a reliable result while testing for a relationship. While these assumptions can be
violated, those violations can introduce additional errors into the regression model, thus
introducing the possibility of returning an erroneous result from the regression model

102

being used. The classic assumptions when using an OLS regression model are as follows
(Kaplan, n.d.):
1. The regression is a linear function.
2. Error term has a zero population mean.
3. The error term is not correlated with any of the independent variables.
4. There is no serial correlation.
5. There is no heteroscedasticity present in the model.
The first assumption is that the regression is a linear function. This interprets into
a visual where the relationship between the independent and dependent variables is a
denoted by a straight line. While a function that is represented by a curved line can be
calculated, the function cannot be properly represented in an OLS regression model.
Some mathematical functions can be applied to the data sets in order to help them fit into
a linear progression. Oftentimes, the data sets can have a log function applied to them,
which will adjust the function into a linear one. While this does introduce some
additional levels of error into the equation, the levels are typically such that it does not
significantly affect the findings of the regression model.
The second assumption is that the error term has a zero population mean. As
Graddy and Wang (2008) state, “This means that we believe we have included all
important nonrandom determinants of the dependent variable in our model” (p. 477). This
is one assumption that can have a large impact on the findings of the model if it is
violated. However, it is easily corrected “by adding or subtracting the sample error mean
to the intercept” (Graddy & Wang, 2008, p. 477). This effectively forces the error term to

103

have a zero mean. While this correction does introduce some additional level of error, the
parsimony of the OLS regression model is such that this new level of error is negligible.
The third assumption is that the error term is not correlated with any of the
independent variables. In other words, the error term is not linked or related to any of the
independent variables, but is completely independent unto itself. Therefore, “explanatory
variables are determined outside of the model” (Kaplan, n.d.). Should the error term be
correlated to any of the explanatory, or independent, variables, the error term will
increase much faster as the independent variable increases, thus introducing a much
higher level of error into the model than should be present.
The fourth assumption is that there is no serial correlation in the regression model.
When error terms from different (usually adjacent) time periods (or cross-section
observations) are correlated, we say that the error term is serially correlated. Serial
correlation occurs in time-series studies when the errors associated with a given time
period carry over into future time periods. For example, if we are predicting the growth
of stock dividends, an overestimate in one year is likely to lead to overestimates in
succeeding years” (Serial Correlation, n.d.).
The final classical assumption is that there is no heteroscedasticity present in the
model. Violations of homoscedasticity make it difficult to gauge the true standard
deviation of the forecast errors, usually resulting in confidence intervals that are too wide
or too narrow. In particular, if the variance of the errors is increasing over time,
confidence intervals for out-of-sample predictions will tend to be unrealistically narrow.
Heteroscedasticity may also have the effect of giving too much weight to small subset of
the data (namely the subset where the error variance was largest) when estimating

104

coefficients. (Testing the Assumptions, n.d.) This error can be fixed using a variety of
methods.
The issue with heteroscedasticity is that “The standard errors of the estimates are
biased if we have heteroscedasticity. If the standard errors are biased, we cannot use the
usual t statistics or F statistics or LM statistics for drawing inferences. OLS, even if
standard errors could be correctly measured, is no longer efficient” (Heteroscedasticity,
n.d.).
This explanation about the OLS model is important in order to discuss why an
ordinary least squares model was used and the methods used to ensure a correct model
was built. A greater understanding of the model ensures that the assumptions required for
the model to work properly are examined and why this examination is important. An
ordinary least squares model allows for the least amount of error to be introduced into the
model while still testing for statistically significant results.
Independent and Dependent Variables
For the model, the independent variable is democracy and the number of internet
users per capita is the dependent variable. Democracy is defined by using several factors.
These factors are the freedom rankings found by Freedom House, the gross domestic
product and foreign direct investment of a country, and the data set built by researchers
Geddis, Wright and Frantz, that adds a finer level of granularity to autocratic countries
based on the Freedom House rankings.
By being careful with the model for the regression analysis, these assumptions
can easily be followed, thus allowing for use of the OLS model. The independent
variables will be built to define democratic ideals while the dependent variable will be the

105

percentage of the number of online users within a country in relation to its total
population. This per capita number will be used as a method to stabilize the effects of
population. While some countries may have a small number of Internet users, it may also
have a corresponding small population, which would not be accounted for by using the
number of Internet users. The number of online users will be obtained through data from
the International Telecommunications Union (ITU).
The ITU is the forerunner in gathering international data on a variety of
telecommunications topics. “ITU's World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database is
the main source of global, and internationally comparable, telecommunication/ICT
statistics. It includes time series for more than 140 indicators and around 200 economies.
The data are collected directly from telecommunication regulatory agencies and/or
ministries and national statistical offices by means of an annual questionnaire, and
subsequently verified, harmonized and complemented by ITU” ("World
Telecommunication/ICT Indicators," n.d.). ITU is the world leader in monitoring the
telecommunications industry and gathering quantitative data from each country.
While the data being used is secondary data, the reputation of the ITU is
unparalleled in regards to international telecommunications data. Most global agencies,
such as The World Bank, use ITU as their primary data source for telecommunication
data (Internet Users per, n.d; "World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators," n.d.). In
addition, much of the data that is gathered by ITU is submitted directly from
telecommunication firms within each country, thus providing an inside viewpoint on
what is actually happening within a country as opposed to using data presented by the
public relations groups of a government. The volume of data available through ITU

106

cannot realistically be gathered by a single researcher in a realistic timeframe. “It
includes time series for more than 140 indicators and around 200 economies. The data are
collected directly from telecommunication regulatory agencies and/or ministries and
national statistical offices by means of an annual questionnaire, and subsequently
verified, harmonized and complemented by ITU” ("World Telecommunication/ICT
Indicators," n.d.).
The measurements of democracy will also be gathered using secondary data. In
this case, the levels of democracy will include rankings of democracy gathered from
Freedom House, which is one of the acknowledged leaders in gathering data and ranking
countries on their levels of democracy. This ranking is based upon two primary
subcategories: political rights and civil liberties. According to the Freedom House’s 2012
report on democracy in the world, the countries are ranked as shown in Table 3.1.

Table 3.1
Freedom Housing rankings of countries, based on freedom status, political rights, and
civil liberties
Freedom
PR CL Trend
Status
Afghanistan Not Free 6 6 ↓
Partly
Albania
3 3 ↓
Free
Algeria Not Free 6 5
Andorra
Free 1 1
Angola Not Free 6 5
Antigua and
Free 3 2
Barbuda
Argentina
Free 2 2
Partly
Armenia
6 4
Free
Australia
Free 1 1
Austria
Free 1 1

Azerbaijan Not Free 6 5
Bahamas
Free 1 1

Country

Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia

107

↓

Not Free 6 6
Partly
Free
Free
Not Free
Free
Free
Free
Partly
Free
Partly
Free

3 4
1
7
1
1
2

1
6
1
2
2

4 5
3 3

↓

Bosnia and Partly
Herzegovina Free
Botswana
Free
Brazil
Free
Brunei
Not Free
Bulgaria
Free
Partly
Burkina Faso
Free
Burma
Not Free
Partly
Burundi
Free
Cambodia Not Free
Cameroon Not Free
Canada
Free
Cape Verde Free
Central
Partly
African
Free
Republic
Chad
Not Free
Chile
Free
China
Not Free
Partly
Colombia
Free
Partly
Comoros
Free
Congo
Not Free
(Brazzaville)
Congo
Not Free
(Kinshasa)
Costa Rica
Free
Côte d’Ivoire Not Free
Croatia
Free
Cuba
Not Free
Cyprus
Free
Czech
Free
Republic
Denmark
Free
Djibouti Not Free
Dominica
Free
Dominican
Free
Republic
Partly
East Timor
Free

4 3
3
2
6
2

Ecuador

2
2
5
2

Egypt

7 6
5 5
5
6
1
1

5 5
7 6
1 1
7 6

↓

3 4
3 4
6 5
6 6
1
6
1
7
1

1
6
2
6
1

1 1
1 1
6 5
1 1

3 3

↓

Not Free 6 5

↑

El Salvador Free 2 3
Equatorial
Not Free 7 7
Guinea
Eritrea
Not Free 7 7
Estonia
Free 1 1
Ethiopia Not Free 6 6
Partly
Fiji
6 4
Free
Finland
Free 1 1
France
Free 1 1
Gabon
Not Free 6 5
The Gambia Not Free 6 5
Partly
Georgia
4 3
Free
Germany
Free 1 1
Ghana
Free 1 2
Greece
Free 2 2
Grenada
Free 1 2
Partly
Guatemala
3 4
Free
Partly
Guinea
5 5
Free
GuineaPartly
4 4
Bissau
Free
Guyana
Free 2 3
Partly
Haiti
4 5
Free
Partly
Honduras
4 4
Free
Hungary
Free 1 2
Iceland
Free 1 1
India
Free 2 3
Indonesia
Free 2 3
Iran
Not Free 6 6
Iraq
Not Free 5 6
Ireland
Free 1 1
Israel
Free 1 2
Italy
Free 1 1

5 3

6
6
1
1

Partly
Free

↓

2 2
3 4

108

↓

↓

↓

Jamaica
Free
Japan
Free
Jordan
Not Free
Kazakhstan Not Free
Kenya

Partly
Free

Kiribati

Free
Partly
Kosovo
Free
Partly
Kuwait
Free
Partly
Kyrgyzstan
Free
Laos
Not Free
Latvia
Free
Partly
Lebanon
Free
Partly
Lesotho
Free
Partly
Liberia
Free
Libya
Not Free
Liechtenstein Free
Lithuania
Free
Luxembourg Free
Partly
Macedonia
Free
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives

Partly
Free
Partly
Free
Partly
Free
Partly
Free
Free
Free

Mali
Malta
Marshall
Free
Islands
Mauritania Not Free
Mauritius
Free

2
1
6
6

3
2
5
5

Partly
Free
Micronesia
Free
Partly
Moldova
Free
Monaco
Free
Mongolia
Free
Montenegro Free
Morocco
Free
Partly
Mozambique
Free
Namibia
Free
Nauru
Free
Partly
Nepal
Free
Netherlands Free
New
Free
Zealand
Partly
Nicaragua
Free
Partly
Niger
Free
Partly
Nigeria
Free
North
Not Free
Korea
Norway
Free
Oman
Not Free
Partly
Pakistan
Free
Palau
Free
Panama
Free
Papua New Partly
Guinea
Free
Partly
Paraguay
Free
Peru
Free
Partly
Philippines
Free
Poland
Free
Portugal
Free
Qatar
Not Free
Romania
Free
Mexico

↓

4 3
1 1
5 4
4 5
5 5
7 6
2 2
5 4
3 3
3 4
7
1
1
1

6
1
1
1

3 3
6 4
3 4

↓

4 4
3 4
2 3
1 1
1 1
6 5
1 2

109

3 3
1 1
3 3
2
2
3
5

1
2
2
4

4 3
2 2
1 1
4 4
1 1
1 1
5 4
3 4
4 4
7 7
1 1
6 5
4 5
1 1
1 2
4 3
3 3
2 3
3 3
1
1
6
2

1
1
5
2

↓

Russia
Not Free 6 5
Taiwan
Free
Rwanda Not Free 6 5
Tajikistan Not Free
Saint Kitts
Free 1 1
Partly
and Nevis
Tanzania
Free
Saint Lucia
Free 1 1
Partly
Saint Vincent
Thailand
Free
and
Free 1 1
Partly
Grenadines
Togo
Free
Samoa
Free 2 2
Partly
San Marino Free 1 1
Tonga
Free
São Tomé
And
Free 2 2
Trinidad and
Free
Príncipe
Tobago
Saudi
Not Free 7 7
Partly
Arabia
Tunisia
Free
Partly
Senegal
3 3
Partly
Free
Turkey
Free
Serbia
Free 2 2
Turkmenistan Not Free
Partly
Seychelles
3 3
Free
Tuvalu
Free
Partly
Sierra Leone
3 3
Partly
Free
Uganda
Free
Partly
Singapore
4 4
Partly
Free
Ukraine
Free
Slovakia
Free 1 1 ↑
United
Arab
Slovenia
Free 1 1
Not Free
Emirates
Solomon
Partly
4 3
United
Islands
Free
Free
Kingdom
Somalia Not Free 7 7
United States Free
South Africa Free 2 2
Uruguay
Free
South Korea Free 1 2
Uzbekistan Not Free
South Sudan Not Free 6 5
Vanuatu
Free
Spain
Free 1 1
Partly
Partly
Venezuela
Sri Lanka
5 4
Free
Free
Vietnam Not Free
Sudan
Not Free 7 7 ↓
Yemen Not Free
Suriname
Free 2 2
Partly
Swaziland Not Free 7 5
Zambia
Free
Sweden
Free 1 1
Zimbabwe Not Free
Switzerland Free 1 1
Syria
Not Free 7 7
Source: Freedom in the World, 2012, p. 16.

110

1 2
6 5
3 3
4 4
5 4
3 3
2 2
3 4
3 3
7 7
1 1
5 4

↓

4 3
6 6
1 1
1
1
7
2

1
1
7
2

5 5
7 5
6 6
3 4
6 6

↑

Freedom House uses several variables in determining the rankings for political
rights and civil liberties. These two categories are then used to determine the ranking of
its level of democracy. The rankings for democracy are broken into three categories:
Free, Partly Free, or Not Free.
Freedom in the World applies one of three broad category designations to each of
the countries and territories included in the index: Free, Partly Free, and Not Free.
A Free country is one where there is open political competition, a climate of
respect for civil liberties, significant independent civic life, and independent
media. A Partly Free country is one in which there is limited respect for political
rights and civil liberties. Partly Free states frequently suffer from an environment
of corruption, weak rule of law, ethnic and religious strife, and a political
landscape in which a single party enjoys dominance despite a certain degree of
pluralism. A Not Free country is one where basic political rights are absent, and
basic civil liberties are widely and systematically denied. (Freedom in the World,
2012, p. 16)
Countries ranked as Free include the United States, The United Kingdom,
Sweden, France, and Germany to name a few. A few countries ranked as Partly Free
include Paraguay, Senegal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. Syria, Swaziland, Oman, and Libya
are examples of countries that are ranked as Not Free.
Political rights and civil liberties are each given a score between 1 and 7. Those
countries with the greatest levels of freedom in each category receive a rank of 1,
whereas countries with significant repression of rights and oppressive laws that limit the

111

freedoms of its citizens receive a higher rank, with the worst score being a 7. These
scores are then averaged in order to be placed under a ranking based on their freedoms.
The average of the political rights and civil liberties ratings, known as the
freedom rating, determines the overall status: Free (1.0 to 2.5), Partly Free (3.0 to
5.0), or Not Free (5.5 to 7.0). Freedom House also assigns upward or downward
trend arrows to countries which saw general positive or negative trends during the
year that were not significant enough to result in a ratings change. (Freedom in
the World, 2012, p. 33)
Countries such as Zambia, Egypt, and Slovakia have each made gains in these
ratings, whereas Uganda, Iran, and Pakistan have incurred losses.
Each of these scores is based upon different criteria. “Political rights ratings are
based on an evaluation of three subcategories: electoral process, political pluralism and
participation, and functioning of government” (Freedom in the World, 2012, p. 33). In
addition, several discretionary questions are included in the political rights ratings. The
electoral process subcategory consists of three individual questions, including how or if
government officials are elected and whether the laws used to conduct those elections are
fair. The political pluralism subcategory includes four questions that cover topics such as
if the people have the right to organize political parties on their own and whether
minority groups have the same political rights as those in the majority as well as whether
people are free from domination for their political choices and whether minority groups
have full political rights. The subcategory on the functioning of government includes
three questions: 1) Who determines the policies of the government? 2) How rampant is
corruption? and 3) Is there accountability and transparency in the government?

112

The civil liberties categories follow similar themes. “Civil liberties ratings are
based on an evaluation of four subcategories: freedom of expression and belief,
associational and organizational rights, rule of law, and personal autonomy and
individual rights” (Freedom in the World, 2012, p. 33).
The freedom of expression category consists of four questions: 1) Is there an
independent media? 2) Are faith communities free to follow their own tenets? 3) Does
academic freedom exist? and 4) Can there be open private discussions by the citizens?
The organizational rights category covers whether the citizens can assemble and
demonstrate freely, if trade unions available, and if non-governmental organizations are
free to address the needs of the people.
The rule of law category covers topics such as whether the judiciary is
independent, whether the rule of law prevails in legal matters, and whether all groups get
equal treatment under the law.
The individual rights category covers such topics as whether people can freely
travel and make their own choices in regards to education and job selection, if individuals
can own property, evidence of social freedom, and the absence of exploitation of
workers.
As each of the questions is answered, a scored is assigned to each answer.
The ratings are determined by the total number of points (up to 100) each country
receives on 10 political rights questions and 15 civil liberties questions; countries
receive 0 to 4 points on each question, with 0 representing the smallest degree and
4 the greatest degree of freedom” (Freedom in the World, 2012, p. 33).

113

Democracy also includes a number of different variables, dependent upon who is
reviewing the term and the way it is being applied. The definition that will be used is
based upon the rankings of the two previously discussed bodies, as well as gross
domestic product (GDP) and foreign direct investment (FDI).
Another measure of democracy that is often used is the gross domestic product of
a country. In general, the greater the level of freedom within a country, the greater its
economic success. ” Nations with higher degrees of economic freedom prosper because
they capitalize more fully on the ability of the free-market system not only to generate,
but also to reinforce dynamic growth through efficient resource allocation, value creation,
and innovation” (Miller & Kim, 2014). This variable data will be retrieved from the
World Bank, which is a leader in gathering financial data from the countries of the world
and aggregating it. The World Bank is an NGO and brings with it less bias in terms of the
data that it releases.
GDP can be defined as
…one of the primary indicators used to gauge the health of a country’s economy.
It represents the total dollar value of all goods and services produced over a
specific time period... (What Is GDP and Why Is It so Important?, n.d.)
GDP is considered an important factor in democratization as typically the greater
the GDP, the greater levels of freedom enjoyed by the populace. Higher levels of GDP
allowing for purchases of technology that help to expand access to information, which
has a direct impact on GDP as found in an article in the Business Standard, “Growing
numbers of Internet and broadband connections can give the Indian economy the much-

114

needed fillip by adding $17 billion to the gross domestic product (GDP) annually”
(Internet Penetration to Boost, 2012).
GDP is also affected by access to online resources. As found in a recent report by
Hazan et al., “The profit levels of these Internet-intense companies were 10 percent
higher than those of less intense Web users, and the rate at which they added workers was
twice as high” (Hazan, Manyika, & Du Rausas, 2011).

Figure 3.1 Gross domestic product (GDP) worldwide, 2010
Source: Polity IV Project (n.d.)
A well-functioning government is essential to a democratic state and a strong
economy. GDP is an economic measure of the strength of an economy. “Some scientists
argue that financial development is an important determinant for an economy to grow. A
well-functioning financial system promotes private saving and private investment and
leads to higher economic growth through the improved efficiency of investment”
(Bobinaite, Juozapaviciene, & Konstantinaviciute, 2011, p. 116).
FDI will be included as a variable in the regression model in addition to GDP to
measure economic growth within a country. “FDI has the positive relation with domestic
investment and economic growth and FDI generates both significantly positive short-run
115

and long-run impacts on economic growth” (Chien & Zhang, 2012, p. 158). Agrawal and
Khan (2011) state that FDI is “The acquisition of at least ten percent of the ordinary
shares or voting power in a public or private enterprise by nonresident investors. Direct
investment involves a lasting interest in the management of an enterprise and includes
reinvestment of profits” (p. 257).
FDI is an important factor to review as part of democracy as the investments often
allow for greater levels of access within a country by providing funding for technology
that would otherwise be out of reach. “FDI has long been recognized as a major source
of technology and know-how to developing countries. Indeed, it is the ability of FDI to
transfer not only production know-how but also managerial skills that distinguishes it
from all other forms of investment, including portfolio capital and aid” (Agrawal &
Khan, 2011, p. 259).
FDI plays an important role in providing technology to further economic growth
within a country where the investment is taking place and within the country from which
the investment originated. “Within the past decade, however, there has been a dramatic
increase in the number of technology startups and this, together with the rise in
prominence of Internet usage, has fostered increasing changes in foreign investment
patterns” (Graham & Spaulding, 2004). “FDI is a key force behind international
economic integration and is considered to be an important driver of economic growth in
OECD countries, because the internationalization of production helps to better exploit the
advantages of enterprises, increase competitive pressures in OECD markets and stimulate
innovative activity and technology transfer“ (Pourshahabi, Mahmoudinia, & Soderjani,
2011, p. 72).

116

The FDI variable will be obtained from World Bank data. The World Bank
monitors all FDI worldwide and aggregates that data. This data is also converted into a
standard currency to facilitate easier levels of comparison. While some errors will occur
based upon the fluctuations of currency exchanges, the overall validity of the data will be
acceptable, given the smaller shifts in exchange rate values in relation to the amount of
investment taking place worldwide.

Figure 3.2 Global foreign domestic investment, 2010
Source: The World Bank
The variable for Internet access will be obtained via the ITU.
The June 2012 Edition of the database includes 2011 data for the following
indicators only: Fixed-telephone subscriptions and per 100 inhabitants, Mobilecellular telephone subscriptions and per 100 inhabitants, Active mobilebroadband subscriptions and per 100 inhabitants, Fixed (wired)-broadband
subscriptions and per 100 inhabitants, International Internet bandwidth, in Mbit/s
and per Internet user, Several indicators related to prices of fixed-telephone,
mobile-cellular prepaid and fixed (wired)-broadband services, Percentage of

117

individuals using the Internet, Percentage of households with Internet, Percentage
of households with computer. (World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators, n.d.)
While the number of individuals using the internet has increased globally, this
growth has not been uniform. The following table indicates the number of individuals
using the Internet and the percentage of individuals using the Internet. The first column
indicates the country. The 2nd column indicates the number of individuals using the
Internet in 2006, followed by the value for 2011. The 3rd column indicates the compound
annual growth rate between 2006 and 2011. The 4th column indicates the percentage of
individuals using the Internet in 2006, followed by the figure for 2011. The final column
indicates compound annual growth rate between 2006 and 2011 for the percentage of
individuals using the Internet,
Table 3.2
Percentage of individuals using the Internet (2006–2011)

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Andorra
Angola
Antigua & Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bahamas
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belarus
Belgium
Belize

2006

2011

598.9
303.3
2463
39.1
324.5
53.2
8166.6
172.9
13691.2
5261.8
1043.5
84.3
229.2
1423.5
170.8
1583.8
6255.7
29.9

1617.9
1575.8
5037.2
69.8
2898.8
73.5
19446.3
472
17858.5
6713.9
4653
225.7
1019.1
7524.7
196.6
3785.5
8388.2
43.6

118

2006–
2011
22
39
15.4
12.3
55
6.7
18.9
39.8
5.5
5
34.8
21.8
34.8
39.5
2.9
19
6
9.9³

2006

2011

2.11
5
9.61
49
7.38
14
48.94
81
1.91 14.78
62.64
82
20.93 47.7
5.63 15.3
66
79
63.6 79.8
11.99
50
26
65
28.24
77
1
5
63
71.77
16.2 39.6
59.72
78
10.4
14

2006–
2011
18.9
38.5
13.7
10.6
50.6
5.5
17.9
39.5
3.7
4.6
33
20.1
22.2
38
2.6
19.6
5.5
7.7

Benin
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Brazil
Brunei Darussalam
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Rep.
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Comoros
Congo
Congo (Dem. Rep.)
Costa Rica
Côte d’Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
D.P.R. Korea
Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Rep.
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji

121.1
30.5
577.1
950
81.5
52963.6
156.2
2083.1
92.5
49.2
63.3
364.1
23622.7
32.6
12.7
58.6
5681.3
138335.4
6703.8
14.5
72.9
174.9
1099.8
279.5
1684
1257.1
375.6
4917

318.5
155
3026.4
2251.3
142.2
88494.8
227.3
3797.5
509
95.2
443.5
1001.5
28510.1
160.2
98.7
219
9307.2
516117.5
18958.6
41.5
231.8
813.1
1990.8
443.4
3108.1
2614.2
644
7686.9

21.3
38.4
39.3
18.8
11.8
10.8
7.8
12.8
40.6
14.1
47.6
22.4
3.8
37.5
50.7
30.2
10.4
30.1
23.1
23.3
26
36
12.6
9.7
13
15.8
11.4
9.3

1.54
4.52
6.2
25.12
4.29
28.18
42.19
27.09
0.63
0.66
0.47
2.03
72.4
6.81
0.31
0.58
34.5
10.52
15.34
2.2
2.01
0.3
25.1
1.52
37.98
11.16
35.83
47.93

3.5
21
30
60
7
45
56
51
3
1.11
3.1
5
83
32
2.2
1.9
53.89
38.3
40.4
5.5
5.6
1.2
42.12
2.2
70.71
23.23
57.68
72.97

17.9
36
37.1
19
10.3
9.8
5.8
13.5
36.5
11
45.9
19.8
2.8
36.3
47.9
26.7
9.3
29.5
21.4
20.1
22.8
32.3
10.9
7.6
13.2
15.8
10
8.8

4716.1
10.5
27.1
1395.2
982.1
9486
334.1
8
100.3
853.6
236
79.5

5015.3
63.4
34.7
3569.9
4605.1
29399.6
1101.6
42
335.7
1025.5
932.1
243.2

1.2
43.4
5.1
20.7
36.2
25.4
26.9
51.4
27.3
3.7
31.6
25.1

86.65
90
1.27
7
39.4 51.31
14.84 35.5
7.2
31.4
12.55 35.62
5.5 17.69
1.28
6
2.16
6.2
63.51 76.5
0.31
1.1
9.6
28

0.8
40.7
5.4
19.1
34.3
23.2
26.3
47.2
23.5
3.8
28.8
23.9

119

Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran (I.R.)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kiribati
Korea (Rep.)
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lao P.D.R.
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania

4194.8
28767.9
76.7
81
334.4
59558.1
603.7
3618.2
22
847.3
58.7
28.7
—
644.2
547.4
4736.2
269.4
32460.7
10955.2
6183
268
2316.9
1883.4
22445.3
442.2
86862.7
762
500.5
2752.9
4.2
36916.1
677
625.6
68.3
1229.8
614.6
62.1
...
253.5
22.5
1491.7

4812.4
50235.6
122.7
193.1
1582.7
68194.9
3522.7
6036.7
35
1730.6
132.9
41.3
241.9
836.4
1233
5880
308.2
125018.2
43618.6
15707.7
1633.2
3476.7
5293.5
34528
866.7
100603.3
2209.2
7293
11650.7
10.1
40551.9
2091
1078.5
565.9
1607.9
2214.9
92.7
123.9
1091.7
30.9
2151.5

120

2.8
11.8
9.9
19
36.5
2.7
42.3
10.8
12.2
15.4
17.8
7.6
—
6.7
17.6
4.4
2.7
31
31.8
20.5
43.5
8.5
23
9
14.4
3
23.7
70.9
33.4
19.2
1.9
25.3
11.5
52.6
5.5
29.2
8.3
...
33.9
6.5
7.6

79.66
46.87
5.49
5.24
7.53
72.16
2.72
32.25
21.4
6.5
0.64
2.06
—
6.8
7.8
47.06
89.51
2.81
4.76
8.76
0.95
54.82
27.88
37.99
16.4
68.69
13.87
3.27
7.53
4.5
78.1
28.79
12.31
1.17
53.63
15
2.98
...
4.3
64.21
43.9

89.37
79.58
8
10.87
36.56
83
14.11
53
33.46
11.73
1.3
2.67
32
8.37
15.9
59
95.02
10.07
18
21
5
76.82
70
56.8
31.5
79.53
34.9
45
28
10
83.8
74.2
20
9
71.68
52
4.22
3
17
85
65.05

2.3
11.2
7.8
15.7
37.2
2.8
39
10.4
11.8
12.5
15.3
5.4
—
5.3
15.3
4.6
1.2
29.1
30.5
19.1
39.3
7
20.2
8.4
13.9
3
20.3
69
30
17.3
1.4
20.8
10.2
50.4
6
28.2
7.2
...
31.6
5.8
8.2

Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Marshall Islands
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Namibia
Nauru
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Romania
Russia
Rwanda

337.6
112
56.1
13728.6
33
99.2
166.1
2
30.7
211.5
21049.4
14
728.9
21.7
—
181.2
6070.2
179.5
84.8
93.2
—
317.7
13708.4
2887.6
154.1
39.6
7948.2
3854.1
206.7
10498.4
571.6
109.6
478.4
5768.3
5001
17016.3
4020.6
283.5
5352.5
25865.2
—

468.9
405
512.2
17604.1
108.8
316.8
289.2
1.9
159.4
456.7
41497.8
22.2
1347
26.6
560
252.9
16459.2
1029
473.7
278.9
0.6
2743.7
15381.6
3796.5
622.2
208.9
46190.4
4627.9
1935.4
15907.1
1524.9
140.3
1569.8
10730.9
27507.1
24848.4
5911.4
1612
9436.3
69989.4
766

121

6.8
29.3
55.6
5.1
26.9
26.1
11.7
-1.5
39
16.6
14.5
12.2
13.1
5.2³
—
6.9
22.1
41.8
41.1
24.5
—
53.9
2.3
5.6
32.2
39.5
42.2
3.7
56.4
8.7
21.7
5.1
26.8
13.2
40.6
7.9
8
41.6
12
22
—

72.51
0.61
0.43
51.64
11.04
0.73
40.41
3.8
0.98
16.7
19.52
12.75
19.62
61.48
—
28.9
19.77
0.84
0.18
4.4
—
1.14
83.7
69
2.81
0.29
5.55
82.55
8.3
6.5
17.35
1.75
7.96
20.7
5.74
44.58
38.01
28.97
24.66
18.02
—

90.89
1.9
3.33
61
34
2
69.22
3.55
4.5
34.95
36.15
20
38
75
20
40
51
4.3
0.98
12
6
9
92.3
86
10.6
1.3
28.43
93.97
68
9
42.7
2
23.9
36.5
29
64.88
55.3
86.2
44.02
49
7

4.6
25.6
50.9
3.4
25.2
22.3
11.4
-2.2
35.7
15.9
13.1
11.9
14.1
5.1
—
6.7
20.9
38.5
40
22.2
—
51.1
2
4.5
30.5
34.6
38.7
2.6
52.3
6.7
19.7
2.7
24.6
12
38.3
7.8
7.8
24.4
12.3
22.1
—

S. Tomé & Principe
Samoa
San Marino
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Spain
Sri Lanka
St. Kitts and Nevis
St. Lucia
St. Vincent and the
Grenadines
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria
Tajikistan
Tanzania
TFYR Macedonia
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Togo
Tonga
Trinidad & Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Tuvalu
Uganda
Ukraine

22
8.1
15.4
4825.9
626.8
2203.5
29.5
12.1
2601.9
3040.7
1083.9
8
94
3676.6
—
22171.8
509.1
24.4
40.9

34
12.8
15.7
13339.2
2234.3
3426.7
37.5
14.9
3890.9
4073
1465.2
33.1
119.5
10596.6
—
31403.5
3156.8
39.8
73.9

9.1
12.2
0.4
22.5
28.9
9.2
4.9
7.2
8.4
6
6.2
33
4.9
23.6
—
7.2
44
13
12.6

13.1

47

29.2

3185.7
48
41.3
7978
5653.5
1482
246.1
2315.6
584.7
11545.1
1.2
110.6
5.9
396.2
1301
12597.2
63.4
—
742.9
2099.5

8480.2
169.4
218.2
8591.1
6561.8
4672.4
909.1
5546.2
1170.2
16475.9
10.4
215.4
26.1
743.2
4142.3
31002.3
255.3
3
4490.9
13828.2

21.6
28.7
39.5
1.5
3
25.8
29.9
19.1
14.9
7.4
53.7
14.3
34.5
13.4
26.1
19.7
32.1
—
43.3
45.8

122

14.18 20.16
4.47
7
50.21 49.6
19.46 47.5
5.61 17.5
27.2 42.2
34.95 43.16
0.23 0.26
59
75
56.08 74.44
54.01
72
1.65
6
1.1
1.25
7.61
21
—
—
50.37 67.6
2.54
15
49
76
24.5
42
12

7.3
11.9
-0.2
19.5
25.5
9.2
4.3
4.5
4.9
5.8
5.9
29.5
2.6
22.5
—
6.1
42.7
11.6
11.4

43.01

29.1

8.09
19
9.5
32
3.7 18.13
87.76
91
75.7 85.2
7.83 22.5
3.77 13.03
5.8
12
28.62 56.7
17.16 23.7
0.12
0.9
2
3.5
5.85
25
30
55.2
12.99 39.1
18.24 42.1
1.32
5
—
30
2.53 13.01
4.51 30.6

18.6
27.5
37.4
0.7
2.4
23.5
28.1
15.7
14.7
6.7
50.5
11.8
33.7
13
24.7
18.2
30.5
—
38.8
46.7

United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Vanuatu
Vatican
Venezuela
Vietnam
Yemen
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Total

2424.6
41662.4
206493.4
978.3
1674.6
12.7
—
4130.3
14506.9
265.6
488.8
1226.9
1128716.4

5523.6
51182.3
243777.7
1737.3
8383.6
19.2
—
11839.5
31139.4
3696.4
1549.6
2002.4
2238124

17.9
4.2
3.4
12.2
38
10.9
—
23.4
16.5
69.3
26
10.3
14.7

52
70
68.82
82
68.93 77.86
29.4 51.4
6.39 30.2
5.85
8
—
—
15.22 40.22
17.25 35.07
1.25 14.9
4.16 11.5
9.79 15.7
17.3 32.3

6.1
3.6
2.5
11.8
36.4
8.1
—
21.4
15.2
64.2
22.6
9.9
10.7

Source: ITU World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators 2012 database
Data from the Geddes, Wright, and Frantz (2012) study was included in order to
gain a finer level of granularity in terms of autocracies. Given the broad categories
presented in the rankings of Freedom House, the Geddes, Wright, and Frantz study
allows a closer look at the relationship between access to information and the levels of
democracy, or lack thereof, within those countries categorized as autocracies. In this case,
an autocracy is a country where
…any of the following occurred, and the same basic rules and leadership group
persist in subsequent years:
1. An executive achieved power through undemocratic means and, with his inner
circle, established new rules for choosing leaders and policies.
“Undemocratic” refers to any means besides direct, reasonably fair,
competitive elections in which at least ten percent of the total population was
eligible to vote; or an indirect election by a body, at least 60 percent of which

123

was elected in direct, reasonably fair, competitive elections; or constitutional
succession to a democratically elected executive.
2. The start date is the date the executive achieved power. The government
achieved power through democratic elections (as described above), but
subsequently changed mal or informal rules, such that competition in
subsequent elections was limited. The start date is the date of the rule change
or action (e.g., the arrest of opposition politicians) that crossed the threshold
from democracy to autocracy.
3. Competitive elections were held to choose the government, but the military
prevented one or more parties that substantial numbers of citizens would be
expected to vote for from competing and/or dictates policy choice in
important policy areas. The start date is the date when these rules take effect,
usually the first election in which popular parties are banned. (Geddes,
Wright, & Frantz, 2012).
The use of a regression model will be the vehicle to test for a relationship
between levels of freedom and access to online information. An ordinary least
squares model was chosen in order to reduce introducing errors. The independent
variables chosen were the freedom rankings from Freedom House, political rights
and civil liberties, as well as gross domestic product, foreign direct investment
and the data set built by Geddis, Wright, and Frantz. The dependent variable is the
number of internet users per capita. The number of internet users was gathered
from the International Telecommunications Union and population data was
gathered from the United Nations.

124

The OLS model will return results indicating whether a statistically significant
relationship exists between the independent and dependent variables. In addition,
the model will indicate whether each individual independent variable is
statistically significant in relation to the dependent variable.
The independent variable of democracy will be viewed against the dependent
variable of the number of internet users per capita. The ordinary least squares
model will return results indicating whether the model has a statistically
significant relationship and if so, its strength in regards to the variables being
tested. In addition, the model will indicate whether each variable, political rights,
civil liberties, gross domestic product, foreign direct investment and the Geddis,
Wright, and Frantz data have a statistically significant relationship to the number
of internet users per capita. The following chapter will discuss those results and
their significance to this study.

125

CHAPTER 4
RESULTS
The independent variables, Freedom House freedom rankings, GDP, FDI, and the
Geddis, Wright Frantz data set, were entered into the statistical software package STATA
as well as the dependent variable, number of internet users per capita. Results were
returned and analyzed in regards to the relationships between the variables.
Stata returns the value of several indicators concerning the regression model.
While many of these abbreviations will be described, this model primarily focuses on R2,
which indicates the strength of the relationship and how much of the dependent variable
is explained by the model. In the results, SS stands for sum of squares, while df is the
degrees of freedom present in the model. MS is the mean square, number of obs is the
number of observations used by Stata in the final model, F is the F statistic, which is used
to test whether the model is significant with no independent variable included. Prob > F
describes the significance of the F statistic, Adj R-squared describes the explanatory
strength that is provided when the independent variable is added, and Root MSE is the
root mean square error, which also indicates how well our model fits our hypothesis.
Results of several indicators are returned by STATA. One indicator is the sum of
squares which reflects the dispersion of the points of the data set. In terms of the
regression model, the sum of squares is used to help determine the amount of deviance
present in a model. The sum of squares is determined by squaring each deviation and then
adding those deviation squares up. As the deviations from the mean get greater, the sum

126

of squares also increases. This increase reflects a greater distribution of the data points
for each variable. In these results, the sum of squares was a high number, but still within
the range of expected results. This indicates that the data points were scattered from the
median scores for each variable, but still within acceptable ranges. Given the vast
differences between countries, these results were not surprising.
Degrees of freedom are defined as the population size minus 1, or N-1. It is an
important figure in determining variance which is defined as s2= (𝛴(X − M)2)/(N-1).
Variance is the average of the squared differences of the mean. The variance measures
how far each data point is from the mean of the entire data set. With this data set, there
were a total of 143 complete sets of data for the countries of the world, thus returning 142
degrees of freedom.
The mean square error indicates how close a line fits the data points.
For every data point, you take the distance vertically from the point to the
corresponding y value on the curve fit (the error), and square the value. Then you
add up all those values for all data points, and divide by the number of points
minus two. The squaring is done so negative values do not cancel positive values.
The smaller the Mean Squared Error, the closer the fit is to the data. The MSE has
the units squared of whatever is plotted on the vertical axis. (What Are Mean,
2011)
The number of observations indicates the number of observations used by Stat in
making the final calculations of the regression. While more data points may have been
included, as is the case of this model, not all of the data sets included all of the countries.

127

Therefore, Stata reflects the fact that it was not able to use all of the observations for this
model.
F is the F statistic, which is used to test whether the model is significant with no
independent variable included. The F statistic is determined by the following formula: F
= (R2/k)/{(1-R2)/[n-(k+1)]}. As shown by the equation, the F statistic is strongly
influenced by the value of R2. As the value of F increases, stronger evidence is indicated
against H0. In this case, H0 is the hypothesis that there is no relationship between our
dependent and independent variables.
Prob > F describes the significance of the F statistic. It is also known as the pvalue. As the p-value decreases, stronger evidence is indicated against H0. In this case, H0
is the hypothesis that there is no relationship between our dependent and independent
variables. Typically, the null hypothesis, H0, is rejected if the p-value is less than 0.05 (F
Test Computation, n.d.).
The root mean square error is an important number reflecting how well our model
fits the reality of the data. It is derived by squaring the mean square error. The mean
square error indicates how close a line fits the data points. The root mean square error is
typically used as it is reported using the same units as the data itself. It reflects the size of
the ordinary error in the model. However, while it reflects the models quality, there are
no criteria to determine whether a specific root mean square error is good or bad. It is
often used to compare models, as opposed to giving an indication of correctness.
The Breusch-Pagan/Cook-Weisberg test for heteroscedasticity was run using the
results as well. These tests were built for the primary to specifically test regression
models for heteroscedasticity in order to verify that the model follows the assumptions

128

needed for an OLS model to function properly. Heteroscedasticity can occur when there
is a difference in subpopulation data. Given that the data used is secondary data, there
was a chance that this differential occurred with the data. Therefore, additional tests were
performed to verify that heteroscedasticity was not present. This test checks “the null
hypothesis that the error variances are all equal versus the alternative that the error
variances are a multiplicative function of one or more variables” (Williams, n.d.).
The results were:
Ho: Constant variance
Variables: fitted values of NetPerCap
chi2(1) = 0.05
Prob > chi2 = 0.8220
Our results indicate that heteroscedasticity is not present as Prob > chi2 is greater
than 0.05. In this test, if Prob > chi2 is less than .0.05, then heteroscedasticity is present.
Therefore, the model fits the OLS assumption that no heteroscedasticity is present within
the model.
Table 4.1
Results from Regression model
Source
Model
Residual

SS
67756.814
50507.445

df
5
137

MS
13551.36
368.6675

Total

118264.26

142

832.8469

NetPerCap
PolRight
CivilLib
GWF
GDP
FDI
_cons

Coef.
-1.34922
-6.464103
0.3161168
6.47E-07
0.0000147
51.83662

Std. Err.
2.324904
2.731267
0.0485065
1.54E-06
0.0000749
4.36157

t
-0.58
-2.37
6.52
0.42
0.2
11.88
129

Number of obs = 143
F(5, 137) =
36.76
Prob > F =
0
R-squared =
0.5729
Adj R-squared =
0.5573
Root MSE =
19.201
P>|t|
[95% Conf. Interval]
0.563
-5.94656
3.248118
0.019
-11.865
-1.06321
0
0.220199
0.412035
0.676
-2.41E-06
3.70E-06
0.845
-0.00013
0.000163
0
43.21191
60.46132

Some of the important figures from the results are:
R2 = .05729
Prob>F = 0
P>|t| for CivilLib = .019
P>|t| for GWF = 0
The results from the regression model returned some surprising findings in terms
of the interaction between the variables. The model returned a value for R2 of 0.5729.
The resulting R2 indicates a fairly strong relationship between the definition of
democracy used within this model and the number of Internet users per capita. The model
used indicates that the model explains ~57% of the relationship between the number of
people using the Internet per capita within a country and that countries level of
democracy. The results indicate less strength than was expected. Results with a much
stronger relationship were expected as the levels of freedom within a country are often
reflected in access to information in general, including online information. The results
indicate that additional variables have an impact on the number of internet users per
capita.
In addition, the P>|t| for CivilLib was 0.019, indicating statistical significance
between the variable CivilLib and the dependent variable of NetPerCap, whereas the
PolRight variable was not statistically significant in regards to NetPerCap. These findings
indicate that while the independent variable used were built around an operationalized
model of democracy, the variable that had affected the number of internet users per capita
was actually the level of civil liberties available within a country. The smaller the value

130

of P returned by the model, the greater the likelihood that a relationship does exist. This
suggests that countries with greater levels of civil liberties will have greater levels of
access to the internet. This relationship would indicate that civil liberties are much more
important indicators in whether an individual has access to online resources. Whereas,
political rights do not have a statistically significant impact whether an individual has
access to online resources.
These results could be impacted by the methodology used by Freedom House to
gather data. The results could also be impacted by where Freedom House included certain
questions in their survey and in their findings. Questions such as whether there is free and
open private discussions available or there is a free, independent media within the
country as well as other forms of cultural expression (Freedom in the World, 2012, p.
35).
In addition, the P>|t| = 0 for the GWF data set. This also indicates statistical
significance between the variable GWF and the dependent variable of NetPerCap. This
result indicates that the rankings developed by Geddis, Wright, and Frantz to score
autocracies does impact the number of internet users per capita within a country.
While some outliers or influential data points are expected, the test determines
whether they have any significant effect on the model. By removing data points, it is
often easy to allow additional errors to enter the model due to the removal of those
points. Therefore, whenever possible, a complete set of data points should be included in
the regression model. However, if they introduce undue amounts of error into the model,
the parsimony of the model may be better served by removing those influences.

131

A robust regression was run in order to verify the results from the previous
regression model. The robust regression command estimates the standard error using the
Huber-White sandwich estimators. The Huber-White sandwich estimators are “used to
estimate the variance of the MLE when the underlying model is incorrect. If the model is
nearly correct, so are the usual standard errors, and robustification is unlikely to help
much” (Freedman, 2006).
At times, outliers or other highly influential observations may be present in the
data. While it is possible to run additional tests to beginning determining whether this is
the case, a robust regression can quickly and easily determine if such factors exist within
a model. If so, additional testing can be done in order to locate any outliers present or to
locate any data that have significant influence on the model. The findings below indicate
the results of the robust regression model, using the same variables as the previous
normal regression model.
Table 4.2
Results of the linear
regression
Linear regression

NetPerCap
PolRight
CivilLib
GWF
GDP
FDI
_cons

Coef.
-1.34922
-6.4641
0.316117
6.47E-07
1.47E-05
51.83662

Number of obs =
F(5, 137) =
Prob > F =
R-squared =
Root MSE =
Robust
Std. Err.
2.4749
2.891247
0.052014
1.32E-06
4.18E-05
4.792355

143
60.73
0
0.5729
19.201

t

P>|t|

[95% Conf. Interval]

-0.55
-2.24
6.08
0.49
0.35
10.82

0.587
0.027
0
0.625
0.725
0

-6.24316
-12.1813
0.213263
-1.97E-06
-6.79E-05
42.36006

132

3.544724
-0.74686
0.418971
3.26E-06
9.73E-05
61.31317

The robust regression also returned a R2 value of .5729, exactly the same as our
previous model. Therefore, our previous regression test was shown to be relatively free of
an errors based upon the Huber-White estimators. In addition, while there are some
differences between the t values and the P values, the differences are minor. This
indicates that any problems in the data not significant enough to invalidate the findings.
These findings show that the hypothesis is statistical significant. Therefore, as
levels of freedom increases, levels of access to the internet increase. Specifically, based
upon these findings, as civil liberties increase, levels of access to the internet increase.
This would indicate that the important component of the Freedom House freedom
rankings that has the most statistically significant impact on the number of internet users
is the level of civil liberties within a country.
In addition, the results from the Huber-White sandwich estimators indicate that no
outliers or other highly influential observations are present in the data. These results
indicate that our model follows the assumptions needed for correct results from an
ordinary least squares model.
Often times, political rights would seem to be the leading variable that would
impact number of internet users. Political rights include activities such as participation in
the administration of a government and power or privilege possessed by an individual
(Political Rights, n.d.). The freedom to access information in whatever form would seem
to be included as a political right enforced by the government.
However, the model indicates that civil liberties, which often includes such topics
as freedom of speech and freedom of assembly, has a statistically significant relationship
to the number of internet users. These findings indicate that as a country expands its civil

133

liberties, such as greater freedom of actions, access to the internet is also expanded. This
would indicate that as the world grows more interconnected and the digital world and
physical world overlap, such ideas as freedom of action would include not only physical
actions but virtual ones as well. An individual would be free to access not only physical
materials but virtual ones as well.
The variable for the gross domestic product of a country returned values that were
not statistically significant. Cost has been discussed as a barrier to access to the internet.
While this may be true at the individual level, the GDP of a country, which would
indicate greater levels of disposable income, did not have a statistically significant impact
on the number of internet users. Therefore, individuals in a country with a higher GDP
did not have a statistically significant advantage over those individuals in a country with
a lower GDP.
In addition, foreign direct investment returned values that were not statistically
significant. While some research, as discussed by Graham & Spaulding, indicated that
FDI increases technology adoption, that adoption did not translate into a statistically
significant impact on the number of internet users. This contrasts the definition of the
digital divide as the definition includes access to technology (Cullen, 2003).
The Geddis, Wright and Frantz data set did return values that were statistically
significant. However, the GWF data includes the scores for both political rights and civil
liberties from Freedom House. Based upon the findings about civil liberties, these results
were in alignment with the results from civil liberties.
These findings indicate that civil liberties are ultimately the best indicator for the
number of internet users although previous research indicated that many of the other

134

variables should have had statistically significant results as well. GDP, FDI, and political
rights, while important factors in freedom, did not have a statistically significant impact
on the number of internet users per capita.
Discussion
Based upon these findings, the operationalized definition of democracy explains a
majority of the relationship between levels of democracy and access to the Internet. The
implications are important in terms of long-term policy decisions and investment
opportunities.
In terms of bridging the digital divide, the more that is known concerning the
variables that impact the divide, the better informed a decision can be in terms of where
investments should be made. While some variables are soft and can be overcome, such as
a lack of electricity, other variables are hard and cannot be influenced, in this case, the
level of democracy within a country. By reviewing each variable and the strength of its
relationship to the digital divide, better policy making decisions can be made. “Fear of
scaring foreign investors away led the government of Malaysia to end restrictions,
including monitoring Internet activity for messages considered a threat to national
security and requiring cybercafés to register with the government” (Guillén & Suárez,
2005, p. 688).
Some variables are often enough to stop a project from leaving the drawing board.
Such hard variables can include democracy, physical access to an area, and government
control. By discussing and analyzing the strength that each variable has in terms of levels
of access, a funding agency could decide to fund one project over another in order to gain
a greater impact in bridging the digital divide. Educational Testing Service stated that

135

“Governments, education experts, and researchers should conduct new public policy
research with the data derived from these assessments. This information can help policy
makers, educators and industry as they attempt to broaden people’s access to and fluency
with new technologies. Government investments, education curricula, and philanthropy
should all be influenced by the data derived from these assessments“("D. Summary of
Recommendations," 2007).
This study found that civil liberties have a statistically significant impact on the
number of internet users. Therefore, as policy makers review where to make changes in
order to increase the number of internet users within their country in order to reap some
of the benefits available, their policy changes should focus on increasing the civil
liberties of their country rather than affecting other changes, such as trying to increase the
FDI coming into their country.
In today’s society, investors and funding sources are often focused on quantitative
results from the use of their resources. By discovering which variables have the greatest
impact on the digital divide, then separating those variables into groups that can be
affected and those that cannot, entities and organizations that begin to tackle the digital
divide can make better-informed decisions.
Those groups that receive access to technology and online resources will certainly
benefit from that access. Telemedicine has had a significant impact in rural Africa, where
even basic healthcare was often unavailable. By introducing access to medical
professionals, these communities have the ability to consult with some of the leading
experts in the world, without either party needing to leave their respective areas. “The
benefit is magnified in smaller communities. Britton described a situation where a

136

pediatrician might diagnose a heart murmur in a child, but when a pediatric cardiologist
is brought in via telemedicine, they discover it was a false alarm” (Alphonse, 2013).
As more people get connected to the multitude of resources available online, they
are adding their own unique perspectives and experiences to the overall discussion, thus
providing greater levels of richness and depth to a conversation that is already breaking
down social and cultural barriers that have been in place for decades. Groups can use
those resources to assist people in building their own information resources and add often
unique ideas and concepts that may have previously gone overlooked. Groups can also
use the information available as a basis for building knowledge and then returning it back
into the cycle. This ever-expanding pool of knowledge then helps other groups in
ongoing research and development, ultimately benefitting their local community, nation,
and the world.
This study found that as civil liberties increase, the number of internet users
increases. Therefore, one method that could be introduced to bridge the digital divide
would be a move away from simple technology access and a shift towards increasing the
civil liberties within a country. By advocating for more liberties, such as increased
freedom of speech or freedoms of expression, policy makers would also be advocating
for a narrowing of the digital divide.
Limitations
While the model does show statistical significance based upon our regression
model, there are still a number of limitations associated with the model and the data.
While none of these limitations are significant in and of themselves, accuracy requires a
discussion about any possible issues.

137

The use of regression models has been an established method of research for a
number of years. As computational methods were polished and perfected, reliance on
regression methodology increased in quantitative studies. However, these studies are not
100% accurate. There is a chance, albeit small, that the findings are erroneous. In
quantitative methodology, two main errors can typically occur: Type I and Type II. In the
case of a Type I error, the null hypothesis, H0, is in reality true. However, it is rejected
due to a value of P ≤ 0.05. In the case of a Type II error, the null hypothesis, H0, is false
but is accepted because of a value of P > 0.05 (Agresti & Finlay, 2009, p. 159).
One reason for the introduction of this error is that the value of α should equal
0.05. This indicates that there is a 95% chance of the model reflecting what is occurring
in the data. A slim chance of 5% still exists that the findings returned from the regression
model are unique and do not reflect the reality of the situation according to the data.
When this occurs, the model will return findings that are the opposite of the reality
represented by the data.
Type I and Type II errors have a correlation. As the value of P for Type I errors
decreases, the value of P for Type II errors increases (Agresti & Finlay, 2009, p. 161).
Therefore, researchers must strike a balance between these two values in order to offset
Type I errors against Type II errors.
The true effects of a relationship may be less significant than what is reported by
the regression model due to a number of factors, such as outliers being included in the
model to gain a greater understanding of the broader picture, yet they are so distant from
other data points that they impact the mean significantly. Some combination of factors
could exert greater levels of influence on the model that are not true representations of

138

the reality represented by the data (Agresti & Finlay, 2009, p. 165). While the model is a
best fit based upon the data being used, it is still only a best fit; it is not necessarily a
perfect fit or a reflection of exactly how the data looks.
While a number of safeguards are in place to reduce the risk of obtaining a Type I
or Type II error, there is still no method that returns a result that has no chance at being
incorrect. However, based upon the tests run on the model, it is unlikely that either of
these types of errors occurred.
The data obtained is secondary data, that, even when obtained from highly
reputable sources such as those used in this study, can have errors that may not be
noticeable to other users. While human error is certainly possible, translation errors can
also be involved that could affect the results of the model. To evaluate the usefulness of
secondary sources, researchers must review several factors, including the purpose the
data was originally intended, scope of the data, authority of the body that gathered the
data, and audience that the information is based on (Cooper & Schindler, 2006, Ch. 7).
In terms of the data used in this study, each of these factors will be discussed. The
purpose of the data is the same as the original use for which the data was gathered. In this
case, the data used for the GDP variable was specifically GDP data gathered by the
World Bank. The data containing the number of Internet users in a country was gathered
by the International Telecommunications Union specifically in response to requests to
review how many Internet users are in a given country. The data for the FDI was
gathered based upon FDI findings by the World Bank. The data set from Freedom House
was built specifically to measure the levels of democracy within a country. Finally, the

139

Geddis, Wright, and Frantz data set was designed specifically to give greater levels of
granularity for levels of freedom with autocratic countries.
The scope of the data sets used was all inclusive. In the model used, a global
perspective was the primary focus, and thus global data was used. The data sets were
included based upon their global perspectives and scopes. By using a global viewpoint,
the data sets fit the same context and scope for which they were initially designed.
Therefore, no additional errors should have occurred.
The authority of the body that gathered the data was of paramount concern in
building our model. Therefore, only data that was obtained directly from globally
recognized sources was used. Each data set was obtained directly from the websites or
databases of each of the respective entities and not from outside sites that were mirroring
the data or storing it on their servers. Only NGOs were reviewed. While some level of
bias is expected in the data, by using NGOs, it was hoped that the amount of bias
included was at a minimum. The NGOs in this case were world renown and often worked
with local, national, and other international parties in their data collection.
Finally, the audience that the information is based on was reviewed. With regard
to the data sets used, the audience for which these data sets were built was primarily
researchers. The data sets were included in formats that were easily built into tables and
models with few adjustments made to the core data. While some labels and abbreviations
had to be standardized, such as how country names were displayed, in general, the data
sets were presented in such a manner as to encourage their use by researchers. This was a
significant concern while gathering data in that the data was built for research and not as
propaganda devices or methods to show the superiority of one group over another.

140

Human error could always be a source of unexpected errors. While multiple
reviews of the data were performed, there is a slight chance that a transcription error
occurred. Due diligence was given when data was copied from one data set to another or
from one program to another. However, some human error could be present within the
data that was not detected.
While every effort was made to reduce the amount of errors introduced into the
model, a chance of error in the model remains. As all of the data was secondary data, the
author was unable to verify the original data used to compile the data set. While the
integrity and reputation of the organizations from which the data sets were obtained are
world renown, there is still a slight chance that an error was introduced into the data set
prior to their compilation and introduction into the database.

141

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION

The initial discussion on the digital divide was an important step in
acknowledging this form of exclusion. As technology continues to grow and expand, the
adoption of newer technologies is inevitable due to their increased levels of efficiency
and lower cost. However, much of the discussion concerning the digital divide does not
keep pace with the new technologies, as much of the research initially focused on
technology access to the point of excluding any other variables. Brown, Barram, and
Irving began the discussion concerning the digital divide in 1995, and this discussion
continued through the end of the 1990’s, whereas technology continued to expand and
connection speeds increased. This mindset of focusing only on technology access actually
hindered the discussion as many people viewed access to computers as a venue for
games, adult content, and social media rather than as a method to access the plethora of
valuable online information.
The analysis of which variables impact the digital divide is a key factor needed to
bridge the divide and integrate many marginalized groups into the information society.
As researchers discovered and analyzed the divide, the three primary variables were
discovered: human capital, infrastructure, and skills. As the discussion expanded
concerning infrastructure, or the lack thereof, policy makers began to take note that this
was not a simple problem of someone having access to a computer with a modem.
Instead, this was a problem of education, resources, skill sets, and access to physical
142

assets. “Internet-savvy students describe dozens of different education-related uses of the
Internet. Virtually all use the Internet to do research to help them write papers or
complete class work or homework assignments” (Levin & Arafeh, 2002, p. ii).
“Information about people's online skills tells us to what extent they are able to use the
medium in ways of most interest to them and in ways that are most useful to their
particular needs. The ability to find different types of information online allows people to
use the medium to their maximum benefit” (Hargittai, 2002).
For variables that cannot be influenced by outside forces, organizations that are
trying to bridge the divide should be aware of the strength of the relationship between the
variable and Internet access to determine whether it is viable to invest the time and
resources into an area where such access may not have any significant impact. This type
of variable that cannot be easily influenced by outside forces was the primary focus for
this research. In this case, an operational definition for democracy was determined that
stated that democracy was composed of a number of variables—economic, governmental,
and social—that were encompassed by several data sets.
The basis of this definition was the rankings based upon the Freedom House data
that was obtained directly from the Freedom House, which is an acknowledged leader in
gathering data and ranking countries on their levels of democracy. These rankings are
based upon two primary categories—political rights and civil liberties—within a country.
Both of these categories were included in the model as independent variables and ranked
between 1 and 7, with a country ranked 7 having the least freedom and a country ranked
1 having the most freedom.

143

Geddis, Wright and Frantz (2012) took these findings one step further and added
greater levels of granularity to countries that were considered autocracies (i.e., countries
with high rankings on the Freedom House scale). While the rankings were fair, there
were still significant differences in higher-ranked countries. By including the Geddis,
Wright, and Frantz data, it was expected that greater degrees of granularity would be
included in the regression model. “Scholars can use the data to disaggregate the
transitions we identify by different characteristics (e.g., violent/non-violent, transitions
via election vs. coerced transitions, domestic-led/foreign led), enabling them to test
hypotheses about whether these characteristics lead to different outcomes” (Geddes,
Wright, & Frantz, 2012). In this regression model, the different outcome hypothesized
was whether autocracies had lower levels of Internet access than countries with greater
levels of democracy.
Many variables are known to impact the digital divide. As these variables are
categorized between variables that can be easily affected by outside forces and those that
cannot be affected, policy makers can then determine the best course of action needed to
have the greatest impact on the digital divide. With hard variables, these factors are
outside the ability of most organizations to change, and therefore need to be accounted
for prior to investing resources into an area. While the soft variables may add additional
financial burdens, they are ultimately factors that can be overcome appropriate planning
and resources must be considered.
Investors want to see the greatest return from their resources. By tracking which
variables explain the most about their relationship with the number of Internet users, and
then analyzing which can be overcome and which cannot be, organizations can better

144

estimate the return on investment being made in a given community and plan their
investment strategy accordingly.
Groups that are in need of online resources can also determine which variables
they may be able to assist with, thus making their communities more competitive in terms
of resources investment. For example, a community may begin to incorporate greater
technology skills into their education programs to build greater levels of human capital.
They may also approach other local communities and build communal resources, such as
a shared community center, that could house computers and allow greater numbers of
people access to technology. This is shown in Indian libraries as a “group of participating
libraries take the initiative to co-ordinate their acquisitions. Their objective is to eliminate
duplication in acquisitions to the 14 extent it is possible. Further, the member libraries
undertake to give services such as information access and document delivery.… This
model is in operation in most of the resource sharing programmes started by various
library networks such as Delhi Library Network(DELNET), Bombay Library
Networking(BONET),Madras Library Network(MALIBNET) and Information Library
Networking(INFLIBNET)” (Kaul, 2001, p. 12).
All things being equal, a difference in levels of freedom could sway policy
makers to develop different policies and procedures to help countries with technology
and Internet access based upon that difference. By separating variables that impact the
digital divide into hard or soft, policy makers can make better-informed decisions as to
where investments should be made to have the greatest impact in bridging the divide. In
today’s society, investors and funding sources are often focused on quantitative results
from the use of their resources. By discovering which variables have the greatest impact

145

on the digital divide, then separating those variables into groups that can be affected and
those that cannot, entities and organizations that begin to tackle the digital divide can
make better-informed decisions and return to their funding partners concrete estimates of
the impact the investments have made.
Only by examining the digital divide at finer levels of granularity will specific
solutions be found. This study found that by increasing levels of civil liberties, the
number of internet users also increases. However, the economic variables included in the
model, GDP and FDI did not have a statistically significant relationship. Therefore,
working to increase GDP and FDI will not necessarily narrow the digital divide. In
addition, political rights did not have a statistically significant relationship with the
number of internet users per capita. As political rights increase, the digital divide will still
not narrow based upon the findings of this model.
By dissecting the divide at the local level, examining what variables are affecting
the community, such as access to infrastructure, literacy rates, or even levels of electricity
available within a community, and then reviewing which of those variables has a
significant relationship with the divide can a long-term solution be found. While many
short-term solutions have been proposed over the years, such as the $100 laptop program,
they have slowed the rate at which many groups are falling behind, not actually helped
them to catch back up and bring them to an equal footing. In the case of the $100 laptop,
these machines are either using older technologies or the systems are not upgradable, thus
leaving the groups behind within a few years once again.
Only by recognizing the significance of the digital divide will the importance of a
solution be brought to the forefront of policy. By dissecting the divide, determining the

146

effects of variables on the digital divide and determining which of those variables have
the greatest impact on the digital divide can we find a long-term solution. This study,
while not a definitive answer to the divide, is one step towards a solution.
Future Studies
The results of this study indicate that there is a positive relationship between
democracy, as defined within this study, and access to the internet. However, several
additional questions were raised by these results.
While the GWF data resulted in a statistical significant value, the results of the
civil liberties value returned a value that was statistically significant. However, the values
for political rights, GDP and FDI did not return values that were statistically significant.
Further studies into the results of the Freedom House ranking could be done to tease out
the variables within the civil liberties category that have the greatest impact on internet
users. The questions used to build the civil liberties ranking are numerous and therefore
present a strong data set to be used in further regression models.
In addition, other data sets that measure freedom, such as those from Polity IV,
could be used in place of the Freedom House data set. While the findings should be
similar, Polity IV uses their own surveys in order to gather data. In addition, Polity IV
uses a different scale for freedom. The scale at Polity IV ranges from -10 to 10. This finer
granularity could produce different results than those discovered from the Freedom
House data.
Furthermore, the advent of mobile technologies has made an impact of the
methods used to access the internet. Future research could look at the impact that these
newer technologies have had on access to the internet. As new ways are made available

147

to gain access to the internet, has the number of internet users increased or have these
new technologies simply replaced older ones with no net gains in access?
Additionally, the results on the economic indicators, GDP and FDI, indicated no
statistically significant relationship to the number of internet users. However, previous
research found that lower socio-economic status did have an impact on access to the
internet. Research into why these broader economic indicators are not statistically
significant could present interesting findings.
Cost has often been discussed as a barrier to entry for internet use. However, if an
increased GDP does not have a statistically significant relationship with number of
internet users, it would seem that there is a disparity between these two findings.
Therefore, different economic indicators could be introduced into the model, replacing
GDP. Given the large disparity in wealth dispersion within many countries, the GDP may
be masking the results at the individual level.
According to Graham & Spaulding (2004), FDI increases technology adoption.
However, this model found that FDI did not have a statistically significant relationship to
the number of internet users. As technology increases, the digital divide decreases based
up on the definition by Cullen (2003). This opens up a greater discussion as to why this
seeming disparity in research is happening. Is the increased technology adoption
implemented by FDI being used simply to replace aging infrastructure already in place?
Is the technology being implemented in areas that already have a significant penetration
rate of technology, therefore very little net gains are seen in relation to the number of
internet users per capita?

148

The study done by Graham & Spaulding (2004) is over a decade old. A new study
replicating their work could also be done in order to review whether their findings still
hold true. In addition, the variables they used in their study could be reviewed in order to
find statistically significant results for each variable.
While this study returns interesting results based upon the statistically significant
relationship between civil liberties and number of internet users, it also yielded more
questions than the initial research question. The lack of relationship between the most of
the initial variables as well as the seeming incongruity between these findings and the
research reviewed points at several questions that need to be answered in order to
continue discovering ways to narrow the digital divide.

149

REFERENCES
Agosto, D. E. (2005, Summer). The Digital Divide & Public Libraries: a first-hand view.
Progressive Librarian, 25, 23-27.
Agrawal, G., & Khan, M. A. (2011). Impact of FDI on GDP Growth: A Panel Data
Study. European Journal of Scientific Research, 57(2), 257-264.
Agresti, A., & Finlay, B. (2009). The Linear Regression Model. In Statistical methods for
the Social Sciences (4th Edition ed., p. 267). New Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Alphonse, L. (2013, November 5). Telemedicine: Vast Potential, Increased Efficiency.
Retrieved from US News and World Report website:
http://health.usnews.com/health-news/hospital-oftomorrow/articles/2013/11/05/telemedicine-vast-potential-increased-efficiency
Angelou, G. N., & Economides, A. A. (2009, November/December). A multi-criteria
game theory and real-options model for irreversible ICT investment decisions.
Telecommunications Policy, 33(10-11), 686–705.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2009.07.005
Antonelli, C. (2003, June). The digital divide: understanding the economics of new
information and communication technology in the global economy. Information
Economics and Policy, 15(2), 173–199. doi:10.1016/S0167-6245(02)00093-8
Aqili, S. V., & Moghaddam, A. I. (2008). Bridging the digital divide: The role of
librarians and information professionals in the third millennium. The Electronic
Library , 26(2), 226-37. doi:10.1108/02640470810864118
150

Baker, P. M. (2001, May 7). Policy bridges for the digital divide: Assessing the landscape
and gauging the dimensions. First Monday, 6(5). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArtic
le/860/769
Banister, S., & Reinhart, R. V. (2011). TPCK for Impact: Classroom Teaching Practices
That Promote Social Justice and Narrow the Digital Divide in an Urban Middle
School. Computers in the Schools, 28(1), 5-26.
doi:10.1080/07380569.2011.551086
Bartlett, J. (2002). Familiar Quotations (J. Kaplan, Ed., 17th ed.). Boston, Mass. ;
London : Little, Brown.
Barzilai-Nahon, K. (2006). Gaps and Bits: Conceptualizing Measurements for Digital
Divide/s. The Information Society, 22(5), 269 - 278.
doi:10.1080/01972240600903953
Becker, S., Crandall, M. D., Fisher, K. E., Kinney, B., Landry, C., & Rocha, A. (2010,
March). Opportunity for All: How the American Public Benefits from Internet
Access at U.S. Libraries (IMLS No. 2010-RES-01). Retrieved from
Behind the digital divide. (2005, March 10). The Economist.
Bell, S. J. (2001). The New Digital Divide: Dissecting Aggregator Exclusivity Deals. DLib Magazine, 7(7/8).
Berry, J. W. (2002, June/July). Equity of access: our continuing challenge. American
Libraries , 33(6), 7.

151

Bertot, J. C. (2003, May). The Multiple Dimensions of the Digital Divide: More than the
Technology ‘Haves’ and ‘Have Nots’. Government Information Quarterly, 20(2),
185–191. doi:10.1016/S0740-624X(03)00036-4
Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., & Grimes, J. M. (2010, July). Using ICTs to create a culture of
transparency: E-government and social media as openness and anti-corruption
tools for societies. Government Information Quarterly, 27(3), 264–271.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2010.03.001
Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., Langa, L. A., & McClure, C. R. (2006, September 4). Public
access computing and Internet access in public librarie- The role of public
libraries in e-government and emergency situations. First Monday, 11(9).
Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1392/1310
Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., McClure, C. R., Wright, C. B., & Jensen, E. (2009, November
2). Public libraries and the Internet 2008-2009: Issues, implications, and
challenges. First Monday, 14(11). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArtic
le/2700/2351
Bertot, J. C., Jaeger, P. T., Wahl, E. E., & Sigler, K. I. (2011). Public Libraries and the
Internet: An Evolutionary Perspective. In The Transforming Public Library
Technology Infrastructure (pp. 7 - 18).
Bertot, J. C., & McClure, C. R. (2000, September 7). Public libraries and the internet
2000: Summary findings and data tables. Retrieved from U.S. National

152

Commission on Libraries and Information Science website:
http://www.ii.fsu.edu/Solutions/Public-Libraries-The-Internet/Reports
Bertot, J. C., McClure, C. R., & Fletcher, P. D. (1997, December). The 1997 national
survey of U.S. public libraries and the internet. Retrieved from U.S. National
Commission on Libraries and Information Science website:
http://www.ii.fsu.edu/Solutions/Public-Libraries-The-Internet/Reports
Bertot, J. C., McClure, C. R., & Jaeger, P. T. (2005, August). ., Public Libraries Struggle
to Meet Internet Demand: New study shows libraries need support to sustain
online services. American Libraries , 36(7), 78-79.
Berube, L. (2006, August). The Digital Divide, or Who Gets to Be Part of the
Information Society? Multimedia Information and Technology, 32(3), 86-89.
Billon, M., Marco, R., & Lera-Lopez, F. (2009, November/December). Disparities in ICT
adoption: A multidimensional approach to study the cross-country digital divide.
Telecommunications Policy, 33(10-11), 596–610.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2009.08.006
Björk, B.-C. (2004, January). Open access to scientific publications - an analysis of the
barriers to change . Information Research, 9(2). Retrieved from
http://InformationR.net/ir/9-2/paper170.html
Blau, A. (2002, June/July). Access isn’t enough. American Libraries, 33(6), 50-52.
Bobinaite, V., Juozapaviciene, A., & Konstantinaviciute, I. (2011). Regression analysis
of gross domestic product and its factors in Lithuania. Economics and
Management , 16, 116-126.

153

BOLD 2003: Development and the Internet. (2003). Retrieved from Berkman Center for
Internet and Society, Harvard law School website:
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/bold/devel03/modules/modIC.html
Bonfadelli, H. (2002). The Internet and Knowledge Gaps: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation. European Journal of Communication, 17(1), 65–84.
doi:10.1177/0267323102017001607
Boris, L. (2005). The Digital Divide and its Impact on the Rural Community. Rural
Libraries, 25(2), 7-35.
Bosch, S., & Henderson, K. (2013, April 25). The Winds of Change - Periodicals Price
Survey 2013. Retrieved from Library Journal website:
http://lj.libraryjournal.com/2013/04/publishing/the-winds-of-change-periodicalsprice-survey-2013/
Bouras, C., Giannaka, E., & Tsiatsos, T. (2009, July). Identifying best practices for
supporting broadband growth: Methodology and analysis. Journal of Network and
Computer Applications, 32(4), 795–807. doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2009.02.003
Bourke, C. (2005, June). Public libraries: Building social capital through networking.
Aplis, 18(2), 71-75.
Britz, J. J. (2004, June). To Know or not to Know: A Moral Reflection on Information
Poverty. Journal of Information Science , 30(3), 192-204 .
doi:10.1177/0165551504044666
Brooks, D. (2014, January 21). New Hampshire Fiber Network Will Bring Broadband to
New Places. Retrieved from http://www.govtech.com/network/New-HampshireFiber-Network-Will-Bring-Broadband-to-New-Places.html

154

Brooks, S., Donovan, P., & Rumble, C. (2005, December). Developing Nations, the
Digital Divide and Research Databases. Serials Review , 31(4), 270-278.
doi:10.1016/j.serrev.2005.09.002
Broos, A., & Roe, K. (2006). The digital divide in the playstation generation: Selfefficacy, locus of control and ICT adoption among adolescents. Poetics, 34(4-5),
306–317. doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.002
Brown, J. S. (2002, February). Growing up digital: How the Web Changes Work,
Education, and the Ways People Learn. USDLA Journal, 16(2).
Brown, R. H., Barram, D. J., & Irving, L. (1995, July). Empowering the Information
Disadvantaged. In FALLING THROUGH THE NET: A Survey of the "Have Nots"
in Rural and Urban America. Retrieved from
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fallingthru.html
Bucy, E. P. (2000, Winter). Social Access to the Internet. The Harvard International
Journal of Press/Politics, 5(1), 50-61. Retrieved from
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/prp/summary/v005/5.1bucy.html
Budhiraja, R., & Sachdeva, S. (2002, November). E-Readiness Assessment (India).
Retrieved from
http://www.indiaegov.org/knowledgeexchg/ereadiness_Assessment.pdf
Cable fault cuts off West Africa. (2009, July 30). Retrieved from BBC website:
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/8176014.stm
Callison, D. (2004, February). Digital Divide. School Library Media Activities Monthly ,
20(6), 37-40, 51.

155

Campbell, D. (2001). Can the digital divide be contained? International Labour Review,
140(2), 119-141.
Cart, M. (2005, October 15). Among the Digitally Divided. Booklist, 102(4), 41.
Chabran, R. (2000). From digital divide to digital opportunity. Hispanic Lifestyle, 3(3),
54-55.
Chadwick, A., & May, C. (2003, April). Interaction between states and citizens in the age
of the Internet: "e-Government" in the United States, Britain, and the European
Union. Governance: An International Journal of Policy, Administration, and
Institutions, 16(2), 271-300.
Chatman, E. A. (1996, March). The Impoverished Life-World of Outsiders. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science, 47(3), 193-206.
Chen, W., & Wellman, B. (2004, Spring/Summer). The global digital divide – Within and
between countries. IT and Society, 1(7), 39-45.
Chien, N. D., & Zhang, K. (2012). FDI of Vietnam; Two-Way Linkages between FDI
and GDP, Competition among Provinces and Effects of Laws. iBusiness, 4, 157163. doi:10.4236/ib.2012.42018
Choemprayong, S. (2006, December). Closing Digital Divides: The United States'
Policies. Libri, 56(4), 201-12.
Cieslikowski, D. A., Halewood, N. J., Kimura, K., & Qiang, C. Z.-W. (n.d.). Key Trends
in ICT Development. Retrieved from World Bank website:
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTIC4D/Resources/58706351242066347456/IC4D_2009_Key_Trends_in_ICT_Deelopment.pdf

156

Çilan, Ç. A., Bolat, B. A., & Coşkun, E. (2009, January). Analyzing digital divide within
and between member and candidate countries o f European Union. Government
Information Quarterly, 26(1), 98– 105. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2007.11.002
Cisler, S. (2005, November). At the EDGE of the Net. American Libraries, 36(10), 5053.
Cooper, M. N. (2002). Inequality in the digital society: Why the digital divide deserves
all the attention it gets. Cardozo Arts and Entertainment Law Journal, 72(20).
Cooper, M. N. (2002, May 30). Does the digital divide still exist? Bush administration
shrugs, but evidence says "yes". Retrieved from Consumer Federation of America
website: http://www.consumerfed.org/pdfs/DigitalDivideReport20020530.pdf
Cordella, A. (2007, September). E-government: towards the e-bureaucratic form? Journal
of Information Technology, 22, 265–274. doi:10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000105
Corrocher, N., & Ordanni, A. (2002). Measuring the digital divide: a framework for the
analysis of cross-country differences. Journal of Information Technology, 17, 919. doi:10.1080/02683960210132061
Crawford, S. P. (2011, December 3). The New Digital Divide. Retrieved from New York
Times website: http://www.nytimes.com/2011/12/04/opinion/sunday/internetaccess-and-the-new-divide.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0
Cullen, R. (2003). The digital divide: a global and national call to action. The Electronic
Library, 21(3), 247 - 257. doi:10.1108/02640470310480506
Curry, J., & Kenney, M. (2006, March 6). Digital divide or digital development? The
Internet in Mexico . First Monday, 11(3). Retrieved from

157

http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1318
/1238
Dainotti, A., Squarcella, C., Aben, E., Claffy, K. C., Chiesa, M., Russo, M., & Pescapé,
A. (2011, November 2). Analysis of Country-wide Internet Outages Caused by
Censorship. ICM '11. Retrieved from
http://www.caida.org/publications/papers/2011/outages_censorship/outages_cens
orship.pdf
Dang, D. (2008). An extended sharing model to provide ICT services to the rural poor.
International journal of Education and Development using Information and
Communication Technology, 4(3), 6-18.
Dasgupta, S., Lall, S., & Wheeler, D. (2001, March). Policy Reform, Economic Growth,
and the Digital Divide: An Econometric Analysis. World Bank, Development
Research Group.
Debono, B. (2002, June). Assessing the social impact of public libraries: what the
literature is saying. Aplis, 15(2), 80-95.
Definition of E-Government. (n.d.). Retrieved from The World Bank website:
http://go.worldbank.org/M1JHE0Z280
democracy. (n.d.). Retrieved April 7, 2014, from Dictionary.com Unabridged website:
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/democracy
Dervin, B. (1994). Information -- Democracy: An Examination of Underlying
Assumptions. Journal of The American Society for Information Science, 45(6),
369-385.

158

Dewan, S., Ganley, D., & Kraemer, K. L. (2005, December). Across the Digital Divide:
A Cross-Country Multi- Technology Analysis of the Determinants of IT
Penetration. Journal of the Association for Information Systems, 6(12), 409-432.
DiMaggio, P., Hargittai, E., Neuman, W. R., & Robinson, J. P. (2001). Social
implications of the internet. Annual Review of Sociology, 27, 307-336.
Does the Internet Speak English? Most of The World’s National Libraries Do. (2006,
February 2). Retrieved from World Information Access website:
http://www.wiaproject.org/index.php/16/national-libraries-online
Dorr, J., & Akeroyd, R. (2001, October). New Mexico tribal libraries: Bridging the
digital divide. Computers in Libraries, 37-42.
Doyle, B. (2006, September). Crossing the Digital Divide. EContent , 29(7), 36.
Dragulanescu, N.-G. (2002, June). Social impact of the “Digital divide” in a central–
Eastern European country. International Information & Library Review , 34(2),
139-151. doi:10.1006/iilr.2002.0190
Drori, G. S. (2010, February). Globalization and Technology Divides: Bifurcation of
Policy between the ‘‘Digital Divide’’ and the ‘‘Innovation Divide’’. Sociological
Inquiry, 80(1), 63–91. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682X.2009.00316.x
D. Summary of Recommendations. (2007). Digital Transformation A Framework for ICT
Literacy . Retrieved from Educational Testing Service website:
http://www.ets.org/Media/Tests/Information_and_Communication_Technology_
Literacy/ictreport.pdf

159

Duff, A. S. (2011, March). The Rawls-Tawney Theorem and the Digital Divide in
Postindustrial Society. Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology, 62(3), 604–612. doi:10.1002/asi.21470
Eamon, M. K. (2004, June). Digital Divide in ComputerAccess and Use Between
Poorand Non-PoorYouth. Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare, 31(2), 91112.
Eastin, M. S., & LaRose, R. (2000, September). Internet Self-Efficacy and the
Psychology of the Digital Divide. Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, 6(1).
E-governance and Citizen Participation in West Africa: Challenges and Opportunities.
(2011). Retrieved from United Nations Development Programme website:
http://www.undpegov.org/sites/undpegov.org/files/UNDP-IPAO-ReportEnglish.pdf
Estes, A. C. (2011, June 6). The U.N. Declares Internet Access a Human Right. The
Atlantic Wire. Retrieved from
http://www.theatlanticwire.com/technology/2011/06/united-nations-wikileaksinternet-human-rights/38526/
Europe leads the broadband race. (2011, October 25). The World in 2011 ICT Facts and
Figures. Retrieved from International Telecommunication Union website:
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/facts/2011/material/ICTFactsFigures2011.pdf
Executive Summary. (n.d.). Connecting America : The National Broadband Plan.
Retrieved from Federal Communications Commission website:
http://download.broadband.gov/plan/national-broadband-plan.pdf

160

Fairlie, R. W. (2004). Race and the Digital Divide. Contributions to Economic Analysis
& Policy, 3(1), 1-38.
Fairlie, R. W. (2005, September). Are We Really A Nation Online? Ethnic and Racial
Disparities in Access to Technology and Their Consequences. University of
California, Santa Cruz and National Poverty Center, University of Michigan.
Fallis, D. (2004). Social Epistomology and the Digital divide. Computers and
Philosophy, 79-84.
Fang, Z. (2002). E-Government in digital era: Concept, practice, and development.
International Journal of the Computer, the Internet, and Management, 10(2), 122.
Farrelly, M. G. (2011, March/April). Digital (Generation) Divide. Public Libraries,
50(2), 28-29.
Ferber, P., Foltz, F., & Pugliese, R. (2008). Demographics and Political Characteristics
Affecting State Legislature Websites: The Quality and Digital Divides. Journal of
Political Marketing, 7(1), 48-68. doi:10.1080/15377850802064114
Ferro, E., Helbig, N. C., & Gil-Garcia, J. R. (2011, January). The role of IT literacy in
defining digital divide policy needs. Government Information Quarterly, 28(1), 310. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2010.05.007
Flamm, K., Friedlander, A., Horrigan, J., & Lehr, W. (2007, November). Measuring
Broadband: Improving Communications Policymaking through Better Data
Collection. Retrieved from
Foster, S. P. (2000, September). The Digital Divide: Some Reflections. International
Information & Library Review, 32(3-4), 437-451. doi:10.1006/iilr.2000.0136

161

Foulger, D. (2001, December). The Cliff and the Continuum: Defining the Digital Divide.
4- How to evaluate the OLS model? . (n.d.). Mistakes to Avoid and Reporting OLS.
Retrieved from http://www.chsbs.cmich.edu/fattah/courses/empirical/29.html
Fourie, I., & Bothma, T. (2006). Addressing the digital divide in teaching information
retrieval: A theoretical view on taking students from ICT access to knowledge
sharing. Electronic Library, 24(4), 469 - 489. doi:10.1108/02640470610689179
Fox, S. (2001, September). Wired seniors: A fervent few, inspired by family ties.
Retrieved from Pew Internet & American Life Project website:
http://www.pewinternet.org/
Fox, S. (2004, March). Older Americans and the Internet. Washington, D.C.: Pew
Internet & American Life Project.
Franklin, P., & Stephens, C. G. (2009, January). Equitable Access, the Digital Divide,
and the Participation Gap. School Library Media Activities Monthly, 25(5), 43-44.
Freedman, D. A. (2006, September). The So-Called “Huber Sandwich Estimator” and
“Robust Standard Errors”. Retrieved from
http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~census/mlesan.pdf
Freedom in the World 2012. (2012). Retrieved from Freedom House website:
http://www.freedomhouse.org/sites/default/files/inline_images/FIW%202012%20
Booklet--Final.pdf
F test computation. (n.d.). Retrieved from University of Wisconsin - Madison website:
http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~bhansen/390/390Lecture17.pdf
Fuchs, C., & Horak, E. (2008, May). Africa and the digital divide. Telematics and
Informatics, 25(2), 99–116. doi:10.1016/j.tele.2006.06.004

162

Funding for Broadband Within Schools and Libraries. (2014). Summary of the E-Rate
Modernization Order. Retrieved from Federal Communications Commission
website: http://www.fcc.gov/page/summary-e-rate-modernization-order
Gebremichael, M. D., & Jackson, J. W. (2006). Bridging the gap in Sub-Saharan Africa:
A holistic look at information poverty and the region's digital divide. Government
Information Quarterly , 23(2), 267-80. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2006.02.011
Geddes, B., Wright, J., & Frantz, E. (2012, September 8). New Data on Autocratic
Regimes. Retrieved from http://dictators.la.psu.edu/pdf/pp10.pdf
Gillan, B. (2003, November/December). Crossing The Great Divide With Networks,
Teaching and Interactivity. Library Media Connection, 22(3), 38-42.
Goal 9. Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industrialization
and foster innovation . (n.d.). Sustainable Development Goals. Retrieved from
United Nations website: https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/sdgsproposal
Goss, E. P., & Phillips, J. M. (2002, Summer). How Information Technology Affects
Wages: Evidence Using Intemet Usage As a Proxy for IT Skills. Journal of Labor
Research, 23(3), 463-474.
Government and Heritage Library. (n.d.). Retrieved from State Library of North Carolina
website: https://www.pinterest.com/ncghl/
Grabill, J. T. (2003, December). On divides and interfaces: Access, class, and computers.
Computers and Composition, 20(4), 455–472.
doi:10.1016/j.compcom.2003.08.017

163

Graddy, E. A. (1999). Multivariate Regression Analysis in Public Policy and
Administration. In G. J. Miller (Ed.), Handbook of Research Methods in Public
Administration (p. 378).
Graham, J. P., & Spaulding, R. B. (2004). How Has FDI Changed in the Past Decade? In
Understanding Foreign Direct Investment (FDI). Retrieved from
http://www.goingglobal.com/articles/understanding_foreign_direct_investment.htm
Grefenstette, G., & Nioche, J. (2000, April 5). Estimation of English and non-English
Language Use on the WWW. Retrieved from Xerox Research Centre Europe
website: http://www.academia.edu/4186955/Estimation_of_English_and_nonEnglish_Language_Use_on_the_WWW
Griffith, J. (2010, August). Information and Communication Technologies in Parliament
:Tools for democracy. Retrieved from Office For Promotion Of Parliamentary
Democracy website:
http://www.ictparliament.org/sites/default/files/oppd_ictp_toolsfordemocracy.pdf
Grubesic, T. H. (2003). Inequities in the broadband revolution. The Annals of Regional
Science, 37(2), 263-289.
Grubesic, T. H., & Murray, A. T. (2002). Constructing the divide: Spatial disparities in
broadband access. Papers in Regional Science, 81, 197–221.
Grubesic, T. H., & Murray, A. T. (2004, Spring). Waiting for Broadband: Local
Competition and the Spatial Distribution of Advanced Telecommunication
Services in the United States. Growth and Change, 35(2), 139-165.

164

Guillén, M. F., & Suárez, S. L. (2005, December). Explaining the Global Digital Divide:
Economic,Political and Sociological Drivers of Cross-National Internet Use.
Social Forces, 84(2), 681-708.
Gurstein, M. (2003, December 1). Effective use: A community informatics strategy
beyond the Digital Divide. First Monday , 8(12). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/1107
/1027
Guynn, J. (2010, June 30). Google to stop redirecting users in China to uncensored site.
Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from
http://articles.latimes.com/2010/jun/30/business/la-fi-china-google-20100630
Haider, J. (2007). Of the rich and the poor and other curious minds: on open access and
"development". Aslib Proceedings, 59(4-5), 449 - 461.
doi:10.1108/00012530710817636
Hargittai, E. (2002, April 1). Second-Level Digital Divide: Differences in People's Online
Skills. First Monday, 7(4). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_4/hargittai/index.html
Hargittai, E. (2010, February). Digital Na(t)ives? Variation in Internet Skills and Uses
among Members of the ‘‘Net Generation’’. Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 92–113.
doi:10.1111/j.1475-682X.2009.00317.x
Harwood, P., & Rainie, L. (2004, March). People who use the Internet away from home
and work. Pew Internet & American Life Project.
Hassani, S. N. (2006). Locating digital divides at home, work, and everywhere else.
Poetics, 34(4-5), 250–272. doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.007

165

Hayden, C. D. (2003, August). Equity of Access—the Time Is Now. American Libraries ,
34(7), 5.
Hazan, E., Manyika, J., & du Rausas, M. (2011). Sizing the Internet's economic impact.
McKinsey Quarterly, 4, 18/21. Retrieved from Business Source Complete
database.
Helbig, N., Gil-García, J. R., & Ferro, E. (2009, January). Understanding the complexity
of electronic government: Implications from the digital divide literature.
Government Information Quarterly, 26(1), 89–97. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2008.05.004
Herb, U. (2010, February 1). Sociological implications of scientific publishing- Open
access, science, society, democracy, and the digital divide. First Monday, 15(2).
Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/259
9/2404
Hersberger, J. (2002). Are the economically poor information poor? Does the digital
divide affect the homeless and access to information? The Canadian Journal of
Information and Library Science, 27(3), 45-63.
Heteroscedasticity. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.math.canterbury.ac.nz/~m.reale/econ324/Topic2.pdf
Hirwade, M. A. (2010, September). Responding to information needs of the citizens
through e-government portals and online services in India. The International
Information & Library Review, 42(3), 154–163. doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2010.07.004

166

Hollifield, C. A., & Donnermeyer, J. F. (2003, May). Creating demand: influencing
information technology diffusion in rural communities. Government Information
Quarterly, 20(2), 135–150. doi:10.1016/S0740-624X(03)00035-2
Houston, R. D., & Erdelez, S. (2004, Spring). The Digital Divide: Who Really Benefits
from the Proposed Solutions for Closing the Gap. Journal of Information Ethics ,
13(1), 19-33.
Howard, P. E., Rainie, L., & Jones, S. (2001, November). Days and Nights on the
Internet : The Impact of a Diffusing Technology. American Behavioral Scientist,
45(3), 383-404. doi:10.1177/0002764201045003003
Huang, J., & Russell, S. (2006). The digital divide and academic achievement. The
Electronic Library, 24(2), 160-173. doi:10.1108/02640470610660350
Hudson, H. E. (2011, September 24). Rural Broadband: From Stimulus to Sustainability
(TPRC No. 2011). Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=1985751
human capital. (n.d.). Retrieved July 25, 2013, from Dictionary.com Unabridged.
website: http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/human+capital
ICT in Developing Countries . (2006, March). Retrieved from Parliamentary Office of
Science and Technology website:
http://www.parliament.uk/documents/post/postpn261.pdf
Impact of the Internet in Africa. (2013, April). Retrieved from Dalberg website:
http://www.impactoftheinternet.com/pdf/Dalberg_Impact_of_Internet_Africa_Ful
l_Report_April2013_vENG_Final.pdf

167

Internet penetration to boost India's GDP. (2012, January 20). Retrieved from Business
Standard website: http://www.business-standard.com/india/news/internetpenetration-to-boost-indias-gdp/462368/
Internet users (per 100 people) . (n.d.). Retrieved from The World Bank website:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/IT.NET.USER.P2
Introduction. (2011, January). Retrieved from Freedom House website:
http://www.freedomhouse.org/template.cfm?page=351&ana_page=373&year=20
11
Jaeger, P. T. (2003). The endless wire: E-government as global phenomenon.
Government Information Quarterly, 20(4), 323–331.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2003.08.003
Jaeger, P. T. (2005). Deliberative democracy and the conceptual foundations of electronic
government. Government Information Quarterly, 22(4), 702–719.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2006.01.012
Jaeger, P. T., & Bertot, J. C. (2009, Winter). E-government Education in Public Libraries:
New Service Roles and Expanding Social Responsibilities. Journal of Education
for Library and Information Science, 50(1), 39-49.
Jaeger, P. T., Bertot, J. C., Kodama, C. M., Katz, S. M., & DeCoster, E. J. (2011,
November 7). Describing and measuring the value of public libraries- The growth
of the Internet and the evolution of library value. First Monday, 16(11). Retrieved
from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/3765
/3074

168

Jaeger, P. T., & Burnett, G. (2005, October). Information Access and Exchange among
Small Worlds in a Democratic Society: The Role of Policy in Shaping
Information Behavior in the Post‐ 9/11 United States. The Library Quarterly,
75(4), 464-495. Retrieved from http://www.jstor.org/stable/10.1086/502787
Jaeger, P. T., & Thompson, K. M. (2003). E-government around the world: Lessons,
challenges, and future directions. Government Information Quarterly, 20(4), 389–
394. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2003.08.001
James, J. (2001). Bridging the digital divide with low-cost information technologies.
Journal of Information Science, 27(4), 211-217.
James, J. (2001, December). Low-cost computing and related ways of overcoming the
global digital divide. Journal of Information Science, 27(6), 385-392.
doi:10.1177/016555150102700604
James, J. (2003). Free software and the digital divide: opportunities and constraints for
developing countries. Journal of Information Science, 29(1), 22-33.
doi:10.1177/016555150302900103
James, J. (2005, April). The global digital divide in the Internet: developed countries
constructs and Third World realities. Journal of Information Science, 31(2), 114123. doi:10.1177/0165551505050788
James, J. (2007, September). From origins to implications: key aspects in the debate over
the digital divide. Journal of Information Technology, 22, 284–295.
doi:10.1057/palgrave.jit.2000097

169

James, J. (2008, March). Digital Preparedness Versus the Digital Divide: A Confusion of
Means and Ends. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology, 59(5), 785–791. doi:10.1002/asi.20793
James, J. (2008, October). Re-Estimating the Difficulty of Closing the Digital Divide.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 59(12),
2024–2032. doi:10.1002/asi.20897
John, K. (2009, January/February). The digital divide – between learners and technology.
Library and Information Update , 29.
Jones, S. (2002, September 15). The Internet Goes to College: How students are living in
the future with today’s technology. Retrieved from Pew Internet & American Life
Project website: http://www.pewinternet.org/
Jones-Kavalier, B. R., & Flannigan, S. L. (2006). Connecting the digital dots: Literacy of
the 21st century. Educause Quarterly, (2), 8-10.
Jung, J.-Y., Qiu, J. L., & Kim, Y.-C. (2001, August). Internet Connectedness and
Inequality : Beyond the ''Divide''. Communication Research, 28(4), 507-535.
doi:10.1177/009365001028004006
Kaplan, C. (n.d.). LEcture 4 Econ 488. Retrieved from Martin V. Smith School of
Business and Economics, California State University Channel Islands website:
http://faculty.csuci.edu/cameron.kaplan/Econ_488_files/Lecture%204.ppt
Kargbo, J. A. (2002, March). Narrowing the Information Divide. The International
Information and Library Review, 34(1), 97-105. doi:10.1006/iilr.2002.0187

170

Kastsinas, S. G., & Moeck, P. (2002). The digital divide and rural community colleges:
Problems and prospects. Community College Journal of Research and Practice,
26, 207- 224.
Kaul, S. (2001). Information resource sharing models in developing countries: a network
emerging from the world bank supported environmental management capacity
building project. INSPEL , 35(1), 9-26. Retrieved from http://forge.fhpotsdam.de/~IFLA/INSPEL/01-1kasu.pdf
Kaye, G. R., & Little, S. (2000). Dysfunctional Development Pathways of Information
and Communication Technology: Cultural Conflicts. Journal of Global
Information Management, 8(1). Retrieved from
http://find.galegroup.com.pallas2.tcl.sc.edu/gtx/infomark.do?&source=gale&srcpr
od=AONE&prodId=AONE&userGroupName=usclibs&tabID=T002&docId=A65
774161&type=retrieve&contentSet=IAC-Documents&version=1.0
Kebede, G. (2004, September). The information needs of end-users of Sub-Saharan
Africa in the digital information environment. The International Information &
Library Review, 36(3), 273–279. doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2003.10.011
Kiiru, J., & Mburu, J. (n.d.). Determinants and Consequencies of Transaction Costs of
Microfinance and their impact on rural poor peoples income. Retrieved from
http://www.african-women-economists.com/joy-kiiru/determinants-andconsequences-of-transactions-costs.pdf
Kim, E., Lee, B., & Menon, N. M. (2009, April). Social welfare implications of the
digital divide. Government Information Quarterly, 26(2), 377–386.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2008.11.004

171

King, A. (2002, Spring). Disconnected: teaching information equity to undergraduates.
Progressive Librarian , 19/20, 65-76.
Kinney, B. (2010). The Internet, Public Libraries, and the Digital Divide. Public Library
Quarterly, 29(2), 104-161. doi:10.1080/01616841003779718
Kornblum, J. (2005, December 6). It's online, but is it true? USA Today.
Kuk, G. (2002). The digital divide and the quality of electronic service delivery in local
government in the United Kingdom. Government Information Quarterly, 20(4),
353–363. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2003.08.004
Labovitz, C. (n.d.). Middle East Internet Scorecard. Retrieved July 19, 2013, from
http://monkey.org/~labovit/blog//viewpage.php?page=middle_east_scorecard_feb
20
LaRose, R., Gregg, J. L., Strover, S., Straubhaar, J., & Carpenter, S. (2007, July/August).
Closing the rural broadband gap: Promoting adoption of the Internet in rural
America. Telecommunications Policy, 31(6-7), 359–373.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2007.04.004
Law, D. (2004). Bridging the digital divide: a review of current progress. Library
Management, 25(1-2), 17 - 21. doi:10.1108/01435120410510210
Lazarus, W., & Mora, F. (2000, March). Online content for low-income and underserved
Americans: The digital divide’s new frontier. Retrieved from The Children’s
Partnership website: http://www.childrenspartnership.org
Lenhart, A. (2000). Who’s Not Online. Retrieved from Pew Research Center website:
http://www.pewinternet.org/2000/09/21/whos-not-online/

172

Levin, D., & Arafeh, S. (2002, August 14). The digital disconnect: Widening gap
between internet savvy students and their schools. Retrieved from Pew Internet &
American Life Project website: http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2002/TheDigital-Disconnect-The-widening-gap-between-Internetsavvy-students-and-theirschools.aspx
Levy, S. (2013, August 26). Zuckerberg Explains Facebook’s Plan to Get Entire Planet
Online. Wired. Retrieved from http://www.wired.com/business/2013/08/markzuckerberg-internet-org/
Lievrouw, L. A. (1994). Information Resources and Democracy: Understanding the
Paradox. Journal of The American Society for Information Science, 45(6), 350357.
List of Wikipedias. (n.d.). Retrieved from Wikimedia website:
http://meta.wikimedia.org/wiki/List_of_Wikipedias
Loges, W. E., & Jung, J.-Y. (2001, August). Exploring the Digital Divide : Internet
Connectedness and Age. Communication Research, 28(4), 536-562.
doi:10.1177/009365001028004007
Loosen, W. (2002, August 5). The Second-Level Digital Divide of the Web and Its
Impact on Journalism. First Monday, 7(8). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArtic
le/977/898
Lor, P. J. (2003). National libraries and the digital divide. Mousaion , 21(2), 62-78.

173

Lor, P. J., & Britz, J. J. (2007, August). Is a knowledge society possible without freedom
of access to information? Journal of Information Science , 33(4), 387-397.
doi:10.1177/0165551506075327
Lowe, G. S. (1997, Summer). Computers in the workplace. Statistics Canada, 75, 29-36.
Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/studies-etudes/75001/archive/1997/5018494-eng.pdf
Luyt, B. (2004, August 2). Who benefits from the digital divide? First Monday, 9(8).
Retrieved from http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_8/luyt/index.html
Lynch, B. P. (2002, October 7). The Digital Divide or the Digital Connection- A U.S.
Perspective. First Monday, 7(10). Retrieved from URL:
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_10/lynch/index.html
Malecki, E. J. (2003). Digital development in rural areas: potentials and pitfalls. Journal
of Rural Studies, 19, 201–214.
Mandel, L. H., Bishop, B. W., McClure, C. R., Bertot, J. C., & Jaeger, P. T. (2010, July).
Broadband for public libraries: Importance, issues, and research needs.
Government Information Quarterly, 27(3), 280–291.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2010.02.004
Martinez, M. E. (1994). Access to Information Technologies among School-Age
Children: Implications for a Democratic Society. Journal of the American Society
for Information Science, 45(6), 95-400.
Mathur, A., & Ambani, D. (2005, December). ICT and rural societies: Opportunities for
growth. The International Information & Library Review, 37(4), 345–351.
doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2005.09.004

174

Mbarika, V. W. (2004, July). Is Telemedicine the Panacea for Sub-Saharan Africa’s
Medical Nightmare? Communications of The ACM, 47(7), 21-24.
McClure, C. R., Bertot, J. C., & Zweizig, D. L. (1994, June). Public Libraries and the
Internet: Study Results, Policy Issues, and Recommendations. Retrieved from
U.S. National Commission on Libraries and Information Science website:
http://www.ii.fsu.edu/Solutions/Public-Libraries-The-Internet/Reports
McConnaughey, J., Nila, C. A., & Sloan, T. (1995, July). Falling through the net: A
Survey of the "Have Nots" in Rural and Urban America. Retrieved from National
Telecommunications and Information Administration website:
http://www.ntia.doc.gov/ntiahome/fallingthru.html
McLaren, J., & Zappalà, G. (2002, November 4). The 'Digital Divide' Among Financially
Disadvantaged Families in Australia. First Monday, 7(11). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_11/mclaren/index.html
Meso, P., Datta, P., & Mbarika, V. (2006, January). Moderating Information and
Communication Technologies’ Influences on Socioeconomic Development With
Good Governance: A Study of the Developing Countries. Journal of the American
Society for Information Science and Technology, 57(2), 186-197.
doi:10.1002/asi.20263
millennial. (n.d.). Retrieved July 24, 2013, from Dictionary.com website:
http://dictionary.reference.com/browse/millennial
The Millennium Development Goals Report 2010. (2010). Retrieved from United Nations
website:

175

http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/pdf/MDG%20Report%202010%20En%20r1
5%20-low%20res%2020100615%20-.pdf#page=73
Miller, T., & Kim, A. B. (2014, November). Why Economic Freedom Matters. Retrieved
from The Heritage Foundation website:
http://www.heritage.org/index/book/chapter-2
Mitchell, M. M. (2002, November). Exploring the Future of the Digital Divide through
Ethnographic Futures Research. First Monday, 7(11). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_11/mitchell/index.html
Moe, T. (2004, July/August). Bridging the “Digital Divide” in Colorado Libraries:
Survey Results from the Colorado Public Libraries and the “Digital Divide” 2002
Study. Public Libraries, 43(4), 227-232.
Morris, A., & Brading, H. (2007). E-literacy and the grey digital divide: a review with
recommendations. Journal of Information Literacy, 1(3), 13-28. Retrieved from
http://jil.lboro.ac.uk/ojs/index.php/JIL/article/view/RA-V1-I3-2007-2
Moss, J. (2002). Power and the digital divide. Ethics and Information Technology, 4,
159–165.
Murphy, S. (2010, August 31). Internet Fuels Bad Self-Diagnoses and 'Cyberchondria'.
Retrieved from Live Science website: http://www.livescience.com/34846medical-website-self-diagnosis-cyberchondria.html
Mutula, S. M. (2005). Bridging the digital divide through e-governance: A proposal for
Africa's libraries and information centres. The Electronic Library, 23(5), 591 602. doi:10.1108/02640470510631308

176

Mutula, S. M. (2008). Digital divide and economic development: case study of subSaharan Africa. The Electronic Library, 26(4), 468-489.
doi:10.1108/02640470810893738
Nagelkerke, N. J. (1991, September). A note on a general definition of the coefficient of
determination. Biometrika, 78(3), 691-692. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2337038
National Archive of South Sudan. (n.d.). Retrieved from The Rift Valley Institute
website: http://www.riftvalley.net/project/national-archive-south-sudan
Norris, P. (2000, Winter). The Internet in Europe: A New North-South Divide? The
Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics, 5(1), 1-12. Retrieved from
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/prp/summary/v005/5.1norris.html
Ojala, M. (2002, September/October). Mining the Deep Web for Company Information.
Online, 26(5), 73-75.
Omekwu, C. O. (2006). Managing information and technology: critical roles for
librarians in developing countries. The Electronic Library, 24(6), 847 - 863.
doi:10.1108/02640470610714260
Ono, H., & Zavodny, M. (2007, September). Digital inequality: A five country
comparison using microdata. Social Science Research, 36(3), 1135–1155.
doi:10.1016/j.ssresearch.2006.09.001
Open collaborative design. (n.d.). Retrieved from Advanced Civilisation website:
http://www.adciv.org/Open_collaborative_design

177

Opesade, A. O. (2011, May). Strategic, value-based ICT investment as a key factor in
bridging the digital divide. Information Development, 27(2), 100-108 .
doi:10.1177/0266666911401707
Other Languages. (n.d.). Retrieved from Ontario Ministry of Labour website:
http://www.labour.gov.on.ca/english/multi/
Overview. (2008). Retrieved from International Telecommunication Union website:
http://www.itu.int/en/about/Pages/overview.aspx
Oyana, T. J. (2011, April). Exploring geographic disparities in broadband access and use
in rural southern Illinois: Who's being left behind? Government Information
Quarterly , 28(2), 252-261. doi:10.1016/j.giq.2010.09.003
Oyelaran-Oyeyinka, B., & Lal, K. (2005, August). Internet diffusion in sub-Saharan
Africa: A cross-country analysis. Telecommunications Policy, 29(7), 507–527.
doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2005.05.002
Paul, G., & Stegbauer, C. (2005, October 3). Is the digital divide between young and
elderly people increasing? First Monday, 10(10). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArtic
le/1286/1206
Peter, J., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2006). Adolescents’ internet use: Testing the
‘‘disappearing digital divide’’ versus the ‘‘emerging digital differentiation’’
approach. Poetics, 34(4-5), 293–305. doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.005
Political rights. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://legaldictionary.thefreedictionary.com/Political+rights
Polity IV Project. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.systemicpeace.org/polity/polity4.htm

178

Potter, A. B. (2006, May 1). Zones of silence: A framework beyond the digital divide.
First Monday, 11(5). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue11_5/potter/index.html
Pourshahabi, F., Mahmoudinia, D., & Soderjani, E. S. (2011, June). FDI, Human Capital,
Economic Freedom and Growth in OECD Countries . Research Journal of
Internatıonal Studıes, (19), 71-81. Retrieved from
http://storage.globalcitizen.net/data/topic/knowledge/uploads/2011091413719533.
pdf
Powell, A., Bryne, A., & Dailey, D. (2010, August). The Essential Internet: Digital
Exclusion in Low-Income American Communities. Policy & Internet, 2(2), 159190. doi:10.2202/1944-2866.1058
Press, L. (2004, April). The Internet in developing nations: Grand challenges. First
Monday, 9(4). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue9_4/press/index.html
Prieger, J. E., & Hu, W.-M. (2008, June). The broadband digital divide and the nexus of
race, competition, and quality. Information Economics and Policy, 20(2), 150–
167. doi:10.1016/j.infoecopol.2008.01.001
Raju, K. A. (2004, September). A case for harnessing information technology for rural
development. The International Information & Library Review, 36(3), 233–240.
doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2004.07.001
The real digital divide. (2005, March 12). The Economist.
Rice, R. E., & Katz, J. E. (2003, September/October). Comparing internet and mobile
phone usage:digital divides of usage, adoption, and dropouts.

179

Telecommunications Policy, 27(8-9), 597–623. doi:10.1016/S03085961(03)00068-5
Robison, K. K., & Crenshaw, E. M. (2010, February). Reevaluating the Global Digital
Divide: Socio-Demographic and Conflict Barriers to the Internet Revolution.
Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 34–62. doi:10.1111/j.1475-682X.2009.00315.x
Rose, M. (2004, September). Democratizing information and communication by
implementing e-government in Indonesian regional government. The
International Information and Library Review, 36(3), 219–226.
doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2003.11.002
Rowe, B. (2003, March). Rural technology deployment and access: successes upon which
to build. Government Information Quarterly, 20(2), 85–93. doi:10.1016/S0740624X(03)00034-0
Sachs, J. (2000, June 22). A new map of the world. Retrieved from The Economist
website: http://www.economist.com/node/80730
Saleh, N. (2009). The Digital Divide and Social Justice. Feliciter, 55(6), 244-245.
Saletan, W. (2011, July 18). Springtime for Twitter: Is the Internet driving the revolutions
of the Arab Spring? Retrieved from Slate website:
http://www.slate.com/articles/technology/future_tense/2011/07/springtime_for_tw
itter.html
Salinas, R. (2003). Addressing the digital divide through collection development.
Collection Building, 22(3), 131 - 136. doi:10.1108/01604950310484456
The Satellite Phone Subsidy Scheme . (2012, July 20). Retrieved from Australian
Government - Department of Broadband, Communicaitons, and the Digital

180

Economy website:
http://www.dbcde.gov.au/mobile_services/the_satellite_phone_subsidy_scheme
Sawada, M., Cossette, D., Wellar, B., & Kurt, T. (2006). Analysis of the urban/rural
broadband divide in Canada: Using GIS in planning terrestrial wireless
deployment. Government Information Quarterly, 23(3-4), 454–479.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2006.08.003
Schumann, R., & Kende, M. (2013, May). Policy - makers should remove roadblocks
that deter investment in and use of terrestrial fibre, including: lack of
liberalisation; high cost of licences; challenges accessing rights of way for
deployment within countries and across borders; and high taxes on equipment
and services. Retrieved from
http://www.internetsociety.org/sites/default/files/Barriers%20to%20Internet%20i
n%20Africa%20Internet%20Society_0.pdf
Schuppan, T. (2009, January). E-Government in developing countries: Experiences from
sub-Saharan Africa. Government Information Quarterly, 26(1), 118-127.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2008.01.006
Sciadas, G. (2002, October). Unveiling the Digital Divide. Retrieved from Science,
Innovation and Electronic Information Division website:
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download;jsessionid=DFC054883761DFAEF
EC349FFD5A9519D?doi=10.1.1.7.9660&rep=rep1&type=pdf
Selwyn, L. L. (2011, September). Helping Themselves to Corporate Welfare: The Large
ILECs' Plan for Universal Broadband. Retrieved from Economics and

181

Technology, Inc. website:
http://econtech.com/newsletter/september2011/september2011a1.php
Selwyn, N. (2004, June). Reconsidering Political and Popular Understandings of the
Digital Divide. New Media Society, 6(3), 341-362.
doi:10.1177/1461444804042519
Serial Correlation. (n.d.). Retrieved from nd.edu/~rwilliam/stats2/l26.pdf
Serial Correlation in Regression Analysis. (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.wfu.edu/~akinc/FIN203/durbin-watson.doc
Shuler, J. A. (2007, January). Public Policies and Academic Libraries—The Shape of the
Next Digital Divide. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 33(1), 141-143.
Sicherl, P. (2000). Digital Divde and the gap between North America and Europe in
internet users per capita: new insight from existing data. Informatica, 24, 439444.
Singer, C. A. (2004). The Transition of U.S. Government Publications from Paper to the
Internet. Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 8(3), 29-45.
doi:10.1300/J136v08n03_03
Size of the Internet as of 31st Dec 2013. (n.d.). Total number of Websites & Size of the
Internet as of 2013. Retrieved from http://www.factshunt.com/2014/01/totalnumber-of-websites-size-of.html
Smith, G. (2012, November 18). Many Rural AT&T Customers Still Lack High-Speed
Internet Despite Merger Promise. Retrieved from
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/18/rural-att-customers-mergerlnternet_n_1914508.html

182

Snellen, I. (2002, June). Electronic Governance: Implications for Citizens, Politicians and
Public Servants. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 68(2), 183-198.
doi:10.1177/0020852302682002
Stern, M. J. (2010, February). Inequality in the Internet Age: A Twenty-First Century
Dilemma. Sociological Inquiry, 80(1), 28–33. doi:10.1111/j.1475682X.2009.00314.x
Stevenson, S. (2009). Digital Divide: A Discursive Move Away from the Real Inequities.
The Information Society, 25(1), 1-22. doi:10.1080/01972240802587539
Stoerger, S. (2009, July 6). The digital melting pot: Bridging the digital native–immigrant
divide. First Monday, 14(7). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArticle/247
4/2243
Syrett, F. (2013). How to connect to the internet. Retrieved from Digital Unite website:
http://digitalunite.com/guides/using-internet-0/connecting-internet/how-connectinternet
Taylor, A. (2012). Information Communication Technologies and New Indigenous
Mobilities? Insights From Remote Northern Territory Communities. Journal of
Rural and Community Development, 7(1), 59-73. Retrieved from
http://www.jrcd.ca/include/getdoc.php?id=1182&article=592&mode=pdf
Testing the assumptions of linear regression. (n.d.). Retrieved from Duke University
website: http://www.duke.edu/~rnau/testing.htm
Thicksten, M. (2003, Spring). Collaborating to Erase the Digital Divide. CSLA Journal,
26(2), 15-16.

183

Tiene, D. (2004). Bridging the digital divide in the schools of developing countries.
International Journal of Instructional Media, 31(1), 89-98.
Umbach, J. M. (2004). Libraries: Bridges Across the Digital Divide. Feliciter , 50(2), 44.
UN against censoring internet. (2011, December 9). Greater Kashmir. Retrieved from
http://www.greaterkashmir.com/news/2011/Dec/10/un-against-censoring-internet58.asp
United Nations Millennium Development Goals. (n.d.). Retrieved from United Nations
website: http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/
Usova, T. (2009). Open Access and the Digital Divide: An Overview in CIS Libraries.
Feliciter , 55(6), 246-248.
Vail, K. (2003, July). Next generation divide: Think the gap between technology haves
and have-nots has been closed? Think again. American School Board Journal, 2325.
van Dijk, J. A. (2006). Digital divide research, achievements and shortcomings. Poetics,
34(4-5), 221–235. doi:10.1016/j.poetic.2006.05.004
Vehovar, V., Sicherl, P., Husing, T., & Dolnicar, V. (2006). Methodological Challenges
of Digital Divide Measurements. The Information Society, 22(5), 279–290.
doi:10.1080/01972240600904076
Vellante, D. (2010, June 21). Information Explosion & Cloud Storage. Retrieved from
Wikibon website: http://wikibon.org/blog/cloud-storage/
Verdegem, P., & Verhoest, P. (2009, November/December). Profiling the non-user:
Rethinking policy initiatives stimulating ICT acceptance. Telecommunications
Policy, 33(10-11), 642–652. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2009.08.009

184

Voters' Guide . (n.d.). Retrieved from Office of the Secretary of State, Washington
website: https://wei.sos.wa.gov/agency/osos/en/pages/onlinevotersguide.aspx
Wade, R. H. (2002). Bridging the digital divide: new route to development or new form
of dependency? Global Governance, 8, 443-466.
Wareham, J., Levy, A., & Shi, W. (2004, June/July). Wireless diffusion and mobile
computing: implications for the digital divide. Telecommunications Policy, 28(56), 439–457. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2003.11.005
Warren, M. (2007, July/August). The digital vicious cycle: Links between social
disadvantage and digital exclusion in rural areas. Telecommunications Policy,
31(6-7), 374–388. doi:10.1016/j.telpol.2007.04.001
Warschauer, M. (2000). Language, Identity, and the Internet. In B. Kolko, L. Nakamura,
& G. Rodman (Eds.), Race in Cyberspace. New York: Routledge.
Warschauer, M. (2002, July 1). Reconceptualizing the Digital Divide . First Monday,
7(7). Retrieved from
http://www.firstmonday.org/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/viewArtic
le/967/888
Wasserman, I. M., & Richmond-Abbott, M. (2005, March). Gender and the Internet:
Causes of Variation in Access, Level, and Scope of Use. Social Science
Quarterly, 86(1), 252-270.
Webster, F. (1999). Knowledgeability and democracy in an information age. Library
Review, 48(8), 373 - 383. doi:10.1108/00242539910288764
What are Mean Squared Error and Root Mean Squared Error? (2011, October 17).
Retrieved from Vernier website: http://www.vernier.com/til/1014/

185

What is GDP and why is it so important? . (n.d.). Retrieved from
http://www.investopedia.com/ask/answers/199.asp
What is Information Literacy? (n.d.). Introduction to Information Literacy. Retrieved
from American Library Association website:
http://www.ala.org/acrl/issues/infolit/overview/intro
What they are. (2006). UN Millennium Project. Retrieved from
http://www.unmillenniumproject.org/goals/
Wilhelm, A. G. (2001, April). They Threw Me a Computer ... But What I Really Needed
Was a Life Preserver. First Monday, 6(4). Retrieved from
http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue6_4/wilhelm/index.html
Williams, R. (n.d.). Heteroscedasticity. Retrieved from
http://www3.nd.edu/~rwilliam/stats2/l25.pdf
Wilson, K. R., Wallin, J. S., & Reiser, C. (2003, Summer). Social Stratification and the
Digital Divide. Social Science Computer Review, 21(2), 133-143.
doi:10.1177/0894439303251554
Worcman, K. (2002, March). Digital Division is Cultural Exclusion. But Is Digital
Inclusion Cultural Inclusion? D-Lib, 8(3).
The World Factbook :Field Listing :: Literacy. (2013). Retrieved from The Central
Intelligence Agency website: https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-worldfactbook/fields/2103.html
World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database. (n.d.). UNData data sets. Retrieved
from United Nations website: http://data.un.org/DataMartInfo.aspx

186

World Telecommunication/ICT Indicators Database 2012 (16th Edition). (n.d.).
Retrieved from International Telecommunication Union website:
http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/ict/publications/world/world.html
Yamazaki, H. (2006, August). Changing society, role of information professionals and
strategy for libraries. Paper presented at World Library and Information
Congress: 72nd IFLA General Conference and Council, Seoul, Korea. Retrieved
from http://www.ifla.org/IV/ifla72/index.htm
Yu, L. (2006, December). Understanding information inequality: Making sense of the
literature of the information and digital divides. Journal of Librarianship and
Information Science, 38(4), 229-252. doi:10.1177/0961000606070600
Åström, J., Karlsson, M., Linde, J., & Pirannejad, A. (2012, April). Understanding the
rise of e-participation in non-democracies: Domestic and international factors.
Government Information Quarterly, 29(2), 142-150.
doi:10.1016/j.giq.2011.09.008

187

