MEMPHIS PUBLIC LIBRARY SERVICE TO AFRICAN AMERICANS, 1903-1961
A HISTORY OF ITS INAUGURATION, PROGRESS, AND DESEGREGATION
by
Steven A. Knowlton

A Thesis
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment o f the
Requirements for the Degree of
Master o f Arts

Major: History

The University o f Memphis
August 2015

ProQuest Number: 10032000

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest
Que
ProQuest 10032000
Published by ProQuest LLC(2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346

DEDICATION
To Jessica, Abraham, and Dennis,
whose sacrifices allowed me to pursue my library dreams.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Any historian is indebted to those whose work preserving the past enables his
own research. Rheba Palmer Hoffman captured in 1955 events within living memory
that, 60 years on, have escaped the written record, and Elizabeth Gritter’s interviews of
key figures in Memphis history will serve historians for many generations to come. The
scholars whose work is cited in this thesis have illuminated my understanding o f the
library’s place in Memphis far more than the bare records o f the library could have. It
continues to astound me that our middle-sized city has produced such a robust
historiography. Much credit belongs to the steadfast members o f the Tennessee
Historical Society and the West Tennessee Historical Society, whose dedication to
publishing the history o f our city has been vital to our profession.
For this particular project, I have been ably assisted by librarians and staff
including Ed Frank and Brigette Billeaudeaux at the University o f Memphis Mississippi
Valley Collection, Jan Stone at the University o f Memphis Law Library, and especially
Wayne Dowdy and Chip Holliday at the Memphis Public Library and Information
Center. Their patient explanation and excavation o f the archives made this research
possible. A word o f thanks is also due to the unnamed souls working in acquisitions and
cataloging who provided unmediated access to the monographs upon which I relied so
heavily, and to those who digitized important documents for both libraries’ institutional
repositories.
I am also grateful to my advisor, Dr. Aram Goudsouzian, for his patient guidance,
useful pointers, and careful proofreading, and to my committee members, Drs. Beverly
Bond and Sarah Potter, for their helpful suggestions to bring this thesis to its final state.

Small portions o f this thesis were written for papers submitted to Dr. Potter and to
Dr. Andrew Daily for earlier coursework.

iv

ABSTRACT
Knowlton, Steven Anthony. M.A. The University o f Memphis. August 2015.
“Memphis Public Library Service to African Americans, 1903-1961: A History of Its
Inauguration, Progress, and Desegregation.” Major Professor: Aram Goudsouzian.
As in most cities o f the South, in Memphis African Americans were not welcome
in the main public library. However, the Cossitt Library did open one o f the first branch
libraries for African-American readers, in 1903. That branch, inconveniently located,
attracted few patrons and moved from location to location until 1939, when a permanent
Negro Branch library was opened. The varying fortunes o f library service to African
Americans in Memphis can be seen in the context o f waxing and waning political power
of African Americans in the city, as the Lincoln League and later the Crump machine
showed the power o f African-American voters to influence city politics, and also its
limits. As Memphians engaged in the civil rights movement o f the 1950s and 1960s, the
main library was a focus o f both lawsuits and direct action for desegregation. In 1960, a
sit-in protest at the main library by dozens o f college students launched a city-wide
movement o f sit-ins and picketing against segregated public facilities. By the end of
1960, readers o f all races were welcome in the main library, and in 1961 all were free to
share the same bathrooms.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter

Page

1 Introduction

1

2 The Foundation o f Cossitt Library and the Inauguration o f Library Service to
African Americans in Memphis

13

3 The Operation o f Segregated Public Libraries in Memphis

36

4 The Desegregation o f the Memphis Public Library

104

5 Conclusion

167

Bibliography

173

vi

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure

Page

1

Cossitt Library, erected 1893

22

2

Approximate locations o f library branches serving African-Americans,
compared to majority African-American neighborhoods, ca. 1940

65

3

Undated photograph o f Cossitt Library Negro Branch

86

4

Undated promotional material for Cossitt Library Negro Branch

87

5

Central Library at McLean and Peabody, ca. 1970

98

6

Allegra Turner and Jesse Turner, ca. 1960

105

7

Russell Sugarmon, A. W. Willis, and H. T. Lockard, 1958

131

8

Police arrest sit-in protesters at Central Library, March 19, 1960

148

vii

CHAPTER 1:
INTRODUCTION

Libraries have often been viewed as a means for uplift as well as edification and
recreation. In 1968, the executive director o f that exemplar o f postwar liberal activism,
the War on Poverty Committee o f Memphis-Shelby County, suggested to the director of
the Memphis Public Library (MPL) that it purchase the International Library o f Negro
Life and H i s t o r y presumably, Washington Butler Jr. believed that the goals o f his
committee, which Laurie Green describes as “addressing black poverty through selfdetermination,” would be served by the library providing reading materials covering the
achievements o f African Americans in the arts, commerce, and military and political
affairs.2
Unfortunately, the M PL’s long history o f segregation, underfunding, and poor
service to African-American patrons meant that Butler’s suggested book would reach few
readers. A report commissioned by the library in 1967 found that only 35% o f African
Americans surveyed had library cards (compared to 48% of whites), and that over half o f
the respondents could not locate their nearest branch library. Only 18% had visited a
public library in the previous year (41% o f whites had). One African-American
respondent told surveyors that she didn’t use the library because “we used to couldn’t go

1Washington Butler Jr. to Lamar Wallis, March 11, 1968, Library History Collection,
Memphis Public Library and Information Center (hereafter abbreviated L.H.C.)
2 Laurie B. Green, “Saving Babies in Memphis: The Politics of Race, Health, and Hunger
during the War on Poverty,” in The War On Poverty: A New Grassroots History, 1964-1980, ed.
Annelise Orleck and Lisa Gayle Haziijian (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 2011), 141.
1

for so long and I never worried about it then.”3 Although the library had desegregated in
1960, for seven decades prior to that date it had excluded African Americans from its
main library and offered inferior collections and services in the single branch library open
to African Americans. This legacy o f Jim Crow library operations was not resolved
overnight - in fact, allegations o f racism in hiring and promotions persisted into the
1980s4 - but by 2005, the library system showed that, in Wanda Rushing’s words,
“Memphis is not the place it was in 1865, 1878, 1905, or 1968” by naming its main
branch after the prominent African-American attorney, civil rights activist, and politician
Benjamin L. Hooks, thereby creating “a powerful symbolic resource in civic space for
establishing a community o f memory and retelling the constitutive narrative o f the city.” 5
Visitors to the Benjamin L. Hooks Central Library in 2015 will find African Americans
well-represented among its patrons, and to a lesser extent among the staff. In another
such show o f change, the widow o f Jesse Turner, the man who had to sue to force the
library’s desegregation, was appointed to the library’s Board o f Directors in 1990 and
served for twelve years.6

3 Lila Leatherwood and Dorothy Stover, “Research Project to Assess Attitudes of
Habitual Readers and Non-Readers Toward the Library” (Memphis: TRENDS, July 1967),
L.H.C.
4 Maxine A. Smith (Executive Secretary, Memphis Branch, National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People) to Memphis and Shelby County Public Library and Information
Center Board Members, memorandum on “Charges, Findings, Questions, and Recommendations
for the Memphis and Shelby County Public Library and Information Center,” September 4, 1986,
L.H.C.
5 Wanda Rushing, Memphis and the Paradox o f Place: Globalization in the American
South (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2009), 61.
6 Allegra W. Turner with Jini M. Kilgore, Except by Grace: The Life o f Jesse H, Turner
(Jonesboro, Ark.: Four-G Publishers, 2004), 123.

2

Libraries are vital in the lives o f those who cherish them, but are hardly
universally patronized. A person could live a long, productive, happy life and never
darken the door o f a public library; in this sense they are unlike public schools and voting
booths, which when segregated potentially affect all citizens. Nonetheless, they are
important symbols o f a municipality’s commitment to culture and education, and their
segregation in Memphis was part o f a larger structure o f creating separate and unequal
spheres for whites and African Americans. Their desegregation was one o f many steps in
the unfinished journey o f making all Memphians equal in rights, opportunity, and
privilege.
While public libraries may appeal to a minority of citizens, those who patronize
them often feel a reverence toward libraries as spaces for the almost holy activities of
reading and study. In one o f the few library cases to reach the United States Supreme
Court, native Memphian Abe Fortas opined that “it is a sad commentary that this
hallowed place. .. bore the ugly stamp o f racism.” 7 That case, Brown v. Louisiana,
affirmed that one o f the tactics used to desegregate the MPL, peaceable sit-ins, was
protected protest rather than disturbance o f the peace. It arose from a sit-in at the
Audubon Regional Library in Clinton, Louisiana, on March 7,1964 - several years after
the MPL was opened to patrons o f all races.
That libraries are communal sanctuaries is vital: as Wayne Wiegand describes it,
the library is a place where “the act o f reading becomes dependably pleasurable,
empowering, intellectually stimulating, and socially bonding” because it occurs in the

7 Brown v. Louisiana 383 U.S. 142 (1966), italics mine.
3

presence o f others who also value reading.8 Such civic bonding parallels the familial
bonding that Sarah Potter discovered in families that shared reading material within the
domicile.9 For African-American readers, the segregation o f the MPL was doubly
damaging: the only branch open to African Americans suffered from an inferior
collection and poor service, and they were excluded from the community o f readers who
found their intellectual home in the Central Library.
While the public library may not have the reach o f other civic institutions, the
study o f its operations as a segregated facility may be instructive as an exemplar o f the
course o f African-American involvement in the collective life o f Memphis during the
first half o f the twentieth century. Although Shane Hand has posited the role o f the
southern public library in providing reading material that reinforced white supremacy,
there is little evidence remaining of the collections of the MPL during the period studied
here.10 That is, the records o f the former holdings have disappeared. However, plentiful
records exist regarding the administration o f the MPL, and as a creature o f the state, the
library’s role in discriminating against African-American patrons may serve as a
microcosm o f institutional racism in the Bluff City.
The story o f the library’s service to African-American Memphians, then, parallels
the story o f the city’s efforts to keep African Americans down without shutting them
completely out. As Rob Bowman wrote in another context, “Memphis is a very strange

8 Wayne A. Wiegand, Main Street Public Library: Community Places and Reading
Spaces in the Rural Heartland, 1876-1956 (Iowa City: University of Iowa Press, 2011), 6.
9 Sarah Potter, Everybody Else: Adoption and the Politics o f Domestic Diversity in
Postwar America (Athens: The University of Georgia Press, 2014), 145.
10 Shane Hand, “Transmitting Whiteness: Librarians, Children, and Race, 1900-1930s,”
(M.A. thesis, University of Southern Mississippi, 2013).
4

city.” 11 Through most o f the twentieth century, Memphis was a dichotomy. While
offering many progressive amenities to its white citizens, and some measure o f economic
opportunity to Memphians o f all races coming to the city from a countryside ravaged by
the successive depressions o f the late nineteenth century and the boll weevil crisis o f the
1920s,12 its laws and its culture embraced the rigid patriarchy and, above all, racial
segregation seen in the small towns o f Mississippi and Alabama.
The public libraries o f Memphis have a place in this narrative - they were
founded as a progressive gesture from a philanthropic native son, yet nevertheless served
to exclude African Americans from an important part o f civic life. As the focus o f an
important lawsuit and the site o f some o f the earliest direct action events in Memphis, the
main library was a rock around which swirled the currents o f the civil rights movement of
1955-1965. It even has secured a place in literary history as the setting o f one o f the most
memorable passages in Richard W right’s autobiography Black Boy.
The public library as an institution to be desegregated is, o f course, an important
focus for a local history o f race. An interesting angle to note is just how little resistance
white Memphians gave to the integration o f the library. One might posit that because the
change occurred during the early 1960s, when leaders of the white community in
Memphis encouraged unpublicized integration by passing the word that “the time had

11 Rob Bowman, Soulsville, U.S.A.: The Story o f Stax Records (New York: Schirmer,
1997), ix.
12 Charles S. Aiken, The Cotton Plantation South Since the Civil War (Baltimore: Johns
Hopkins University Press, 1998), ch. 3 and 4.
5

come,” 13 it was part o f a historical period in which whites were less hostile to integration
than the post-sanitation strike years when tensions ran high. It is equally possible to be
skeptical that such a period ever existed, given the majorities that Henry Loeb won in
both his campaigns for mayor. Rather, it seems likely that libraries simply did not
occasion the strong emotions in white southerners that other facilities did.
While there were instances o f violence regarding library desegregation, and other
occasions when municipal authorities chose to close libraries rather than integrate them,
the removal o f barriers to library access by African Americans was often less
confrontational than desegregation of schools and universities, swimming pools, parks,
and buses.14 By 1963, 71 o f the 76 largest southern cities had integrated libraries.15
Michael Fultz offers the perspective that libraries provided less o f an occasion for the
dreaded “social equality” (per Whitney Strub, translated as whites and African Americans
forming intimate relationships) than did other public facilities. Library service is a
transactional enterprise, more akin to shopping than to sharing a schoolroom, and many

13 Anne Trotter, “The Memphis Business Community and Integration,” in Southern
Businessmen and Desegration, ed. Elizabeth Jacoway and David R. Colburn (Baton Rouge:
Louisiana State University Press, 1982), 287.
14 For histories of library desegregation, see Karen Cook, “Struggles Within: Lura G.
Courier, the Mississippi Library Commission, and Library Service to African Americans,”
Information and Culture 48, no. 1 (2013): 134-56; Stephen Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim
Crow in Southern Libraries,” Libraries & Culture 31, no. 3/4 (1996): 557-73; Patterson Toby
Graham, A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama's Public Libraries, 19001965 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002); Reinette F. Jones, Library Service to
African Americans in Kentucky, from the Reconstruction Era to the 1960s (Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland & Co, 2002); and Cheryl Knott Malone, “Unannounced and Unexpected: The
Desegregation of Houston Public Library in the Early 1950s,” Library Trends 55, no. 3
(2007): 665-74.
15 American Library Association, Access to Public Libraries (Chicago: The Association,
1963), 28, 34-35, 126-30.
6

whites had shopped alongside African Americans throughout the Jim Crow era.16 The
director o f the MPL during the desegregation lawsuit, Lamar Wallis, concurred: “1 told
[the library board] th a t... there would be no violence. ... Reading in a library is a fairly
private affair, you do not mingle with the people around the table with you.” 17 It was
“race mixing”, or love affairs between members o f the two races, and subsequent
“miscegenation” that provoked the worst fears among whites resisting desegregation.18
Despite its historical precedence in the history o f the Memphis civil rights
movement, the library has not received concentrated attention in the historical literature.
Some o f this may be explained by the timing o f library desegregation in the midst o f a
flurry o f activity in the late 1950s and early 1960s by a vigorous NAACP branch that
included lawsuits to desegregate buses, parks, and schools, as well as massive voter
registration drives and campaigns to elect African-American candidates to local and state
offices, along with nearly daily protests aimed at forcing downtown businesses to open
their doors to all. As well, in both the historiography and popular memory, later events
such as the sanitation strike, the Black Monday movement, and the busing crisis have
overshadowed the breakthroughs o f the early 1960s that resulted in token desegregation.
The earlier victories often involved a small number o f dedicated volunteers, while the

16 Michael Fultz, “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation,”
Libraries and the Cultural Record 41, no. 3 (2006): 348-49; Whitney Strub, “Black and White
and Banned All Over: Censorship and Obscenity in Postwar Memphis,” Journal o f Social History
40, no. 3(2007): 685-715.
17 C. Lamar Wallis, interview by JoAnn A. Lynn, November 28, 1984, transcript,
Mississippi Valley Collection, University of Memphis Libraries.
18 Among many others, see Kristina DuRocher, Raising Racists: The Socialization o f
White Children in the Jim Crow South (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2011), ch. 5.
7

events o f 1968 and afterward saw a very large part o f the African-American populace o f
Memphis play a part in demanding a more broadly just civic governance.
Coverage of the library’s desegregation has been sparse. Benjamin Hooks, the
main library’s current namesake, fails to mention it in his autobiography.19 And the
major historical works on the black freedom movement in Memphis do not discuss the
library’s desegregation in detail.20 Unlike other southern public libraries, that of
Memphis has not received even an article-length scholarly treatment of its desegregation.
A close look at the administration o f the MPL and its service to African
Americans, followed by an examination o f the events surrounding its desegregation, will
reveal in detail the main currents o f the city government’s approach to serving AfricanAmerican citizens in general. In 1903, the library first began service to African
Americans, in what David Battles reckons to be “not only the first southern African
American library, but also the first to be accorded a self-governing board.”21 Although
this precedes the 1913 bargain in which Mayor E. H. Crump agreed to establish Douglass
Park for African Americans in exchange for their votes, a move that Wayne Dowdy

19 Benjamin L. Hooks with Jerry Guess, The March fo r Civil Rights: The Benjamin
Hooks Story (Chicago: American Bar Association, 2004).
20 The library is briefly mentioned in Elizabeth Gritter, River o f Hope: Black Politics and
the Memphis Freedom Movement, 1865-1954 (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2014);
and Kimberly K. Little, You Must Be from the North: Southern White Women in the Memphis
Civil Rights Movement (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2009); it is addressed to a
slightly greater extent in Laurie B. Green, Battling the Plantation Mentality: Memphis and the
Black Freedom Struggle (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007); and G. Wayne
Dowdy, Crusades for Freedom: Memphis and the Political Transformation o f the American
South (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010); the best coverage is in Doris Ann
Youngblood Mulheam, “Southern Graces: Women, Faith, and the Quest for Social Justice,
Memphis, Tennessee, 1950-1969”(Ph.D. dissertation, University of Memphis, 2012).
21 David M. Battles, The History o f Public Libraiy Access for African Americans in the
South, or, Leaving Behind the Plow (Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2009), 30.
8

characterizes as establishing “the strategy o f bloc voting ... [to] not only swing a local
election but also deliver tangible results to the African American community,” the
establishment o f library service to African Americans accords with other trends in
Memphis governance.22 Some African Americans in Memphis retained the franchise and
paid taxes, and it was the practice o f city leaders to provide a modicum o f city services,
albeit in inferior, segregated facilities. A segment o f the African-American middle class,
particularly its women, had emphasized education as one means o f what Beverly Bond
characterizes as “character building” among their children.23 A natural fit between the
political desires o f the white elites and the interest in culture among African American
elites, then, was library service.
The segregated branch library was, of course, underfunded and understaffed
compared to the library for whites, and a close look at the details o f its administration
will reveal some o f the machinery o f Jim Crow public services; at the same time, the
tension between keeping Memphis segregated and encouraging African American votes
for the Crump machine led to improvements in library service during the 1930s. The
continuing neglect o f library service to African Americans in this period reflects the
phenomenon that Gunnar Myrdal identified in 1942 as “The Self-Perpetuating Color
Bar”:24 after denying opportunities for advancement to African Americans, whites could

22 G. Wayne Dowdy, A BriefHistory o f Memphis (Charleston, S.C.: History Press, 2011),
77; see also William H. Frye, “For Their Exclusive Enjoyment: Racial Politics and the Founding
of Douglas [sic] Park,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 47 (1993): 18-36.
23 Beverly G. Bond, ‘“ Every Duty Incumbent Upon Them’: African-American Women in
Nineteenth Century Memphis,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 59, no. 4 (2000): 267.
24 Gunnar Myrdal with the assistance of Richard Sterner and Arnold Rose, An American
Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy, Twentieth Anniversary ed. (New York:
Harper & Row, 1962), 391.
9

claim such opportunities were unnecessary because African Americans had failed to
advance. In 1957, library director Jesse Cunningham expressed doubts that another
branch library open to African Americans was needed, because “the fact is that much less
than 10% o f the estimated negro population make any effort to use the libraries” when
the single branch library open to African Americans was inconveniently located for five
o f the six largest African American neighborhoods.25
The story o f the library’s desegregation illustrates how the civil rights movement
achieved its earliest successes in Memphis. Memphis branch vice-president Vasco Smith
characterized the NAACP’s efforts as proceeding simultaneously in the courts and in the
streets: “Even then, there were some things that could be aided greatly by the political
activity... However, they had to be done jointly... besides the political side, you also had
here something that I think most cities didn’t have. We had very intelligent black
lawyers who were not asking for a penny.”26 Desegregation of the library involved both
the efforts o f attorney H.T. Lockard and the sit-ins by students o f LeMoyne and Owen
Colleges.
The early place o f the library in the chronology o f desegregation illustrates
another crucial fact o f Memphis history : the contingencies presented by individual
personalities. Although, as stated, not every Memphian was a library lover, Allegra
Turner was. Her disappointment at being denied library service spurred her husband to
file the lawsuit. So important was this in her memory that in her biography o f her
husband, Allegra Turner devotes more space to the library lawsuit than to any other
25 Jesse Cunningham to Charles H. Freeburg, December 20,1957, L.H.C.
26 Vasco Smith, interview by Elizabeth Gritter, July 12,2004, transcript, Everett R. Cook
Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.

chapter in his illustrious career as a civil rights leader27 - including a moment when he
was nearly killed by Klansmen in Mississippi.28 Allegra Turner was not alone - her
South Memphis neighborhood included many well-educated citizens who pined for
greater access to the materials in the Central Library. But no others had demanded access
the way Jesse Turner did. Had Allegra Turner married a more timid man, or Jesse Turner
married a movie buff, the library’s place in history may have been very different.
Personalities also shaped white reaction to the desegregation movement. In the
era o f massive resistance, the city could have closed the libraries, or simply defied the
courts and maintained segregation. But in the person o f Mayor Henry Loeb, Memphis
had a leader who valued order and compliance above segregation. This may in part have
been due to the political environment o f Tennessee - a state whose governors during the
1950s, Frank Clement and Buford Ellington, recognized that “The Negro is a citizen. He
pays taxes even as the white” and had a fair claim to public services.

9Q

In this work, the founding and administration o f the public library o f Memphis as
a segregated institution will be traced through the use o f documents found in the library’s
own archives, augmented by secondary sources that illuminate the political and social
milieu o f Memphis between 1903 and 1958. Then, the movement to desegregate the
library will be detailed, using primary sources including documents from the library’s
archives, interviews with key figures, and newspaper reports, supplemented by secondary

27 Turner and Kilgore, Except by Grace, 110-16.
28 Aram Goudsouzian, Down to the Crossroad: Civil Rights, Black Power, and the
Meredith March Against Fear (New York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2014), 211.
29 Frank G. Clement, quoted in Lee Seifert Greene, Lead Me On: Frank Goad Clement
and Tennessee Politics (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1982), 214.
11

sources that cover the civil rights movement in Memphis. A brief conclusion will discuss
the consequences o f library desegregation to the later history o f Memphis.
Although many have posited public libraries as a key to social mobility, their
segregation in Memphis left many citizens without access to the information and services
that libraries provide. For certain Memphians, such exclusion was impetus to action to
desegregate the libraries as a first step toward greater access to all facilities. By
examining public libraries in the context o f racial politics in Memphis, historians can
illuminate the trends o f simultaneous service and segregation that marked civic
governance o f African Americans throughout the early twentieth century. And by
examining in close detail the events o f the library’s desegregation, historians can see how
individual and collective efforts to overturn Jim Crow operated in specific instances.

12

CHAPTER 2:
THE FOUNDATION OF COSSITT LIBRARY AND THE INAUGURATION OF
LIBRARY SERVICE TO AFRICAN AMERICANS IN MEMPHIS

Memphis never had a “Public Library” by that name until 1955. Prior to then, its
public libraries operated under the moniker o f “Cossitt Libraries,” named for the
benefactor whose heirs endowed the city with its first library.1 The Cossitt Libraries
were operated as a private philanthropic institution, with a board o f directors accountable
to no one but the other members o f the board, even after the city government began
augmenting the Cossitt Library’s funds with public monies.
Early efforts at providing a public space for reading in Memphis were haphazard.
The first known reading room opened in the office o f the newspaper The Eagle, in 1848.2
During the second half o f the nineteenth century, a number o f mutual benefit societies
operated lending libraries and reading rooms restricted to paying members.3 A longerlived library was operated by the Odd Fellows Hall and Library Association from 1877 to
1900.4 This appears to have been a shoestring operation: it gained part o f its holdings by
appealing to housewives to clean out their shelves, and by 1886, it had only about 2500
books to lend.5 It even closed during the hottest part o f summer to “give the librarian a

1“The First 80 Years: Cossitt Library - Memphis Public Library and Information Center,
1893-1973,” pamphlet (Memphis: Memphis Public Library and Information Center, 1973),
L.H.C.
2 C. Lamar Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” in Encyclopedia o f
Library and Information Science, ed. Allen Kent, vol. 17 (New York: Dekker, 1976), 440.
3 Anonymous pamphlet, circa 1945, in Press-Scimitar clipping files, Mississippi Valley
Collection
4 Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” 440.
5 Commercial Appeal [hereafter abbreviated CA], December 2, 1882; CA, April 17, 1886.
13

rest.”6 The Odd Fellows Library ceased operation in 1900 after the Cossitt Library
proved to be popular among the reading public of Memphis.7 In 1907, the Goodwyn
Institute at the comer of Madison and Third was created to offer “educational agencies”
including a public lecture series and a reference library to the white people o f Memphis.8
The Goodwyn Institute library never circulated books and merged with the Cossitt
Library in 1961.9
In the late nineteenth century, the city government of Memphis was in no position
to establish a public library. Having been devastated by two successive waves o f yellow
fever in the 1870s, followed by a period o f lax oversight and consequent pilfering o f city
accounts, the city had been depopulated and fallen into debt.10 Faced with the necessity
of repudiating its debt, the city government was dis-incorporated in 1879, and the area
was governed as a Special Taxing District o f the state until 1893, with no powers to issue
bonds and a mandate to keep taxes low and pour any surplus into sanitation measures to
keep away yellow fever-bearing mosquitos.11
Even had the city been flush, it is unlikely that library service would have been
extended to African Americans on an equal basis. The post-Civil War narrative of race

6 CA, August 28, 1886.
7 Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” 440.
8 Goodwyn Institute Year Book, 1930-1931, L.H.C.
9 G. Wayne Dowdy, Hidden History’ o f Memphis (Charleston, S.C. : History Press, 2010),
67.
10G. Wayne Dowdy, A BriefHistory o f Memphis (Charleston, S.C.: History Press, 2011),
47-60.
11 Lynette B. Wrenn, “Commission Government in the Gilded Age: The Memphis Plan,”
Tennessee Historical Quarterly 47, no. 4 (1988): 216-226.
14

relations in Memphis parallels that o f many southern cities. During the war, thousands of
freedpeople left the plantations where they had been enslaved as the Union army
advanced southward during Ulysses Grant’s campaigns in Mississippi, and many o f them
migrated to Memphis. In 1866, a “race riot” (perhaps better called a pogrom because of
the massacre that occurred) took place in Memphis, resulting in the deaths, injuries, and
rapes o f more than one hundred African Americans and the destruction o f most of their
schools and many of their houses.12 Despite this calamity, migration from the
countryside continued for the next century, and by 1900 the African-American population
o f Memphis represented 49 percent o f the fast-growing city.13 During Reconstruction
and into the 1870s, African Americans experienced a level o f success in civic affairs that
was not matched until the 1960s. A number of African Americans served in the wardbased city council until it was replaced by the elected-at-large commissioners following
the yellow fever epidemics.14 African-American fraternal societies formed an influential
bloc that proved capable o f swinging elections, and through the 1870s bi-racial coalitions

12 Those interested in the events of May 1-3, 1866, may refer to Stephen V. Ash, A
Massacre in Memphis: The Race Riot That Shook the Nation One Year after the Civil War (New
York: Hill and Wang, 2013), as well as James Gilbert Ryan, “The Memphis Riots of 1866: Terror
in a Black Community During Reconstruction,” Journal o f Negro History 62, no. 3 (1977): 24357; Bobby L. Lovett, “Memphis Riots: White Reaction in Memphis: May 1865-July 1866,”
Tennessee Historical Quarterly 38 (1979): 9-33; Altina L. Waller, “Community, Class and Race
in the Memphis Riot of 1866,” Journal o f Social History 18, no. 2 (1984): 233-46; and Kevin R.
Hardwick, “ ‘Your Old Father Abe Lincoln is Dead and Damned’: Black Soldiers and the
Memphis Race Riot of 1866,” Journal o f Social History 27, no. 1 (1993): 109-28; Walker
Barrington, “ ‘This Is the White Man’s Day’: The Irish, White, Racial Identity, and the Memphis
Riots,” Left History 5 (1997): 31-55.
13 United States Bureau of the Census, Negro Population 1790-1915 (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1918), 103.
14 Wrenn, “Commission Government in the Gilded Age.”
15

determined the outcomes o f local and federal polling.15 There was even representation o f
African Americans on the police force (from 1878 to 1895) and the Board o f Education
(until 1886).16 During the frenzy o f sewer construction after the yellow fever epidemics,
African American neighborhoods received nearly equal investment in the sanitary
infrastructure; engineers simply may have recognized that people o f both races mingled
during the workday and could spread the disease, although evidence from other cities
suggests that Memphis was more enlightened in the provision o f these resources than
might have been expected in a southern city.17
Despite such involvement in governance, there was never social integration
between whites and African Americans. From the start, African American residents were
concentrated in neighborhoods with high concentrations o f residents o f a single race, and
over time the smaller pockets that had been dispersed among white neighborhoods tended
to be reduced, while majority-black districts tended to grow .18 Public schools were

15John E. Harkins, Metropolis o f the American Nice: An Illustrated History o f Memphis
and Shelby County (Oxford, Miss.: The Guild Bindery Press, 1991), 86.
16 Dennis C. Rousey, “Yellow Fever and Black Policemen in Memphis: A PostReconstruction Anomaly,” Journal o f Southern History 51, no. 3 (1985): 357-74; David N. Plank
and Marcia E. Turner, “Contrasting Patterns in Black School Politics: Atlanta and Memphis,
1865-1985,” Journal o f Negro Education 60, no. 2 (1991): 203-18.
17Wemer Troesken, “The Limits of Jim Crow: Race and the Provision of Water and
Sewerage Services in American Cities, 1880-1925,” Journal o f Economic History 62, no. 3
(2002); 734-72.
1s

•

Robin Flowerdew, “Spatial Patterns of Residential Segregation in a Southern City,”
Journal o f American Studies 13, no. 1 (1979): 93-107.
16

segregated from their founding in 1869, and even the Roman Catholic church maintained
separate parishes for African Americans.19
Elections in 1869 and 1870 put conservative politicians in charge o f the
statehouse, and they quickly dismantled some o f the Reconstruction-era protections for
freedpeople in Tennessee, although African-American political influence would last
longer in Memphis.20 In 1881, the first “Jim Crow” law was passed, requiring railroads
to establish separate cars, “equal in all physical respects,” for passengers o f each race.
This doctrine o f “separate but equal” established a legal precedent that was to be
enshrined as the law o f the land in the 1896 U.S. Supreme Court decision in Plessy v.
Ferguson 21 A series o f voting “reforms” passed between 1889 and 1891 - including
advance registration, a poll tax, and a requirement only in large cities for use o f the secret
ballot and elimination o f party tickets (making it difficult for illiterate people to cast their
vote) - effectively disfranchised large numbers o f poor voters, with a disproportionate
effect on African-American citizens, although in Memphis quite a few African
Americans continued to vote.22 In Memphis, a string o f lynchings in the early 1890s,
followed by others in 1912 and 1917, along with other impersonal murders o f African
Americans by whites who went unprosecuted removed any doubt about the place o f

19 Plank and Turner, “Contrasting Patterns,” 205; Mark Newman, “The Catholic Church
in Tennessee and Desegregation, 1954-1973,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 66, no. 1 (2007):
144-65.
20 Paul H. Bergeron, Stephen V. Ash, and Jeanette Keith, Tennesseans and Their History
(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1999): 176-180.
21 Lester C. Lamon, Blacks in Tennessee 1791-1970 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1981), 59.
22 Bergeron, Ash, and Keith, Tennesseans, 197-98.
17

African Americans in the caste system o f Shelby County.23 William Miller attributes the
strictness o f white attitudes toward African American subservience to the predominance
among the white population of those bom in the rural South; few white Memphians were
raised in the city and exposed to African-American professionals and tradespeople.
Consequently, they continued in their rigid adherence to the tenets o f white supremacy.24
Recalling his early adulthood in Memphis during this era, Richard Wright noted both the
oppression that made Memphis a southern city and the opportunities that distinguished
Memphis from the countryside: “The people in Memphis had an air of relative urbanity
that took some o f the sharpness off the attitude of whites to Negroes.... Although I could
detect disdain and hatred in their attitudes, they never shouted at me or abused me.” 25
Historians have found that, despite these oppressions, African Americans in
Memphis were not without agency. Kenneth Goings and Gerald Smith identified a
number of ways African Americans in Memphis used subterfuge and collective action to

23On lynchings, see among others Ida B. Wells-Bamett, On Lynchings: Southern
Horrors, A Red Record, Mob Rule in New Orleans (New York: Amo Press, 1969); David M.
Tucker, “Miss Ida B. Wells and Memphis Lynching,” Phylon 32, no. 2 (1971): 112-22; Lisa A.
White, “The Curve Lynchings: Violence, Politics, Economics, and Race Rhetoric in 1890s
Memphis,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 64, no. 1 (2005): 44-61; Kenneth W. Goings and
Gerald L. Smith, “ ‘Unhidden’ Transcripts: Memphis and African American Agency, 18621920,” Journal o f Urban History 21 (1995): 372-94; Kenneth W. Goings and Gerald L. Smith, “
‘Duty of the Hour’: African-American Communities in Memphis, Tennessee, 1862-1923,”
Tennessee Historical Quarterly 55, no. 2 (1996): 130-43; on general impersonal murders, see
William D. Miller, Memphis During the Progressive Era, 1900-1917 (Memphis: Memphis State
University Press, 1957), 89-103; and Goings and Smith, “ ‘Unhidden’ Transcripts.”
24 William D. Miller, “Rural Ideals in Memphis Life at the Turn of the Century,” West
Tennessee Historical Society Papers 4 (1950): 41-49.
25Richard Wright, Black Boy: A Record o f Childhood and Youth (New York: Harper &
Bros, 1945; New York: Harper Perennial, 1998), 224. Citations refer to the Harper Perennial
edition.
18

protect their bodies against white violence.26 Ida B. Wells used her platform as a
journalist to raise national outrage against the lynchings, although the consequences
included the destruction o f her newspaper’s office by a white mob in 1892 and her
subsequent removal from Memphis from fear for her life.27 Goings and Brian Page
record that a number o f African American Memphians took advantage o f the law
requiring “equal” accommodations on streetcars to sue the proprietors o f streetcar lines
that discriminated - and were often victorious in court, even if the very act o f discussing
racial characteristics in court reinforced racist stereotypes.28
Above all, African Americans in Memphis sought education as the means to rise
above their circumstances. Many freedpeople subscribed to the notion that, in the words
o f Freedmen’s Bureau commissioner John Eaton, “Anyone devoted to his books was on
the road to freedom; anyone ignorant o f books was on his way back to slavery.”29
Attendance at schools operated by the Freedman’s Bureau far exceeded capacity, and
among the earliest uses o f the limited political capital that African Americans enjoyed in
Memphis was pressure to open public schools in 1868.30 By 1870, Lemoyne Normal

26 Goings and Smith, “ ‘Unhidden’ Transcripts.”
27 Lisa A. White, “The ‘Saddle-Colored Sapphira’ versus the ‘Slimy Rattlesnake’: The
Rhetorical Melee of Ida B. Wells and Edward Carmack on the Subject of Lynching,” Tennessee
Historical Quarterly, 62, no. 4 (2003): 310-31; Robin Hardin and Marcie Hinton, “The
Squelching of Free Speech in Memphis: The Life of a Black Post-Reconstruction Newspaper,”
Race, Gender & Class 8, no. 1(2001): 78-95.
28 Kenneth W. Goings and Brian D. Page, “African Americans versus the Memphis Street
Railway Company : Or, How to Win the Battle but Lose the War, 1890-1920,” Journal o f Urban
History 30, no. 2 (2004): 131-51.
29 John Eaton, quoted in Paul David Phillips, “Education of Blacks in Tennessee During
Reconstruction, 1865-1870,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 46, no. 2 (1987): 98.
30 Phillips, “Education of Blacks,” 103-104.
19

Institute was established to educate teachers for those schools.31 While African
Americans formed many organizations for mutual support and benefit, especially
churches and fraternal organizations, each had a component of education, from Sunday
classes that taught parishioners to read the Bible to lecture series for edification and
uplift. Citizens from all strata o f society, but especially women, participated in these
educational activities. Held on Sundays and in the evening, they were structured
especially to accommodate the needs of working African Americans.32
Given the demonstrated demand for library services, it was fortunate for the
reading public o f Memphis that Frederick H. Cossitt remembered the city in his will.
Cossitt had been one o f the creditors forced to accept payment o f pennies on the dollar o f
his Memphis debt when the city dissolved itself, but he didn’t hold that against the Bluff
City’s people.33
Cossitt was a native New Englander, bom in Granby, Connecticut, in 1811, but he
transplanted to Clarksville, Tennessee, as a teenager and in 1842 established a successful
dry goods wholesaler in Memphis. While in Memphis he participated in literary
conversations and loaned books from his own collection to friends. He advocated for a
public library before the Civil War, but removed to New York City in the spring of
1861.34 While he never formally bequeathed funds for a library in Memphis, there was
found in his papers after his death a memorandum indicating that he intended to donate
31 Goings and Page, “ ‘Duty of the Hour’,” 134.
32 Beverly G. Bond, “ ‘Every Duty Incumbent Upon Them’: African-American Women
in Nineteenth Century Memphis,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 59, no. 4 (2000): 265-66.
33 Dowdy, A Brief History, 59.
34 George Sisler, “Record Volume of Business Reported by City Libraries,” CA, January
24, 1954.
20

$75,000 to the city o f Memphis for building a public library.35 Cossitt had made a
promise to his friend Carrington Mason o f Memphis that he would make such a donation,
and upon Cossitt’s death in 1887 Mason first “carried on an urgent correspondence,” and
then travelled at his own expense to New York in order to persuade Cossitt’s three
daughters to honor that promise.36 Cossitt’s heirs, having seen their father’s letters to
Mason regarding the library, agreed to donate $25,000 each to build a library in
Memphis. The library was established as a private philanthropy according to the plans
Cossitt had outlined in his papers. On April 7, 1888, nine prominent white Memphians
incorporated the Cossitt Library as a “body politic and corporate” with the general
purpose “to establish and maintain a Free Public Library within the City o f Memphis.” It
included an option to also establish a public art gallery, public music hall, public lecture
room, and public museum.37
The city donated a lot at the comer o f Front and Monroe streets located on the
“promenade,” which was a wide expanse overlooking the river, and promised to provide
fund for the “working expenses” o f the library. The $75,000 bequest from Cossitt’s heirs
was spent entirely on the construction of a red sandstone Romanesque pile dedicated on
April 12, 1893 (figure 1). The city’s initial operating budget ($3,333.33) could not
support the purchase o f new books. The library was stocked from private collections and

35 Ibid.
36 Alfred D. Mason to the Board of Directors of Cossitt Library, March 17, 1927, L.H.C.
37 Cossitt Library Charter of Incorporation (1888), L.H.C.
21

the daily newspapers also led fund-raising campaigns, so that by 1898 the Cossitt Library
was circulating 150 books per d a y .38

FIGURE 1. Cossitt Library, erected 1893 (source: DigMemphis,
http://memphislibrary.contentdm.oclc.org/)
The “General Rules” o f the Cossitt Library stated that the building was “open to
the public,” with no mention o f racial restrictions.39 Nonetheless, African Americans
were not welcome, except as members o f the janitorial crew. Although the city o f
Memphis had provided some support for the library, it operated as a private organization.
As such, under prevailing jurisprudence, it was free to discriminate in its services.40

38 CA, March 13,1894; Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” 440-441.
39 Cossitt Library General Rules (1894), L.H.C.
40 United States v. Stanley; United States v. Ryan; United States v. Nichols; United States
v. Singleton; Robinson et ux. v. Memphis & Charleston R.R. Co., 109 U.S. 3 (1883).
22

Existing records fail to show that consideration was ever given by the Directors o f
Cossitt Library to the question o f including African Americans as patrons. Throughout
Memphis in this period, establishments opened with their clientele pre-determined: a
business or institution would serve whites or African Americans, but never people o f both
races at the same time.
For the first decade o f its existence, then, the main library in Memphis provided
no services at all for nearly half o f the city’s residents. This period was one o f racial
retrenchment in the United States, as Plessy v. Ferguson established the legality of
segregation in state institutions, the last African-American congressman, George White
o f North Carolina, left office, and the nation saw a sharp spike in the number of
lynchings. In Memphis, too, the divisions grew deeper and harder - the police force
became all-white again, the city government turned to at-large elections producing allwhite city councils, and the “Curve” lynchings o f 1892 followed by the destruction o f the
African-American Free Speech newspaper and exile o f Ida B. Wells made it clear that
white supremacy would rule in the Bluff City.
The Cossitt Library likely played a part in the tum-of-the-century formation of
racial attitudes. While racial animus was, of course, an intrinsic part o f white culture
from the nation’s beginnings, this period witnessed a more intentional use o f the tools of
culture to develop in children a heightened awareness o f racial distinctions. As Edward
Blum notes, in an effort to bridge the divisions between North and South that arose in the
period leading to the Civil War, cultural tropes were used to “re-create and re-sanctify the
ethnic nationalism that had been in place before the war.”41

41 Edward J. Blum, Reforging the White Republic: Race, Religion, and American
Nationalism, 1865-1898 (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 2005), 6.
23

Grace Elizabeth Hale identified a southern strain o f longing for “whiteness” that
developed in the “New South” as that region became integrated more closely into the
national economy and a trans-regional popular culture. “Former Confederates [along with
many other groups], simultaneously but for different reasons, found race useful in
creating new collective identities to replace older, more individual, and local groundings
o f self. As important, these mass racial meanings were made and marked at a time when
technological change made the cheap production of visual imagery possible and the
development o f a mass market provided a financial incentive - selling through
advertising - to circulate the imagery.”42
The longing for the certainties o f white superiority motivated the popularity of
writers such as Joel Chandler Harris, who depicted southern blacks as nostalgic for the
plantation and none-too-smart. This projection allowed whites to justify the relegation of
educated, middle-class blacks away from first-class cars in trains to which their economic
station would have fitted them. The ironic romanticizing o f mammies was another way
of effacing the individuality o f African Americans and framing them as purely
instrumentalist appurtenances o f the white order.
Hale discusses racial formation as a collective experience, exhibited through
media and the design o f public spaces. Individual authors, illustrators, and legislators
caused certain images and circumstances to come into being, but those creators are not
the prime subjects o f her study. Instead, it is the nameless and faceless audiences o f such
tools that interest her. The libraries that offered up literature suitable for a white southern
audience were a key part o f the cultural discourse under analysis, because for many
42 Grace Elizabeth Hale, Making Whiteness: The Culture o f Segregation in the South,
1890-1940 (New York: Vintage, 1999), 7.
24

without the means to purchase books, the library was the means to access the texts aimed
at producing whiteness.
Kristina DuRocher writes in Raising Racists that “the primary way to forge
solidarity strong enough to maintain segregation was to indoctrinate white youth into the
racial order, which included prescribed gender roles.”43 She came to her conclusions
looking at the “race training” that occurred in homes, as white children were instructed
by their parents in behavior toward African Americans. Behavior toward servants and
playmates was carefully regulated and presented as “the way we do things.” Her
discourse analysis begins with the school curriculum - in which the very authorities
charged with teaching the way o f the world instilled a deep sense o f African-American
inferiority in their students - and publications aimed at children; from these white
children “confirmed their prerogative to control black bodies.”44
Jennifer Ritterhouse finds in child-rearing manuals and children’s literature and
pedagogical materials a “racial etiquette” which was taught from the earliest ages. These
were ceremonial rules and expressions conveying image and social standing, by which
children learned the “scripts” which governed race relations. The “determinedly, fiercely
asymmetrical” rules governing deference shown by blacks to whites and the minimal
nature o f white courtesy required in return are seen by Ritterhouse as reinforcing white

43 Kristina DuRocher, Raising Racists: The Socialization o f White Children in the Jim
Crow South (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2011), 4.
44 Ibid., 154.
25

children’s sense o f worth.45 The violence that followed transgressions o f racial etiquette
are, to Ritterhouse, responses to challenges to this asymmetry.
Memphis was not immune from the influence o f literature to shape racial
consciousness. Elizabeth Avery Meriwether, a woman suffragist and novelist living in
Memphis from 1835 to 1916, wrote a series o f novels set in the South depicting slavery
as the only force restraining the “inherent savagery” o f African Americans.46 From 1915
to 1969, the Commercial Appeal ran a daily comic strip, “Hambone’s Meditations,” that
Sandra Frink says helped to perpetuate an image o f tamed and subservient African
Americans as a figure o f ridicule.47 Benjamin Hooks, for one, noted that the persistence
o f the comic despite strenuous protests by African Americans exhibited a “failure o f
communication and community” in Memphis.48
Libraries, o f course, played a role in the dissemination o f literature that was
essential to this enterprise o f “race-making.” Shane Hand has developed a method
comparing the services and collections offered to white children by the New Orleans
Public Library (NOPL) with the recommendations o f the United Daughters o f the

45 Jennifer Ritterhouse, Growing Up Jim Crow: How Black And White Southern Children
Learned Race (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2006), 4.
46 Elizabeth Avery Meriwether, quoted in Sally Sartain Hermsdorfer, “For ‘The Cultured
Mothers of the Land’: Racist Imagery in the Old South Fiction of Tennessee Suffragist Elizabeth
Avery Meriwether,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 56, no.2 (1997): 194.
47 Sandra Frink, “Creating ‘Blackness,’ Defining ‘Whiteness’: ‘Hambone’s Meditations’
and the Construction of White Identity, 1920 to 1925” (M.A. thesis, University of Memphis,
1996.)
48 Michael K. Honey, Going Down Jericho Road: The Memphis Strike Matrin Luther
King’s Last Campaign (New York: W. W. Norton, 2007), 129.
26

Confederacy (UDC).49 As detailed by Karen Cox, the UDC had a school curriculum and
reading lists that emphasized the glory o f antebellum southern life, elevated Confederate
commanders to heroes, and served to inculcate a feeling of white superiority among
southern white children.50 Hand tracks the services o f the children’s section o f NOPL to
the recommendations o f the UDC and makes the case that NOPL was deeply implicated
in the perpetuation o f the racial culture that underlay segregation.
It is difficult to know how the Cossitt Library participated in distribution o f such
literature to Memphians. Only a few accession records from its first years have survived,
and no circulation information. There seems little doubt, however, that generally popular
literature would have been included in its collection. A single pamphlet from 1902 does
remain, and in its list o f new and notable books is The Leopard’s Spots by Thomas
Dixon.51 The Leopard’s Spots was a novel that served as the partial basis (along with
another o f Dixon’s books, The Clansman) o f the notorious D.W. Griffith film Birth o f a
Nation. This national best-seller reinforced many white stereotypes about physical
features that are common among African Americans signifying intellectual and moral
inferiority.52
While the turn o f the 20th century saw a decline in the civil rights o f AfricanAmerican Memphians, in other ways the city extended the services and privileges

49 Shane Hand, “Transmitting Whiteness: Librarians, Children, and Race, 1900-1930s,”
(M.A. thesis, University of Southern Mississippi, 2013).
50 Karen Cox, Dixie's Daughters: The United Daughters o f the Confederacy and the
Preser\>ation o f Confederate Culture (Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 2003), ch. 6 and 7.
51 “New and Notable Books at Cossitt Library” (September 1902), L.H.C.
52 Chris Ruiz-Velasco, “Order out of Chaos: Whiteness, White Supremacy, and Thomas
Dixon, Jr.,” College Literature 34, no. 4 (2007): 148-65.
27

afforded to its residents. For example, in 1900 a parks commission was formed. It
retained renowned landscape architect William Olmsted to outline plans for what
eventually became Riverside and Overton Parks.53 These were followed by children’s
playgrounds erected in 1908.54 In 1903, the Board o f Health commenced food
inspections, and in 1911 visiting nurses began to pay calls on poor families.55 An interest
in keeping juvenile delinquents away from the harmful influence o f adult miscreants led
the city to establish first a Shelby County Industrial and Training School in 1904, and
then a Juvenile Court separate from the criminal courts in 1909.56 As population grew
rapidly, school construction boomed: some seventeen new schools were built in a
decade.57 Some o f the “progress” o f the era involved compulsion: in 1901 smallpox
vaccination was required o f all students enrolling in public or private schools, and in
1909 the state o f Tennessee prohibited alcoholic beverages.58 Much o f the population
growth o f the city came as Memphis annexed, against the citizenry’s wishes, outlying
suburbs.59 And, o f course, new services meant higher taxes.
African Americans were typically left out of the benefits of progressive reforms in
Memphis. While the visiting nurses did number an African American among their staff,
53 Dowdy, A Brief History o f Memphis, 66-67.
54 Miller, Memphis During the Progressive Era, 104.
55 Ibid., 115-16.
56 Randall G. Shelden, “Origins of the Juvenile Court in Memphis, Tennessee: 19001910,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 52, no. 1 (1993): 33-43.
57 Miller, Memphis During the Progressive Era, 120.
58 Ibid., 114-15, 124-25.
59 Lois D. Bejach, “The Seven Cities Absorbed by Memphis,” West Tennessee Historical
Society Papers 8 (1954): 95-103.
28

the parks and the juvenile reformatory were reserved for whites. Interestingly, as with
the library, there were no laws on the books restricting African-American access to public
parks. Nonetheless, those who attempted to enjoy the parks were “routinely driven” from
them.60 Schools for whites were more numerous (13 out o f 17 built in this period) and
better furnished: when a new Central High School was built for whites, the old building
was “handed down” to be used by African-American students.61 In order to enjoy similar
amenities, African Americans often had to furnish them out o f pocket. For example, a
Colored Detention Home was created only after African-American citizens raised the
funds.62 Parks open to African Americans were commercial enterprises, such as
Church’s Park on Beale Street, and Klondyke Park in the neighborhood o f the same
name.63
In this era o f increasing city services begrudgingly doled out to Memphis’s
African-American citizens, two momentous events occurred in the history of the public
library in 1903. First, the library was granted a dedicated millage for its support, and
second, the Cossitt Library opened a branch for African-American readers. It is not clear
whether the two occurrences were related.

60 William H. Frye, “For Their Exclusive Enjoyment: Racial Politics and the Founding of
Douglas [sic] Park, Memphis, 1910-1913,” West Tennessee Stale Historical Society Papers 47
(1993): 18.
61 Miller, Memphis During the Progressive Era, 120.
62 Shelden, “Origins of the Juvenile Court,” 39.
63 G. P. Hamilton, The Bright Side o f Memphis: A Compendium o f Information
Concerning the Colored People o f Memphis, Tennessee, Showing Their Achievements in
Business, Industrial and Professional Life and Including Articles o f General Interest on the Race
(Memphis: The Author, 1908): 19-20.
29

For its first ten years, the Cossitt Library had enjoyed such municipal support as
the city government chose to provide from year to year. From his appointment in 1898,
its second librarian, Charles Dutton Johnson, identified variable and capricious funding
as an obstacle to the library’s growth, and successfully lobbied the Tennessee legislature
to add a library millage to the taxes paid by Memphians.64 The act, passed on March 28,
1903, and signed by Governor James B. Frazier on April 3, enabled a library millage in
“any taxing district having a population o f one hundred thousand, or more” - a group of
which Memphis was the only member.65 The tax o f three cents on every one hundred
dollars o f “all the taxable property, real and personal, including merchants, capital, and
all others -- property assessed for taxes ad valorem on capital invested, bank stock and all
other stock subject to taxation within the territorial limits o f such taxing district” was “for
the use and benefit o f the public libraries already established and in operation with such
taxing districts respectively, and for no other purpose whatsoever.”66
Curiously, the phrase “public library” appears three times in the bill, which is
clearly intended to support the Cossitt Library - yet the Cossitt Library was governed as a
private philanthropic institution. Its board was self-perpetuating, with lifetime tenure for
members and no accountability to the voting public or the elected officers o f Memphis
who enforced the taxation required to operate the Cossitt Library. True, it was “open to
the public,” as its directors defined the term, but its operations remained under the control
o f men with no duty to consult the will o f the people.

64 Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” 441.
65 Tennessee House Bill No. 604, 1903.
66 Ibid.
30

The establishment o f the millage was a milestone in library history - the library
itself suggested it was the first such tax in the South.67 One may speculate that the taxsupported status o f the library motivated the directors to extend service to African
Americans; after all, the tax was levied on all property owners in Memphis. This
reasoning is not without problems, however. As discussed, many city services of
Memphis were not made available to African Americans, despite their status as
taxpayers.
The motivations for the decision to extend library service to African Americans
were not recorded in the minutes o f the Cossitt Library Board o f Directors. It was simply
noted that on November 17, 1903, “The matter o f establishing a branch library for the
colored people was discussed, the conclusion reached being that the secretary would
correspond with Professor A. J. Steele, President o f LeMoyne Institute, with whom he
had previously talked on the subject and report the results later.”68 However, that
secretary, Alfred D. Mason, told Rheba Hoffman in 1955 that most o f the board members
had a “heart interest” in the “mental, spiritual, and cultural improvement o f the Negroes
o f Memphis, many o f whom had lived in close personal relationship with them.”69
Mason did not recall that the board had ever received a request from African Americans,
individually or in groups, to extend library services.70 To the extent that Mason’s

67 “What Cossitt Library is Doing for the People of Memphis,” undated pamphlet (c.
1920’s), L.H.C.
68 Minutes of the Board of Directors of Cossitt Library (hereafter abbreviated Minutes),
November 17, 1903, L.H.C.
69 Rheba Palmer Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Memphis,
Tennessee” (M.A. thesis, Atlanta University, 1955), 13.
70 Ibid., 14.
31

recollection is accurate, it may reflect the politically precarious position in which
African-American Memphians found themselves by the 1890s. As Eamestine Jenkins
reports, the city was becoming increasingly segregated in neighborhoods, public
accommodations, and even cemeteries, so perhaps an aspiration to use the Cossitt Library
was deemed unrealistic, and petitions for access a waste o f time, by any potential
African-American reader.71 As well, low levels o f education for African Americans
meant that fewer African American were readers than were whites; it was noted by the
American Library Association at its 1913 conference that “among the masses o f the
colored race there is yet very little demand for libraries.”72 It also possible that the
directors o f Cossitt Library were persuaded by what their contemporary William Yust
identified as “the missionary standpoint” that library service to African Americans would
have a beneficial effect on the city’s most oppressed residents.73
Regardless o f the specific circumstances of the Memphis library, the Cossitt
Library’s gesture inaugurated a region-wide movement to include African Americans, to
a very limited degree, in the patronage o f public libraries. Also in 1903, the North
Carolina legislature established a public library for Charlotte with a mandated separate
branch for African Americans. Galveston built an addition to the Negro Central High
School in 1904, to house the first puipose-built branch library for African Americans.
Louisville, Savannah, and Houston followed by 1909. But throughout the rural South,

71 Eamestine Lovelle Jenkins, African Americans in Memphis (Charleston, S.C: Arcadia,
2009), 28.
72 William F. Yust, “What of the Black and Yellow Races?” Bulletin o f the American
Library Association 7 (1913): 167.
73 Ibid., 160.
32

and in large cities including Birmingham, Montgomery, Jacksonville, Atlanta, Macon,
New Orleans, Nashville, Dallas, Norfolk, and Richmond, African Americans wishing to
use a public library would have to wait until the 1920s or later.74 As late as 1935, ninety
percent o f the African-American population in the South could not use any kind o f a
library.75 The Memphis precedent was particularly influential in establishing the model
of a public library setting up branches within existing educational institutions for African
Americans; this method of providing library service was the most common way that
African Americans could use libraries throughout the first half o f the twentieth century.76
A record o f the actual date that Cossitt Library began service to the AfricanAmerican public has not been found, but it seems likely to have been in late 1903 or
1904; in September of 1904 the directors once again “fully discussed” the “matter o f a
branch library for Negroes” without adding any o f the discussion to their minutes.77 It is
known that the “branch library” established in this period was not a stand-alone building,
but rather a collection housed within LeMoyne Institute, an African-American college on
South Orleans Street a mile-and-a-half from Cossitt Library. (In 1914, LeMoyne
Institute, and with it the “branch library” would move another mile south, to Walker
Avenue.)

74 Ann Allen Shockley, “A History of Public Library Services to Negroes in the South,
1900-1955” (Dover: Delaware State College, 1955), 4-8.
75 Tommie Dora Barker, “Libraries of the South: A Report on Development, 1930-1935”
(Chicago: American Library Association, 1936), 50.
76 Eliza Atkins Gleason, The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study o f the
Government and Administration o f Public Library Service to Negroes in the South (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1941), 19-20.
77 Minutes, September 19, 1904.
33

LeMoyne Institute was founded in 1870 under the auspices o f the American
Missionary Association (A.M.A.), a private charity which had taken on the responsibility
o f providing education for former slaves after the federal Freedman’s Bureau was
disbanded. Dr. Francis Julius LeMoyne, an abolitionist from Washington, Pennsylvania,
donated $20,000 to the A.M.A. after all its Memphis schools were destroyed in the 1866
“race riot;” $9,000 was used to erect the building, and $11,000 was reserved for an
endowment. Until 1924, the LeMoyne Institute operated as a “Normal and Commercial
School,” training teachers and office workers; thereafter it was a junior college, and in
1930 it became a four-year college.78 In 1968, the college merged with S.A. Owen
Junior College and is now called LeMoyne-Owen College. It has retained its nondenominational Christian character, including instruction in morals and character as well
as practical and scholarly matters, to the present. In 1903, it had around 700 students,
confined to a single building, under the leadership o f Andrew J. Steele, a white veteran o f
the Union Army who had served as the principal o f LeMoyne Institute since 1873.79
While the LeMoyne Branch o f Cossitt Library was housed within the LeMoyne
Institute, it was intended that the branch would be open to any African-American patrons
who wished to use it. Yust noted it served as “the book supply for all interested negroes
in the city and surrounding district.”80
While the formal association o f the Cossitt Library and LeMoyne Institute would
be severed after three decades o f largely ineffective service, the intersection o f the two
78 J. Winfield Qualls, “The Beginnings and Early History of the LeMoyne School at
Memphis, 1871-1874,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 7 (1953): 5-37.
79 Hamilton, The Bright Side, 13-14.
80 Yust, “What of the Black and Yellow R a c e s ? 163.
34

institutions would not end there. It was LeMoyne College alumni and students who were
among the most prominent o f the activists who led the struggle to desegregate the
Memphis Public Library between 1957 and 1961. Between 1903 and 1961, however,
were many decades o f segregated library service, which reflected in some measure the
political and social trends in Memphis during the first half o f the twentieth century.

35

CHAPTER 3:
THE OPERATION OF SEGREGATED PUBLIC LIBRARIES IN MEMPHIS

The LeMoyne Branch o f Cossitt Library, which began operation in 1903 or 1904
inside the LeMoyne Institute at 240 S. Orleans, was a delight to those who patronized it.
In his 1908 compendium o f African-American life, The Bright Side o f Memphis, G. P.
Hamilton rhapsodized:
This library is open to the public at large, and anyone conforming to its
regulations will be accommodated. It is the pleasure o f the librarian and
management to oblige the reading public, and they are anxious to stimulate and
promote the growth o f intelligence among the colored people o f M emphis.1
However, the branch faced difficulties reaching its intended patrons:
It is a source o f regret with those who are interested in the cause o f education that
more o f our people do not take advantage o f the great opportunity afforded them
by this library. It is really a public library and is intended to serve the wants of
the colored citizens o f Memphis just as the Cossitt library serves the wants o f the
white people. In this book we want to exhort our people to take advantage o f this
excellent library and make the most o f it.2
While the directors o f the Cossitt Library made an effort to provide library service
to their fellow Memphians o f color, it was a feeble one. The branch library’s location,
staffing, funding, and collection were all markedly inferior to the same functions o f the
1G. P. Hamilton, The Bright Side o f Memphis: A Compendium o f Information
Concerning the Colored People o f Memphis, Tennessee, Showing Their Achievements in
Business, Industrial and Professional Life and Including Articles o f General Interest on the Race
(Memphis: The Author, 1908): 261.
2 Ibid., 261.
36

main library for whites, and doubtless played a role in the low use o f the LeMoyne
branch and its successors. Just as schools, parks, and civic services for African-American
Memphians were provided with hand-me-downs, unwanted land, and inferior funding, so
was the African-American library given leftover books, space intended for other uses,
and a paltry budget. As the Crump machine reached the height o f its powers based in
part upon political bargains involving African-American votes, the situation improved a
little, but the Negro Branch established in 1939 was still no match for the main library.
When the LeMoyne Branch was set up, and until around 1925, its collection
consisted entirely o f books discarded from the main library.3 Although it is not recorded
when this policy began, for many years African-American library patrons were allowed
to request a book from the main library, and the book would be delivered to the Negro
Branch whence it could be checked out.4 How patrons o f the Negro Branch were to
become aware o f the titles at the main branch was left unstated; they certainly could not
use the traditional tools o f searching the card catalog or browsing shelves.
The Cossitt Library’s policy of stocking the African-American branch with
castoffs from the main branch was not unknown among southern libraries, or other
institutions in Memphis. For example, when Central High School for white students was
built around the same time that Booker T. Washington High School (BTW) for AfricanAmerican students was erected, the schools were assigned the same nickname, Warriors,

3 Rheba Palmer Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service to Negroes in Memphis,
Tennessee” (M.A. thesis, Atlanta University, 1955), 13.
4 “Negro May Place Order for Any Library Book,” Memphis Press-Scimitar (hereafter
abbreviated PS), January 15, 1960.
37

so that used athletic uniforms from Central could be given to the players at BTW.5 The
courier service to the Negro Branch was at least less offensive than that in Birmingham,
Alabama, where a book once loaned to an African-American patron would never be re­
circulated to a white reader.6
Although the LeMoyne Branch was located within his own institution, LeMoyne
Institute’s president Andrew J. Steele must have found it wanting. In 1907, he sent a
letter to the Carnegie Foundation, then in the midst o f a vast programme o f funding
public library buildings, requesting a separate building to serve as a branch library for
African Americans in Memphis.7 The reaction o f the Carnegie Foundation is unrecorded,
but in the event no Carnegie Library was ever constructed in Memphis. Three years later,
Steele - by then Principal Emeritus - implored the Cossitt Library board to support
construction o f a new, separate library building on the Institute’s planned new campus.8
The board declined. The LeMoyne Branch moved with the Institute in 1914 but remained
housed within the school building.

51 have found no citation for this widely-held belief, which nonetheless stands to reason.
6 Patterson Toby Graham, A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama's
Public Libraries, 1900-1965 (Tuscaloosa: University of Alabama Press, 2002), 5.
7 Minutes of the Board of Directors of Cossitt Library (hereafter abbreviated Minutes),
December 17, 1907, L.H.C.; for a history of the Carnegie Libraries, see George S. Bobinski,
Carnegie Libraries: Their History and Impact on American Public Library Development
(Chicago : American Library Association, 1969); Abigail Ayres Van Slyck, Free to All: Carnegie
Libraries and American Culture, 1890-1920 (Chicago : University of Chicago Press, 1995);
Theodore Jones, Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacv (New York: Wiley,
1997).
8 Minutes, 1910.
38

Records o f the LeMoyne Branch are incomplete, but Hoffman assembled a table
showing the growth o f the library’s collection and circulation through its first decade
(table 1).

TABLE 1: STATISTICS OF LeMOYNE INSTITUTE LIBRARY WHICH SERVED AS
THE NEGRO B1RANCH OF THE MEMPHIS PUBL 1C LIBRARY
YEAR
Number of
Active
Number of
Total Volumes
Volumes Added
Borrowers
Books Circulated
1905
n/a
n/a
n/a
462
1906
179
641
n/a
5,478
1907
n/a
961
n/a
192*
1908
n/a
1,138
446
1,309
1909
279
1,417
6,846
n/a
1910
292
552
4,936
1,638
1911
293
8,115
1,831
n/a
1912
n/a
n/a
n/a
2,228
1913
n/a
n/a
2,513
n/a
1914
n/a
644
7,560
2,906
*this figure may be recorded erroneously
(Compiled from Rheba Palmer Hoffman, “A History o f Public Library Service to
Negroes in Memphis, Tennessee” [M.A. thesis, Atlanta University, 1955], 16, 18-19; and
Minutes o f the Board o f Directors o f Cossitt Library.)

The number o f borrowers does not exceed the number o f students enrolled at
LeMoyne Institute. Indeed, usage o f the library was predominantly by those students. In
1911 and 1912, the library recorded use by students and by other patrons; non-student
patrons represented only one-tenth o f the recorded users.9 It seems that the branch’s
location within an educational institution served to depress its use by the public. A
number o f factors may have accounted for this effect: users from the general public may
have been intimidated about entering a school building, or else under the misimpression

9 Minutes, January 17, 1911; January 22, 1912.
39

that the library was only for students; the library’s hours may have been those o f the
Institute, and perhaps not convenient for working people; and finally, the library’s
collection may have been focused on those volumes which would appeal most to
students, considering that they constituted the bulk o f users. Without complete records,
this remains a matter o f speculation.
After a decade o f library service to African Americans at the LeMoyne Branch,
the Cossitt Library had made little headway. Only one out of every 81 African
Americans in the city held a library card.10 However, Cossitt Library continued to offer
other avenues o f library service. Sometime between 1910 and 1914, the library began to
open public libraries in the schools. These school libraries operated under the
supervision o f a teacher, who was allowed to borrow books for the term and check them
out to students. Once a teacher believed the books had been read by as many as wanted
to, he or she could retrieve a new batch o f books.11 Such services in schools for AfricanAmerican children began on September 15,1913, as it was on that date that the board
“ordered that Mrs. Cecilia K. Yerby (Colored) be employed as Superintendent o f the
Extension o f Library work among the Colored people o f the City, at a salary not to
exceed $35.00 per month.” 12 In 1914, the number o f books checked out o f the school
libraries was triple the total checked out o f the LeMoyne Branch.13

10 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 19.
11 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 20.
12 Minutes, September 15, 1913.
13 Minutes, January 19, 1915.
40

The investment in the LeMoyne Branch paled next to that for the main library. In
1910, the LeMoyne Branch accessioned 293 “new” titles and checked out 8,155 books to
552 borrowers. The main branch accessioned 8,930 new books and checked out 197,748
books to 11,215 borrowers. Alma Childs, the librarian at the LeMoyne Branch, earned a
monthly salary o f $35 - slightly higher than the night watchman at the main library, who
earned $25. When all the white librarians received a raise in 1914, there was none
forthcoming for the African-American employees.14 Charles D. Johnston, the librarian o f
Cossitt Library (who oversaw the entire operation and dozens of employees) earned
$166.65 per m onth.15
The discrepancies continued for many years. The salary o f the LeMoyne Branch
librarian remained steady at $35 per month until 1920, when it was raised to $50, while
Johnston’s salary rose to $300 a month in the same period.16 The rapid inflation o f the
war years made that flat salary an effective 43% reduction.17 Despite the difficulties
offered by flat salaries and a paltry book budget, Ms. Childs was reported to provide
“helpful and encouraging” service to her patrons.18 Table 2 demonstrates the recorded
salaries o f selected library employees; salary records are available only through 1926.
The effect o f low wages in an inflationary economy, perhaps coupled with the

14 Minutes, January 20, 1914.
15 Minutes, January 17, 1911.
16 Minutes, January 22, 1912; January 19, 1915; January 15, 1917; January 17, 1918;
January 15,1919; January 28, 1920.
17 Bureau of Labor Statistics, “CPI Inflation Calculator,” accessed March 22, 2015,
http://data.bls.gov/cgi-bin/cpicalc.pl.
18 William F. Yust, “What of the Black and Yellow Races?” Bulletin o f the American
Library Association 7 (1913): 163.
41

frustrations o f a meager budget and an inconspicuous location, was to produce high
turnover among African-American library employees. No employee stayed in his or her
position longer than four years, and many turned over within a single year. As effective
library service often depends upon familiarity with the collection and the information
needs o f the community, such high turnover may have had a deleterious influence on the
level of library assistance provided to African American patrons.
It is no surprise that a largely female, entirely African-American workforce in the
Cossitt Library should have earned such low wages. As Laurie Green has demonstrated,
the Memphis way o f life was rooted in the “plantation economy” - structured on the
assumptions of the rural South that African-American workers were to be afforded the
most menial tasks at the lowest possible wages, leaving white capitalists to reap the
profits.19 Although librarianship is hardly chopping cotton, the white directors o f Cossitt
Library were just as able as the owners o f the Loeb Laundry Cleaner Company to keep
wages steady in the face o f cost-of-living increases and demand excessive work for the
pay, all because the prevailing standards o f Jim Crow employment meant that AfricanAmerican employees had little leverage to negotiate higher wages or better conditions.20

19 Laurie B. Green, Battling the Plantation Mentality (Chapel Hill: University of North
Carolina Press, 2007), 19-22.
20 Mantri Sivananda, “Controversial Memphis Mayor Henry Loeb III, 1920-1992: A
Biographical Study” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Memphis, 2002), 66.
42

TABLE 2: MONTHLY SALARIES OF SELECTED COSSITT LIBRARY
EMPLOYEES21
IN D E X :

1911

1914

1915

1916

1917

1918

1919

1920

1922

1923

1924

1925

1926

n /a

$ .9 9

$ .9 8

$ .9 1

$ .7 7

$ .6 6

$ .5 7

$ .4 9

$ .5 9

$ .5 8

$ .5 8

$ .5 7

$ .5 6

$167

$250

S275

$275

$300

$425

$450

$35

$35

$35

$35

$50

$50

$50

$50

$45

$50

$50

$50

$40

$40

p u rc h a s in g
p o w e r o f $1
c o m p a r e d to
1 9 1 3 p ric e s
C h a rle s D .

$400

J o h n s to n ,
H e a d L ib ra ria n
A lm a C h ild s ,
L ib n ., L e M o y n e
C o r a B . D a v is ,

$35

L ib n ., L e M o y n e
C o r r in e W ild e r,

$35

$50

$50

L ib n ., L e M o y n e
E u n ic e Q u im b y ,
L ib n ., L e M o y n e
J .M . H o m e ,

$ 1 2 .5 0

" n ig h t w o rk "
C e c ilia Y e rb y ,
S u p v r.,

$35

$45

C o lo re d

S c h o o l D e p t.
H a rrie t L e e ,

$35

$40

$40

S u p v r ., C .S .D .
W illia m J o n e s ,

$25

$30

$35

S u p v r ., C .S .D .
J e n n ie L . W h ite ,

$45

S u p v r ., C .S .D .
J u lia R e y n o ld s ,
S u p v r ., C .S .D .
A rd e lia O ld s ,
S u p v r ., C .S .D .
P o c a h o n ta s

$20

$25

$25

$35

Jones,
A s s t.,

H ow e

B ran c h
S a llic D a rrill,

$35

A s s t., H o w e
K e n tie B e rk le y ,

$35

$35

A s s t., H o w e
$40

C e le s tin e
C o le m a n ,
A s s t., H o w e
L illie A d a m s .
A s s t., H o w e *
L o w e s t p a id

$25

$35

$35

$35

$35

$40

a s s is ta n t a t
m a in lib ra ry
♦ th e s e e m p lo y e e s ’ p o s itio n s a re n o t s ta te d , b u t m a y b e in fe rre d fro m

th e ir s a la r ie s a n d p la c e in th e e m p lo y e e r o ll

21 Compiled from Minutes, January 17,1911; February 18, 1913; January 19, 1915;
January 15, 1917; January 17,1918; January 15, 1919; January 28, 1920; February 16,1922;
September 18, 1923; October 18, 1923; April 13, 1925.
43

Jim Crow meant that African-Africans were offered not only lower wages, but
less respect. Whites during the first half o f the twentieth century often shied away from
placing African-Americans in any position o f public trust. The Cossitt Library found
itself troubled by such conventions in 1912, when it was recorded that “the Librarian
explained the need for the employment o f a white man who would have charge of the
Building, and could be clothed with greater authority and police powers than the present
colored Janitor.”22
While it is not clear from the existing records, it may be inferred that many o f the
aspects o f librarianship requiring fiduciary responsibility were kept away from the
African-American librarians serving the LeMoyne Branch. The budget for library
materials, for example, was set by the Board o f Directors (likely at the suggestion o f the
head librarian, Johnston.) The LeMoyne Branch seldom acquired new books. For
example, in 1912 the main library spent more than $5,400 on new books, and LeMoyne
spent $47.23 In other years, expenditures were even lower. Table 3 shows expenditures
for books at the main library and the LeMoyne Branch.
Perplexingly, the budgeted amount for books at LeMoyne was not fully expended
in many years. Few librarians with control over their own collections would deliberately
under-expend their budgets. However, if the materials purchased for the AfricanAmerican collections were bought by white librarians with no sense o f responsibility to
the African-American patrons at branch libraries, they may have been tempted to balance
budgets by moving money away from the branch libraries. Alternatively, they may

22 Minutes, November 9, 1912.
23 Minutes, February 18, 1913.
44

simply have neglected their duties in this regard, having little incentive or inclination to
purchase new books for African-American patrons. Another possibility is that AfricanAmerican libraries sought to curry favor with their white supervisors by operating their
libraries at a lower expense than anticipated.

TABLE 3: EXPENDITURES FOR LIBRARY MATERIALS AT COSSITT LIBRARY
BRANCHES24
1912
M a in B ra n c h

1913

1914

$ 5 ,4 6 7

1915

1916

1918

$ 6 ,0 9 7

1919

1920

1921

1922

1924

1923

$8975

$ 1 4 ,1 0 2

$ 1 5 ,4 7 5

$ 1 0 ,6 5 5

$ 1 4 ,4 1 7

$808

$ 1 ,1 9 9

$ 1 ,0 4 4

$ 1 ,0 8 3

$ 1 ,3 0 7

$50

$70

$50

$0

$20

$53

$0

$70

$82

B ook
E x p e n d itu re s
M a in B ra n c h
P e rio d ic a ls
E x p e n d itu re s
L eM oyne

$400

$100

$50

$27

$0

$39

$50

B ook B udget
$47

L eM oyne

$20

$11

B ook
E x p e n d itu re s
L eM oyne

$69

$64

$64

P e rio d ic a ls
E x p e n d itu re s
$25

$25

$20

$0

$0

$64

$48

$60

H ow e B ook
B udget
$2

H ow e B ook
E x p e n d itu re s

$36

H ow e

$54

$55

P e rio d ic a ls
E x p e n d itu re s

Other improvements in library service to African Americans continued in the
1910s. Through no effort o f its own, the Cossitt Library obtained a more capacious
library for African Americans when the LeMoyne Institute moved to its present location
on Walker Avenue, where the new school building provided “better library
accommodations.”25 More significantly, in 1914 another branch library was opened in

24 Compiled from Minutes, February 18, 1913; January 20, 1914; January 19, 1915;
January 18, 1916; January 15, 1917; January 17, 1918; January 15, 1919; January 28, 1920; June
15, 1921; February 16, 1922; May 17, 1923; October 18, 1923; January 17, 1924; April 13, 1925.
25 Yust, “What of the Black and Yellow Races?,” 163.
45

Howe Institute, another African-American school affiliated with the Baptist church, that
encompassed elementary and upper grades.26
Howe Institute had been founded in 1883 but experienced a dramatic increase in
enrollment after T. O. Fuller became its principal in 1902. His expanded curriculum
included some vocational programs, which were publicized in the white press to make the
Howe Institute palatable to the community, and a much more comprehensive liberal
education curriculum that paralleled the offerings in the city’s high schools for white
students.27 By 1915, at least 500 students were enrolled.28 The location o f Howe Institute
at the comer o f St. Paul and Wellington was about a mile and a half from the Cossitt
Library, and considerably closer to downtown than the LeMoyne branch. Details are
unavailable regarding the maintenance o f the Howe branch’s collection, but its budget for
new books was even smaller than that of the LeMoyne branch. Perhaps the use of
discards from the main library was continued at Howe. Books may also have been
received as donations.
The Howe branch quickly proved more popular than LeMoyne. Perhaps it was a
more convenient location or had a more accommodating schedule (records no longer
exist), but its circulation was three times greater than that o f LeMoyne, and more than
eight times as many patrons had library cards at Howe. By contrast, the users at

26 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 20.
27 Carroll Van West and Jen Stoecker, “Thomas Oscar Fuller,” in The Tennessee
Encyclopedia ofHistoiy and Culture, version 2.0,
http://tennesseeenevclopedia.net/entrv.pho?rec=528.
28 Hamilton, The Bright Side o f Memphis, 14.
46

LeMoyne borrowed many more books per capita - eight books per user, compared to less
than one book per user at Howe.29
While the Cossitt Library was offering far-ffom-equitable treatment to AfricanAmerican patrons, it was nonetheless among the more progressive o f southern public
libraries. As late as 1913 such large cities as Atlanta, Birmingham, Nashville, and Dallas
failed to offer any public library service to African Americans.30 Memphis, by contrast,
was continuing to expand its public library services - and even participating in the only
program o f library education available to southern African-American librarians.
Thomas Fountain Blue, a librarian in the Western Colored Branch of the
Louisville Free Library, had “entered the library field withfout] formal training or
education for librarianship” in 1905, but in seeking to provide an easier transition for
other African-American librarians, he established a training program that was the only
one o f its kind until 1925.31 In 1914, as the Cossitt Library was expanding its school
libraries program, “The Librarian reported that he had sent Cecilia K. Yerby to Louisville
for six weeks to attend a Library School, and to be especially instructed in her work in
connection with the Colored School Department o f the Library.”32 But Yerby remained
on the payroll as Supervisor o f the Colored School Department for only two years.
Records are insufficient to determine if the impetus for expanded library service
came from requests by African-American citizens or from the Cossitt Library’s leaders.
29 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 21.
30 Ann Allen Shockley, “A History of Public Library Services to Negroes in the South,
1900-1955” (Dover: Delaware State College, 1960), 7-8.
31 Cheryl Knott Malone, “Louisville Free Public Library's Racially Segregated Branches,
1905-35,” Register o f the Kentucky Historical Society 93, no. 2 (Spring 1995): 173.
32 Minutes, July 21, 1914.
47

However, a 1927 letter suggests that service at Howe Institute was initiated by a request
from Cossitt. In 1926, the board voted to close the Howe branch, and shortly thereafter
T. O. Fuller wrote to its president, John R. Pepper, in an effort to maintain good relations:
Recently, in the exercise o f your prerogative, this Branch was
discontinued. However, this did not disturb the sincere and grateful appreciation
o f the opportunity the library gave us to cooperate with your Board in this
splendid and most valuable community service.... If we can be o f any service to
your Board in the future, we shall be just as willing as at first and more capable,
perhaps, on accounts o f the years o f contact and experience.33
An unspoken element that may have influenced the Cossitt Library’s decisions
was the growth in political power o f the African-American electorate during the first
mayoralty o f Edward H. Crump. Crump was elected in 1909 and served until he was
forced out of office in 1915 following a contretemps with state officials over his
lackluster enforcement o f state prohibition law. After a decade holding minor offices and
re-building his coalition, his organization gained control o f the city’s government in the
election o f 1927 - in large part by rallying African-American voters against the white
supremacist campaign by Rowlett Paine - and continued to “boss” the Memphis city
government, while rarely holding office himself, until his death in 1954.34

33 T. O. Fuller to John R. Pepper, January 19, 1927, L.H.C.
34 For the 1927 campaign, see David M. Tucker, Lieutenant Lee o f Beale Street
(Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 1971), 91-98; Robert A. Lanier, Memphis in the
Twenties: The Second Term o f Mayor Rowlett Paine, 1924-1928 (Memphis: Zenda Press, 1979),
123-137; for a biography of Cmmp (that unfortunately offers little commentary on his
relationships with African-American voters), see William D. Miller, Mr. Crump o f Memphis
(Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1964).
48

Crump had received few African-American votes in his first campaign, but
determined thereafter to make African-Americans an important part o f his electoral
coalition, particularly after the efforts o f Robert Church, Jr., to organize the Lincoln
League in 1916 showed that African-Americans, voting as a bloc, could swing
elections.35 William Miller notes that “Crump did not cynically court the Negro vote...
with Crump there was a more basic consideration o f their needs. Negro medical
inspectors had been placed in Negro schools; infants o f indigent parents had been
provided with milk; a movement had been inaugurated to purchase a park; and most
important, Crump had moved to break up the inhuman business o f preying on Negroes
that was practiced by some o f the county magistrates and their agents.”36 On the other
hand, Elizabeth Gritter sees that “his actions masked his derogatory views and activities.
Some African Americans campaigned for him o f their own free will, but he also
manipulated the support o f some African Americans by ‘herding’ them to the polls: he
arranged his supporters to pick them up by the carload, pay their poll taxes, and reward
them with barbecue and liquor. Like white politicians across the South, he embraced
segregation. He perpetuated black inequality by providing public service improvements
within the context o f the Jim Crow system. African Americans were excluded from
participation in the local Democratic Party and occupied the lowest rung o f government
employment.” 37

35 Elizabeth Gritter, River o f Hope: Black Politics and the Memphis Freedom Movement,
1865-1954 (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 2014), 48-50.
36 Miller, Mr. Cramp, 104.
37 Gritter, River o f Hope, 36.
49

Crump’s organization was certainly no monolith when it came to race relations.
Wayne Dowdy summarizes the complexities: “Evidence suggests that several
contradictory forces were at work. It appears that Crump had but one guiding principle,
winning elections at any cost. Even white supremacy was forfeited when it stood in the
way o f electoral success. When he deemed it practical, Crump played both sides of the
racial fence, which meant that the machine juggled the interests o f both black and white
Memphians while attempting to keep order. When Crump decided that it was not
practical to play both sides, he catered to his natural white constituency at the expense of
African Americans.”38
Crump consistently came down on the side o f providing a modicum o f civic
services for African Americans, always in a strictly segregated manner. When a group of
African-American citizens pushed for a park to be opened to them, Crump surreptitiously
steered the debate toward opening a park in a neighborhood that was already populated
with African Americans, and away from the question o f whether parks should be
desegregated. Naturally, it had a scanty budget and received poor maintenance.39 In
1914, he agreed to suppress a theatrical production o f The Leopard’s Spots, at the request
o f a delegation o f African Americans who objected to the film’s racially inflammatory
tone. He reasoned that he doubted “the wisdom o f permitting the production o f any play
that might be calculated to arouse any racial feeling.”40

38 G. Wayne Dowdy, “Censoring Popular Culture: Political and Social Control in
Segregated Memphis,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 55 (2001): 113-14.
39 William H. Frye, “For Their Exclusive Enjoyment: Racial Politics and the Founding of
Douglass Park, Memphis, 1910-1913,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 47 (1993): 1836.
40 E. H. Crump, quoted in Dowdy, “Censoring Popular Culture,” 98.
50

Historians have not directly addressed the role o f libraries within the Crump
machine’s program o f civic services, and in fact the existing documentation shows little
evidence that Crump was particularly concerned with libraries. However, in a civic
environment that encouraged a minimum level o f services to African-American residents
as a matter o f political expediency, the library’s Directors may have felt emboldened to
act on their natural impulses to serve as many readers as possible to provide expanded
services through the branches and the public schools. It was all within limits, o f course African American branches received the castoffs o f the main collection and made do with
pennies on the dollar that the main library enjoyed.
African-American library patrons did not leave extensive records o f their
experiences with libraries. However, as we trace the library’s history over the next
decades, the appreciation and demand by African-American Memphians for library
services becomes clear.
The three means o f access to library materials that were available by 1915
remained in place through 1926. LeMoyne Institute and Howe Institute housed their
branch libraries for children and adults, and children were also allowed to check out
books from the very limited collections offered in their local schools. Although the
library millage rate increased to 4 cents in 1919, the increase had little effect on the
allocation for books at the African-American branches.41
The Board o f Cossitt Library was not entirely insensate to the services offered to
their African-American patrons. In 1923, Charles Johnston, the head librarian, “reported
on the work being done at the Negro Branch and Negro Schools and brought to the board

41 Minutes, April 16, 1919.
51

a request from T. O. Fuller of Howe Institute that the two librarians working from Howe
Branch be increased $5.00 each.”42
The 1920s was a period when African-American influence waned and waxed
within Memphis city halls, but the African-American community built up independent
institutions o f culture and commerce. During the mayoral administration o f Rowlett
Paine (1920-1927), Crump’s machine did not control the city, but only participated in
electoral activities. Paine, taking a page from Crump’s book, sought the African
American vote by promising improvements in African-American neighborhoods, but he
was less assiduous than Crump in keeping those promises.43 During the first half o f the
decade, the establishment had to beat off an electoral challenge by the Ku Klux Klan,
making it difficult for white politicians to be seen as too closely tied to African-American
interests.44 Despite this, the city’s African-American commercial hub o f Beale Street
was flourishing, in ways that allowed African-American Memphians a measure o f selfexpression and self-determination not seen before. The economic boom o f that decade,
while it did not benefit African-Americans to the same extent as white Memphians, did
allow several Memphis-based life insurance companies to flourish, and their leaders such
as George W. Lee “provided a militant philosophy o f black pride” to their agents and

42 Minutes, October 18, 1923.
43 Virginia Phillips, “Rowlett Paine, Mayor of Memphis, 1920-1924,” West Tennessee
Historical Society Papers 13 (1959): 95-116; Wayne Dowdy, “E. H. Cmmp and the Mayors of
Memphis,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 53 (1999): 84-85.
44 Gary R. Blankenship, “The Commercial Appeal's, Attack on the Ku Klux Klan, 19211925,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 31 (1977): 44-58; Kenneth D. Wald, “The
Visible Empire: The Ku Klux Klan as an Electoral Movement,” Journal o f Interdisciplinary
History 11, no. 2 (1980): 217-234; Paul J. Bowman, “Antagonist of the Invisible Empire: The
Editorials of C. P. J. Mooney,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 50 (1996); 149-161.
52

customers.45 Robert Lanier notes that in Memphis, African-American workers had
opportunities for work in more fields and industries than in the rural South or in northern
cities.46 The “chiltlin’ circuit” o f African American-owned and -operated entertainment
enterprises (clubs and record labels) has its origins in Memphis and other southern cities
in this period.47 Due to the political savvy o f Robert R. Church, Jr., the AfricanAmerican contingent o f the Republican Party in Memphis was able to command federal
patronage for selected African-American civil servants during the Harding and Coolidge
administrations.48 Beale Street, with its shops, restaurants, and clubs that served an
African-American clientele, “provided relief from the forced carefulness with which
blacks lived in relationship to whites” and afforded a measure o f respect not experienced
in white-owned stores where African Americans could not try on shoes or hats.49 And in
the African American-owned Memphis Red Sox baseball team, African-American
Memphians had a wholesome entertainment venue where families could admire the
athletic prowess o f their neighbors while showing off their finest clothes and mingling
with fellow citizens o f all classes.50 Despite these signs o f progress, economic

45 David M. Tucker, “Black Pride and Negro Business in the 1920s: George Washington
Lee of Memphis,” Business History Review 43, no. 4 (1969): 450.
46 Lanier, Memphis in the Twenties, 99.
47 Preston Lauterbach, The Chitlin ’ Circuit and the Road to Rock and Roll (New York:
W.W. Norton, 2011).
48 Roger Biles, “Robert R. Church of Memphis: Black Republican Leader in the Age of
Democratic Ascendancy, 1928-1940,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly 42, no. 4 (1983): 362-63.
49 S. Davidson Hill, “The Self-Defined African American Community of Jim Crow
Memphis,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 54 (2000): 11.
50 Kurt McBee, “The Memphis Red Sox Stadium: A Social Institution in Memphis’
African American Community,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 49 (1995): 149-64.
53

difficulties remained in place for African Americans. Shields Mcllwaine noted in the
1930s that certain traditionally African-American jobs such as barbering and waiting
tables had been taken over by whites in the previous decade.51
The Cossitt Library’s maintenance o f two branches for African-Americans
evidently was not known to all interested citizens. Richard Wright’s life story was
typical o f many Memphians - bom in rural Mississippi in 1908 and haphazardly
educated, he migrated to Memphis in 1925 and found work in various downtown
establishments. He only stayed in Memphis for a brief period before moving on to
Chicago in 1927.52 Sometime in that period around 1926, Wright encountered an
editorial in the Commercial Appeal denouncing the Baltimorean author and editor H. L.
Mencken, whose iconoclasm did not sit well with many southerners. Intrigued, Wright
wondered, “How could I find out about this Mencken? There was a huge library near the
riverfront, but I knew that Negroes were not allowed to patronize its shelves any more
than they were the parks and playgrounds o f the city.”53 Ironically, Wright had attended
the Howe Institute briefly around 1916 - but as a small child, he may not have used the
library branch during his time in the school, or else the eventful intervening years had
driven its existence from his memory. Regardless, he made no mention in his memoir of
knowing about branch libraries for African-Americans. In fact, he “knew o f no Negroes

51 Shields Mcllwaine, Memphis Down in Dixie (New York: E. P. Dutton, 1948), 318.
52 Dictionary o f Literary Biography, vol. 76, Afro-American Writers, 1940-1955, ed.
Trudier Harris-Lopez (Detroit: Gale, 1988), s.v. “Wright, Richard.”
53 Richard Wright, Black Boy (American Hanger): A Record o f Childhood and Youth,
restored text (New York: Harper and Brothers, 1945; New York: Perennial Classics, 1993), 24445. Citations refer to the Perennial edition.
54

who read the books I liked and I wondered if any Negroes ever thought o f them.”54 His
detachment from the library-going class o f African-Americans was such that, "I knew
that there were Negro doctors, lawyers, newspapermen, but I never saw any o f them.”55
African-Americans were not barred from the grounds o f the main library - they
were allowed to borrow books on behalf o f white patrons, and Wright had done just that
for several o f his bosses. Taking advantage o f this exception, Wright persuaded a
Catholic white man - who was by his religion a fellow “object o f hatred” in the office to allow Wright to use the white man’s library card and take out something by
Mencken.56
A review o f W right’s interactions with the white librarian may suggest some of
the defects o f library service in the African-American branches. Wright, not knowing
any o f the titles o f Mencken’s books, had forged a note saying, “Dear Madam: Will you
please let this nigger boy have some books by H. L. Mencken?” (Wright used the epithet
to make it appear that he could not have written the note.) The librarian, echoing earlier
comments by W right’s white sponsor, Mr. Falk, was concerned about an AfricanAmerican reading material by Mencken; but a lie about being illiterate removed Wright
from suspicion. She accommodated the request by delivering two o f Mencken’s books,

54 Ibid., 251.
55 Ibid., 251-52.
56 I b i d Black Boy, 245.
55

but was troubled because she didn’t know which books by Mencken were desired by Mr.
Falk.57
(As an aside, we may note that the unnamed librarian performed high-quality
reader advisory service. For a newcomer to Mencken, A Book o f Prefaces and Prejudices
were excellent choices. The former was the book that made Mencken’s name famous or
infamous and was widely regarded as among his finest, while the latter was Mencken’s
most recent and topical work at time.58)
Consider if Wright had made his way to one o f the branch libraries and made the
same request. If, as it appears, white librarians controlled the book collection at the
branch librarians, and if they held the same attitude toward Mencken’s suitability for
African-American readers as Mr. Falk and the librarian at the main library, then there
would have been no Mencken on the shelves. To be sure, Wright could have asked for a
book to be sent from the main library to the branch. But without being able to search the
card catalog or browse the shelves, how could Wright have known the titles of any
Mencken books to request? A librarian may have helped overcome those obstacles by
consulting bibliographic guides, but she may have been hindered by an inadequate
reference collection as well.
Wright was further handicapped by his exclusion from the library as he tried to
explore the works o f Mencken. He wondered, “Who were these men about whom
Mencken was talking so passionately? Who was Anatole France? Joseph Conrad?
57 An attempt to trace a Mr. Falk who lived in Memphis in 1926 and worked for an
optical company has turned up no information. Perhaps Wright used a pseudonym for his
sympathetic co-worker.
58Dictionary o f Literary Biography, vol. 11, American Humorists, 1800-1950, ed.
Stanley Trachtenberg (Detroit: Gale, 1982), s.v. “Mencken, H. L.”
56

Sinclair Lewis, Sherwood Anderson, Dostoevski... and scores o f others? Were these men
real? Did they exist or had they existed? And how did one pronounce their names?”59 As
a supremely gifted individual, Richard Wright was able to organize his fraudulent library
use and expand his understanding o f literature and writing, but one can imagine an
average person, simply seeking the pleasure o f good literature or the challenge o f
reading, being stymied by the obstacles that stood between an African-American reader
and most o f the library’s collection. Wright persistently felt “a vague hunger ... for
books, books that opened up new avenues o f feeling and seeing, and again I would forge
another note to the white librarian. Again I would read and wonder as only the naive and
unlettered can read and wonder, feeling that I carried a secret, criminal burden about with
me each day.”60
Richard Wright was bold enough to bear his “secret, criminal burden” and hungry
enough for learning to risk an encounter with white authorities. It is not known how
many other African-Americans shared those characteristics - and the opportunities
Wright had, which would have been limited to people working downtown with white
colleagues willing to indulge them. Differential literacy rates may have also influenced
demand for library services. In 1930, 5.9% o f native-born whites in Memphis were
illiterate, while 8.2% o f African Americans could not read.61
The contradictions embodied in W right’s story reflect the larger picture o f library
service to African-Americans: a noble intention o f providing excellent librarianship, but
59 Wright, Black Boy, 248-49.
60 Ibid., 252.
61 United States Bureau of the Census, Fifteenth Census o f the United States: 1930, vol.
3, part 2 (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office, 1931), 890.
57

delivered inadequately and out o f sight o f most o f the African-American citizens of
Memphis. It was not uncommon for white southerners to fail to recognize the dichotomy
between segregation and other ideals o f democracy and equality. For example, at about
the same time Wright arrived in Memphis, the Board o f Directors adopted a Code o f
Ethics for Cossitt Library. Most o f the points dealt with on-the-job behavior, but the last
item was ideological. It read:
“THE ETHICS OF THE PROFESSION MUST STAND FOR:
1. A spirit o f democracy.
2. Freedom of thought and expression permitting the fullest initiative within the
limits o f the broad policies o f the library.
3. A broad social view point.”62
Richard Wright had certainly not experienced a broad social view point or spirit
o f democracy - but it is likely that many white patrons would say that they had.
As Timothy Burgess has demonstrated, American librarians have always
struggled with reconciling their twin missions o f promoting community stability and
advancing access to information.63 In the 1920s, the ideal o f advancing access was
current among a select group o f librarians who formed a round table “for workers among
colored people” to discuss shared concerns at American Library Association meetings.
The ideal o f promoting community stability (through enforcing white supremacy), o f

62 Minutes, November 18, 1925.
63 John Timothy Freedom Burgess, “Virtue Ethics and the Narrative Identity of American
Librarianship, 1876 to Present” (Ph.D. diss, University of Alabama, 2013.)
58

course, was manifested by the “dismal state o f library service to African Americans” in
those places where it even existed.64
In Memphis, some gains were seen for African-American library patrons in the
1920s, even as the library branches remained obscure and underutilized. Many o f the
advances stemmed from new leadership at the Cossitt Library.
In late 1924, the head Librarian, Charles Johnston, died, leaving his many friends
in Memphis bereft. Among those was T. O. Fuller, who wrote for public consumption a
memorial to Johnston:
In the death o f the late Charles D. Johnson... my race has lost a sincere
friend and helper.
For 24 years I have been a student o f conditions, and a worker among my
people in this city with the hope o f bringing them to high standards o f living and
enabling them to make their best contribution to the life o f the community.
Among the friends in other groups, none have been more sincere in their
sympathies nor more willing to render assistance than the late Chas. D. Johnston.
Through the LeMoyne and Howe branches o f the Cossitt Library
thousands o f young people have acquired the reading habit, which has been
divided along proper constructive lines by the teachers in the public schools.
These branches, located in the residence sections and in easy reach o f the business
section, have been o f great educational value to our people.65

64 Klaus Musmann, “The Ugly Side of Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services
from 1900 to 1950,” in Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black Librarianship, ed. John
Mark Tucker (Champaign: University of Illinois Press, 1998), 84-85.
65 T. O. Fuller, letter to the editor, Memphis News Scimitar, November 25, 1924.
59

Fuller’s assessment may be questioned. Miriam DeCosta-Willis notes that he was
“a proponent o f racial accommodationism... who believed in appeal rather than
protest.”66 Nonetheless, as a statement o f the value placed upon branch libraries by some
in the African-American educational community, Fuller’s letter shows a strong interest in
the libraries by at least some African-American Memphians.
Those citizens must have been cheered by the initial actions o f Johnston’s
successor, Jesse Cunningham. Cunningham was a Missouri native who had formal
training in librarianship - a first for the leader o f Cossitt Library. After his appointment
in early 1925, he introduced a number o f professional practices to the library system,
such as organizing books using the Dewey Decimal System.67 His reform o f the
LeMoyne branch was particularly dramatic.
When he came to inspect the LeMoyne branch, Cunningham was satisfied with
the competence o f the librarian in charge there, but not with the usage the library
received. He was especially dissatisfied with the quality of the book collection. As
discards from the main branch they were “not books that might have stimulated a desire
to read or satisfied the desire o f one wanting to read.” His solution was to have the entire
collection removed from the shelves and burnt! The replacement o f the old book stock
with newer, more appropriate materials did not have an appreciable effect on library
usage at the LeMoyne branch.68

66 Miriam DeCosta-Willis, “T. O. Fuller,” in Notable Black Memphians (Amherst, N.Y.:
Cambria Press, 2008), 133-34.
67 G. Wayne Dowdy, Hidden History o f Memphis (Charleston, S.C.: History Press, 2010),
66-67.
68 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 22-23.
60

Cossitt Library continued to seek highly trained librarians for its AfricanAmerican branches. In addition to the training offered in Louisville by Thomas F. Blue,
in 1925 the Hampton Institute opened a Library School. Hampton Institute, an AfricanAmerican school in Virginia, focused its efforts on training college librarians but also
graduated public librarians.69 While the Hampton Library School eventually became a
course o f study terminating in a bachelor’s degree, at its inception it was a junior
undergraduate program.70 When the Cossitt Library agreed in 1926 to hire Virginia Dare
Young, a recent Hampton graduate, to be an assistant at the LeMoyne branch with a
salary o f $75 per month, it added to its staff a member o f the initial graduating class from
this first southern institution to grant library degrees to African-Americans.71
The library’s insistence on “trained colored librarians” for its African-American
branches was manifested later in 1926 when a vacancy occurred in the chief librarian’s
position at LeMoyne. The Cossitt Library board o f directors made an arrangement with
the American Missionary Society, sponsors o f LeMoyne Institute, to supplement
Cossitt’s budget and provide a high enough salary to recruit a qualified candidate.72
The late 1920s saw a continuation o f the ebb and flow o f advancements in library
services countered by setbacks. The Howe branch was closed at the end o f 1926. This
event may indicate the use o f the library as a political tool.

69 Eliza Atkins Gleason, The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study o f the
Government and Administration o f Public Library Service to Negroes in the South (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1941), 25.
7 Reinette F. Jones, Library Service to African Americans in Kentucky (Jefferson, N.C.:
McFarland, 2002), 81.
71 Minutes, June 1, 1926.
72 Minutes, September 16, 1926.
61

In that year, a struggling African-American Baptist college in Nashville called
Roger Williams University ceased operations due to financial difficulties caused in part
by a series o f unexplained fires that white crews refused to extinguish. The students and
faculty from Roger Williams were relocated to Memphis and merged into the Howe
College, as it had become known.73 Fuller was enthusiastic about the opportunities for an
expanded, improved Howe College presented by the merger, and began making
arrangements to build a new facility on South Parkway, in a neighborhood already
populated with African-Americans. However, the prospect o f an educational institution
in Memphis that would attract African-American students from the North was too much
for a number o f white citizens. Several civic clubs pressured the city commission to deny
a permit for construction, and the new Howe College was never built.74
To follow such a crushing blow to Fuller and Howe College with a removal o f its
branch library would seem needlessly cruel - unless this was some sort o f punishment
intended for Fuller’s effrontery in showing untoward ambition for an African-American
educational program.
Regardless o f the intentions behind the move, it appears that T. O. Fuller, as head
o f Howe College, regretted the closure. In the letter quoted earlier (written on letterhead
that boasted among other amenities, “Modem Library and Reading Room”), he
remonstrated to the Board o f Cossitt Library that, “For twenty-five years I have been in
charge o f this school, and I have sought every opportunity to elevate my people and there

73 Bobby L. Lovett, The African-American History o f Nashville, Tennessee, 1780-1930
(Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 1999), 154.
74 David M. Tucker, Black Pastors and Leaders: Memphis, 1819-1972 (Memphis:
Memphis State University Press, 1975), 65.
62

is nothing more effective than the printed page well selected and properly studied. You
can never know, how the young life o f my race has been inspired as directed by the
reading and research in connection with other lines of social and literary work.”75 To add
insult to injury, the books from the Howe branch were not moved to the LeMoyne
branch, but rather transferred to the main library.76
The Howe branch was closed “with the understanding that a High School Branch
be established in the Booker T. Washington School” (a new high school being built for
African-American students).77 The BTW branch would also serve as a hub from which a
staffer would direct high school library service for African American students. That
branch did not open until late 1928 and never served the public outside o f the BTW
student body. The closure o f the Howe branch did not reflect an oversupply o f library
service to African Americans in Memphis. The Howe and LeMoyne branches were both
located in South Memphis. Meanwhile, significant populations o f African Americans
lived in the neighborhoods o f Douglass (where the first park open to African-Americans
had been established), Orange Mound, North Memphis (especially New Chicago,
Smokey City, and Klondyke), and Binghamton, all o f which were miles away from the
LeMoyne branch (figure 2). Memphis did not have a consolidated “black belt” but rather
had concentrated pockets o f African-American residences that had grown up around

75 Fuller to Pepper, January 19, 1927.
76 Minutes, December 16, 1926.
77 Jesse Cunningham, “Orange Mound Petition,” memorandum to Board of Directors of
Cossitt Library, May 17, 1927, L.H.C.
63

workplaces such as railroad yards, lumber mills and cotton warehouses.78 To expect a
single branch to suffice for library service to the more than 60,000 African Americans in
Memphis was unrealistic - as DeWitt Alcom pointed out to the Board.79 Alcorn,
president o f the Orange Mound Booster’s Club, wrote to the Cossitt Library Board in
early 1927 that:
“A round trip to town requires the consideration o f 14 cents, and with
perfect transfer connections, one and half hour [sic] by street car service. A trip
to a downtown branch, LeMoyne or Booker Washington is, as the condition
discloses, prohibitive because o f the time and monetary expenditure. We could
almost say there are no parents who could afford, say the library accommodation
o f three children under prevailing circumstances. Our youngsters are ganged
about on street comers and in questionable resorts as an alternative.
... this section would most likely excell [sic] any colored community in
book circulation. For example, I brought at my expense about 300 discharged
books from Cossitt and in four days the boys and girls had come from all over the
entire vicinity and had taken every book.”

78 Vickie Hankins Peters, “Housing by Color: The Memphis Story, 1900-1955,” (M.A.
thesis, University of Memphis, 2001), 7; Robin Flowerdew, “Spatial Patterns of Residential
Segregation in a Southern City ''Journal o f American Studies 13, no. 1 (1979): 93-107:
79 Population figure derived from the 1920 census, United States Bureau of the Census,
Fourteenth Census o f the United States Taken in the Year 1920, vol. 5 (Washington, D.C.:
Government Printing Office, 1923), 1426.
64

Alcorn went on to propose that Cossitt open a small branch library in the spare rooms o f
the office o f a willing physician, D. J. Thomas. The Booster Club would provide
volunteers to staff the branch.80

FIGURE 2. Approximate locations o f library branches serving African-Americans,
compared to majority African-American neighborhoods, ca. 1940. Map adapted from
Roger Biles, Memphis in the Great Depression (Knoxville: University o f Tennessee
Press, 1986), 91.

3

BWi

Black Neighborhoods

H

Public Housing
Bayous and Swamps

±

Main Library (whites only)
LeMoyne branch, ca. 1903-1914
LeMoyne branch, 1914-1932
Howe branch, 1914-1926
Booker T. Washington High School
branch, ca. 1928-1935
Church Auditorium, 1935-1936,
1939
Butler Street branch, 1937-1939
Negro branch, after 1939

▲
▲
^
^

1DeWitt Alcorn to H. H. Litty, February 12, 1927, L.H.C.
65

Cunningham gave careful thought to the request and to the shortcomings of
Cossitt Library service to African Americans. Three months after Alcorn’s letter,
Cunningham wrote a memorandum for the Board o f Directors. He stated that the
LeMoyne branch “operates imperfectly as a library o f people o f its community, being
used almost entirely by the students and faculty o f LeMoyne,” but pledged that it would
be “reorganized and enlarged within the present year and every effort made to increase its
usefulness.” He also noted that the branch contemplated for BTW had not been opened
yet, and he deemed it “ill advised” to establish another branch before his staff could
implement the existing plans for improving library service. He also projected that the
Orange Mound School needed library service “more than the community needs a Branch”
and expected that that the library would extend service in Orange Mound after the BTW
branch was completed.81 By the “Orange Mound School” Cunningham may have meant
Melrose School, which had been in operation since the 1880s.82
The branch library that was supposed to serve in place o f the Howe branch proved
an insufficient resource. The Howe branch closure was effective January 1, 1927, and
the branch at Booker T. Washington High School did not open for nearly two years. The
only library service for African-Americans during this period was at LeMoyne. Records
are contradictory regarding the date that the BTW branch opened. In late 1928, the
Board o f Directors noted that the branch was to open on December 15 under the
supervision o f Ora Lee Newton; but in their December meeting it was noted that the

81 Cunningham, “Orange Mound Petition.”
82 Charles Williams, African-American Life and Culture in Orange Mound: Case Study o f
a Black Community in Memphis, Tennessee, 1890-1980 (Lanham, Md.: Lexington Books, 2013),
82.
66

branch opened on December 17.83 In February o f 1929, however, the Board “discussed
at length” the matter o f “furnishing further library service to colored people.” Their
conclusion was that “an early opening o f the branch in the Booker T. Washington
Technical High School is probably imminent and greatly to be desired.”84 As late as
1932, the Cossitt Board planned to “proceed” with opening a branch at BTW.85 It seems
the BTW branch began operation in earnest in 1932 after the collection at LeMoyne was
transferred to the high school.86
Whenever it opened, by some accounts the BTW branch never truly served the
public. The school’s principal, Blair T. Hunt, recalled that, while the branch was
nominally open to any African-American citizen, it was exclusively visited by students
and teachers at the high school. The financial arrangement was that Cossitt Library
furnished the books and supervised the organization and operation o f the library, while
the school paid the librarian’s salary via fundraising activities.

87

After about five years,

in Hunt’s recollection, the Cossitt Library suspended its participation and the school took
over library services. This is not consistent with the Cossitt Library’s school libraries
program, which remained in operation until 1965, but perhaps Hunt’s memory was
simply o f BTW reverting to the same library program as other schools.88 In contrast to

83 Minutes, November 15, 1928; December 20, 1928.
84 Minutes, February 21, 1929.
85 Minutes, December 15, 1932.
86 Jesse Cunningham to William M. Stanton, April 6, 1939, L.H.C.
87 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 25.
88 C. Lamar Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” in Encyclopedia o f
Library and Information Science, ed. Allen Kent, vol. 17 (New York: Dekker, 1976), 444.
67

Hunt’s telling, Cunningham wrote in 1939 that the BTW branch had “operated
successfully” since the closure o f the LeMoyne branch.89
The Great Depression was not uniform in its effects: African-Americans and the
South took worse blows than other groups and regions in the United States.90 By 1932,
the unemployment rate among African Americans in Memphis exceeded 30%.91 Despite
that, conditions in the city were better than on the farms o f the Mid-South, and AfricanAmerican migration to Memphis soared.92 As may have been expected, library service
suffered throughout Memphis, but particularly for African-Americans. At the same
time, the Great Depression witnessed a flurry o f innovations in philanthropy, and
beginning in 1931 African-Americans in rural Shelby County benefitted from the
inauguration o f library service through the benefaction o f the Rosenwald Fund, which
provided funds to support public library branches within rural schools throughout the
South.
Politically, the Crump machine was at the height o f its powers in the 1930s during several elections in that period Crump’s candidates enjoyed “the honor o f having
no opposition.”93 As part o f his political strategy, Crump continued building public
works in African-American neighborhoods. Beale Avenue Park was constructed in 1933

89 Jesse Cunningham to William M. Stanton, April 6, 1939, L.H.C.
90 Denise Lynn, “Great Depression, 1929-1933,” in Encyclopedia o f American Recessions
and Depressions (Santa Barbara, Calif.: ABC-Clio, 2014), 479.
91 Roger Biles, Memphis in the Great Depression (Knoxville: University of Tennessee
Press, 1986), 92.
92 Ibid., 90.
93 G. Wayne Dowdy, Mayor Crump Don’t Like It: Machine Politics in Memphis
(Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2006), 75.
68

and a swimming pool was built in South Memphis in 1938.94 At the same time, Crump’s
officials disregarded New Deal regulations regarding equal wages and prioritized hiring
o f whites for public works.95 In 1933 Civil Works Administration funds were made
available to Cossitt Library, and workers were employed in making repairs to the main
library and the Binghamton branch library for white citizens, as well as in cataloging. Yet
none were hired to provide library service for African Americans.96
African-Americans were still subject to police brutality and even occasional
forced labor in the 1930s. When the Mississippi River flooded in 1937, police were
given an order to round up African-American men to work on the levee, and proceeded to
dragoon men as they left theaters and restaurants on Beale Street.97 The two sides o f the
Crump machine can be seen in the construction of public housing. Between 1935 and
1941 Dixie Homes, Foote Homes, and LeMoyne Gardens were constructed to provide
new, well-built homes for African-Americans. Such efforts did much to alleviate the
substandard housing in which most African-Americans lived - and yet the AfricanAmerican community often paid a high price for them. African-American
neighborhoods were razed to make way for parallel public housing projects for whites,
and a middle-class African-American neighborhood was destroyed so that Foote Homes
could take its place.98

94 Ibid., 61,98.
95 Roger Biles, “The Persistence of the Past: Memphis in the Great Depression,” Journal
o f Southern History 52, no. 2 (1986): 208.
96 Minutes, December 21, 1933.
97 Dowdy, Mayor Crump Don’t Like It, 97; Patrick O’Daniel, Memphis and the Super
Flood o f 1937: High Water Blues (Charleston, S.C.: History Press, 2010): 107-108.
98 Biles, Memphis in the Great Depression, 94-95.
69

As discussed, the BTW high school branch proved to be little help to readers
outside the school walls. The LeMoyne branch, which had also proved to be more
popular with students than community readers, ceased its relationship with Cossitt
Library in 1932. In retrospect, Hoffman concluded that “the public, it seemed, could not
adjust itself to seek or use free public library service in a private institution.” And while
the Board desired a more suitable location for an African-American branch, “it appears
though that they were not willing to erect a public library building for Negroes. Nor is
there any evidence that there was any effort made by the Negroes themselves to secure
such a building.”99
The closing o f the LeMoyne branch, like that o f the Howe branch, appears at first
to be a matter o f retaliation for overweening African-American ambition. LeMoyne
Institute had a new president, a white man named Frank Sweeney, who sought
accreditation for his college. The Southern Association o f Colleges and Secondary
Schools evaluated the Institute and found its library to be substandard. When Sweeney
suggested the Cossitt Library increase the size of the collection to meet the SACSS
standard, Cunningham demurred. As the branch library was intended to serve the public
and not merely the students o f LeMoyne, Sweeney’s request and its consequent increase
in expenditures could not be justified.100
Sweeney then moved to purchase a sufficient number o f books to satisfy SACSS
- and bypassed library procedures for selection and cataloging. As a result, the library
had a mixture o f books. Some belonged to the Cossitt Library and meeting

99 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 23.
100 Ibid., 23-24.
70

Cunningham’s professional standards, and other those belonged to LeMoyne Institute and
did not meet Cunningham’s approval. Upon discovering this situation, Cunningham
suggested that Cossitt withdraw from the LeMoyne branch.101
Sweeney’s decision was impolitic at best, but it perhaps only served as final
confirmation that the LeMoyne branch was unsatisfactory to its intended public as well as
its host institution. Later reflection by Rosa Cooke, who was to serve as a librarian at
various African-American branches o f Cossitt Library between 1937 and 1955, noted that
“there was a hesitancy on the part o f most colored people to make use o f the LeMoyne
Library facilities because the location o f the Library gave the impression that it was for
school people only. This fact, with a growing need to confine the facilities o f the college
library to the college students, resulted in the college taking complete administration of
the Library in 1932.” 102
In the end, the closing o f LeMoyne may have been less a matter o f racial politics
than bureaucratic turf warfare, as Cossitt Library intended to continue library service for
African Americans. In an agreement with Sweeney dated December 15, 1932, the Board
of Cossitt Library agreed to support the salary o f the LeMoyne librarian for several
months per his contract, and to “proceed with the establishment o f a Branch Library at
Booker T. Washington School, this branch to serve the students o f that school and be
open to all negroes o f the community.” 103 The books at LeMoyne belonging to Cossitt
Library were to be transferred to the BTW branch. Due to the unanticipated failure o f the

101 Ibid., 24.
102 Rosa Cooke, quoted in Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 24.
103 Minutes, December 15, 1932.
71

public to access the BTW branch, for three years no African Americans who were not
students in the city schools received library services.
For African-American readers outside the city limits, the same period saw a great
expansion o f access to libraries. Library service to Tennesseans living outside o f major
cities was scarce until 1929, when the state legislature empowered county governments to
establish libraries using either general funds or a library-specific levy.104 As late as 1960,
all o f the Shelby County library branches were restricted to white patrons only, with the
exception o f a branch inside a bi-racial hospital in Oakville.105
To combat the detrimental effects o f racism on educational opportunities, Julius
Rosenwald, an executive o f Sears, Roebuck (notably serving as president from 1908 to
1924), had been funding charitable projects for the betterment o f African Americans in
the South since 1910; in particular, his money had been used to build almost 5,000
schools, including a number in Shelby County.106 In 1928, the Rosenwald Fund
expanded its scope to include rural libraries accessible by African-Americans, and in
1929 eleven demonstration projects were inaugurated, including one in Shelby County.

104 Louis R. Wilson and Edward A. Wight, County Libraiy Service in the South: A Study
o f the Rosenwald County Library Demonstration (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1935),
28.
105 Margaret C. McCulloch, “Rural Libraries in West Tennessee, March 1961,” report to
Tennessee Council on Human Relations, March 1961, L.H.C.
106 Peter Max Ascoli, Julius Rosenwald: The Man Who Built Sears, Roebuck and
Advanced the Cause o f Black Education in the American South (Bloomington: Indiana University
Press, 2006); Daniel Aaronson and Bhashkar Mazumder, “The Impact of Rosenwald Schools on
Black Achievement,” Journal o f Political Economy 119, no. 5 (2011): 827.
107 Jackson E. Towne, “Rural School Library Service from County Libraries Aided by the
Julius Rosenwald Fund,” Peabody Journal o f Education 8, no. 1 (1930): 7-8; Wilson and Wight,
County Libraiy Service in the South, v.
72

The Rosenwald Foundation’s general plan was to extend aid to local government
with the expectation o f matching funds from the counties. Typically, the Rosenwald
funds were used to open branch libraries in schools serving both races, and the branches
were open to the general public. Lucile Merriwether reported that, “The aid was to
extend over a five-year period (later extended to seven years at the request o f the Fund)
with a sliding scale for matching appropriations: one dollar from the Fund for a dollar
from local sources during each o f the first two years, one dollar from the Fund for two
dollars from local sources for the third and fourth years, and finally one dollar from the
Fund to match four from local sources for the fifth year.” 108
Records do not indicate the reason for it, but the Cossitt Library was approached
by the Rosenwald Fund to administer the demonstration project in Shelby County. The
newness o f the county library system, enacted in the same year as the Rosenwald
proposal, may have precluded its participation. Due to an extended period o f negotiation
with Shelby County authorities, more than two years passed between the offer from the
Rosenwald Fund and the opening o f Rosenwald branch libraries in rural schools. The
Rosenwald Fund proposal was first discussed in April o f 1929, and approved by the
Cossitt Board in June.109 It was not until July o f 1930 that the Shelby County Board o f
Education appropriated $13,500 for support o f Rosenwald libraries, and only in October
was a budget approved by both parties.110 More months passed as contracts were drawn
up and approved by the Cossitt Board and the Board o f Education, and then two
l08Lucile Merriwether, “High School Library Service in Tennessee Rosenwald
Demonstration Units,” Peabody Journal o f Education 12, no. 3 (1934): 128.
109 Minutes, April 18, 1929; June 18, 1929.
110 Minutes, July 17, 1930; October 16, 1930.
73

(presumably white) Cossitt employees received training through Julius Rosenwald
Scholarships at the Library School o f Emory University.111
Finally, with the beginning o f the school year in August 1931, three Rosenwald
libraries were opened in African-American high schools in rural Shelby County.112 A
month later, five more branches for African-Americans were opened in junior high
schools (along with six branches for white residents). Each branch had around 500
volumes.113 The grant as finally negotiated gave the Cossitt Library administrative
jurisdiction over the selection and cataloging o f books and supervision of library
employees. The library workers remained employees o f Shelby County, however. The
county recompensed Cossitt Library for administrative expenses.114
Although the inauguration o f the Rosenwald Libraries was a great advance for
African-American readers, the Shelby County Board o f Education had supplied less
money for their operation than other local government bodies - it only granted $190,000
over five years (about 75 cents per resident), while the more thinly populated Hamilton
County (seated in Chattanooga) provided around $216,000 for the Rosenwald Libraries
(about $ 1.81 per resident).115 The last payment from the Rosenwald Fund came in
1937.116 Until 1952, the Shelby County Board o f Education continued to contract the
Cossitt Library to administer its school libraries, but after that took over their own
111 Minutes, February 19, 1931, March 19, 1931; June 18,1931.
112 Minutes, August 20, 1931.
113 Minutes, September 17, 1931.
114 Minutes, October 16, 1930.
115 Merriwether, “High School Library Service,” 128.
116Minutes, December 16, 1937.
74

operations. By 1961 all o f the African-American county libraries had closed, with the
exception o f the hospital branch at Oakville.117
In the city o f Memphis, the Cossitt Library recognized a need to restore public
library service outside o f BTW. In perhaps the clearest indication o f political motives,
the Board’s minutes from August 16, 1934, note that Cunningham called to their
attention a “petition o f a Committee o f colored citizens for the establishment o f a branch
library for the colored people, also the interest and cooperation being shown by Mayor
[Watkins] Overton for the City Commission and Mr. Renfrow for the Park Commission,
and the proposal to use a very suitable room in the Church Auditorium on Beale Ave.” 118
The Church Auditorium was located within Robert R. Church Park at the comer of
Fourth and Beale; although Church Park originally had been a private venture owned by
Robert R. Church, Sr., by the 1930s it was municipal property. The Board approved
locating a branch library within the Church Park Auditorium.
Within a month, the Park Commission began construction o f furniture for the
branch library, while Cossitt Library staff made arrangements to relocate suitable
materials to the branch. From the context o f the minutes, it appears that those materials
came from the main library, although that is not certain.119 Records show that the
collection at BTW did circulate through 1935, indicating that those materials were left in
place.120

117 Wallis, “Memphis and Shelby County Public Library,” 442.
118 Minutes, August 16, 1934.
119 Minutes, September 20, 1934.
120 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 26.
75

Demand among African-American Memphians for library services was, in the
1930s, a strong driver o f change. The petition mentioned in September o f 1934, coming
at a time when the Crump machine was seeking ways to shore up its support in the
African-American community, proved to be a powerful incentive. In January 1935 the
branch library in Church Auditorium was opened to the public and immediately proved
popular. As Hoffman notes, its location at the edge o f the main commercial district for
African Americans paralleled the main library’s position near the white business
downtown. Circulation at the “well organized free library independent o f an educational
institution” was triple that o f the LeMoyne branch.121
Typically, however, the African-American readers o f Memphis were given the
bare minimum o f service. Branch libraries in white neighborhoods were placed in
storefronts, rented at the library’s expense, and dedicated as spaces for library service.
By contrast, the African-American branch was located in a shared space already owned
by the city. The room in the auditorium proved to be an undesirable location for a
library. Behind it was a playground, and inside the auditorium was a gymnasium. The
noise o f running and playing was distracting to those who wished to concentrate.122
After only a year in Church Auditorium, it was clear that the location was not
working for library service. A series o f fortuitous circumstances led to a quick turnover
o f locations for several years, but by 1939, there was a permanent, free standing branch
library for African Americans.

121 Ibid., 26.
122 Ibid., 26.
76

The unsatisfactory location o f the branch on Beale Street may have been brought
to the attention o f Cunningham through another mechanism in which African-American
Memphians had a semblance o f a voice, but also clearly lacked control. When the branch
opened, “a few Negroes prominent in political circles” were consulted about forming a
Negro Advisory Board for the library.123 The prominent leaders themselves (probably
men like George W. Lee and Robert Church, Jr.) were not on the committee, but AfricanAmerican professionals including teachers, pastors, and dentists served on it. Hoffman
interviewed two o f the Advisory Board members and their recollections show some of
ways that African Americans were stymied in Crump’s Memphis. One member could
not recall ever attending a meeting and felt his appointment had probably been due to his
having expressed an interest in libraries. The other member called it “an empty honor to
flatter their ego and to give the impression that Negroes participated in policy-making
affairs.” 124 Although he could not identify any concrete accomplishments o f the Advisory
Board, one member was “quite outspoken about the location of the Negro Library in the
noise and confusion o f a park auditorium.” The Advisory Board ceased to meet after a
few sessions.125
As early as April 1936, the Board o f Cossitt Library was considering, yet again,
the “most suitable location for a branch for colored people.” 126 The board suggested
BTW yet again. Whether this indicates a desire to revive the former level o f service, or

123 Ibid., 35.
124Ibid., 36.
125 Ibid., 36-37.
126 Minutes, April 18, 1936.
77

that BTW never operated at the level o f service expected by the Board, remains unclear.
Regardless, BTW never again hosted a branch for non-student readers, in September, the
Park Commission informed Cunningham that it “desired the quarters [in Church
Auditorium] for their use,” leaving the library to seek new accommodations; this did not
fluster Cunningham, as the auditorium was “not satisfactory because o f activities there
that interfere with library service, and the library could function better, if a more suitable
location can be found.” 127 In a letter to Mayor Watkins Overton, Cunningham averred
that “We have met with a great deal o f difficulty in finding a suitable place so located as
to reach the largest number o f the colored population,” and went on to note that, “The
problem involves more than just the moving of the present library. We would tike this
move to involve a planned program for the establishment o f a library that would serve as
the center for library service to the colored population, just as the library, at Front and
Monroe, serves as the center for service to the white population.”
One should not confuse Cunningham’s professional commitment to providing the
best service to African American readers with any personal sympathy for his fellow
citizens o f color. That same year, racial controversy roiled the national library
community, and Cunningham came out very publicly for segregation. In May o f 1936,
the American Library Association held its annual convention in Richmond, Virginia. In
accordance with local practice, African-American attendees were excluded from social
gatherings and meals and required to use separate doors and sit in separate sections from

127 Jesse Cunningham to Watkins Overton, September 19, 1936, L.H.C.
128 Ibid.
78

white attendees.129 The library professional press was filled with what Cunningham
called “rather strong criticisms o f the Southern customs with respect to negroes,” and he
responded with a letter to the Library Journal: 130
The South is accustomed to be tolerant and amused over the efforts o f committees
to solve their Negro problem s... Liberal provisions were made for Negro
librarians to attend sessions at Richmond. Adequate provisions were likewise
made at New Orleans and Louisville. It is just unfortunate that emphasis was
placed on the negative side o f Negroes attending meetings where food was
served. No Negro attending a meeting in Richmond would expect this. It is not
the custom .... From a section where they confess a superior civilization comes an
attempt to formulate rules of conduct for another section. Why not remember that
necessity has its own laws which transcend all others... What does Rhode Island
or New Jersey know about the Southern Negro? A population of five whites to
one Negro does not make a problem. It is another matter entirely where
communities have a Negro population ranging from 3 to 1 to 7 to 1. The entire
Negro population o f Providence would not make a crowd for the dice and policy
games on Beale Street, Memphis, on a Saturday night.131
Cunningham had made clear that in the library’s director, African-American readers of
Memphis would find a man who thoroughly approved o f a separate branch. Furthermore,
he engaged in racial caricatures and stereotypes, along with the common wishful thinking
129 Jean L. Preer, “ ‘This Year—Richmond!’: The 1936 Meeting of the American Library
Association,” Libraries and Culture 39, no. 2 (2004): 137-60.
130 Jesse Cunningham to Bertine E. Weston, June 3, 1936, L.H.C.
131 Jesse Cunningham, letter to the editor, Library Journal, July 1936: 515.
79

about African-Americans’ acceptance o f segregation. He was not alone - in response he
received letters o f approbation from librarians in Greenville, South Carolina, and
Providence, Rhode Island!132
A temporary solution to the problem o f finding a standalone site for an AfricanAmerican library branch was found when an empty storefront at 366-368 E. Butler Street
became available. This site was about four blocks south o f the Church Auditorium. A
certain amount o f refurbishment was required to make the space serviceable as a library,
but between the agreement to lease the building on January 21, 1937, and its opening on
June 7, contractors fixed up the plumbing, wiring, sidewalks, and steps.133 Keeping with
the Cossitt Library’s practice o f hiring trained librarians to serve African-American
patrons, it hired Rosa Cooke, a graduate o f BTW, LeMoyne, and the library program at
Atlanta University, as the librarian for the Butler Street Branch.134 Cunningham
organized a Colored Citizens Committee on the library and reported that the group had
held meetings and was arranging an Opening Day Program for the new branch.135
The Butler Street branch was not the only advance in library service to AfricanAmericans during the late 1930s. The library became involved in public housing in
October 1938, when a small branch library, supervised by a social worker, was opened
inside the administrative offices o f Foote Homes.136 Given the inadequate geographic

132 Fanny Taber to Jesse Cunningham, August 16, 1936; Clarence Sherman to Jesse
Cunningham, July 1936; L.H.C.
133 Minutes, January 7, 1937; January 15, 1937; May 20, 1937.
134 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 28.
135 Minutes, May 20, 1937.
136 Minutes, October 13, 1938; Jesse Cunningham to William M. Stanton, April 6, 1939,
L.H.C.
80

coverage o f the widely separated African-American neighborhoods in Memphis, this
choice seems myopic: Foote Homes was about a half-mile from the Butler Street branch,
while Dixie Homes was about two miles away. The question of the placement of
libraries for African-Americans would persist for the next two decades.
Between 1938 and 1940, the relationship between the Crump machine and
African-American Memphians changed profoundly. According to Wayne Dowdy, the
triggering event was an event o f police brutality, in which African-American postal
worker George Brooks was shot to death under questionable circumstances. Community
leaders including Fuller, Hunt, and the president o f Universal Life Insurance, J. E.
Walker, protested to Crump, but their complaints were ignored; subsequently, political
leaders in the African-American community threatened to withhold their votes from
Crump’s candidates. Additional public works, including a swimming pool and a park,
were promised to stanch the defections. In the 1938 gubernatorial primary Crump’s
candidate was victorious, but by a margin 9,000 votes smaller than in 1936. Dowdy
attributes the difference to African-American votes going against the Crump machine.137
David Tucker’s analysis is that “the machine’s manipulation o f the Negro vote
had become so outrageous that it finally brought... investigation” so that “the machine
decided not to tamper with the Negro vote but put pressure on all the white wards
instead.” 138 Either way, it appears that by 1939 the Crump machine had decided to
discontinue courting the African-American vote - and by 1940 imposed a crackdown on
African-American Republican campaign efforts, including seizing the property o f Robert

137 Dowdy, Mayor Crump Don’t Like It, 97-98.
138 Tucker, Lieutenant Lee o f Beale Street, 124.
81

R. Church, Jr.139 The Crump machine’s hard line against Church and his allies disturbed
not only African-American voters, but also a number o f moderate whites. A group called
the Memphis Interracial Commission - formed in 1940 to “create attitudes o f justice,
equity and fair play for all people without regard to race or religion” - decried the
“intimidation and persecution o f citizens by the police.” 140
After 1938, then, the relationship o f the city government to its African-American
citizens was less straightforward. Crump often used police power to intimidate AfricanAmerican politicians, particularly Republicans, who failed to toe his line, but at the same
time the city did continue to cater to African-American Democrats in hopes o f retailning
their votes for the Crump ticket. For example, in 1942 the White Rose Laundry Cleaners
erected a sign depicting “an African-American woman, dressed in traditional mammy
garb, bending over a wash tub.” 141 As the sign moved up and down, the washer revealed
her underpants - apparently an attempt at humor. Incensed, the Negro Chamber of
Commerce called upon Mayor Chandler to have it demolished. The sign quickly
disappeared. In 1948, a wave o f outrage after police rapes o f African-American women
and another police killing o f a young African-American man led to the hiring o f AfricanAmerican patrolmen for the Memphis Police Department.142
By 1948, the Crump machine had lost its grip on the city. Most notoriously, in
late 1947 Crump and Mayor James Pleasants rejected a visit by the Freedom Train, a
139 Dowdy, Mayor Crump Don’t Like It, 109.
140 Marie Gregson Wingfield, “The Memphis Interracial Commission,” West Tennessee
Historical Society Papers 21 (1967): 94, 101.
141 G. Wayne Dowdy, “The White Rose Mammy: Racial Culture and Politics in World
War II Memphis,” Journal o f Negro History 85, no 4 (2000): 310.
142 Green, Battling the Plantation Mentality, 107-109.
82

touring exhibit o f historic documents such as manuscript copies o f the Bill o f Rights and
the Gettysburg Address. Because the Freedom Train required free access by people o f all
races, Memphis leaders refused to have it in town. This troubled not only AfricanAmerican voters, who by then included a large contingent o f World War 11 veterans, but
also a number o f “moderate” whites who were willing to ease segregation in their city.
The votes o f those two groups were lost to the machine, and Crump’s candidate lost the
senatorial primary in Memphis that year.143
Library service for African-Americans in this period was similarly a mixture of
successes and setbacks. Crucially, in 1939 the Cossitt Library erected a standalone
library in South Memphis dedicated to serving African-American patrons. But for many
years following, the library denied requests for expansion o f services in other AfricanAmerican neighborhoods, even as it built branches for whites were at a steadilyincreasing pace.
It seems that the Cossitt Library was not averse to a bit o f real estate speculation.
The Butler Street property had been leased with an option to purchase the property.
Word came that the Memphis Housing Authority (MHA) was contemplating construction
o f another project in the area; with the potential o f earning a tidy profit from sale o f the
lot, the Board o f Directors decided to “exercise the option” and purchase the property in

143 Sandra M. Frink, “ ‘Freedom is Everyone’s Job’: Segregation, Identity, and the
Freedom Train Controversy in Memphis, Tennessee, 1947-1948,” Tennessee Historical Quarterly
66, no. 4 (2007): 329-349.
83

February 1939.144 In short order, the MHA made a bid on the lot, and when the sale
closed in June, the library had realized $1,906.77 in profit.145
The profit was retained as the seed money for a grand project - the renovation of
a new building to serve as a Negro Branch library. For the few months after MHA took
possession o f the Butler Street lot and before the Negro Branch was opened, the library
resumed operations in Church Auditorium.146
The site selected for the new Negro Branch was 531 Vance Avenue, about four
blocks north and east o f the Butler Street branch, and five blocks south and east o f the
Church Auditorium. It was not directly part o f the commercial district o f the Beale Street
neighborhood, but was within walking distance. It was near a streetcarline at a transfer
point, and within a short walk o f BTW and a number o f other schools and large
churches.147 Hoffman describes the neighborhood as transitional, noting that Vance
Avenue had once been the site o f “fine antebellum residences” for whites, but had
become an African-American district as the white population o f South Memphis had
moved eastward.148 The building at 531 Vance Avenue, ironically, had been the target o f
an African-American homeowners’ organization, which urged the city in the late 1930s
to clear the entire south side o f the street in that very block, to eliminate substandard
housing in their neighborhood.149

144 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 29; Minutes, February 16, 1939.
145 Minutes, March 16, 1939; June 15, 1939.
146 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 29.
147 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 31.
148 Ibid., 30.
149 Peters, “Housing by Color,” 41.
84

Prior to its possession by Cossitt Library, the building had been the site o f the
McDowell-Monteverde funeral home.150 Frank Monteverde had served as mayor of
Memphis from 1917 to 1919, but in less than twenty years Vance Avenue had become
firmly established as an African-American neighborhood.151
Rather than building a new edifice, the Cossitt Library completely renovated the
undertakers’ establishment. The work took approximately three months and cost a total
o f $10,654 - far more than was gained from the sale o f the Butler Street property.152
This was the first branch library that Cossitt had constructed as a separate building; the
other branches to date, for whites as well as African-Americans, had been in rented
storefronts.
When completed, the Cossitt Library Negro Branch was “a one story structure o f
gray stone, located some distance from the street with a spacious grassy law n... ample in
size; about one half o f the space [was] used for the book shelves, reading rooms, and the
circulation desk. The other half house[d] the office o f the Librarian and shelves for the
public school depository book collection.” 153 (Figures 3 & 4) The Negro Branch library
was reserved solely to African-American patrons; white patrons living nearby were
redirected to a branch for white readers.

150 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 30.
151 Wayne Dowdy, “E. H. Crump and the Mayors of Memphis,” West Tennessee
Historical Society Papers 53 (1999): 83-84.
152 Minutes, August 17, 1939; August 21, 1939; August 25, 1939; September 21, 1939;
November 16, 1939; March 28, 1940.
153 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 30.
85

FIGURE 3. Undated photograph o f Cossitt Library Negro Branch (source: DigMemphis,
http://memphislibrary.contentdm.oclc.org/)

PRESENT
NEGRO
PUBLIC

LIBRARY

FIGURE 4. Undated promotional material for Cossitt Library Negro Branch (source:
DigMemphis, http://memphislibrary.contentdm.oclc.org/).

87

The Negro Branch opened in the fall o f 1939 (contrary to the text in Figure 4, the
floor was still being finished as late as September 21), under the direction o f Rosa
Cooke.154 It not only served as a public library open to African-Americans, but was the
center for coordinating the school libraries program in African-American libraries, a task
which had been impossible at the branch libraries hosted within other institutions.
Technical services - acquisitions, cataloging and classification - were performed by staff
at the main library, and the books delivered “ready for circulation” to Vance Avenue.155
For the first sixteen years o f its operation, and maybe longer, the Negro Branch was open
six days a week, from 2:00-8:00 p.m. on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, and from
2:00-6:00 p.m. on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday. Cooke had three full-time assistants
and one part-time assistant. Circulation remained similar to the levels seen at Butler
Street.156

In the early 1950s Cooke was succeeded by Pearl Oates, and Geneva
1 f*7

Cooper served as Assistant Librarian.
The Negro Branch quickly took on functions associated with public libraries in
many neighborhoods. Local groups such as Boy Scout troops, a Young Mother’s Club, a
Garden Club, churches, and adult education classes at local schools found the library a
helpful resource in planning their activities and educating their members.158 In the fall of
1940, the Negro Branch made room for the MHA to set up an office to accept rental

154 Minutes, September 21, 1939.
155 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 30.
156 Ibid., 32.
157 Ibid., 33.
158 Ibid., 31.
88

applications for Foote Homes.159 Special programming included a Book Festival in the
spring and Book Week after school resumed in the autumn; exhibits were keyed to
seasonal themes, and book displays tied to local events.160
Although it was underfunded, the Negro Branch played an important role in the
education o f the African-Americans o f Memphis. By 1952, the largest improvements in
literacy among different ethnic groups in Memphis were seen among AfricanAmericans. 161 And as the only library serving African-Americans, the Negro Branch
touched the lives o f many future leaders. Benjamin Head, who served as librarian in the
late 1970s, noted, “All the blacks who lived and were educated in Memphis had to use
that library. For Otis Higgs, Benjamin L. Hooks and any number o f community leaders,
it was the only place. Those who have gone away and returned to visit always mention it
was the only place in the city where they could study and find materials.” 162
The Negro Branch also, o f course, played a part in the Crump machine’s efforts to
retain the African-American vote. In 1944, the city prepared a booklet, Benefits and
Opportunities fo r Colored Citizens o f Memphis: Civic Progress 1940-44, designed to
emphasize the benefits that the city administration provided to its African-American
citizens. It emphasized, among other features, “the city’s one black library branch as a
privilege for African Americans while ignoring the fact that they could not utilize the

159 Minutes, September 19, 1940; October 17, 1940.
160 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 40.
161 James Ewing, “They’re Bringing Books Nearer Home,” CA, October 26, 1952.
162 Gertha Coffee, “Blacks Lost Friend in Burned Branch Library,” CA, July 7, 1978.
89

city’s other library branches.” 163 Naturally, the booklet was distributed at the Negro
Branch library. Cunningham reported to Mayor Walter Chandler that “500 copies o f the
booklets came yesterday and we are putting them in the Vance Avenue Colored Library
for distribution. We have a very intelligent colored librarian in this branch and 1 am real
sure she will make a distribution o f these copies in such a way as they will do the most
good.” 164 The booklet’s authors, to some African-American readers, revealed their true
intentions to continue “degradation o f a race” by failing to capitalize the word Negro. 165
Records o f the budget for the Negro Branch do not remain, but its collection was
not large - in 1942 only 4,781 books were on its shelves; that is, one book for every 14
African-Americans in the city.166 Despite this, Cooke did her best to make the library a
center for research specific to interests within the African-American community. As
early as 1940, Cooke began organizing exhibitions to commemorate Negro History
W eek.167 After the library was burned in the wave o f arsons accompanying the July 1978
firefighters’ strike, its loss was regarded as a great tragedy because the community had
lost the rich collection o f primary and secondary sources on local and worldwide black
culture that Cooke and her colleagues had collected. As Cooper, who continued to serve
at the branch library until 1977, noted, “So much valuable material on black history has
been lost. A lot o f what was destroyed was irreplaceable, first edition material,”

163 Gritter, River o f Hope, 169.
164 Jesse Cunningham to Walter Chandler, October 19, 1944, L.H.C.
165 Gritter, River o f Hope, 169-70.
166 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 32.
167 Inez T. Boyd, letter to the editor, CA, June 14, 1978.
90

including manuscripts by T. O. Fuller and African-American historian Carter G.
W oodson.168
The library’s service to African Americans at Vance Avenue often went
unnoticed - as good library service often does. Beginning in 1953, however, a teacher
named Mauddean Thompson Seward took up her pen and began a weekly column in the
Memphis World newspaper, titled “Know Your Library.” Seward’s columns promoted
library materials keyed to seasonal themes; she focused on those areas the librarian
considered o f special interest to the library’s patrons, such as religious topics, family life,
and child psychology.169
In September 1953, Margaret McCulloch, a white teacher formerly at LeMoyne
College, organized a Committee on Community Service to publicize the library among
those who were not already patrons, and to solicit gifts for the library; Seward was on the
committee.

170

Two o f its members had been members o f the Advisory Board in the

1930s. In their work they were to observe strict guidelines promulgated by Cunningham
- no public solicitation was allowed, nor any fundraising campaign for general purposes.
He “did permit civic and church groups to be contacted by letter.” As had been the case
twenty years before, leading African-American teachers, pastors, and professionals were
given a nominal voice in, but not control of, library management. Cunningham even
reserved the right to veto the addition o f books that were offered for donation. This

168 Coffee, “Blacks Lost Friend.”
169 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 33,40.
170 Mauddeen Thompson Seward, “Know Your Library,” Memphis World (hereafter
abbreviated MW), February 2, 1954.
91

committee was also de-activated after a short while, although its efforts did bear fruit in
the form of donations o f a few dozen books and less than $250 in cash.171
While the Negro Branch performed its important duties well, its distance from
many African-American neighborhoods continued to trouble residents o f those areas. A
1952 newspaper account reported that the Negro Branch had become “a favorite haunt
fo r those who live nearby."112 In 1941, the idea o f putting a library in Orange Mound
arose again, this time at the behest o f “a group o f white people interested in the
improvement o f conditions” there.

173

Nothing came o f that discussion. In 1946, Mayor

Chandler suggested a “New Branch for Colored People in North-East Memphis,” and
sites were scouted along Poplar Avenue, at the corners o f Ashland, Ayers, and Decatur all near Dixie Homes.174 Despite the mayor’s suggestion being “enthusiastically
received” by the Board, nothing came o f those discussions.175 The Cossitt Board and the
City Commission dithered over possible sites for half a year until the matter, it seems,
was dropped.176 In 1949, the Cossitt Library Board again raised the matter o f another
Negro Branch, which was “discussed with favor.” 177 Nothing came o f that discussion.

171 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 33-34.
172 James Ewing, “They’re Bringing Books Nearer Home,” CA, October 26, 1952, italics
mine.
173 Jesse Cunningham to Wassell Randolph, April 3, 1941, L.H.C.
174 Minutes, January 17, 1946; June 27, 1946.
175 Jesse Cunningham to Walter Chandler, January 18,1946, L.H.C.
176 Jesse Cunningham to Walter Chandler, January 29, 1946; March 11, 1946; April 30,
1946; Chandler to Cunningham, May 25, 1946; Cunningham to Chandler, May 30, 1946; July 2,
1946; L.H.C.
177 Minutes, July 21, 1949.
92

As the 1950s loomed, Memphis and its libraries faced drastic changes. Crump
pushed through a $150,000 bond issue in 1951, and a million-dollar bond issue in 1952 to
enable the construction o f permanent branch locations, rather than storefronts, and a new
Central Library to replace the crumbling Cossitt Library downtown.178 Between 1951
and 1968, twelve new branch libraries were constructed all across the city. The master
plan, as Cunningham laid it out to City Comptroller Frank Tobey in 1951, included
“another library for our colored citizens. This project was very active a few years ago but
the exact location was never selected. We feel that this project should be revived.” The
anticipated cost was about $150,000, or fifteen times that o f the Vance Avenue Negro
Branch.179 (Figuring in the inflation o f the World War II years, it was more like eight
times the cost.)180
African-Americans in Memphis were also experiencing an expansion - in their
housing choices, in their popular culture, and in their political power - although it
remained curtailed by the white establishment. As whites began moving east, many
formerly redlined neighborhoods opened up to African-American homeowners,
particularly in South Memphis - although not without some conflict. An AfricanAmerican home on East Olive Street (a few blocks from LeMoyne College) was bombed
in 1953, for example.181 In 1948, radio station WDIA began broadcasting the program

178 Wallis, “Memphis Public Library and Information Center,” 442-43; Jesse
Cunningham to Frank Tobey, July 3, 1952.
179 Wassell Randolph to Frank Tobey, October 31, 1951, L.H.C.
180 Bureau of Labor Statistics, “CPI Inflation Calculator,” http://data.bls.gov/cgibin/cpicalc .pi?cost 1=1OOOO&year 1=1939&y ear2= 1951.
181 Wayne Dowdy, “ ‘Something for the Colored People’: Memphis Mayor Frank Tobey
and the East Olive Bombing,” West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 51 (1997): 110.
93

Tan Town Jamboree and had an entirely African-American on-air presence by the middle
of 1949; the station served not only for entertainment but also to provide community
organizers a forum to share information.182 O f course, white Memphis was not ready for
too much African-American independence. Clear through to 1955, the city o f Memphis
maintained Lloyd Binford as chair o f its municipal Board o f Censors.183 Binford is best
remembered for quashing depictions of African Americans enjoying a station in life for
which they would be ineligible under the rules of segregation in the Memphis. Any film
that depicted “social equality between whites and negroes in a way that is not practiced in
the South” came under Binford’s scrutiny.184
The 1950s also saw a resurgence o f African-American political activity outside o f
the Crump machine’s control. One o f Crump’s tools had been Tennessee’s poll tax - his
organization would pay the tax for African-American voters. But in 1953 the state
eliminated the poll tax.185 As early as 1951, African-American candidates began to seek
election to city offices such as the school board, judgeships, and the city commission building political networks outside o f the Crump machine, or what remained o f it after
Crump’s death in 1954.186

182 Green, Battling the Plantation Mentality, 163-82.
183 Binford’s career is detailed in Whitney Strub, “Black and White and Banned All Over:
Censorship and Obscenity in Postwar Memphis,” Journal o f Social Histoiy 40, no. 3 (2007): 685715;and G. Wayne Dowdy, “Censoring Popular Culture”; see also Richard Ward, “Golden Age,
Blue Pencils: The Hal Roach Studios and Three Case Studies of Censorship during Hollywood’s
Studio Era,” Media History 8, no. 1 (2002): 103-119.
184 Lloyd Binford, quoted in Strub, “Black and White,” 692.
185 Lewis Laski, The Tennessee State Constitution (New York: Oxford University Press,
2011 ), 112 .

186 G. Wayne Dowdy, Crusades for Freedom: Memphis and the Political Transformation
o f the American South (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010), passim.
94

In this optimistic environment, the Cossitt Library enlisted the support o f Mayor
Watkins Overton, and in January 1952 it announced plans for the new Central Library
and a “North Memphis branch library for negroes.” 187 The branch for AfricanAmericans would be built only after the new Central Library was completed.188
It appears that, finally, the Cossitt Board was taking seriously its intention to build
another branch for African-Americans. Although the construction o f the new Central
Library was the foremost concern, through 1952 and 1953 it occasionally considered
possible locations for another African-American branch.189 In these intentions, however,
it found an opponent in Cunningham. Cunningham had been thinking over the question
of branch libraries in general, and he had noted that a concern over lack o f access to
libraries may have been overblown when “such a small percentage use the facilities
provided.” That is, fewer than one-third o f white Memphians used libraries at all, and it
was crucial that libraries be placed near shopping corridors so that a stop at the library
could be included in a day’s errands. Further, he expected that bookmobile service could
“be a factor in helping us locate good sites for branches,” by providing a way to measure
local interest in library services.190 He was particularly concerned that “a study of the
negro areas in Memphis and the type o f negroes in them, raises a serious question in my
mind about spending much money in an attempt to provide them service.” 191 Given that

187 “Overton Announces Plans for $500,000 Library,” PS, January 25, 1952.
188 James Ewing, “They’re Bringing Books Nearer Home,” CA, October 26, 1952.
189 Minutes, May 15, 1952; March 19, 1953.
190Jesse Cunningham to Joseph L. Wheeler, February 26, 1952.
191 Jesse Cunningham to Robert Alvarez, October 20, 1953, L.H.C.; Cunningham’s
thinking was bolstered by correspondence from Alvarez, Director of the Nashville Public Library,
who reported low use of the newly opened “beautiful new Negro branch” (Robert Alvarez to
95

bookmobile services in 1952 did not extend to African-American neighborhoods, his
opposition to building another branch revealed the extent o f his disregard for AfricanAmerican readers.
The question o f what “types o f negroes” would have justified the building o f
another branch library may be answered by examining Cunningham’s other statements
regarding library service to African Americans. He observed that few African Americans
used the library, and probably attributed it to his stereotyped view o f gambling, gameloving African Americans rather than to the inconvenient location of the Vance Avenue
branch. It is hard to say what might have changed his mind, given that even a sober,
financially successful businessman in 1957 could not persuade him to open the library
doors to African Americans.
The library did come around to adding bookmobile service for African-American
neighborhoods in late 1953. Cunningham “had concluded that one or two bookmobiles
would furnish more or better service and at much more reasonable expense than the
purchase o f a lot and construction o f a branch for Negroes.” 192 Cossitt Library had
provided bookmobile service in white neighborhoods since 1935, so this development
was long overdue.193
However, the question o f what constitutes “more or better service” requires a
definition o f those terms. If libraries are simply a means to put books in the hands of

Jesse Cunningham, undated postscript on a letter from Cunningham to Alvarez, October 20,
1953, L.H.C.).
192 Minutes, October 15, 1953.
193 Perveen Rustomfram, “Democracy on Wheels: Bookmobile Services in Tennessee,
Part I,” Tennessee Librarian 50, no. 1 (1998): 25.
96

readers, then bookmobiles suffice. But, as Weigand explains, libraries serve as
communal spaces where reading is valued - and librarians serve communal information
needs through programming and community outreach. Bookmobiles allow for no
seating, nor pleasurable silence surrounded by books and fellow readers. Their staffs,
preoccupied with driving, circulation, and crowd management, do no programming.
Their book selection is quite limited, and the readers must make themselves available
when the bookmobile comes, rather than visiting the library when convenient. To assert
that the community o f African-American readers could be served as well with a
bookmobile as with a library was to dismiss their needs for space, fellowship, service,
and self-determination.
Despite the disadvantages o f bookmobile service compared to a branch library,
the service did find a ready audience. Among the frequent users o f the bookmobile were
the children o f Allegra and Jesse Turner, who waited alongside their neighbors for the
bookmobile to arrive with the expectancy other children showed for the ice cream
truck.194
The library administration in this period was not primarily concerned with service
to African-Americans. However, in 1956 the Negro Branch was slated for repairs and
additions - new furniture immediately, and extensive construction in 1958.195 In the
spring o f 1955, the new Central Library at the comer of McLean and Peabody opened;
the old main library became a specialized reference library for business and technology
(figure 5). Shortly afterward, the Cossitt Library changed its name to Memphis Public

194Beverly Bond, in conversation with the author, June 2015.
195 Jesse Cunningham to Wassell Randolph, September 15, 1956; Jesse Cunningham to
Edmund Orgill, October 9, 1956; L.H.C.
97

Library, but the organization retained its charter with an independent, self-perpetuating
board o f directors.196 Throughout this period, the Memphis Public Library was engaged
in negotiations with the Goodwyn Institute, another charitable foundation which operated
a reference library and auditorium for edifying lectures in a downtown building.
Goodwyn’s finances were failing, and in the end the two boards determined to merge the
reference collection from Goodwyn with that o f the old Cossitt Library and create a
dedicated reference library downtown. An addition to the Cossitt Library building to
accommodate the specialized business and technology collection opened in 1959, and the
merger was finalized in 1961.197

FIGURE 5. Central Library at McLean and Peabody, ca. 1970 (source: DigMemphis,
http://memphislibrary.contentdm.oclc.org/)
196 Minutes, May 19,1955.
197 Minutes, December 16,1954; Edmund Orgill to Wassell Randolph, November 28,
1955, L.H.C.; Wallis, “Memphis Public Library and Information Center,” 443.
98

It is interesting to note how the rhetoric o f dem ocracy often arose in discussions
o f the library - and w hat it says about w hite M em phians’ notions o f inclusivity. For
exam ple, in the sum m er o f 1955 the library branches reduced their hours by closing on
Saturdays. O utraged letters to the new spaper cited the fact that the library was “built to
accom m odate all the people” and should stay open for those who w orked during the
w eek .198 M ayor Edm und Orgill, in contem plating the m erger o f G oodwyn and Cossitt,
rem arked that “the C ossitt Library and all o f its branches should be fully available to any
persons interested in any o f the subjects” that G oodw yn’s library supported.199 In 1956,
the M em phis Public Library once again prom ulgated a Code o f Ethics for its employees.
A m ong its provisions is this statement: “It is... unethical to discrim inate in service
towards any particular patron at the expense o f another. The service is for the
com m onw eal.”200 In none o f these discussions was the outrage directed at the
segregation o f library service by race - instead, the concern was differential treatm ent o f
w hite patrons.
On the eve o f the civil rights m ovem ent, then, library service in M emphis
exem plified in m any ways the relationship o f the city governm ent to its AfricanA m erican citizens. There was some service, to be sure, but it was paltry in com parison to
that offered to w hite citizens. A frican A m ericans were not even an afterthought, but
rather w ere largely excluded from the conception o f the citizenry. Despite this, A frican-

198 B.W. Homer, letter to the editor, PS, June 11, 1955.
199 Edmund Orgill to Wassell Randolph, November 28, 1955, L.H.C.
200 Memphis Public Library Code of Ethics, 1956, L.H.C.

99

A m erican librarians were vigorous in their duties and w orked as they could to tailor their
library to the special needs o f its readers.
Phoebe W eaver W illiam s, who was bom in 1946, recalls the N egro Branch in the
1950s: “As a fam ily we patronized the Colored Branch o f the City o f M em phis Library. It
was located in a small building in a black neighborhood. The City o f M emphis em ployed
black librarians to w ork there, and they w ere courteous and kind to us. Yet, I knew that
w hite children had access to a much better facility. During trips dow ntow n I could see
w hat appeared to me a m assive and im pressive structure that housed the dow ntow n
public library, which at that time was open to w hites only.” 201
A ssessing the state o f affairs in 1955, Hoffman noted that “ library facilities for
M em phis Negroes lag far behind m any other southern cities,” and noted that in m any o f
those cities A frican-A m ericans patrons had by persistent requests achieved access to the
m ain library. She found “no com parable record on the part o f [M emphis] Negroes in
[sic] b eh alf o f library services,” and noted that “there is reason to believe that if Negroes
o f M em phis asked for better library services they could be obtained.” 202
It is true, as Hoffm an notes, that by 1953 there were 59 southern m unicipalities
w here A frican-A m ericans had access to the m ain public library.203 But in m any cases
there w ere limitations on A frican-A m ericans’ borrow ing privileges, or seating areas, and
often segregated restroom s or circulation desks. In the largest cities, including Richm ond

201 Phoebe Weaver Williams, “Segregation in Memphis,” in Law Touched Our Hearts: A
Generation Remembers Brown V. Board o f Education, ed. Richard J. Bonnie and Mildred Wigfall
Robinson (Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press, 2009), 123.
202 Hoffman, “A History of Public Library Service,” 44-45.
203 Shockley, “A History o f Public Library Services to Negroes in the South.”
100

(desegregated in 1947), Louisville (1948), Chattanooga (1949), and Little Rock (1951),
the libraries’ leaders had given in to “subtle but persistent pressures from black
com m unities” w hen deciding to open their facilities to A frican-A m erican patrons.204 In
her detailed case study o f H ouston’s public library, Cheryl Knott M alone found that a
group o f five A frican-A m erican leaders approached the library board in 1951 with a
request to desegregate; w ith the recently-decided case o f Sweatt v. Painter ruling that the
“separate-but-equal” law school in Texas was unconstitutional, attorney H erm an W right
ventured that they w ould w in a lawsuit to open the library. However, W right and his
clients preferred for the library to voluntarily desegregate as a gesture tow ard
“establishing a better understanding and feeling” between people o f the two races in
Houston. Library leaders stalled for two years until a new ly-elected m ayor, Roy
H ofheinz, told the board to desegregate but w ithout publicity. After racial restrictions
w ere dropped in 1953, it took months for the w ord to spread am ong A frican-A m erican
patrons. H ofheinz felt that w hite Houstonians w ould accept A frican A m ericans in the
library because those w ho used the library w ould be “serious m inded and with good
dem eanor” ; that is, unlikely to cross the m any social boundaries that stood between
A frican A m ericans and whites, even in shared public spaces.205
The situation in H ouston confirm s the observations o f m any librarians - that
desegregation o f libraries was less troublesom e than schools or parks, because the
interaction was m ore business-like than social, and less likely to lead to “race m ixing.” If

204 Michael Fultz, “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure
Segregation,” Libraries and the Cultural Record 41, no. 3 (2006): 347-48.
205 Cheryl Knott Malone, “Unannounced and Unexpected: The Desegregation of Houston
Public Library in the Early 1950s,” Library Trends 55, no. 3 (2007): 665-74.
101

African Am ericans and w hites could shop together, then they could patronize libraries
together.206
H offm an’s criticism o f M em phians for failing to m ount a pressure cam paign for
better access to libraries m ay have been grounded in a sim ilar understanding. W hat she
m ay have overlooked is that in M em phis, African A m ericans and w hites did not, in fact,
shop together. A lm a Roulhac Booth recalled, “A t G oldsm ith’s and Levy’s [you] had to
go in the back to try on the hats, you couldn’t go to out front [to try on clothes].”207
Johnnie M ae Peters rem em bered it similarly: “Y ou didn’t have a right to try clothes on,
look at them too m u c h .... I f you w anted something, you had to know w hat you had and
buy it.” 208
Phoebe W eaver W illiam s recalls an instance o f underground resistance to such
policies: “M y grandm other greatly resented store policies that prohibited black women
from trying on hats before purchasing them. She protested against this practice by
purchasing the hat, trying it on at home, and returning it if she did not like it. W e made
m any trips to the hat department. She explained to me that despite store policies, some
w hite w om an w ould eventually w ear a hat that had been on the head o f a black
w om an.” 209

206 Fultz, “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era of De Jure Segregation.”
207 Alma Roulhac Booth, quoted in Photographs from the Memphis World, 1949-1964,
ed. Marina Pacini (Memphis: Brooks Museum o f Art, 2008), 69.
208 Johnnie Mae Peters, interview by Elizabeth Gritter, July 15, 2005, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
209 Williams, “Segregation in Memphis,” 127.
102

W hen the time cam e that Jesse Turner asked for a library card, the libraries o f
M em phis w ould prove less accom m odating than those o f Houston, Richm ond or
Louisville.

103

CH A PTER 4:
TH E DESEG REG ATION OF THE M EM PHIS PUBLIC LIBRARY

Jesse Turner w anted his w ife to be able to use the library (see figure 6).
Throughout the w inter o f 1949, A llegra Turner was in m ourning for a younger brother
who had been killed in a railroad accident. Looking for a diversion, Jesse Turner
suggested that a visit to the library m ight help Mrs. Turner “becom e engrossed in both
fun and facts.” 1 Mr. Turner, an officer at the Tri-State Bank located ju st a few blocks
from the Cossitt Library, had used the m ain branch in the past. Crucially, he had never
sat dow n nor tried to borrow a book. D ue to a quirk in the rules o f segregation, Jesse
Turner had been allow ed to stand in the reference section looking up a few facts in a
book. H ad he attem pted to use the full range o f the library’s facilities, he w ould have
know n better than to suggest that Mrs. Turner w ould find a relaxing w elcom e at the
Cossitt Library downtown.

1Allegra W. Turner with Jini M. Kilgore, Except by Grace: The Life o f Jesse H. Turner
(Jonesboro, Ark.: Four-G Publishers, 2004), 119.

104

' M' ’ *\

\
*

*.
•

FIGURE 6: Allegra Turner and Jesse Turner, ca. 1960 (source: Turner and Kilgore,
Except by Grace, 137).
H er travails that day encapsulate the everyday realities o f African-American life
in segregated Memphis. Allegra Turner, who was familiar with libraries from her days as
a student and instructor at Southern University and the University o f Chicago, entered the
library and made straight for the card catalog. Almost immediately, a white library
employee redirected her to a “small, white picket-fenced area” to wait while library staff
bustled about deciding “what should be done.” In the end, Mrs. Turner was instructed to
leave Cossitt Library and to visit the Vance Avenue branch. She proceeded out to Main
Street to find a telephone and call her husband for a pickup - but the only establishments

105

open at that hour were restricted to whites. So she then had to catch a bus, sitting in the
rear, all the w ay out to her apartm ent in B ingham ton.2
Eight years later, Jesse Turner w ould surprise his w ife by appearing on the
television news in a report that “a w ell-dressed N egro man entered the front door o f the
m ain library at Peabody and M cLean and requested a library card to borrow books.” 3
T urner’s actions on June 17, 1957, were am ong the earliest in a swirl o f anti-segregation
activism that A frican-A m erican M em phians and their allies w ould engage in until the
public facilities o f the city were open to all. The libraries were the locus o f legal action
and direct action, and Jesse Turner w ould becom e one o f the forem ost spokespeople for
civil rights in M emphis. All this became possible in the eight years betw een Mrs.
Turner’s ejection from C ossitt Library and M r. T urner’s formal application to use the
facility. M em phis and its libraries - and the U nited States - had changed, but not always
in ways that made life easier for A frican Americans.
The 1948 election o f Estes K efauver to the U. S. Senate - bitterly opposed by
Crum p - proved that a coalition o f A frican-A m erican and liberal w hite voters could defy
the m achine that had governed M em phis since 1927. W ayne D ow dy cites that election as
the starting point from w hich “black leaders devised a three-prong strategy to rectify
inequality in M em phis.”4 Those prongs o f electoral activity (voter registration and
cam paigns by A frican-A m erican candidates), litigation, and direct action, w ould fall into
place in succession over the next decade. The first attem pt at electoral success occurred

2 Ibid., 110, 120.
3 Ibid., 111.
4 G. Wayne Dowdy, A B rief History o f Memphis (Charleston, S.C.: History Press, 2011),
104
106

in 1951, w hen insurance executive J. E. W alker stunned politicos o f both races when he
announced his candidacy for the school board. His cam paign involved a voter
registration drive as w ell an innovative suggestion for African A m ericans inside the
voting booth. W alker’s cam paign literature showed the whole ballot, but a check m ark
appeared by his nam e only - encouraging supporters to vote for W alker and abstain from
voting for any other candidates, even though there were several slots on the school board
up for election. The hope was that “single-shot” voting in at-large elections w ould boost
the chances o f the A frican-A m erican candidate by depriving other candidates o f their
shares o f the African-A m erican vote.5 A num ber o f A frican-A m erican candidates for
various offices conducted cam paigns throughout the 1950s and early 1960s, until at last
in 1964 A. W. W illis gained a seat in the state legislature and H. T. Lockard was elected
to the Shelby County Q uarterly Court, predecessor o f today’s County Board o f
Com m issioners.6
The year 1954 was one o f turning points: the year before, the state poll tax had
been repealed, opening the franchise to m any poor citizens and reducing the pow er o f any
party to m anipulate the voting populace;7 Crum p died, leaving a pow er vacuum in the
city;8 the Suprem e C ourt decision in Brown v. Board o f Education made it clear that
“separate educational facilities are inherently unequal” and that African-A m erican

5 G. Wayne Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom: Memphis and the Political Transformation
o f the American South (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010), 22-23.
6 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 107.
7 Connie L. Lester, “Disfranchising Laws,” in The Tennessee Encyclopedia o f History
and Culture, 2nd ed., http://tennesseeencyclopedia.net/entry.php?rec=380
8 William D. Miller, Mr. Crump o f Memphis (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1964), 352.
107

students w ere “deprived o f the equal protection o f the laws guaranteed by the Fourteenth
A m endm ent” 9; and Elvis Presley made his first record at Sun Studios on Union
A venue.10 The Brow n decision was m om entous in theory but had little practical effect:
the president o f M emphis State University, J. M illard Smith, represented the approach
taken by m ost school adm inistrators: “I believe we will eventually adm it Negroes, in
view o f the Suprem e C ourt ruling, but m y position [not to do so] will be unchanged until
the courts act further and the state board o f education in turn directs me to adm it them .” 11
The launch o f a music career seems trivial, but as M ichael Bertrand argues, the massive
popularity o f rock and roll music and its A frican-A m erican rhythms, slang, and
personalities led to a relaxation o f racial attitudes among southern youth - making
segregation unsustainable as a white cultural heritage.12 The rock and rollers’ elders,
however, w ould give up their segregated privilege very slowly.
To be sure, some earlier advances in civil rights had already led to w hite backlash,
as dem onstrated by the 1948 split in the D em ocratic party, when some w hite southerners,
including Crump, abandoned the H arry Trum an presidential ticket to support Strom
Thurm ond on a “D ixiecrat” platform dedicated to w hite suprem acy and segregation.

9 Brown v. Board o f Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954)
10 Peter Guralnick, Last Train to Memphis: The Rise o f Elvis Presley (New York: Little,
Brown, and Co., 1994), 104.
11 J. Millard Smith, quoted in Richard L. Saunders, “James F. Estes: Grassroots
Advocate”, West Tennessee Historical Society Papers 63 (2009): 63.
12 Michael T. Bertrand, Race, Rock, and Elvis (Bloomington, University of Illinois Press,
2000).

108

Interestingly, Trum an outpolled Thurm ond in Shelby County - dem onstrating both the
strength o f the A frican-A m erican vote and C rum p’s w eakening grasp on the electorate.13
However, the Brow n decision sparked a w hole other kind o f w hite reaction. In
the tradition o f their Civil W ar-era forebears, m any white southerners sim ply refused to
accept the outcom es o f the political process that threatened “the destruction o f [our]
fam ily and our w ay o f life.” 14 In a num ber o f states, local governments invoked
“m assive resistance” to court-ordered desegregation, to the extent that in parts o f V irginia
and A rkansas, the schools w ere closed tem porarily.15 Throughout the South, W hite
Citizens Councils form ed to provide a cover o f civic voluntarism to “harsh economic
reprisal” aim ed at A frican A m ericans who dared assert their rig h ts.16
M assive resistance also m et efforts to desegregate libraries. In Danville, Virginia;
Petersburg, Virginia; and Greenville, South Carolina, in 1960, city councils closed
libraries rather than serve A frican-A m ericans.17 Anniston, Alabama, saw a w hite mob
beat two A frican-A m erican m inisters who asked for library cards in 1963.18 In a num ber
o f cities, including D anville in 1960; M ontgomery, Alabam a, in 1962; and Albany,

13 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 17.
14 James O. Eastland, quoted in Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 17.
15 Michael J. Klarman, “Why Massive Resistance?” in Massive Resistance: Southern
Opposition to the Second Reconstruction, ed. Clive Webb (New York: Oxford University Press,
2005), 30-31.
16 Taylor Branch, Parting the Waters: America in the King Years, 1954-63 (New York:
Touchstone, 1988), 138.
17 David M. Battles, The History o f Public Library Access fo r African Americans in the
South, or, Leaving Behind the Plow (Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2009), 119-120; Stephen
Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries,” Libraries & Culture 31, no. 3/4
(1996): 559.
18 Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries,” 561.
109

Georgia, in 1963, desegregation w ent forward but in such a w ay as to obviate the
library’s function as a com m unal space for study.19 U nder the “vertical integration” plan,
all the furniture was rem oved from a library. Patrons o f both races could browse the
shelves and check out books, but they could not sit together at a table. Ironically, this
scheme had first been proposed by hum orist Harry G olden as a parody o f segregationist
fears about shared seating.20 Just as school closures quickly eroded the will o f white
citizens to resist desegregation by sacrificing their own services, so did library closures
and vertical integration - in m ost cases, library service was restored w ith full access to
A frican A m ericans w ithin a few days.
W ith the notable exception o f Clinton, w here mobs harassed students and the high
school w as bom bed in 1958, m assive resistance had little support in Tennessee.

") I

Rather,

white authorities responded to court rulings ordering desegregation with foot-dragging.
M artha B arret M orrow characterized a four-phase pattern o f action by Tennesseans o f
both races in reaction to the Brown decision. First, cautious w aiting for clarification by
the courts; second, organization to resist or im plem ent desegregation once it was clear
that the courts dem anded it; third, form ation o f study groups to plan for inevitable
desegregation; and fourth, actual desegregation.22 M any com m unities never got beyond

19 Cresswell, “The Last Days of Jim Crow in Southern Libraries,” 559, 562; Patterson
Toby Graham, A Right to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in Alabama's Public Libraries,
1900-1965 (Tuscaloosa: University o f Alabama Press, 2002), 180.
20 Harry Golden, “The Vertical Negro Plan,” Carolina Israelite, August 1956; reprinted
in Only in America, 121-123 (Cleveland: World Publishing Co., 1958).
21 Bobby L. Lovett, The Civil Rights Movement in Tennessee: A Narrative History
(Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 2005), 56-60.
22 Martha Barret Morrow, “The Reaction in Tennessee to the Supreme Court
Desegregation Decision of 1954: From May, 1954, through December, 1957” (M.A. thesis,
Memphis State University, 1964).
110

the second step until well into the 1960s. M emphis authorities kept m um throughout the
period, and in fact continued to build segregated schools even after B row n.22,
In m ost o f the state, the schools rem ained segregated, de fa c to if not de jure,
throughout the 1960s; residential segregation and reluctance to em brace busing
contributed to this state o f affairs. In M em phis, the gains in electoral clout seen by
A frican Am ericans in the last years o f C rum p’s rule proved to be o f little advantage, as
dem ands for civic participation m oved beyond the issue o f receiving any services to the
issue o f full access to all city services.
A fter C rum p’s passing in 1954, M ayor Frank Tobey held together the political
m achine until his unexpected death in the m iddle o f the 1955 mayoral cam paign.24
Subsequently, Crum p associate and form er m ayor W atkins Overton ran against hardw are
m agnate and perceived liberal Edm und Orgill. O rgill’s prior endorsem ent o f the
candidacy o f J. E. W alker and rejection o f m achine politics made him the favorite am ong
A frican-A m erican voters. Their votes, along with those o f white voters frustrated by the
old system, put him into office.25
H opes for the Orgill adm inistration were high in the African-A m erican
com munity. Shortly after his election, the M emphis branch o f the N ational A ssociation
for the A dvancem ent o f Colored People (N AA CP) petitioned for the city to uphold Frank
T obey’s prom ise to allow a g o lf tournam ent with African-A m erican players to use a

23 Beverly Bond and Janann Sherman, Memphis in Black and White (Charleston, S.C.:
Arcadia Publishing, 2003), 135.
24 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 46.
25 David M. Tucker, Memphis Since Crump: Bossism, Blacks, and Civic Reformers,
1948-1968 (Knoxville: University of Tennessee Press, 1980), 76-78.
Ill

w hite m unicipal g o lf course, as well as to desegregate its parks and schools. Resistance
am ong segregationists proved fierce. Orgill pushed the g o lf course plan through the city
council in February 1956 but only after enduring hours o f segregationist rhetoric. Later
he proposed to appoint J. E. W alker to the board o f a local charitable hospital, on the
grounds that a m ajority o f the patients w ere African Americans. The plan met such
resistance - including a cross burned on the m ayor’s lawn - that Orgill abandoned the
plan.26 A lthough he had started his term seeking racial reconciliation, and seem ingly
never abandoned his personal b elief that desegregation was a political necessity, by 1958
he was stum ping for the governor’s office and insisting, “I, along with other m em bers o f
the present C ity Com m ission, am on record as being in favor o f continued segregation.” 27
A look at some o f the correspondence Orgill received during the controversies o f
1955 and 1956 reveals the depth o f white resistance to desegregation in M emphis. “The
N A A C P have dem onstrated their aims are to destroy the orderly process o f life in the
south.”

“ [Negroes] have everything now that the w hites have except sleeping with

them and that w ill com e before lo n g ... but, thank goodness I will be gone when they
have a m ongrel race in the South, you ju st cant [sic] m ix them on an equal social equality
basis as in schools, colleges, etc., etc., w ithout this result.” 29 “The negro here in

26 Tucker, Memphis Since Cmmp, 83; Anne Trotter, “The Memphis Business Community
and Integration,” in Southern Businessmen and Integration, ed. Elizabeth Jacoway and David R.
Colburn (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1982), 288.
27 “Mayor Orgill’s Stand on Segregation Extracted from His Speech at Franklin,
Tennessee on June 26, 1958,” Edmund Orgill Papers, Mississippi Valley Collection, University
of Memphis Libraries
28 Americans United for Patriotic Action, Memphis Chapter, to Edmund Orgill, February
14, 1956, Edmund Orgill Papers.
29 Allan Asher to Edmund Orgill, February 28, 1956, Edmund Orgill Papers.
112

M em phis has been coddled too long. They look to the w hite race for everything free;
there is not 15% o f them that pay any kind o f tax, except the state sales tax.... They have
so m any relatives on their exem ptions, o f the federal income tax, that they even get by
w ithout paying that w ay .... I say the negro is entitled to ju st the things they pay for. If
they w ant all to share alike, then we should all pay alike.” 30
Some civic-m inded individuals attem pted to form an interracial Greater M emphis
Race Relations Com m ittee, with the purpose o f m aintaining “good w ill,” avoiding
violence, and delaying desegregation.31 The latter two were definitely achieved, but not
through the offices o f this com mittee. It fell apart because conservative w hite appointees
w ould not participate in integrated m eetings with African-A m erican appointees.

T9

Vasco

Sm ith recalled that the w hite m em bers m et separately, the A frican-A m erican m em bers
m et separately, and representatives from each group then met to discuss the findings.33
A long w ith national developm ents including the M ontgom ery bus boycott and the
subsequent Suprem e C ourt ruling in N ovem ber 1956 that segregated buses are
unconstitutional, the hostile atm osphere o f mid-1950s M emphis brought about bold
actions by A frican-A m ericans to end legal segregation.34 The second prong, as described
by Dowdy, was launched in 1955.

30 Earnest Leslie to Edmund Orgill, February 28, 1956, Edmund Orgill Papers.
31 Tucker, Memphis Since Crump, 85.
32 Tucker, Memphis Since Crump, 120n4.
33 Vasco Smith Sr., interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 9, 2000, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
34 Branch, Parting the Waters, 193.

113

Shortly after the Brown decision in 1954, five African-A m erican students applied
for adm ission to M emphis State University, and w ere denied solely on account o f race.
The next year, Jam es Estes filed suit on their behalf, with legal assistance from the
N AACP. Courtroom delays put o ff the desegregation o f the university until 1959.35
In 1956, 0 . Z. Evers, a postal clerk who had lived in Chicago prior to M em phis,
boarded a bus on A pril 26, 1956, and unw ittingly broke a state law by sitting behind the
driver. W hen ordered to m ove by the driver, Evers refused but eventually left the bus
w hen confronted by police officers w ith the threat o f arrest. W ith the counsel o f
M emphis N AA CP president H. T. Lockard, Evers filed suit in the federal court on
N ovem ber 13; that suit w ould not be decided until I9 6 0 .36
In July o f 1957, the editor o f the African A m erican-oriented new spaper the TriState D efender, L. A lex W ilson, wrote an editorial castigating the C om mercial A ppeal for
its failure to extend courtesy titles (“M iss,” “M rs.,” “M r.”) to African Americans. His
words spurred a group o f M em phians to form a Citizens Im provem ent Com m ittee (whose
nam e echoed the M ontgom ery Im provem ent A ssociation that had organized the bus
boycott), w hich led a boycott o f the Commercial A ppeal am ong African-A m erican
subscribers. The forty-five-day boycott - during which m any A frican-Am erican
paperboys w ere fired - dem onstrated the econom ic clout o f the African-A m erican
com m unity and succeeded in forcing the largest w hite-oriented new spaper in M emphis to
agree to use “titles o f respect before the nam es o f N egroes” and otherwise engage in fair
reporting about A frican-A m erican activities. Thom as Hrach credits the new spaper

35 Lovett, The Civil Rights Movement in Tennessee, 345.
36 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 59-61.
114

boycott as “an early successful step in the city’s black citizens’ struggle for equal
rights.” 37
It was in this atm osphere o f white backlash and A frican-A m erican activism that
Jesse Turner m ade his m ove to desegregate the library. The library had, o f course, been
very active throughout the early years o f the civil rights movement. In 1955, it opened
the new Central Library and officially changed its nam e to M emphis Public Library. The
nam e change had no effect upon its governance - it rem ained by law a charitable
institution governed by a self-perpetuating board under the auspices o f its 1888 charter.
That its funding cam e from taxes collected by the city did not affect its legal status.
N or did its status result in equal pay for equal work. In 1955, African-A m erican
librarians w ere drastically underpaid com pared to their w hite counterparts. For example,
G eneva Cooper, librarian at the N egro Branch, had a salary o f $1,560, while other branch
librarians had salaries at least twice as high. The em ployees at Vance A venue or in the
“N egro Bookm obile” included Pearl Oates, Raychelle Carhee, Rachel M cKinney, and
M ary R uth Yates. None earned m ore than $2,340 a year, at a time when other librarians
earned upw ards o f $3,000.38
As was the case throughout the establishm ent in M emphis, it appears that library
leaders chose to sim ply not discuss the question o f desegregation, but rather moved
forward adm inistering segregated libraries. The earlier promises o f a second branch for
African A m ericans were gradually becom ing reality, but even that developm ent faced
resistance. V. J. Alexander, a board member, w rote to Cunningham in 1956 that “ I do
37 Thomas J. Hrach, “Insults for Sale: The 1957 Memphis Newspaper Boycott,”
Tennessee Historical Quarterly 72, no.l (2013): 44.
38 Minutes, February 11, 1955.

115

not feel that w e should encourage negroes to use the library any m ore than w e already
have. They have a special library built and m aintained for their use and I am o f the
im pression that they can get all o f the services there that they need for the present
tim e.” 39
N onetheless, on M arch 13,1957, representatives o f the Douglas, Bungalow and
Crump Civic League, w hich served three neighborhoods in northeastern M emphis,
petitioned for another branch library “after a thorough exam ination o f the present poor
circum stances.” A lexander G ladney and Annie B. Colem an noted that the Vance A venue
branch was “ too far and too inadequately equipped,” w hile the hours o f operation for the
Bookm obile w ere “incom patible w ith the working schedules o f about eighty percent o f
our adult population.” Furtherm ore, “it’s [sic] stock o f light and pleasurable fiction leans
more to the juveniles.” They proposed three locations along Chelsea Road that would
“not only serve the Douglas [sic] Park area, but w ould be convenient to the Bingham ton
and Hyde Park areas also.” 40
Cunningham responded a bit defensively, but also held out some hope. “Vance
A venue Branch has only recently been refurnished with m odem up-to-date equipm ent
and w e have tried to brighten up the place. W e buy books regularly for the branch and
we thought we w ere doing a fairly good jo b at m eeting the needs for books there. I know
the juvenile collection is excellent, but if the additional collection is not m eeting the
needs adequately, we w ant to know it.” D espite Cunningham ’s tone, he also assured that,
“The Library Board has, for some time, been acquainted with the needs for additional
39 V. J. Alexander to Jesse Cunningham, November 9, 1956, L.H.C.
40 Alexander Gladney and Annie B. Coleman to Jesse Cunningham, March 13, 1957,
L.H.C.
116

service and has given considerable thought to the selection o f a site for the location o f
another branch.” 41 A t their next meeting, the Board “expressed itself as very favorable
for an additional branch library for negro citizens and referred the m atter to the Librarian,
w ith instructions to study and investigate sites.” 42
Before the M em phis Public Library could m ake any headw ay on the timeconsum ing process o f selecting a site and contracting for the construction o f a branch
library, it was confronted with an im m ediate dem and for service to an African-A m erican
patron at the Central Library. On a sunny M onday, June 17, 1957, Jesse Turner left his
hom e on Gill Avenue for w ork, as on m ost M ondays. D uring a break from his duties at
Tri-State Bank, he ventured to the Central Library and “requested o f Mr. Jesse L.
Cunningham the necessary cards and/or perm ission for him and his children to use the
facilities o f the m ain library.”43 Cunningham denied him such permission; he told
reporters, “I was acting on the custom that prevails in this com m unity and the South.”
The librarian referred Turner to the V ance Avenue branch, and furtherm ore advised him
that the reference library in the old Cossitt building “is not open to colored people.” A fter
Turner departed, Cunningham reported his response to the Board o f Directors, w hich
“sustained our action, unanim ously.” 44
T urner’s audacious request was enough to generate headlines in the PressScimitar. W hen a reporter pressed Cunningham to provide a legal justification for

41 Jesse Cunningham to Alexander Gladney, March 16, 1957, L.H.C.
42 Minutes, March 21, 1957.
43 H. T. Lockard to Wassell Randolph, July 15, 1957, L.H.C.
44 John Spence, “Negro Asks to Borrow Books From Library,” PS, June 28, 1957.
117

denying Turner library services, the director adm itted, “There is no law, city, county, or
state, that I know o f that w ould have prevented” issuing a library card to Turner, and that
the Board had never adopted a policy “in w riting” against serving African Americans at
the m ain library. He did, however, assert that the library on Vance Avenue served
African Americans; w hile it did not have the same holdings as the Central Library, “the
library assistant there, if she knew w hat the borrow er w anted and that he was a person
really trying to do som ething and not trying to m ake a scene, w ould get the book and
have it for the borrow er.” 45
A personal visit having failed, Turner then form ally appealed for access. His
attorney, H. T. Lockard - the same NAACP branch president litigating E vers’s bus
lawsuit - drew up a letter to W assel Randolph, president o f the Board o f Directors o f
M em phis Public Library. Lockard w rote that, “ In denying Mr. Turner’s request it appears
that Mr. Cunningham predicated his action soley [sic] on account o f race. As his
attorney, I take the position that Mr. Turner and his children have the right to use any and
all public library facilities in the city o f M emphis, and to be denied on account o f race is
unlaw ful as w ell as discrim inatory.” He concluded w ith a request that Turner “be
inform ed in w riting that they m ay use the aboved nam ed library and all other city
libraries, w ithout reservations.” 46
The Board considered the request on July 18. Consistent with M orrow ’s
observation about official M em phians’ reactions to desegregation dem ands, they stalled.
“The President was authorized to answ er the letter, stating that it had been considered but

45 Spence, “Negro Asks to Borrow Books from Library.”
46 H. T. Lockard to Wassell Randolph, July 15, 1957, L.H.C.
118

no decision was made, and when a decision is made, the w riter was to be inform ed.” 47
The board pledged to keep the m ayor and city com m issioners inform ed as well.
Lockard insisted that, despite his position as president o f the M emphis branch o f
the N AA CP, Turner’s request was “not an action by the NAACP. On the contrary,
Turner called me and asked me to represent him in the m atter.” He em phasized that the
letter was not a threat o f litigation. “I can ’t anticipate in good conscience that the Board
will not do the right thing, and I am not so pessimistic as to begin to prepare a lawsuit.”
However, is his review o f the Tennessee code o f law, he found no act prohibiting African
Am ericans from using public libraries, and he added, “There is a federal district court
decision in Virginia, if it should com e to that.”48
For tw o m ore months, the Board o f Directors continued to ignore Turner’s
request, as “some m em bers were not fam iliar enough w ith details o f the request.” 49
Finally, on O ctober 2, the Board voted unanim ously to deny Turner’s application to use
the Central Library.50 In his formal response to Lockard, Board President Randolph
wrote,
“For citizens o f the vicinity in w hich Jesse Turner lives, the Vance Avenue
Library has been in operation for m any y ears.... [It] has the same facilities for
furnishing books for circulation that are available at the library on M cLean and
Peabody, and if any desired books are not on the Vance Avenue Library shelves, a

47 Minutes, July 18, 1957.
48 “Negro Asks Permission to Use ‘The Facilities o f the Main Library’,” PS July 16,
1957.
49 “Library Board Defers Action,” PS, September 21, 1957.
50 Minutes, October 2, 1957.
119

call from the librarian w ill bring those books from any o f the lib raries... Thus, the
circulating library facilities are available equally to all citizens, but for
convenience in management, and to avoid regrettable incidents w hich have no
relation to the circulation o f books, the D irectors have designated the Vance
A venue Library as the headquarters f o r the distribution o f books to Negro
citizen s... A library is not a public school and has not been so defined. It w ill be
contended that Negro readers are not perm itted to have joint use o f reading rooms
w ith W hite readers, and it has been and is the unanim ous opinion o f the Directors
that this is not advisable, nor it is conducive to harm onious relations among the
people o f our City. Forcing people to associate together against their will is the
antithesis o f freedom, and nowhere in the Federal Constitution has a citizen, black
or white, surrendered his inherent right o f freedom o f association.... The public
advantages and opportunities furnished our N egro citizens have been gratifying,
although N egroes pay a very small and disproportionate part o f the cost o f these
benefits; and the alm ost com plete experience with these shared blessings has
shown that self-respecting Negroes and self-respecting W hite people do not
com m ingle socially. Each prefers his ow n group, except when sinister influences
intervene to breed discord and illwill. Sadly, recent events have opened w ounds
w hich we thought were healed forever, and have destroyed friendships developed
am ong the people o f the tw o races for the welfare, principally o f our Negro
citizens and for their general advancement; and the Library Directors on their own

120

part, are unw illing to increase the tension or widen the breach now so painfully
apparent.” 51
Lockard was unpersuaded by R andolph’s argument; he apparently failed to discern that
his ow n interests as a “self-respecting N egro” w ere being served by the continued
segregation o f the M ain Library. He responded on January 3, 1958: “ I had a discussion
o f this m atter w ith m y client and several other interested persons. W e decided that the
request m ade by Mr. Turner can and ought to be granted without any difficulty at all.
Therefore, w e again refer you to our letter dated July 15, 1957, and ask you to reconsider
the request m ade therein.”
T urner’s request rem ained in the air for the tim e being - w hile the Library Board
follow ed through on the prom ises made to G ladney early in 1957. O n N ovem ber 21, it
was recorded that “M ayor Orgill is quite insistent that a library to serve the colored
citizens o f M em phis be established som ew here in the northern part o f the city.” Orgill
had appointed some civil servants to identify appropriate locales for such a branch and
they, along with Cunningham , settled on a site near the Klondyke school. This was
around four miles aw ay from the sites proposed by G ladney’s group, but the Vance
A venue branch was tw ice as far. The board voted to request an appropriation o f
$150,000 from the city for construction o f a second branch for A frican A m ericans.53
Through the next two years, even as Turner filed a lawsuit, the Library Board
pursued the construction o f a second branch for A frican-Am ericans. The proposition to

51 Wassell Randolph to H. T. Lockard, October 3, 1957, L.H.C. (italics in original).
52 H. T. Lockard to Wassell Randolph, January 3, 1958, L.H.C.
53 Minutes, November 21, 1957.
121

build a library next to the Klondyke school ran into zoning difficulties.54 City officials
suggested a site inside a vacant restaurant, but the library director feared that the
indignity o f the small space “w ould arouse the Negroes against us even m ore.” 55
Cunningham announced plans for a $40,000 branch library in February 1959, while still
aw aiting for details to be clarified.56 Eventually, on A ugust 25, 1959, lawyers and
bureaucrats sorted out the zoning and the city transferred to the library a plot o f land next
to the K londyke school, on the com er o f V ollintine and Bellevue, for construction o f a
new library branch.57
The decision by the board to pursue m ore library service for A frican-A m ericans
was prescient, for dem ands kept coming. In N ovem ber, a property developer in South
M em phis urged another branch in the Castalia Heights neighborhood, abutting the A rm y
co

Depot.

Cunningham replied that “a negro com m unity o f 2500 persons w ould have to

give precedence to negro com m unities w ith a much larger population and a greater
potential as library users. The fact is that much less than 10% o f the estim ated negro
population m ake any effort to use the libraries.” 59 In M arch o f 1958 the board received
an epistle from Ensley Tiffin, Secretary o f the N orth M emphis Interracial Council,
“m aking inquiry about library services in their ‘area o f concern.’” 60 Tiffin noted that the

54 Jesse Cunningham to Ensley Tiffin, November 12, 1958, L.H.C.
55 C. Lamar Wallis to Board of Directors, March 4, 1959, L.H.C.
56 John Spence, “Start to Be Made This Year on Negro Library,” PS, February 24, 1959.
57 Minutes, September 17, 1959.
58 Charles H. Freeburg to Jesse Cunningham, December 5, 1957, L.H.C.
59 Jesse Cunningham to Charles H. Freeburg, December 20, 1957, L.H.C.
60 Minutes, March 20, 1958.
122

Council was “particularly concerned at the apparent lack o f library facilities open the
N egroes throughout the city, in com parison to service offered to white citizens.”61 This
prom pted further discussion about library service to African Americans. O n April 18, the
board discussed both T insley’s letter and “the Lockard-Tum er issue”, and “by consent o f
those present, no action was taken.” 62
T urner’s patience w as apparently grow ing thin, as was that o f others advocating
desegregation o f the libraries. It appears that on M ay 23, 1958, Lockard transm itted yet
another letter to Randolph, which is now lost. Again, on June 23 the board “voted not to
change the position expressed... O ctober 2, 1957.” They stated that “the necessity for
adhering to this position is greater than when the letter was w ritten, by reason o f the
increasing public interest involved.” A ttem pting to placate Lockard, Randolph added
that the library was planning to build an addition to the old Cossitt Library dow ntow n to
create an “extensive research library, and that the Board, some time ago, decided that this
new research library w ould be available to all students, teachers and researchers eligible
for its use. This will give all N egro teachers, students and researchers full use o f these
research facilities, w hich include m any valuable docum ents and papers not subject to
circulation.” 63 The prim a fa c ie contradiction between this peace offering and the
assertion o f O ctober 2 that library service was provided equally through the Vance
A venue branch was apparently lost on Randolph, a retired lawyer.

61 Ensley Tiffin to Jesse Cunningham, March 17, 1958.
62 Minutes, April 18, 1958.
63 Wassell Randolph to H. T. Lockard, undated latter after June 23, 1958, L.H.C.

123

R andolph’s note o f “increasing public interest involved” m ay have referred to the
general increase in civil rights activism in M emphis, but he was probably referring to
other groups forming to pressure the M em phis Public Library to desegregate. A t an
undeterm ined point early in 1958, the Protestant Pastors A ssociation had presented a
petition, now lost, urging desegregation o f the libraries.64 A m ore forceful protest was
launched by a group w hich had made their case on June 20, ju st days before Randolph
drafted his m ost recent response to Lockard. Row land Hill, a white professor o f English
at the still-segregated M em phis State University, had been gathering signatures from
students and faculty at his institution as w ell as Christian Brothers College, Southwestern
College at M em phis, and the U niversity o f Tennessee College o f M edicine.65 The
petition that Hill circulated read, in part,
“In view o f the fact that the present denial o f the equal use o f the public library
facilities at the Central Public L ib rary ... Cossitt Library [and branch libraries]
constitutes discrim ination against a large body o f our citizens, a violation o f the
dem ocratic principle o f equal opportunity and a deterrent to the cultural and
educational advance o f our entire com munity, and in view o f the fact that such
cities as N ashville and C hattanooga in Tennessee, M iam i, Florida and N ew
Orleans, Louisiana have opened all public library facilities to equal use by all
their citizens w ithout difficulty or disturbance, we the undersigned, educators and
citizens o f the city o f M em phis, respectfully request the City and the County
Com m issioners, the Chairman and M embers o f the Public Library Board and all
64 Bob Marks, “Segregation Will Continue in Libraries o f Memphis,” CA, June 25, 1958.
65 These institutions are today known as, respectively, University o f Memphis, Christian
Brothers University, Rhodes College, and University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center.
124

duly constituted public bodies and officials to declare and put into im mediate
effect a new policy granting equal use o f all public library facilities in M emphis
and Shelby C ounty to all our citizens w ithout any distinction or discrim ination
w hatsoever.”
The signers w ere m ostly faculty at one o f the colleges in M emphis, although some m ay
have been students at Christian Brothers. The petition carefully noted that “the signers o f
this petition express their personal opinions only. Position and institution, when added,
are given solely for identification.” N otable signers included two librarians from
Southw estern, five librarians from M em phis State, and Enoch M itchell, esteemed
professor o f history at M em phis State.66
Hill dated the petition from M ay 12, but it is not clear how long it circulated. Hill
w rote to Randolph on June 11 with a request to present the docum ent to the Board. He
w ould be joined by V an D. Philpot, Jr., professor at U niversity o f Tennessee College o f
M edicine, and Perry Scrivner, professor o f education at Southw estern.67
On June 20, the three faculty representatives presented the petition to the board.
In addition to the precisely legal and logical phrasing em ployed in the petition, Hill added
his ow n personal statement, full o f sentiment, flattery, and paternalism:
“The mental and spiritual w elfare o f our citizens, both Negro and W hite, is at
stake. No m an can ever grow to his full potentialities as a hum an being and as a
child o f G od if he is deprived o f the very tools w hich are m ost efficacious in

66 Petition to the Board o f Directors, signed May 12, 1958 by 183 faculty members and
students at Southwestern College, University of Tennessee at Memphis, Memphis State
University, and Christian Brothers College, presented to the Board on June 20, 1958, L.H.C.
67 Rowland M. Hill to Wassell Randolph, June 11, 1958, L.H.C.
125

aiding him to im prove h im self.... Granting to Negroes the privilege o f using the
full public library facilities o f the city o f which they are citizens can be done
simply, gradually, w ithout fanfare, w ithout publicity, w ithout court action. I am
certain that no one here desires turm oil, bitterness, or racial antagonism s in
M em phis, a city o f good will. The experience o f other cities in the South shows
that this respected Board now has it in its power, by quiet and unobtrusive means,
to be instrum ental in raising the level o f N egro culture.”
It w ent on to detail successful library desegregation attempts elsewhere, w hich were
uniform ly achieved w ithout incident, and concluded “Gentleman, I appeal to your
Christian charity and your concern for the intellectual and spiritual w elfare o f your city to
take im m ediate steps to assure all our citizens the free and equal use o f all the facilities o f
our fine public libraries, o f w hich we are all ju stly proud.” 68
It seem s neither logic, nor persuasion, nor the pow er o f numbers, would convince
the Board to desegregate. On June 23, the Board m et to consider Lockard’s letter and the
petition, and Randolph confirm ed to the press that the Board had unanim ously approved a
policy that “N egroes will be given library cards and books only at the V ance Avenue
Branch.” H e added that the city’s political leaders had been consulted on the matter.
Orgill advocated continued delay, while City Com m issioner H enry Loeb urged a firm
decision to continue segregation. The other Com m issioners had earlier w eighed in with
their support o f the segregation policy, but did not form ally confirm the m ost recent
Board decision.69

68 Rowland M. Hill, statement to the Board of Directors, June 20, 1958, L.H.C.
69 Marks, “Segregation Will Continue in Libraries of Memphis.”

126

Despite the B oard’s desire not to rouse the em otions o f M em phians around library
segregation, the issue becam e a topic in the press. The Tri-State D efender made a banner
headline out o f “U ntold Facts A bout How 183 W hites Backed Fair Play In Library
System,” and asked pointed questions about the extent o f desegregation in the new
reference library. “W ill Negroes have com plete use o f all facilities, including drinking
fountains and w ash room s, when the new addition to the Cossitt library on Front St.
opens som etim e next year?” (Cunningham had evaded the question, noting that “the only
change that has been m ade in library policy is an agreem ent by the trustees to allow all
students, teachers, and researchers ‘eligible for its u se,’ access to all books, docum ents,
and publications on file there.”) 70 The M emphis World called the petition an “unusual
plea for fair play and justice,” but correctly predicted that the board w ould refuse to
desegregate.71
Cunningham was quick to forward the nam es o f the signatories to their respective
college presidents, and to the city com m ission, writing that “we thought you m ight be
interested in seeing this petition and identifying the persons who signed it.” 72 Hill
experienced retribution for his efforts. Rumors arose that M emphis State president J.
M illard Sm ith regarded the professor’s action as “disloyal,” so Hill began a search for a
new position, finally landing an appointm ent at Tennessee W esleyan College. W hen

70 “Untold Facts About How 183 Whites Backed Fair Play In Library System,” Tri-State
Defender (hereafter abbreviated TSD), July 12, 1958; “Librarian Fails to Answer Query on New
Addition,” TSD, July 12, 1958.
71 “ 170 Whites Ask Library Board to Lift Barriers,” TSD, July 5, 1955.
72 Cunningham to Brother Richard, Christian Brothers College, June 24, 1958;
Cunningham to Peyton M. Rhodes, Southwestern at Memphis, June 24, 1958; Cunningham to O.
W. Hyman, University o f Tennessee College of Medicine, June 26, 1958; Cunningham to
Commissioners Armour, Dillard, Dwyer, and Loeb, June 26, 1958; L.H.C.

127

H ill’s resignation was announced in the Press-Scim itar, “the usual am ount o f cranks”
bom barded his hom e phone with angry calls. Smith “accepted his resignation without
regret.” 73 Professor Law rence Edwards, also o f the English department, was similarly
“ousted,” although details are unclear.74
Perhaps the fates o f Hill and Edwards provoked some fear, or else H ill’s petition
was m isrepresented by those circulating it, but several signatories later corresponded with
Cunningham to rescind their support. A typical explanation is, “M y signature was
obtained as a result o f m isinterpreting the petition and its intent. I interpreted it as a
request to attem pt to m ake available analogous library facilities to all groups. I w ant it
understood that I am entirely in sym pathy with the policies o f the Board and its
m em bers.” 75 Interestingly, none o f the “m isinterpretations” were identical, ranging from
“I understood the petition was to request lim ited use o f the Library’s reference facilities
for N egroes” to “ interpretations o f the petition have been expressed and/or im plied which
go far beyond m y original intention.” Perhaps the m ost honest correspondent stated
simply, “Since the ram ifications o f the issue could adversely affect others as well as
myself, I respectfully ask that m y nam e be rem oved from said petition.” 76
W ithin a fortnight, the M emphis World was speculating w hether Lockard w ould
file suit against the library on T urner’s behalf; the decision, it reported, w ould w ait until

73 “Advocate of Integration Resigns from MSU,” PS, July 19, 1958; “Prof. Hill Quits
MSU; Gets Top Post at Tenn. Wesley College,” TSD, July 26, 1958.
74 “Smith Moves to Prevent Fall Integration at MSU,” Memphis World (hereafter
abbreviated MW), August 13, 1958.
75 Edward I. Crawford to Jesse Cunningham, July 7, 1958, L.H.C.
76 Mrs. Harry Woodbury to Wassell Randolph, June 27,1958; Eugene Bence to Cossitt
Library Board o f Directors, July 9, 1958; L.H.C.
128

the law yer returned from vacation. In the report, Turner m ade w hat appears to have been
his first public statem ents on his desire to use the Central Library. D eflecting speculation
that his action was taken at the behest o f the NAACP (w hile confirm ing his m em bership
therein), he noted, “I applied as an individual for the card at the main library and that is
w hat I still w ant - the right to use any library. W hen I go to the library, I am not looking
for a particular book. I w ant to look in some periodical for statistics and facts, in material
w hich can not be found at the N egro branch. I feel that I have the right to go any library I
choose, for m y tax m oney also goes to support the libraries. It was pretty insulting to be
told by M r. Jesse Cunningham that I was ‘too intelligent’ to w ant to go to the main
library. It w ould seem to m e that the m ore intelligent you are the less you need a library
is going backw ards.” Turner adm itted he had not and “w ould never” use the Vance
A venue branch, despite its proxim ity to his hom e.77
One concern that Turner and Lockard m ay have pondered was the recent failure
o f O. Z. E vers’s bus lawsuit. O n June 27, a three-judge Federal court ruled that Evers
lacked a standing to sue because he was not a regular bus rider and had “boarded the bus
for the purpose o f instituting” the case; therefore, he had not suffered injury, and was
“not in the position o f representative o f a class o f colored citizens w ho do use the buses
in M em phis as a means o f transportation.” 78 Lockard relayed a com m ent that “some
observers have said that it is one o f the w eakest grounds for dism issal o f the law suit that
the hum an m ind could conceive o f w ithout Divine revelation.” 79 Despite Lockard’s

77 Lockard Expected to Take Library Ruling to Court,” MW, July 5, 1958.
78 “Bus Rider Loses Segregation Suit,” New York Times, June 28, 1958.
79 “Basic Issue in Bus Suit Ignored by Court,” MW, July 5, 1958.

129

contem pt for the ruling, he m ay have w ondered w hether Turner, who adm ittedly did not
use the single library branch open to him, w ould face a sim ilar ruling.
On the other hand, Turner and Lockard m ay have been encouraged by progress in
the M em phis State U niversity case, which had pressured the State Board o f Education to
agree to adm it A frican-A m erican students in 1958.80 President Smith successfully
delayed desegregation for another year to “prevent violence,” but the continued progress
o f the case in Federal court forced the state to finally adm it eight African-A m erican
students in the fall o f 1959.81
Despite the setback in the Evers case, Lockard and Turner m oved forward with
legal action. O n July 22, 1958, Lockard told the press that he planned to file a suit in
Federal court, with the tim ing to be determ ined by “other legal m atters and m y planned
absence from the city.”

It took him three weeks to prepare the suit, working with

fellow attorneys A. W. W illis Jr., and Russell Sugarmon Jr. (see figure 7).

Their fees

w ere underw ritten by the NAA CP, w hose national office sent well-know n litigators
Thurgood M arshall and Constance M otley to assist.84

80 “Smith Moves to Prevent Fall Integration.”
81 Lovett, The Civil Rights Movement in Tennessee, 344-45.
82 “Suit is Planned Against Library,” CA, July 22, 1958; “Seeking Integration at
Libraries,” PS, July 22, 1958.
83 “Negro Use of Libraries is the Object o f Suit,” PS, August 15, 1958.
84 “Hearing is Urged on Negroes’ Suit, CA, August 16, 1958.
130

FIGURE 7: Russell Sugarmon, A. W. Willis, and H. T. Lockard, 1958 (source: PressScimitar, August 15, 1958).

After filing the suit at 11:00 a.m. on August 15 in the Federal courthouse in
downtown Memphis, the attorneys made a statement: “The necessity o f filing any suit o f
this type is regrettable. And in this case, it is extremely unfortunate that court action has
been made necessary by the uncompromising attitude o f the library board and Mr.
Cunningham, the librarian. Equal use o f the library facilities in Memphis certainly would
not result in creation o f racial tensions or animosities, and we feel that the library board
131

has m issed an outstanding opportunity to prom ote progress in race relations in our
Of

city.”

t
The library suit earned an above-the-banner headline in the M em phis World and

Turner’s face was on the front page.86
W hile Lockard could certainly turn a phrase w hen he wished, the suit as filed is a
dry, legalistic document. Turner, “on beh alf o f him self and others sim ilarly situated,”
sued all the m em bers o f the Board o f D irectors o f the M em phis Public Library and
Cunningham. For ease o f reference, it was called Turner v. Randolph, civil action
num ber 3525 in the U nited States District Court for the W estern District o f Tennessee,
W estern Division.
Turner alleged that “the jurisdiction o f the court is invoked pursuant to the
provisions o f Title 28, U nited States Code, 1343(3), this being a suit in equity which is
authorized by law, Title 42 U nited States Code 1893.... The rights here sought to be
redressed are rights guaranteed by the due process and equal protection clauses o f the
Fourteenth A m endm ent to the Constitution o f the United States and by Title 42, United
States Code, 1981.” He sought “a perm anent injunction enjoining defendants from
enforcing their policy, custom and usage o f restricting N egro citizens and residents o f
M em phis” to the V ance Avenue branch, “solely because o f race and color.” Furtherm ore,
he sought a “declaratory ju d g m en t... for the purpose o f d efining... w hether defendants
m ay continue to operate public library facilities and services in the City o f M emphis,
Tennessee on a racially segregated basis.”
It was a class action suit, the class consisting o f

85 “Negro Use of Libraries is the Object of Suit,” PS, August 15, 1958.
86 “Federal Suit Seeks Opening of Libraries,” MW, August, 20 1958.
132

N egro citizens o f the U nited States and o f the State o f Tennessee who
reside in the city o f M em phis, Tennessee, and w ho are entitled to use the public
library facilities and services o f the City o f M emphis. All o f the members o f the
class are sim ilarly affected by the policy, custom and usage o f defendants in
refusing to perm it N egro persons living in the C ity o f M em phis use o f public
library facilities and services w ithout restrictions based solely upon consideration
o f race and color. Said persons constitute a class too numerous to be brought
individually before this court, but there are com m on questions o f law and fact
involved, a com m on grievance arising out o f a com m on wrong, and a com m on
relief is sought for plaintiff nam ed herein and m em bers o f the class. The interests
o f said class are fairly and adequately represented by the nam ed plaintiff.”
The suit recounted the library’s segregation policy and Turner’s attem pts to
access the library. It concluded that T urner’s exclusion from the Central Library “has
resulted in irreparable injury o f rights guaranteed plaintiff by the C onstitution and laws o f
the U nited States. Plaintiff shall continue to suffer injury which is irreparable until such
injury is enjoined by this court. The plaintiff has no other plain, adequate or speedy
rem edy at law to redress the violation o f his Federal constitutional and statutory rights
herein com plained of.” Turner asked the court to adjudicate the question o f w hether
segregated libraries in M em phis are perm issible, to issue an injunction forbidding
segregation in the libraries, “grant plaintiff such other, additional or alternative relief as
m ay appear to the court to be equitable,” and to grant Turner his court costs.87

87 Turner v. Randolph, complaint, L.H.C.
133

The laws under w hich Turner was suing arose from Reconstruction-era legislation
to preserve the rights o f freedpeople under the Fourteenth and Fifteenth am endments. As
it read in 1958, Title 28, section 1343 provided that the Federal district courts “shall have
original jurisdiction o f any civil actio n ... to redress the deprivation, under color o f any
State law, statute, ordinance, regulation, custom or usage, o f any right, privilege or
im m unity secured by the Constitution or the United States or by any Act o f Congress
providing for equal rights o f citizens or o f all persons w ithin the jurisdiction o f the United
States.” 88 Title 42, section 1981 provided that “all perso n s... shall have the same right in
every State and Territory to make and enforce contracts, to sue, be parties, give evidence,
and to the full and equal benefit o f all laws and proceedings for the security o f persons
and property as is enjoyed by w hite citizens.” 89 Title 42, section 1983 provided that
“Every person who, under color o f any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom , or usage,
o f any State or Territory, subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen o f the U nited
S tates... to the deprivation o f any rights, privileges, or im munities secured by the
Constitution and laws, shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in
equity, or other proper proceeding for redress.” 90
Section 1343 has its roots in the Civil Rights A ct o f 1866, w hile the other two
sections derived from the Enforcem ent Acts o f 1870 and 1871, which enabled the Grant

88 United States Code, 1958 ed. (Washington, D.C.: Government Printing Office: 1959),
5024.
89 United States Code, 1958 ed., 7061-62.
90 United States Code, 1958 ed., 7062.
134

A dm inistration to tem porarily break up the K u Klux Klan in m ost parts o f the South.91
A lthough they had been “dead letters” for m any years, the laws were on the books and
had form ed the basis for m uch im portant litigation since the late 1930s.
As the Library Board and the city ’s leaders contem plated their response to the
lawsuit, pressures continued to m ount on various segregated facilities in M emphis. The
B ingham ton Civic League, a group led by Evers, made headlines with a petition to the
C ity Com m ission urging desegregation o f all tax-supported facilities, including the zoo,
fairgrounds, and parks.92
D espite evidence that desegregation m ust com e - the federal governm ent had
m ade clear at Little Rock in 1957 that it w ould support school desegregation, and the
state Board o f Education had approved the desegregation o f M emphis State U niversity the w hites in charge o f the library w ere steadfast in their maintenance o f the color line.
Even before the Board h ad a chance to m eet and discuss T urner’s lawsuit, Cunningham
was confidently reporting that “the Library Board is definitely com m itted to the
continuance o f our policy in the m atter w hich has existed all through the existence o f our
public library system .” He added w ith some resignation that “with a Supreme Court like
we have in this country m ost anything can happen.” 93
Cunningham was correct in his evaluation o f the B oard’s attitude. On A ugust 21,
the Board m et and decided to defend them selves in court. They sent a request to the City

91 Mark Wahlgren Summers, The Ordeal o f the Reunion : A New History o f
Reconstruction (Chapel Hill: University ofNorth Carolina Press, 2014), 270-71.
92 “Group Asks End o f ‘One Day at Zoo’ Rule,” TSD, August 23, 1958; “Negroes
Petition City to Consider Full Integration,” CA, August 21, 1958.
93 Jesse Cunningham to E. M. Hall, August 19, 1958, L.H.C.

135

Com m ission that the city ’s counsel, Frank Gianotti, take responsibility.94 In a joint
m eeting o f the Library Board and the C ity Com m ission on Septem ber 3, that decision
was reversed.95 The legal position o f the library was that it was “an eleem osynary
corporation entirely distinct from the city o f M em phis,” whose relationship to the city
was contractual. Hence, independent counsel w ould better serve to represent the library
than a city lawyer. B y m id-Septem ber Edw ard P. Russell, Larry Creson and John S.
M ontedonico had agreed to defend the library.96
W hatever the legal relationship between the city and the library, the City
C om m ission was firm ly behind segregation at the library. A sked on television about the
m atter, Stanley Dillard, John T. Dwyer, H enry Loeb, and Claude A rm our all affirm ed
that they w ere “strongly opposed to integration o f the M emphis public libraries and will
fight any law suit that seeks to force it.” D illard likened the library case to the bus
lawsuit, A rm our decried the “tactics used by the N A A C P,” and Loeb repeated
C unningham ’s assurance that “we have separate but equal facilities. Anyone from one
branch can call for a book from any other branch. I d o n ’t know how you could m ake it
Q7

m ore equal.”
In the m idst o f all this action, new leadership was appointed at the library.
Cunningham had decided to retire after thirty years as head librarian, and C. Lamar
W allis, lately director o f the public library at Richm ond, Virginia, accepted an offer to
94 Minutes, August 21, 1958.
95 Minutes, September 3,1958.
96 Wassell Randolph to Edmund Orgill et al., September 15, 1958, L.H.C.; Minutes,
September 18, 1958.
97 “Four Officials Are in Accord to Fight Integration of City Libraries,” CA, undated
clipping from summer 1958, L.H.C.
136

take the new ly created position o f D irector o f the M em phis Public Library beginning
D ecem ber 1. Cunningham w ould stay on as a consultant until the rem odeling o f the old
Cossitt Library was com pleted.98
Perhaps in an effort to tam p down rum ors that he w as attem pting to “ instigate”
something, Turner w ent public about his lawsuit shortly after it was filed. He told the
Tri-State D efender that “his only interest is ‘that I w ant to be able to get into any library
in the city o f M em phis’.” Turner pressed for a “ju st a swift settlem ent.” He added “ I
do n ’t care if the V ance Ave. branch is adequate or not. I should be able to use either
branch.” 99 (Suspicions o f subterfuge on T urner’s part m ay not have been com pletely
unfounded - in 1955 he had “desegregated” the U niversity o f Tennessee by enrolling via
mail in a course at the M em phis evening extension school; he was allowed to stay but no
other undergraduates were adm itted until 1961.)100
The suit w ould linger m any months in court. On Septem ber 2, Judge M arion
Boyd - who had been part o f the panel that ruled against Evers in the bus lawsuit granted the Library Board thirty extra days to file its answ er to T urner’s com plaint, on the
grounds that the full board had not had a chance to discuss the issu e.101 As Lockard
recalled, Judge Boyd “w ould not rule on our cases.” Lockard would not m ind being

98 C. Lamar Wallis to Wassell Randolph, August, 25, 1958, L.H.C.; Minutes, October 16,
1958.
99 “Ask for Quick Settlement in Library Suit,” TSD, August 23, 1958.
100 Lovett, The Civil Rights Movement in Tennessee, 346-47.
101 “Library is Granted Delay,” CA, September 3, 1958 (interestingly, this item appeared
in the same column as Hambone ’s Meditations.)
137

ruled against, as he could appeal. But Boyd “was a m aster at putting o f f ’ a decision.102
In any num ber o f cases, from Evers’s bus suit, to the library case, to the M em phis State
U niversity m atter, Boyd allowed delays to obstruct any decision from com ing forth.
A quick survey o f the course o f events in Turner v. Randolph dem onstrates
B oyd’s w illingness to countenance delay. On October 7, the library’s attorneys asked for
a dism issal o f the case, on the grounds that “the com plaint contains no claim against the
defendants upon w hich relief can be granted, the Federal Court is w ithout jurisdiction in
the m atter, and denies the bulk o f the claims made in the com plaint.” 103 A t the hearing
on the com plaint and its response, Lockard planned to ask for a sum m ary judgm ent, or a
decision on the facts w ithout recourse to a trial. It was scheduled for D ecem ber 3 .104
That day, Boyd reset a hearing on the merits o f the case to January 30, 1959, because the
library’s counsel was “unable to be in Federal court.” W hen Lockard opposed the delay
because at least one o f the library’s attorneys had received notice, Boyd ruled that a delay
was justifiable because “this is not an old case - this is ju s t the first setting and the
application for continuance has m erit.” 105 On January 28, Boyd determ ined that he could
not participate in the case because his son was a m em ber o f the law firm o f the
defendant’s attorneys - a fact he clearly should have know n from the start o f the case.
The case was delayed indefinitely while the chief judge o f the Sixth C ircuit Court o f

102 H. T. Lockard, interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 10, 2000, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
103 “Library Board Seeks Dismissal o f Suit,” TSD, October 7, 1958.
104 “Segregation Topic for Hearing Today,” CA, December 3, 1958.
105 “Desegregation Case Reset for Jan. 30,” PS, December 4, 1958; “Library Race Suit
Delayed by Judge,” CA, December 4, 1958.

138

A ppeals nam ed B oyd’s replacem ent.106 B oyd’s delay tactics in the M em phis State
U niversity case finally ended w hen Lockard’s N AA CP colleague Jim N abrit suggested
that Lockard file a “show cause” m otion in the circuit court - requiring the judge to
dem onstrate w hy his (in)actions were not in contem pt o f court ru les.107 On February 26,
1959, T urner’s library suit was reassigned to W illiam E. Miller. M iller was assigned to
the M iddle D istrict o f Tennessee, but w ould travel to M em phis to hear Turner’s case.108
The M em phis State U niversity case, and other civil rights activism including a
concerted effort to elect A frican-A m erican candidates to public office, occupied Lockard,
W illis, Sugarmon, and Turner throughout 1959. There w ould be no m ovem ent on the
library lawsuit until the spring o f 1960. The delays resulted from M iller having to clear
his ow n docket from M iddle Tennessee before being able to hear a M em phis case.109
One note o f encouragem ent to African A m ericans seeking to use all libraries
cam e through the M em phis Com m ittee on Com m unity Relations. This successor to the
G reater M em phis Race Relations Com m ittee was form ed by w hite attorney Lucius
Burch. The m em bership included m any business owners and executives, with the
thought that econom ic clout m ight be persuasive w hen moral arguments failed. The
M C C R did not m ove quickly on m any m atters, but in 1959 it did issue a report

106 “Judge Boyd’s Action Delays Library Hearing,” MW, February 4, 1959.
107 H. T. Lockard, interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 10, 2000, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
108 Turner v. Randolph, docket, National Archives and Records Administration.

109 Richard Connelly, “Integration Suit Put on Docket,” CA, June 29, 1960.

139

recom m ending im m ediate desegregation o f the libraries. That recom m endation was
ignored by the Library B oard.110
This does not m ean the library had escaped the attention o f African A m ericans in
M emphis. Perhaps the publicity around T urner’s lawsuit in the fall o f 1958 had piqued
their interest, or perhaps a nascent direct action m ovem ent was testing its legs, but in
evening o f M onday, Septem ber 22, 1958, four young people followed T urner’s lead and
approached the Central Library for service. Reference librarian M ary Haley reported to
C unningham that they began at the card catalog, and when confronted the first student
replied he w anted a biography o f Pestalozzi, the nineteenth-century Swiss educator.
Upon being told he m ust go the Vance A venue branch, request it there, and w ait another
day for it to be brought there, he proceeded to ask if he could listen to records in the
library’s m usic room. “Y ou know that you cannot use the music room ,” was H aley’s
reply. He asked if he could borrow a record, which was im possible because “none o f the
Branches m ay borrow records, since the Record Collection is set up for borrowers who
com e to this branch.” He was also refused perm ission to “browse around.” The other
students w ere also denied access to Flaubert’s M adam e Bovary and E instein’s Out o f M y
Later Years. H aley m ade note o f their requests and sent them to Vance Avenue the next
day; a w eek later, “the books had not been asked for” at V ance A venue.111 Cunningham
was convinced “these persons were sent to the library coached and rehearsed for the
definite purpose o f being w itnesses in our case w hen it comes to trial” ; if they were, their

110 Tucker, Memphis Since Cramp, 120.
111 Mary T. Haley, memorandum, September 29, 1958, L.H.C.
140

interaction w ith H aley provided plenty o f p ro o f that the treatm ent o f A frican A m ericans
at Central Library was discrim inatory and unequal.112
A sim ilar incident occurred on D ecem ber 15, when an adult woman, N ellie Irwin,
called via telephone to reserve The N ight Before Christmas. W hen she cam e to retrieve
the book from Central Library, representing herself as acting on b eh alf o f a white patron,
she was requested by a library staffer, M rs. Langley, to show the white patron’s library
card. Perhaps feeling som e stress, Irwin crumbled, and adm itted she had lied. “I am
Mrs. Irwin. Some colored people told me to com e and get this book. They had tried to
get books here and they w ouldn’t let them. They w anted me to com e and get this book.”
In response, Irwin was directed to the registration desk to get a library card; the
registration desk directed her to V ance A venue.113 W hether C unningham ’s suspicions
about coordinated activities to create a pool o f w itnesses were w ell-founded is now
unknown. There does not appear to be a record o f such coordination.
As w ith legal action, direct action at the library was quiet throughout 1959. But
other events that year w ere o f concern to A frican-A m erican library patrons. Orgill had
declined to run for re-election, citing health concerns.114 The w inner o f the mayoral race
was H enry Loeb, previously City Com m issioner and on record as a strong supporter o f
segregation in the library. In his cam paign, Loeb pledged to “fight any integration order

112 Jesse Cunningham to Walter Chandler, September 30,1958, L.H.C.
113 Mrs. Langley, report, December 15, 1958, L.H.C.
114 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 70.
141

all the w ay.” He did m aintain that a Loeb adm inistration w ould provide services that
w ere “separate but equal, but I m ean equal in all fairness.” 115
The Library Board had com m itted to opening the new Cossitt reference library to
patrons o f both races; as the time for its opening approached, some hesitation about the
acceptable limits o f library service to A frican A m ericans appeared in their
correspondence, as the im plications o f their com m itm ent became clearer. On O ctober 20,
1959, Randolph met with the City Com m ission to ascertain the extent to w hich the city
was w illing to provide library services to African Americans. Loeb disapproved o f the
plan entirely, “but w ould not push his objections upon the Library B oard.” The City
A ttorney and Police Com m issioner pointed out the need for segregated bathroom s.116
Just before the new Cossitt reference library opened on N ovem ber 31, W allis
circulated a mem o to his departm ent heads. He reiterated the policy that all patrons could
use the reference collection. Due to the specialized nature o f the “Business and
Technology C ollection” housed there, A frican-A m erican patrons could borrow books on
a special card, good only for the Business and Technology section. W allis was especially
concerned to avoid “m isstatem ents or m isunderstandings in the new spapers” and insisted
that any statements to the press com e from the m ain office. “A sk your staff to give no
private interviews on this matter, even to the friendliest o f reporters.” Eager to avoid
unpleasantness w ith patrons, he counseled staff, “Do not com m ent on w hether you
approve or disapprove o f serving N egro patrons but say cheerfully that you enjoy library

115 Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 68.
116 Minutes, November 5, 1959.
142

work, or som e such noncom m ittal rem ark .... The best answ er to all com m ents is a big
sm ile and a cheerful neutrality. W e need to ignore the problem w henever possible.” 117
A small step for inclusion was made in the nam e o f efficiency. The new library
director, Lam ar W allis, suggested that “N egro staff m em bers attend the sam e classes as
the other m em bers o f the staff in order to avoid giving the same lectures tw ice.”
Surprisingly, perhaps, “it was agreed that such an arrangem ent was reasonable and should
be follow ed.” 118
Continuing his charm offensive, W allis took to the newspapers in early 1960 to
prom ote a new “daily delivery service,” w hich m eant that “Negroes now m ay obtain any
book in the M em phis library system .” The new service m ay have benefited other
branches, but it appears to have been identical to that in place at Vance Avenue for m any
years. N onetheless, W allis made a point o f trum peting it along with the opening o f the
Cossitt reference library as im portant advances in library service. W ith his white
audience probably in mind, he noted, “W e have had no trouble. W e expect no incidents.”
But with a lawsuit pending, he added, “O f course, the Vance Library is w ell-stocked
itself. So are libraries in N egro schools. Everyone seems satisfied.” 119
Everyone, that is, expect African-A m erican readers. Turner’s lawsuit had still not
had its first hearing. M em phis had, by delay after delay, avoided both desegregation and
the violence that accom panied it in other cities. The exceptions had been the peaceful
m atriculation o f eight students at M emphis State in the fall o f 1959, and com pliance with

117 C. Lamar Wallis, memorandum, November 25, 1959, L.H.C.
118 Minutes, September 17, 1959.
119 “Negro May Place Order for Any Library Book,” PS, January 15, 1960.

143

federal regulations at the interstate bus term inal.120 W ould a Loeb adm inistration, faced
with decisions once the C ircuit Court m oved B oyd’s cases along, provide a different
experience? It is w orth rem em bering that M em phis was still the kind o f city w here a
police officer w ould call a grow n A frican-A m erican m an “boy,” and a young African
A m erican could be arrested on charges o f disorderly conduct for allegedly w inking at a
w hite w aitress.121
W hile W allis m ight counsel ignoring the “problem ” o f library service for African
Americans, m any M em phians were unw illing to do so. Events kept piling onto the white
establishm ent. Turner filed another law suit to desegregate the airport.122 A nd a mass
m eeting was held to organize a boycott o f local car dealers after a segregated auto show
was held in the city auditorium .

A nd on M arch 19, 1960, A frican-A m ericans took

their place in the M em phis Public Library, regardless o f policy.
The sit-in was not entirely a novel form o f protest, not even at libraries. In 1939,
several A frican-A m erican youths entered the library in Alexandria, Virginia, and read
quietly until they w ere arrested. This protest resulted in the city building a branch for
A frican-A m ericans.124 But the wave o f sit-ins that swept the South in early 1960 took
m ost observers by surprise. From a single sit-in at a Greensboro, N orth Carolina,
W oolw orth’s on February 1, the idea spread to Raleigh, Nashville, M ontgomery, and
120 “Memphis U. Quietly Integrates Classes,” MW, September 16, 1959; “Jim Crow Signs
Take Another Tumble Here,” MW, October 24,1959.
121 “Officer’s Order: ‘Pull Over Boy’ Irks Rev. Love, Wife,” TSD, February 28, 1959;
“McGhee Denies Winking at White Waitress,” MW, July 22, 1959.
122 “City Officials in Segregation Case,” PS, January 8, 1960.
123 “Shift Gears in Freedom Fight,” TSD, January 30, 1960.
124 Battles, The History o f Public Library Access, 82-83.

144

other locales across the S outh.125 The students o f M emphis were ready on M arch 19, and
am ong their first targets was the Central Library.
As w ith m any o f the sit-ins, the leaders o f civil rights organizations were caught
by surprise w hen a group o f students from LeM oyne College and Owen Junior College
staged the first sit-in at the lunch counter o f M cLellan’s V ariety Store on M arch 18.
M arion Barry, a graduate o f LeM oyne who was attending graduate school at Fisk
U niversity in Nashville, had participated in the sit-ins at the state capital. He returned to
his hom etow n and spread enthusiasm for protest am ong his acquaintances.126 A dozen
students w ent to M cLellan’s late Friday afternoon to sit in. The m anager closed the
counter and then the store after the protesters refused to vacate. W hen one protester
asked for coffee, the m anager “told him w e w ould be happy to serve him at the other
counter. He said, ‘I w ant a cup o f coffee and I w ant it here.’” The protesters, while
aw aiting service, read magazines or menus. M cLellan’s m anagem ent did not call police
- it was only a departing w hite custom er who flagged a traffic officer; the officer, in turn,
radioed police headquarters. The protesters left as police arrived, and no one was
arrested. The students had brought along a photographer from the Tri-State D efender,
but had apparently neglected to inform anyone at the N AA CP or other organizations.

177

Years later, m any key figures such as W illis, Sugarmon, and M axine Smith had no
recollection o f the lunch counter being the first sit-in.

125 Branch, Parting the Waters, 271-284.
126 Russell B. Sugarmon, Jr., interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 13, 2000,
transcript, Everett R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information
Center.
127 Wesley Pruden Jr., “Dozen Negroes Stage Sit-In: McLellan’s on Main Closes,” CA,
March 19, 1960.
145

The next day’s sit-in w ould have a far different outcome. M ore than three dozen
students decided to sit in sim ultaneously at the Central Library and the C ossitt reference
library. N o one seem s to have recorded the m inutes o f strategy sessions among the
inform ally organized protesters, so the reason for the choice o f libraries over other
segregated facilities rem ains unclear. O ne protester, Jennie M ary Betts, recalled a strong
grievance about the libraries, however: “There w asn’t nothing in [the Vance Avenue
bran ch .]... I was in college and you ju st couldn’t find anything in the black library that
we n eed ed ... The one I sit in, everything I w anted.” 128 In court hearings, protesters
G wendolyn Townsend, a LeM oyne student, and Clyde Battle, a student at Owen Junior
College, testified that a group o f students had m et to discuss their term papers. A
com m on com plaint was that their college libraries lacked m aterials needed for research,
and that “they decided to go to the main branch to get the books we needed.” 129
On Saturday, M arch 19, a little after noon, tw enty-two young A frican A m ericans
entered the C entral Library. M ost w ere students at LeM oyne or at O wen Junior College.
Saying little, they began using the library’s card catalog and reading at the tables
provided. A w hite librarian observed that “they ju st cam e in and scattered around and sat
at the tables.” Even hostile witnesses adm itted they were “courteous and not loud or
boisterous.” Fourteen others entered the C ossitt reference library and sat in the section
reserved for w hite patrons. At both locations, white librarians advised the A fricanA m erican patrons o f the rules o f segregation and asked them to leave. W hen the

128 Jennie Mary Betts, interview with Elizabeth Gritter, June 28, 2004, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
129 “Attorneys Appeal Fines o f ‘Sit-in Students,” MW, March 26, 1960.

146

protesters continued to use the library, the librarians called police. They adm itted that
“the reasons they had the students arrested was that they w ere N egroes.” 130
The police had been tipped o ff about the protest at the Central Library and had
given the librarians advance w arning that the sit-in w ould occur. The C ossitt librarians
had not been w arned.131 W ithin minutes o f the protesters’ arrival, police cam e and
arrested thirty-six protesters (figure 8). A lso arrested were five reporters and
photographers from the M emphis World and Tri-State D efender newspapers. This was
the first tim e m em bers o f the press had been arrested during a sit-in protest. The charges
for the students and new spaperm en w ere disorderly conduct, loitering, and threat o f
breach o f p eac e.132 The protesters arrested included M arion S. Barry, Clyde Battle,
A m inda Battles, H orace John Bell, A aron Booker, Laverda Bradford, Roosevelt Brassel,
W illie Brown, C hester B. Cade Jr., Josephine Bonita Cashel, A rthur Eberhardt, Jevita
Lois Edw ards, Evander Ford, Gwenn Glover, W illie F. Granderson, Ray F. Grimes,
Em ilyn Harris, H ardin Jones Jr., Ernestine Lee, M artha Ellis Little, Eddie Charles
M eacham, Elm er M oore Jr., H enry M oses, Curtis R. M urphy, Oily Neal Jr., M ary Ellis
Perry, M arvin. L. Plunkett, Coy Sanders, W illie Lee Shotwell Jr., Ed Smith, Doris Jean
Townsend, G wendolyn Y vonne Townsend, Benjam in W ard Jr., Joan Louise W iggins,
W alter W ilson, and Edgar M. Y oung.133 From the Tri-State Defender, editor Lutrelle F.

130 Jay Hall, “Judge Sets Bond for Negroes Held After Two Sit-Ins,” CA, March 20,
1960; “Attorneys Appeal Fine o f ‘Sit-In’ Students,” MW, March 26, 1960; “Sit-In Bailout Is
Large Order for 41 Negroes,” CA, March 20, 1960.
131 “Sit-In Bailout Is Large Order for 41 Negroes,” CA, March 20, 1960.
132 Hall, “Judge Sets Bond.”
133 “Five Newsmen Held for Sit-In,” CA, March 20, 1960;
147

Palmer, city editor Burleigh Himes, and photographer George E. Hardin were arrested,
along with the World's editor Thaddeus T. Stokes and photographer Robert M orris.134

FIGURE 8. Police arrest sit-in protesters at Central Library, March 19,1960 (source:
M emphis World, March 23,1960).
The charges were serious enough that the accused were required to post bond, and
they spent many hours in jail until the bond was raised for all o f them. To pass the time,
the protesters sang spirituals including “Onward Christian Soldiers,” “Glory Glory
Hallelujah,” “Swing Low, Sweet Chariot,” “America the Beautiful,” “Lift Every Voice
and Sing,” and “Nobody Knows the Trouble I’ve Seen,” as well as joining in prayer with

134 “First Time Newsmen Have Been Arrested for Sit-in Tactics,” MW, March 23,1960.
148

Baptist m inister E. W. W illiam son, who visited them to provide support, and with A rthur
Eberhadt, a protester who was also a Baptist m inister.135 The students put on a brave face
about spending the day in jail, com m enting that the only hardship they suffered was
“sitting on those hard benches they have in the ja il.” 136 The arrested new sm en - and
A frican-A m erican public opinion - w ere less sanguine. The M emphis World noted that
the young m en w ere “dum ped into jail cells w ith drunks and other socially
undesirables.” 137 Himes, the arrested city editor o f the Tri-State Defender, recalled his
experience w ith “d isg u st.... Offensive to the physical, moral, or aesthetic taste, and you
can throw in all the synonym s such as loathsome, sickening (you should have seen the
food they offered us in that jail), repulsive, revolting and nauseous for a good m easure o f
the treatm ent.” 138 L. F. Palm er, the D efender's editor, recounted being
forced to line up against the wall, frisked (searched) and ordered into a small bull
pen. Next, we w ere taken to the departm ent o f crim inal investigation w here we
w ere fingerprinted, m ugged (photographed) and questioned. W e ended up back
in the bull pen w hich is a filthy barred enclosure about 15 feet by 5 fe e t... M ade
to accom m odate about 15 or 16, this bull pen already held 10 m ore college
students w ho had been arrested.... W hen we w ere m arched in the total count in
the bull pen was 29. Then the procession o f drunks began and shortly our bull
pen was holding 41 m e n ... back to back or belly to b elly .... Tim e dragged heavily
135 “Protesting Students and Newsmen Jailed,” MW, March, 23, 1960; “Sit-In Bailout Is
Large Order for 41 Negroes,” CA, March 20, 1960; L. F. Palmer, “Story from Inside Jail,” TSD,
March 26, 1960.
136 “Protesting Students and Newsmen Jailed.”
137 “Truce in ‘Sit-Ins’ Denied by Attorneys,” MW, March 26, 1960.
138 Burleigh Himes, “Disgusting in the Word for It,” TSD, March 26, 1960.
149

on our hands. All o f our personal property had been taken aw ay from us and we
had no w ay o f know ing w hat tim e it w as.” 139
The “gutsy, w onderful k id s ... threatening the status quo by fighting peacefully for
first class citizenship” galvanized the M em phis civil rights com m unity.140 The local
branch o f the N AA CP w as not prepared for the protests. In fact, H. T. Loekard had gone
to N ew Y ork to attend a national N AA CP conference on the sit-in m ovem ent.141 M axine
Sm ith recalls that the executive board was in a m eeting to discuss plans for a M emphis
sit-in m ovem ent w hen they received a call to com e bail out the library protesters.142
Lawyers Russell Sugarm on and A. W. W illis were quickly dispatched to the jail to
arrange for the protesters’ release.143 The proceedings lasted several hours. Judge
Beverly Boushe set the bond at $352 for each protester, totaling $14,432 for the group.
In the m eantim e, a snap mass m eeting on Saturday evening at the Mt. Olive CM E
Cathedral drew m inisters from num erous churches, who prom ised to call on their
congregants to contribute m oney for the sit-in m ovem ent.144 The m eeting also resulted in
the adoption o f a statem ent for the press by the NAA CP, w hich read, “The M emphis
Branch o f the NAACP, having been inform ed o f the efforts o f local N egro student groups
to obtain recognition o f their hum an rights by business, governm ent and com m unity

139 Palmer, “Story from Inside Jail.”
140 Himes, “Disgusting.”
141 “Memphis NAACP Pledges All-Out Support to ‘Sitters’,” G4, March 20, 1960.
142 Maxine Smith, interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 9, 2000, transcript, Everett R.
Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
143 “Memphis NAACP Pledges All-Out Support to ‘Sitters’.”
144 “Protesting Students and Newsmen Jailed.”
150

groups in this city, w ishes to declare its w hole-hearted support o f these students, their
objectives and their non-violent dem onstrations. This branch further pledges its moral,
financial and legal resources to assist them in achieving these goals.” 145 By the tim e the
bond hearings began at 10:30 p.m., the N AA CP had rounded up $5,270 in cash and put
up corporate bonds for the rem ainder.146 The police entered the church around 1:15 a.m.,
night sticks in hand, to clear out the building “before we lock you up for loitering on the
streets at 1:30 a.m.” 147
The students were released in small groups, about fifteen m inutes apart, so that
the process lasted into the night; the w om en were released last o f all. The protesters were
greeted outside the jailhouse by a jubilant crowd o f around 100 people and escorted to a
gathering in a residence at 519 Vance A venue - right next door to the N egro B ran ch.148
As they w ere released, the protesters m ostly declined to com m ent for the press, although
E d Y oung did serve notice that, “W e have ju st begun to fight.” 149 Gwendolyn
Tow nsend, w hen asked w hy she was at the library, told a reporter, “I felt that since I was
a citizen, I had the right to attend the library.” 150

145 “Memphis NAACP Pledges All-Out Support to ‘Sitters’.”
146 “Sit-In Bailout Is Large Order for 41 Negroes,” CA, March 20, 1960.
147 Markham Stansbury, “Memphians Rally, Help Arrested in Sit-Downs,” TSD, March
26, 1960.
148 “Protesting Students and Newsmen Jailed,” MW, March 23, 1960.
149 “Sit-In Bailout Is Large Order for 41 Negroes.”
150 Gwendolyn Townsend, quoted in Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom, 78.
151

The arrests w ere not inconsequential to the protesters. The Tri-State D efender
ceased publication for a w eek until its staff could file their reports.151 A num ber o f
students w ere fired from their part-tim e jobs at firms including the A m erican Legion
Club, St. Joseph Hospital, and dom estic w o rk .152 D espite the approbation the students
received in the press, not all their families were pleased. M arion B arry recalls that his
m other’s first reaction to the sit-ins in N ashville was to reprim and him: “Boy, w hat are
Io

you doing in ja il? ”

The long-term fate o f m ost o f the M emphis protesters has not been

tracked, but Fred Jones, one o f the G reensboro sit-in pioneers, was blackballed from
em ploym ent after his graduation, and only landed a position w hen G eorge W. Lee
offered him a place in the M em phis office o f the A tlanta Life Insurance com pany.154
The Sunday following the first sit-in protests was filled with sermons in A fricanA m erican churches urging support for the protesters. S. A. Owen encouraged his
congregants to attend the trials scheduled for M onday morning: “ If enough o f you go,
they m ay have to m ove the trial to a larger cham ber.” Herbert Brew ster noted the
students “w ere m erely applying Gandhi and N ehru’s tactic o f passive resistance to
com pel the w hite race to live up to its ow n political and religious philosophy,” and
claim ed that “even the old, discarded Supreme Court doctrine o f ‘equal but separate’
education facilities is not being lived up to.” He cited that phonograph records could

151 “40 Arrested in Memphis,” New York Times, March 20, 1960.
152 “LeMoyne ‘Sit-In’ Students Ousted from Part-Time Jobs,” MW, March 30, 1960.
153 Marion Barry Jr. and Omar Tyree, Mayor fo r Life: The Incredible Story o f Marion
Barry Jr. (New York: Strebor, 2014), 60.
154 “ ‘First’ Sit-In Student Here,” TSD, January 14, 1961.
152

only be checked out o f the Central Library. W allis, asked for a response, said that “so far
as he knows no N egro has asked to take out records.” 155
The protesters appeared in court before Bouche on M onday, M arch 21. In
addition to the crow d (including parents o f the protesters) filling the courtroom gallery to
capacity, around 250 A frican-A m erican supporters rallied quietly outside the Central
Police Station, w hich also housed the City Court, for the duration o f the hours-long
hearing. A line o f police blocked every entrance to the building, firehoses at the ready to
disperse crow ds.156 The team o f lawyers from the N AA CP defending the protestors
(described as “every single N egro attorney in M em phis”) included Benjam in Hooks,
Lockard, W illis, S. A. W ilburn, Jam es Estes, and Ben Jo n es.157 Hooks said the charges
o f disturbing the peace should have been pinned on the police instead o f the students
quietly using the library: “If the city policem an w ould have not arrested these defendants,
this hearing w ould not have been necessary. This mass disturbance was brought on by
the police departm ent.” W illis noted that the students had violated no laws, and w ere
“being fined sim ply because they are N egroes.” The city attorney, Jam es F. A. Shea,
pressed the argum ent that the students had conspired to create a disturbance, to which
Lockard took offense, saying “there cannot be a conspiracy as long as you are acting
w ithin law, w ithin your constitutional rights. These students w ere w ithin their rights to
enter a public library and use its facilities in an orderly m anner.” A nd Estes established

155 Charles Edmundson, “Negro Pastors Rally Forces for Sit-In Trial of 42 Today,” CA,
March 21, 1960.
156 “37 Negroes Fined in Memphis Case,” New York Times, March 22, 1960; “Negroes at
Fever Pitch, Vow All-Out Support of Students,” TSD, March 26, 1960.
157 “ ‘Sit-Ins’ Created Drama Equal to ’10 Commandments’,” MW, March 26, 1960;
“Editor Palmer, 36 Others Fined,” TSD, March 26, 1960.
153

that there w ere no signs posted forbidding A frican-A m ericans from using the Central
L ibrary.158
D espite Judge Bouche adm itting that the defense lawyers had “done pretty good,”
he found the protesters guilty o f disorderly conduct; the charges o f loitering and
disturbing the peace w ere dropped. Bouche, in the end, agreed with the prosecutor’s
argum ent that the protesters’ actions were a “threat to disorder.” Bouche declared that
the sit-ins w ere a “mass dem onstration that breeds contem pt for the law, an open
invitation to m ob rule, to violence. I d o n ’t care w hose mob rule or w hose violence, I am
not going to stand for it. Just a spark could set o ff a situation such as we have never had
before.” 159 Each protester was fined $26; Sugarmon prom ised to appeal all the w ay to the
Suprem e C ourt if necessary.160
The m edia representatives’ fates were different. Bouche agreed with their defense
that they had m erely been perform ing duties norm ally associated w ith reporting and
dism issed the charges against Stokes, Himes, M orris, and Hardin. Palm er, however, was
fined $50 for “talking above a w hisper w hile covering a story in the Front Street
Library.” H e also pledged to appeal.161
In addition to the 250 standing vigil outside the courtroom , another 2,000 A fricanA m erican M em phians gathered in the evening at Mt. Olive CM E Cathedral to await news
o f the hearing. $3,000 m ore in cash was raised for the defense o f the students, and

158 “ ‘Sit-Ins’ Created Drama Equal to ’10 Commandments’.”
159 “37 Negroes Fined in Memphis Case.”
160 “Attorneys Appeal Fines o f ‘Sit-In’ Students,” MW, March 26, 1960.
161 “Attorneys Appeal Fines o f ‘Sit-In’ Students.”

154

“feeling for the cause o f the N egro students and their fight ran high through the tw o-hour
m eeting.” Speaker after speaker roused the crowd w ith statements like, “All Negro
citizens o f M emphis are behind this m ovem ent.” The library sit-ins had stirred the
A frican-A m erican com m unity o f M emphis into pledges o f mass action. V asco Smith
“said the day has finally arrived. ‘People are shedding tears; tears o f jo y .’” An
im m ediate result o f the meeting, besides the cash raised, was a proposal to avoid buying
new Easter clothes and to devote the m oney saved to sit-in defenses, and to stay aw ay
from (but not “boycott”) dow ntow n businesses on Thursdays and M ondays. The
N AA CP garnered 115 new members that n ig h t.162
The prom ised mass action started the very next day. On Tuesday, M arch 22, sitins re-occurred at the Cossitt Branch, as well as at the Brooks M emorial A rt Gallery.
W hile thirteen protesters entered the Brooks, ten entered the Cossitt Branch, “selected
books and began reading.” 163 Those arrested at the library included Ronald B. Anderson,
Rosetta Jean Bonds, M attie M. Daniels, Jo Iris, Jesse E. Jones, V irginia Owens, and
Darnell. L. Thomas. Prosecutors proffered charges o f loitering, disorderly conduct, and
disturbing the peace, and the Tuesday protesters also spent an entire day in ja il before
being bailed out after midnight. A continuance o f their hearing to April 6 was
m isinterpreted by the Com m ercial A ppeal as a “truce” in the protests, but H ooks clarified
that “as lawyers representing them, we have not been em powered by them to propose a
truce.” 164

162 “Negroes at Fever Pitch, Vow All-Out Support of Students,” TSD, March 26, 1960.
163 “Memphis Stops 2 New Sitdowns,” New York Times, March 23, 1960.
164 “Truce in ‘Sit-Ins’ Denied by Attorneys,” MW, March 26, 1960.
155

The fervor throughout the A frican-A m erican com m unity carried forward into the
spring. On M arch 29, a crow d o f 4,500 m et at Mt. Olive Church and pledged $6,700 in
cash and a com m itm ent to continue to “struggle as long as it is necessary for us to obtain
full citizenship.” 165 On April 4, police arrested four students in the morning at the Cossitt
branch, and four m ore students were arrested in the afternoon at the Central L ibrary.166
The library sit-ins sparked a mass m ovem ent in M emphis. Sit-ins occurred over
the next seven months at lunch counters, bus stations, and churches through N ovem ber
1961, resulting in 318 arrests and the eventual desegregation o f m ost public
accom m odations in the city.
Reactions in the w hite com m unity varied. The M emphis Com m ittee on
Com m unity Relations (M CCR), w hose m ain aim, according to Laurie Green, was
“avoiding civil strife,” quickly attem pted to arrange m eetings with new m ayor Loeb and
the city com m ission.167 O n M arch 28, the m ayor and com m ission held a conference,
closed to the public, w ith the attorneys w ho had represented the protesters. In defiance o f
the M C C R ’s hopes for m oderation, the attorneys issued a request that “this honorable
body desegregate forthw ith all public facilities and perm it N egro citizens o f M em phis to
enjoy the existing public facilities w ithout interference and on the same basis as now
enjoyed by all other citizens o f our city.” The meeting, according to S. A. W ilburn, was
an “open and frank discussion. H owever, I cannot say that anything tangible was
accom plished. However, w e are not discouraged.... Y ou can rest assured that

165 “Citizens Vote to Continue Rights Quest,” MW, April 2, 1960.
166 “More Sit-In Arrests Made,” TSD, April 9, 1960.
167 Laurie B. Green, Battling the Plantation Mentality:Memphis and the Black Freedom
Struggle (Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2007), 220.
156

constitutional rights will becom e a reality in M em phis.” The attorneys faced a city
com m ission com posed o f m en like W illiam Farris, w hose com m ent was, “I was elected
by the citizens o f M em phis on a platform to m aintain racial segregation and I am going to
do ju st that.” 168
The lack o f progress w as unsurprising. In an open letter two days before, Loeb
had called the protests an “ attempt to take the law and custom s o f generations into their
ow n hands in groups.” 169 Faced w ith the city governm ent’s intransigence, protesters
continued their sit-ins and other direct action - but also ram ped up their legal activity. In
early M ay, W illis and Sugarm on announced plans to sue for desegregation o f tennis
courts, the Brooks Art Gallery, the Pink Palace M useum , and Ellis A uditorium .170
The response to the sit-ins by library personnel was restrained, although W allis
allow ed som e tension to show in his correspondence. A library student from Los
A ngeles, F ay Blake, had w ritten to President Eisenhow er and several leading library
journals (and copied W allis) urging him to speak out against segregated libraries, and that
o f M emphis in particular.171 W allis replied w ith some vigor that B lake’s “im petuous and
ill-advised letter” ignored the book transfer service and the new branch being built, as
well as the “long traditions, custom s, and local laws which cannot be brushed aside in an
instant by an organized, defiant group.” His view was that since a court case against the
library was pending, “the organized group moved, m orally at least, in contem pt o f the

168 “Mayor, City Commissioners Meet with Race Attorneys,” MW, April 2, 1960.
169 “Open Letter to Mayor Loeb,” TSD, April 9, 1960.
170 “Suits to be Filed Against Pink Palace, Tennis Court, Art Gallery,” MW, May 7, 1960;
“Sue to End Segregation at Ellis Auditorium,” MW, May 21, 1960.
171 Fay M. Blake to Dwight D. Eisenhower, March 24, 1960, L.H.C.

157

court before which their case was filed.” Finally, he noted that “people like you w ho fire
o ff letters w ithout know ing all o f the circum stances o f a case do irreparable harm to those
o f us w ho are w orking for a quiet and orderly solution to this m ost vexing problem .” 172
A single letter to the library regarding the sit-ins survives. Bettye S. Eastman
noted that she hoped that “ it will be possible to continue having segregated facilities for
w hite and colored,” but adm itted that such decisions depended on the co u rts.173
Som etim e in April, representatives o f the M C C R m et w ith the Board o f Directors,
and recom m ended that the libraries be desegregated. Their suggestion, like all earlier
suggestions to the same effect, was rejected. A t the next regular board meeting, the
directors did not discuss sit-ins; however, they did approve the plans for a new branch for
African A m ericans, to be nam ed the N orth B ranch.174
The criticism o f the insufficiency o f the Vance Avenue Branch finally struck
some directors. One floated a proposal that V ance Avenue “ought to be air conditioned
w ithout further d elay ... instead o f w aiting until the N orth Branch had been opened and a
rem odeling program had begun at the V ance Avenue Branch building.” 175
W hile sit-ins and boycotts pressured the segregated establishm ents o f M emphis,
lawyers for Jesse Turner finally got their day in court. By the spring o f 1960, Judge
M iller m ust have been ready to hear Turner v. Randolph, and on M ay 3 Lockard filed a

172 C. Lamar Wallis to Fay M. Blake, March 29, 1960, L.H.C.
173 Bettye S. Eastman to Cossitt Library Board, March 21, 1960, L.H.C.
174 Minutes, April 21, 1960, L.H.C.
175 Minutes, May 17, 1960, L.H.C.
158

m otion for a sum m ary judgm ent in favor o f the p laintiff.176 A sum m ary judgm ent is one
in w hich both parties agree to the set o f facts presented, and the judge is required only to
rule on the question o f how the law applies.177
On June 29, M iller ruled against the m otion for a sum m ary judgm ent. The
defense noted that “m any o f the material facts alleged in the com plaint are positively and
directly denied by the defendants.” The denials included T urner’s assertion that he was
denied his rights “under color o f state law ,” because he had failed to specify w hich law
required the library to be segregated. As well, “ Section 5 o f the com plaint states in
substance that the plaintiff Turner is a citizen o f M emphis, o f good moral character, is
entitled to use the library facilities under the control o f the defendants, is w illing to abide
by all library rules applicable to all other persons, is w illing to pay the uniform charges
for the use o f library facilities, and has been denied the right ‘solely because he is a
N egro.’ The defendants deny all o f these allegations.” 178 The arguments presented by
the defense persuaded M iller that Turner’s lawyers “did not produce sufficient evidence
to justify a sum m ary judgm ent at this tim e,” and he set a trial date for N ovem ber 7.
Because he cam e to the case w ith “very lim ited know ledge as to ju st w hat this is all
about,” M iller w anted to “get a com plete picture o f the relationship o f the library, and o f
the library board to the C ity o f M em phis.” 179

176 Turner v. Randolph, docket.
177 Steven H. Gifis, Dictionary o f Legal Terms: A Simplified Guide to the Language o f
Law (Hauppauge, N.Y.: Barron's Educational Series, 1998), 481.
178 Turner v. Randolph, law memorandum for the defendants, June 17, 1960.
179 “Judge Denies Turner Summary Judgement in Library Case,” MW, July 2, 1960.
159

On July 7, Lockard deposed a num ber o f directors along with W allis.180 Their
testim ony largely regarded the governance and funding o f the library vis-a-vis the C ity o f
M em phis.181 Along with appropriate docum ents attesting to the history and budget o f the
library, it was entered on the record A ugust 2 5 .182
W hile the case was creeping tow ard trial, the library board continued to m ove
ahead w ith the N orth Branch, opening bids for construction on July 19; it also authorized
air conditioning o f the Vance Avenue B ranch.183 Lockard noted that the new building,
planned to “look like a m odem club or m otel,” w ould not have any bearing on T urner’s
case.184
A sw ift turn in the m ayor’s attitude was noted at the end o f the summer. Loeb
and the city com m issioners m et with the library board to consider again the “ long
standing policy” o f keeping facilities segregated. The library board voted unanim ously to
defer to the city com m ission in determ ining w hether to change the p o licy .185
Loeb was under pressure to desegregate from a num ber o f directions. The federal
Justice Departm ent was urging him to desegregate, and he felt that doing so in the
libraries w ould bolster the city’s defense in a lawsuit against the public school system. It
w ould show that the city was acting in good faith to m ove with “all deliberate speed” to

180 Turner v. Randolph, notice of taking depositions, June 28, 1960.
181 C. Lamar Wallis to Board of Directors, July 18, 1956, L.H.C.
m Tumer v. Randolph, request for admission of facts, August 25, 1960.
183 C. Lamar Wallis to Board of Directors, July 18, 1956, L.H.C.
184 “ ‘New Library Won’t Stop Suit’ - Lawyer,” TSD, July 6, 1960.
185 Minutes, September 9, 1960.
160

desegregate public facilities.186 W hile Loeb never adm itted it, the continual disruption
caused by the sit-ins and pickets m ust have influenced his decision. W hile he frequently
and publicly announced, “ I am a segregationist,” he also qualified it with, “But not a
professional segregationist.” His personal inclination tow ard segregation was tem pered
by a strong sense o f duty to enforce the laws and m aintain o rd er.187 In addition, his own
lawyers advised that the suit w ould probably have been decided in favor o f T urner.188
The first step in Loeb’s desegregation program was the announcem ent on
Septem ber 19 that bus riders “will not be asked to change seats because o f their race.” 189
In the background, the city com m ission had m et on Septem ber 15 and agreed to
desegregate the libraries. The library board agreed to “abide by that decision.” 190
Finally, on O ctober 13, the city com m ission announced a new policy regarding
the libraries. “The City Com m ission has decided the facilities o f the public libraries shall
be m ade available to all citizens o f the city.” Loeb added, “The libraries were open to all
citizens this morning, period. T hat’s all there is to it.” 191 Later that day, he addressed an
audience at Treadwell High School and explained, “W e have opened the libraries. I ’m a

186 Mantri Sivananda, “Controversial Memphis Mayor Henry Loeb III, 1920-1992: A
Biographical Study,” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Memphis, 2002), 115; Minutes, October
20, 1960.
187 Henry G. Loeb Jr., interview with Elizabeth Gritter, June 21, 2004, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.
188 “Desegregation at Libraries,” PS, October 14, 1960.
189 “Ends J’Crow Policy,” MW, September 19, 1960.
190 Minutes, September 15, 1960.
191 “Desegregation at Libraries,” PS, October 14,1960.

161

segregationist and I ’m going to do everything I can to hold on to w hat w e ’ve got. But I’m
going to do it legally. W e w ill not go beyond the law.” 192
A lthough Loeb had said, “th at’s all there is to it,” there was, in fact, more to the
case. Lockard was unw illing to w ithdraw Turner’s suit “until we are sure that everything
in the libraries is w orking sm oothly over a period o f tim e.” He and the defense counsel
prepared alternative versions o f a consent decree for the judge to ord er.193
D uring a hearing on N ovem ber 9 regarding the consent decree, an unexpected
issue arose. Randolph, the library board president, said that the board had only agreed to
desegregate the library - not the restrooms. “There was no discussion about
desegregation o f the restroom s, and I understand that there is a city ordinance which
prohibits this,” he testified. M iller postponed the ruling another thirty d ay s.194
B ecause the libraries had been built w ithout segregated restrooms, A fricanA m erican patrons w ere required to use the ja n ito r’s em ployee bathroom in the basem ent
o f the Central Library. It was a single toilet for both sexes, difficult o f access, and
cram ped.195
Loeb and the city com m ission were in agreement w ith Randolph that the
desegregation order had not covered the restrooms. They authorized their lawyers to

192 “City Commissioners Integrate Libraries,” MW, October 19, 1960.
193 Paul Vanderwood, “Lawyers Fail to Agree on Library Suit,” PS, November 5, 1960.
194 “Library Hearing Hits a Snag,” PS, November 9, 1960.
195 Wayne Dowdy, in discussion with the author, September 2014.

162

am end their proposed consent decree to clarify that restrooms w ould rem ain segregated
even though the library was n o t.196
A t a hearing on D ecem ber 9, attorneys for the library board requested perm ission
to enter a new defense w hich w ould com pel a ruling on the constitutionality o f the city
ordinance regarding segregated bathroom s. That ordinance was part o f the building code.
It required separate restroom s for w hites and African A mericans, and that each be
labelled w ith signs. T urner’s lawyers had their own demands. They insisted the order
include language desegregating “all facilities w ithin the library,” and that the case not be
dism issed until enough tim e had passed to assess the success o f desegregation.197
M iller ruled in favor o f both sides. His order o f January 4, 1961, confirm ed that
all library units (“excepting restrooms and toilet and lavatory facilities”) w ere to be
operated w ithout racial discrim ination, but that he w ould hear the new defense and rule
on the constitutionality o f the city ordinance. Court costs were assessed to the library
board .198
The case was continued until M ay, but in the m eantim e the N orth Branch was
com pleted and officially dedicated on M arch 26, 1961. The library’s inform ation about
the branch stated, “it will be open to all residents o f both M emphis and Shelby
County.” 199

196 Minutes, November 21, 1960.
197 “Library Trustees Ask U.S. Ruling,” PS, December 9, 1960.
198 Turner v. Randolph, order, January 4, 1961.
199 “Dedication of the North Branch,” pamphlet, March 26, 1961, L.H.C.

163

B efore the next hearing, scheduled for M ay 3, the board o f directors m et to
consider their strategy. One proposal was to close the restroom s to everyone. However,
in the end the board unanim ously approved a m otion to “instruct the Counsel to defend
the case with every possible means to prevent opening all restrooms to N egroes.” 200
The revised defense b rief for the M ay 3 hearing argued that, based on an earlier
decision out o f N orfolk, Virginia, “separate but equal” was still constitutional regarding
restroom s. The lawyers m aintained that the ordinance only requires the construction and
labelling o f separate restroom s - but does not penalize a person for using the restroom
assigned for another race. They also introduced evidence that in M emphis “venereal
diseases am ong negroes are 27 times greater than among w hites,” m aking public health a
justification for separate restroom s, under the aegis o f reasonable use o f police pow ers.201
Turner’s lawyers seized on the last point. Lockard called it “a flagrant subterfuge aim ed
at cutting o ff one segm ent o f the population from public places,” w hile H ooks suggested
that disease-bearing patrons o f all races be kept out o f public restroom s.202
W hile aw aiting M iller’s ruling, the library board faced another quandary. Because
the public library operated small library branches within schools, and because the
libraries w ere open to the public during the summer, it raised the question o f how an
integrated library could operate in a segregated school. The board decided to consult
with attorneys, but also to get clarity on the question o f w hether the libraries or the

200 Minutes, May 2, 1961.
201 Turner v. Randolph, memorandum brief on behalf of the defendants, June 20, 1961.
202 “Segregation in All Public Restrooms May Be Challenged,” MW,, May 15, 1961.
164

schools w ould “be responsible if Negroes used the library in a white school.” 203 In the
end, the school board determ ined that there w ould be no problem s, except in buildings
w here sum m er school classes were held; in those schools, the library w ould serve only
students. W allis felt “these few restrictions w ould not ham per unduly the program .” 204
Tensions ran high on the board. A fter some unexplained falling out with the lead
attorney, Edw ard Russell, W allis felt obliged to assure him that, “M y sym pathy is with
legal resistance,” and “M y personal stand on all o f these matters is one o f m oderation, but
I have a personal dislike for the methods o f the N AA CP and am perfectly w illing to do
battle as the Board directs.” 205 In response, Russell adm itted that “It is, o f course, a
losing effort, b u t ... your co-operation is much appreciated.” 206
M iller’s ruling cam e on July 22. He found that the “separate but equal” doctrine
“has been generally swept aw ay” and that the proposal for segregated restroom s violated
the equal protection clause o f the Fourteenth Amendm ent. As to the question o f venereal
disease, M iller found that “ in the absence o f proof, one w ould be led to believe that
venereal disease w ould not be expected to occur to any appreciable extent among that
segm ent o f the population, w hether white or negro, using th e ... public libraries o f the
city.” Furtherm ore, toilets are not a significant vector for venereal disease.207
M iller’s order, presented on A ugust 19 but filed officially on Septem ber 5,
insisted that “all public restroom s, lavatories, toilets and other public facilities in all
203 Minutes, May 18, 1961.
204 Minutes, June 15, 1961.
205 C. Lamar Willis to Edward P. Russell, May 3, 1961, L.H.C.
206 Edward P. Russell to C. Lamar Willis, May 8, 1961, L.H.C.
207 Turner v. Randolph, opinion, July 22, 1961.

165

public library u n its... shall hereafter be m aintained and operated by them w ithout
discrim ination.... The defendants... are hereby enjoined from applying any o f the
provisions o f the city ordinance quoted in the said m em orandum opinion to any
restroom s, lavatories, toilets, or other public facilities in any o f the public library units.”
Court costs w ere again assessed to the defendants.208
A lthough Loeb w ished to “fight the restroom case to the final limit,” all parties
recognized that the law was on Turner’s side, and the board agreed to drop the suit. A fter
the final order was filed on A ugust 19, W allis had his staff “rem ove the ‘w hite’ and
‘colored’ signs from the restroom s quietly and w ith as little publicity as possible.” 209 The
public libraries in M em phis were no longer segregated by law.

208 Turner v. Randolph, order, September 5, 1961.
209 Minutes, July 31, 1961.

C H A PTER 5:
CONCLUSION

In contrast to the great publicity that surrounded the inauguration o f the library
sit-in m ovem ent, the successful conclusion o f Jesse T urner’s lawsuit garnered little
attention. The Press-Scim itar and Com mercial A ppeal each gave it three or four column
inches. The World m ade it front-page (but not headline) news, but the Tri-State D efender
ignored it com pletely.1 The final ruling on the bathroom s got a tw o-sentence w rite-up in
the W o rld 2
The lack o f coverage w as proportionate to the lack o f dram a inside the library
after desegregation. In the first week, fewer than 200 African-A m erican patrons
registered for library cards at the form erly all-white branches.3 A m ong them were
A llegra Turner and her three sons.4 Tw o African A m ericans attended a book talk on
O ctober 20. Their presence caused no disturbance.5
A lthough the num bers w ould increase over the next few months to more than
2,000 A frican-A m erican patrons at form erly all-white branches, African A m ericans’ use
o f the libraries w ould lag behind w hite use at least through 1967. Some people m ay have
been put o ff by attitudes like those o f W allis, who wrote that the A frican-A m erican

1 “Desegregation at Libraries,” PS, October 14,1960; “Library Branches are
Desegregated,” CA, October 14, 1960; “City Commissioners Integrate Libraries,” MIT, October
19, 1960.
2 “Lavatories in Memphis Public Libraries,” MIT, August 19, 1961.
3 “Less Than 200 Negroes Ask for Library Cards,” PS, October 21, 1960.
4 Allegra W. Turner with Jini M. Kilgore, Except by Grace: The Life o f Jesse H. Turner
(Jonesboro, Ark.: Four-G Publishers, 2004), 122.
5 “Less Than 200 Negroes Ask for Library Cards.”

167

patrons he encountered w ere “polite, courteous, and understanding, and the older students
have shown a surprising know ledge o f the card catalog.” 6 Others may have been kept
aw ay from libraries due to the distance to V ance Avenue from their homes, and never
picked up the habit once closer branches w ere opened to them. And, o f course, reading
requires both literacy and leisure time, both o f which w ere more com m on am ong whites
than am ong A frican A m ericans in the 1960s.
The pain and dam age caused by the library’s segregation policy had lasting
effects. A llegra Turner called the day o f M iller’s desegregation order “bittersw eet,”
because her oldest child w as already ten years old, well past the age w hen she could have
introduced him to the pleasures o f the library and built a lifelong habit o f library-going.7
And the library’s resistance to desegregation left ill will in the community. In 1967 the
Youth Council o f the M em phis N AA CP sent a petition to the library board accusing it o f
hiring “N egroes for your N egro branches only.” They rem inded the board that, “Y our
record o f service to this large segm ent o f our com m unity is disgusting. W e have not
forgotten that it was you who, when forced to integrate, continued to m aintain segregated
restroom s and then attem pted to justify your action in court by arguing that you were
protecting your w hite patrons from the venereal disease infested Negroes. No, we have
not forgotten.” 8
Perhaps the lack o f jubilation over the library’s desegregation was sim ply due to a
shift o f focus, as African A m ericans in M emphis had m oved on to new lawsuits, new

6 C. Lamar Wallis to John Wakeman, February 27, 1961, L.H.C.
7 Turner and Kilgore, Except by Grace, 122.
8 Memphis NAACP Youth Council to Memphis Public Library Board, June 16, 1967,
L.H.C.

168

protests, and new threats. The library suit had done much to elevate Jesse T urner’s status
- in 1960 he was elected president o f the M emphis branch o f the NAACP. For A llegra
Turner, it had spurred her to greater activity w ithin the civil rights m ovem ent, such as
com bing through registration records at M em phis State U niversity to assist Lockard in
gathering evidence for his case, and later leading efforts to desegregate the Catholic
schools o f M em phis.9
The energetic em brace o f protest by African A m ericans in M emphis that was
kicked o ff by the library sit-ins lasted for years and had profound effects. Boycotts and
pickets o f dow ntow n businesses absorbed the energies not only o f students but also o f
m any adults w orking w ith the N AA CP and other civil rights organizations. By 1963,
m ovie theatres, buses, the zoo, the Brooks M emorial A rt G allery and three g o lf courses
w ere desegregated.

Schools w ere de ju r e desegregated in 1961 but rem ained largely de

fa c to segregated until at least 2015 despite the im plem entation o f a busing plan in the
1970s. Parks rem ained segregated through 1963.10
Doris M ulheam notes that the library desegregation suit had “trem endous
sym bolic m eaning in the struggle for civil rights in M em phis.” 11 It was one o f the first o f
m any victories. Yet, even as Judge M iller was ordering the bathroom s desegregated,
M ayor Loeb w as m aking clear w hat the rest o f the decade w ould hold in a speech at the
Rotary Club.

9 Doris Ann Youngblood Mulheam, “Southern Graces: Women, Faith, and the Quest of
Social Justice, Memphis Tennessee, 1950-1969” (Ph.D. dissertation, University of Memphis,
2012), 96-101.
10 G. Wayne Dowdy, Crusades fo r Freedom: Memphis and the Political Transformation
o f the American South (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2010), 80-85.
11 Mulheam, “Southern Graces,” 96.
169

1 know , as does every intelligent N egro citizen o f M emphis, that full citizenship
never comes to any m inority group through the hands o f politicians attem pting to
use the m inority group. It does not com e from always asking and never giving. It
does not com e from continuously pushing and not pulling in the whole
com m unity’s interest. It does not com e from political chicanery o f shrewd
leaders o f Negroes w hose talents could be better used in leading their constituents
dow n the road o f responsibility. Full citizenship com es from the toil o f the level­
headed people o f com m on sense and m oderation.... It comes finally - and this
had not been done and this is the challenge - w ith an assum ption o f responsibility
by the N egro com m unity m eeting the white com m unity h alf w ay on w hat is best
for all o f u s .12
Even as Loeb was conceding defeat he was m aking clear that he w ould offer resistance to
inclusion o f A frican A m ericans in the civic life o f M emphis.
The close study o f segregated library service to A frican-A m erican readers in
M em phis, and the struggle to desegregate the libraries, reveals m uch w orth know ing
about the history o f M em phis. Every city likes to tell its story in w ays that are m ost
flattering, and M em phians often brag about the lack o f violence during the early days o f
desegregation, chalking it up to the influence o f m oderate whites. John Harkins, for
exam ple, claim s that “The M C CR was largely responsible for the peaceful and successful

12 “Text o f Mayor Loeb’s Address Before Club,” TSD, August 12, 1961.

170

desegregation o f M em phis in the early 1960s.” 13 As V asco Smith notes, “A bigger lie
has never been told.” 14
To be sure, M em phis did not witness the atrocities o f Birmingham, and by the
m iddle o f the 1960s m ost w hites had accepted the inevitability o f desegregation. But to
claim that mass arrests o f students for the crim e o f quietly reading - and o f the new sm en
reporting their stories - w as “peaceful” is to tw ist the m eaning o f that word. To deny the
agency o f the bold plaintiff and the skillful lawyers who successfully proved that
segregation had no place under the laws o f the United States and to give credit to an
ineffective com m ittee is to cover up the true struggle.
For a w hite man living in the tw enty-first century, the brutalities o f southern
racism can som etim es seem as abstract and rem ote as the Crusades or Sundiata. But as a
librarian and a lover o f libraries, to put m y self in the shoes o f Richard W right or Johnnie
M ae Peters - needing ju st that right book, w anting a peaceful place to read it, and
know ing it has been denied to me because o f m y race - is to feel the insult and the
indignity on a deeply personal level. This study recalls that the civil rights m ovem ent in
M em phis was not a single struggle capped by an apocalyptic victory. Rather, it was
dozens o f fights all at once - each one o f which could have an equally lengthy study
detailing its convoluted path. There were so m any barriers, and each had to be broken,
one at a time. This study serves, in some ways, as a m icrocosm o f life in M em phis for

13 John E. Harkins, Metropolis o f the American Nile (Oxford, Miss.: The Guild Bindery
Press, 1991), 141.
14 Vasco Smith Sr., interview with Elizabeth Gritter, October 9, 2000, transcript, Everett
R. Cook Oral History Collection, Memphis Public Library and Information Center.

171

African A m ericans in the tw entieth century. Perhaps it helps dispel some com fortable
myths about our city as well.

172

BIBLIOGRAPHY
ARTICLES, BOOKS, A ND G RAD U ATE W ORKS
Aaronson, Daniel, and B hashkar M azumder. “The Impact o f Rosenw ald Schools on
Black A chievem ent.” Journal o f Political Econom y 119, no. 5 (2011): 821-888.
Aiken, Charles S. The Cotton Plantation South Since the Civil War. Baltimore: Johns
H opkins U niversity Press, 1998.
Ascoli, Peter Max. Julius R o se n w a ld : The M an Who B uilt Sears, R oebuck and
A dvanced the Cause o f B lack Education in the Am erican South. Bloomington:
Indiana U niversity Press, 2006.
Ash, Stephen V. A M assacre in M em phis: The Race R iot That Shook the Nation One
Year after the Civil War. New York: Hill and W ang, 2013.
Barrington, W alker. “ ‘This Is the W hite M an’s D ay’: The Irish, W hite, Racial Identity,
and the M emphis R iots.” L eft H istory 5 (1997): 31-55.
Barry, M arion Jr., and O m ar Tyree. M ayor fo r Life: The Incredible Story o f M arion
Barry Jr. N ew York: Strebor, 2014.
Battles, D avid M. The H istory o f Public Library Access fo r African Am ericans in the
South, or, Leaving Behind the Plow. Lanham, Md.: Scarecrow Press, 2009.
Bejach, Lois D. “The Seven Cities Absorbed by M em phis.” West Tennessee H istorical
Society Papers 8 (1954): 95-103
Bergeron, Paul H., Stephen V. Ash, and Jeanette Keith. Tennesseans and Their History.
Knoxville: U niversity o f Tennessee Press, 1999.
Bertrand, M ichael T. Race, Rock, and Elvis. Bloom ington, U niversity o f Illinois Press,

2000 .
Biles, Roger. M em phis in the Great Depression. Knoxville: U niversity o f Tennessee
Press, 1986.
. “The Persistence o f the Past: M emphis in the G reat D epression.” Journal o f
Southern H istory 52, no. 2 (1986): 183-212.
Blankenship, G ary R. “The Com mercial A ppeal's A ttack on the Ku Klux Klan, 19211925.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 31 (1977): 44-58.
Blum , Edw ard J. R eforging the White Republic: Race, Religion, and Am erican
Nationalism, 1865-1898. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State U niversity Press, 2005.

173

Bobinski, G eorge S. Carnegie Libraries: Their H istory and Im pact on Am erican Public
Library Development. Chicago: A m erican Library Association, 1969.
Bond, B everly G. “ ‘Every Duty Incum bent Upon T hem ’: African-A m erican W om en in
N ineteenth Century M em phis.” Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 59, no. 4 (2000):
254-73.
Bond, Beverly, and Janann Sherman. M em phis in B lack and White. Charleston, S.C.:
A rcadia Publishing, 2003.
Bowman, Paul J. “A ntagonist o f the Invisible Empire: The Editorials o f C. P. J.
M ooney.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 50 (1996): 149-161.
Bowman, Rob. Soulsville, U.S.A.: The Story o f Stax Records. New York: Schirm er, 1997.
Branch, Taylor. Parting the Waters: Am erica in the K ing Years, 1954-63. N ew York:
Touchstone, 1988.
Burgess, John Tim othy Freedom. Virtue Ethics and the N arrative Identity o f Am erican
Librarianship 1876 to Present. Ph.D. dissertation, U niversity o f Alabam a, 2013.
Cook, Karen. “ Struggles W ithin: Lura G. Courier, the M ississippi Library Com m ission,
and Library Service to African A m ericans.” Inform ation and Culture 48, no. 1
(2013): 134-56.
Cox, Karen. Dixie's D aughters: The United D aughters o f the Confederacy and the
Preservation o f Confederate Culture. Gainesville: U niversity Press o f Florida,
2003.
Cresswell, Stephen. “The Last Days o f Jim Crow in Southern Libraries.” Libraries &
Culture 31, no. 3/4 (1996): 557-73.
D eCosta-W illis, M iriam. N otable B lack M emphians. Amherst, N.Y.: C am bria Press,
2008.
Dowdy, G. W ayne. A B r ie f H istory o f Memphis. Charleston, S.C.: H istory Press, 2011.
. “C ensoring Popular Culture: Political and Social Control in Segregated M em phis.”
West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 55 (2001): 98-117.
. Crusades fo r Freedom : M em phis and the P olitical Transformation o f the Am erican
South. Jackson: U niversity Press o f M ississippi, 2010.
. “E. H. Crum p and the M ayors o f M em phis.” West Tennessee H istorical Society
Papers 53 (1999): 78-99.
. H idden H istory o f M emphis. Charleston, S.C.: H istory Press, 2010.

174

. M ayor Crump D o n ’t Like It: M achine Politics in M emphis. Jackson: University
Press o f M ississippi, 2006.
. “ ‘Som ething for the Colored P eople’: M em phis M ayor Frank Tobey and the East
O live Bom bing.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 51 (1997): 108-15.
. “The W hite Rose M ammy: Racial Culture and Politics in W orld W ar II
M em phis.” Journal o f Negro H istory 85, no 4 (2000): 308-14.
D uRocher, Kristina. Raising Racists: The Socialization o f White Children in the Jim
Crow South. Lexington: U niversity Press o f Kentucky, 2011.
Flowerdew, Robin. “ Spatial Patterns o f Residential Segregation in a Southern City.”
Journal o f Am erican Studies 13, no. 1 (1979): 93-107.
Frink, Sandra. “Creating ‘Blackness,’ D efining ‘W hiteness’: ‘H am bone’s M editations’
and the C onstruction o f W hite Identity, 1920 to 1925.” M.A. thesis, U niversity o f
M em phis, 1996.
. “ ‘Freedom is E veryo n e’s Jo b ’: Segregation, Identity, and the Freedom Train
C ontroversy in M em phis, Tennessee, 1947-1948.” Tennessee H istorical
Q uarterly 66, no. 4 (2007): 329-349.
Frye, W illiam H. “For Their Exclusive Enjoyment: Racial Politics and the Founding o f
Douglas [sic] Park.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 47 (1993): 18-36.
Fultz, M ichael. “Black Public Libraries in the South in the Era o f D e Jure Segregation.”
Libraries & the Cultural R ecord 41, no. 3 (2006): 337-59.
G leason, Eliza Atkins. The Southern Negro and the Public Library: A Study o f the
G overnm ent and Adm inistration o f Public Library Service to Negroes in the
South. Chicago: U niversity o f Chicago Press, 1941.
Goings, K enneth W ., and Brian D. Page. “A frican Americans versus the M emphis Street
Railw ay Company: Or, H ow to W in the Battle but Lose the W ar, 1890-1920.”
Journal o f Urban H istory 30, no. 2 (2004): 131-51.
Goings, K enneth W ., and G erald L. Smith. “ ‘Duty o f the H our’: African-A m erican
C om m unities in M emphis, Tennessee, 1862-1923.” Tennessee H istorical
Q uarterly 55, no. 2 (1996): 130-43.
. “ ‘U nhidden’ Transcripts: M em phis and African Am erican A gency, 1862-1920.”
Journal o f Urban H istory 21 (1995): 372-94.
Golden, Harry. Only in Am erica. Cleveland: W orld Publishing Co., 1958.
G oudsouzian, Aram. D own to the Crossroad: Civil Rights, B lack Power, and the
M eredith M arch A gainst Fear. N ew York: Farrar, Straus, and Giroux, 2014.
175

G raham, Patterson Toby. A R ight to Read: Segregation and Civil Rights in A la b a m a’s
P ublic Libraries, 1900-1965. Tuscaloosa: U niversity o f A labam a Press, 2002.
Green, Laurie B. Battling the Plantation M entality: M em phis and the B lack Freedom
Struggle. Chapel Hill: U niversity o f North C arolina Press, 2007.
. “ Saving Babies in M emphis: The Politics o f Race, Health, and H unger during the
W ar on Poverty.” In The War On Poverty: A N ew Grassroots History, 19641980, edited by A nnelise Orleck and Lisa Gayle Hazirjian, 133-58. Athens:
U niversity o f G eorgia Press, 2011.
Greene, Lee Seifert. L ead M e On: F rank G oad Clement and Tennessee Politics.
Knoxville: U niversity o f Tennessee Press, 1982.
Gritter, Elizabeth. River o f Hope: B lack Politics and the M em phis Freedom M ovement,
1865-1954. Lexington: U niversity Press o f Kentucky, 2014.
Guralnick, Peter. L ast Train to M emphis: The R ise o f Elvis Presley. New York: Little,
Brown, and Co., 1994.
Hale, G race Elizabeth. M aking Whiteness: The Culture o f Segregation in the South,
1890-1940. N ew York: Vintage, 1999.
Ham ilton, G. P. The B right Side o f M emphis: A Compendium o f Inform ation Concerning
the C olored People o f M emphis, Tennessee, Show ing Their Achievem ents in
Business, Industrial and Professional Life and Including Articles o f General
Interest on the Race. M emphis: The Author, 1908..
Hand, Shane. “Transm itting W hiteness: Librarians, Children, and Race, 1900-1930s.”
M.A. thesis, U niversity o f Southern M ississippi, 2013.
Hardin, Robin, and M arcie Hinton. “The Squelching o f Free Speech in M emphis: The
Life o f a Black Post-Reconstruction N ew spaper.” Race, Gender & Class 8, no. 1
(2001): 78-95.
H ardwick, K evin R. “ ‘Y our Old Father Abe Lincoln is Dead and D am ned’: Black
Soldiers and the M emphis Race Riot o f 1866.” Journal o f Social H istory 27, no. 1
(1993): 109-28.
Harkins, John E. M etropolis o f the Am erican Nile: An Illustrated H istory o f M em phis
and Shelby County. Oxford, M iss.: The G uild Bindery Press, 1991.
Herm sdorfer, Sally Sartain. “For ‘The Cultured M others o f the Land’: R acist Imagery in
the Old South Fiction o f Tennessee Suffragist Elizabeth A very M eriw ether,”
Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 56, no.2 (1997): 183-95.
Hill, S. Davidson. “The Self-Defined African Am erican Com m unity o f Jim Crow
M em phis.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 54 (2000): 1-33.
176

Hoffman, Rheba Palmer. “A H istory o f Public Library Service to N egroes in M emphis,
Tennessee.” M .A. thesis, A tlanta University, 1955.
Honey, M ichael K. G oing D own Jericho Road: The M em phis Strike M atrin Luther
K in g ’s L ast Campaign. N ew York: W. W. Norton, 2007.
Hooks, Benjam in L., with Jerry Guess. The M arch fo r Civil Rights: The Benjamin H ooks
Story. Chicago: A m erican Bar Association, 2004.
Hrach, Thom as J. “Insults for Sale: The 1957 M emphis N ew spaper Boycott.” Tennessee
H istorical Q uarterly 72, n o .l (2013): 28-49.
Jenkins, Eam estine Lovelle. African Am ericans in M emphis. Charleston, S.C: Arcadia,
2009.
Jones, Reinette F. Library Service to African Am ericans in Kentucky, fro m the
Reconstruction Era to the 1960s. Jefferson, N .C.: M cFarland & Co, 2002.
Jones, Theodore. Carnegie Libraries Across America: A Public Legacy. New York:
W iley, 1997.
Klarm an, M ichael J. “W hy M assive R esistance?,” in M assive Resistance: Southern
O pposition to the Second Reconstruction, ed. Clive Webb. New York: Oxford
U niversity Press, 2005.
Lam on, Lester C. Blacks in Tennessee, 1791-1970. Knoxville: U niversity o f Tennessee
Press, 1981.
Lanier, Robert A. M em phis in the Twenties: The Second Term o f M ayor R ow lett Paine,
1924-1928. M emphis: Zenda Press, 1979.
Laski, Lewis. The Tennessee State Constitution. New York: O xford U niversity Press,
2011 .
Little, K im berly K. You M ust B e fro m the North: Southern White Women in the M em phis
Civil Rights M ovement. Jackson: U niversity Press o f M ississippi, 2009.
Lovett, Bobby L. The African-Am erican H istory o f Nashville, Tennessee, 1780-1930.
Fayetteville: U niversity o f A rkansas Press, 1999.
. The Civil Rights M ovem ent in Tennessee: A Narrative History. Knoxville:
U niversity o f Tennessee Press, 2005.
. “M em phis Riots: W hite Reaction in M emphis: M ay 1865-July 1866.” Tennessee
H istorical Q uarterly 38 (1979): 9-33.

177

M alone, Cheryl Knott. “Louisville Free Public Library's Racially Segregated Branches,
1905-35.” Register o f the Kentucky H istorical Society 93, no. 2 (Spring 1995):
159-79.
. “U n an n o u n ced and U nexpected: The D eseg reg atio n o f H o uston P ublic
L ib rary in th e E arly 1950s.” L ib ra ry Trends 55, no. 3 (2007): 665-74.
M cBee, Kurt. “The M em phis Red Sox Stadium: A Social Institution in M em phis’
A frican A m erican Com m unity.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 49
(1995): 149-64.
M cllw aine, Shields. M em phis D ow n in Dixie. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1948.
M erriw ether, Lucile. “High School Library Service in Tennessee Rosenw ald
D em onstration Units .” Peabody Journal o f Education 12, no. 3 (1934): 126-33.
M iller, W illiam D. M em phis D uring the Progressive Era, 1900-1917. M emphis:
M em phis State U niversity Press, 1957.
. Mr. Crump o f M emphis. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State U niversity Press, 1964.
. “R ural Ideals in M em phis Life at the Turn o f the Century.” West Tennessee
H istorical Society Papers 4 (1950): 41-49.
M orrow, M artha Barret. “The Reaction in Tennessee to the Supreme Court
D esegregation D ecision o f 1954: From May, 1954, through D ecem ber, 1957.”
M .A. thesis, M em phis State University, 1964.
M u lh earn , D oris A nn Y o ungblood. “ S o u th ern G races: W om en, F aith, and th e
Q u est fo r S ocial Ju stice, M em phis, T en n essee, 1950-1969” . Ph.D .
d issertatio n , U n iv ersity o f M em phis, 2012.
M usm ann, Klaus. “The U gly Side o f Librarianship: Segregation in Library Services from
1900 to 1950.” In Untold Stories: Civil Rights, Libraries, and Black
Librarianship, ed. John M ark Tucker. Champaign: U niversity o f Illinois Press,
1998.
M yrdal, Gunnar, w ith the assistance o f Richard Sterner and A rnold Rose. A n Am erican
D ilemm a: The N egro Problem and M odern D em ocracy, Tw entieth A nniversary
ed. N ew York: H arper & Row, 1962.
N ew m an, M ark. “The Catholic Church in Tennessee and Desegregation, 1954-1973.”
Tennessee H istorical Q uarterly 66, no. 1 (2007): 144-65.
O ’Daniel, Patrick. M em phis and the Super F lood o f 1937: High Water Blues.
Charleston, S.C.: H istory Press, 2010.

178

Pacini, M arina, ed. Photographs fro m the M emphis W orld, 1949-1964. M emphis: Brooks
M useum o f Art, 2008.
Peters, V ickie Hankins. “Housing by Color: The M em phis Story, 1900-1955.” M.A.
thesis, U niversity o f M em phis, 2001.
Phillips, Paul David. “Education o f Blacks in Tennessee During Reconstruction, 18651870.” Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 46, no. 2 (1987): 98-109.
Phillips, Virginia. “Row lett Paine, M ayor o f M emphis, 1920-1924.” West Tennessee
H istorical Society Papers 13 (1959): 95-116.
Plank, D avid N., and M arcia E. Turner. “Contrasting Patterns in Black School Politics:
A tlanta and M emphis, 1865-1985.” Journal o f Negro Education 60, no. 2 (1991):
203-18.
Potter, Sarah. Everybody Else: Adoption and the Politics o f D om estic D iversity in
P ostw ar America. Athens: The U niversity o f Georgia Press, 2014.
Preer, Jean L. “ ‘This Y e a r— Richm ond!’: The 1936 M eeting o f the Am erican Library
A ssociation.” Libraries & Culture 39, no. 2 (2004): 137-60.
Qualls, J. W infield. “The Beginnings and Early H istory o f the LeM oyne School at
M em phis, 1871-1874.” West Tennessee H istorical Society Papers 7 (1953): 5-37.
Ritterhouse, Jennifer. G rowing Up Jim Crow: H ow B lack A n d White Southern Children
Learned Race. Chapel Hill: U niversity o f North Carolina Press, 2006.
Rousey, D ennis C. “Y ellow Fever and Black Policem en in M emphis: A PostReconstruction A nom aly.” Journal o f Southern H istory 51, no. 3 (1985): 357-74.
Ruiz-Velasco, Chris. “O rder out o f Chaos: W hiteness, W hite Supremacy, and Thom as
Dixon, Jr.” College Literature 34, no. 4 (2007): 148-65.
Rushing, W anda. M em phis and the Paradox o f Place: Globalization in the Am erican
South. Chapel Hill: U niversity o f N orth Carolina Press, 2009.
Rustom fram , Perveen. “D em ocracy on W heels: Bookm obile Services in Tennessee, Part
I.” Tennessee Librarian 50, no. 1 (1998): 22-33.
Ryan, Jam es Gilbert. “The M emphis Riots o f 1866: Terror in a Black C om m unity D uring
R econstruction.” Journal o f Negro H istory 62, no. 3 (1977): 243-57.
Saunders, R ichard L. “Jam es F. Estes: Grassroots A dvocate.” West Tennessee
H istorical Society Papers 63 (2009): 50-81.
Sivananda, M antri. “Controversial M emphis M ayor H enry Loeb III, 1920-1992: A
Biographical Study.” Ph.D. dissertation, University o f M emphis, 2002.

179

Shelden, Randall G. “O rigins o f the Juvenile Court in M emphis, Tennessee: 1900-1910.”
Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 52, no. 1 (1993): 33-43.
Strub, W hitney. “Black and W hite and Banned All Over: Censorship and O bscenity in
Postw ar M em phis.” Journal o f Social H istory 40, no. 3 (2007): 685-715.
Summers, M ark W ahlgren. The O rdeal o f the Reunion : A N ew H istory o f
Reconstruction. Chapel Hill: U niversity o f N orth Carolina Press, 2014.
Towne, Jackson E. “Rural School Library Service from County Libraries A ided by the
Julius Rosenw ald Fund.” Peabody Journal o f Education 8, no. 1 (1930): 7-12.
Troesken, W erner. “The Lim its o f Jim Crow: Race and the Provision o f W ater and
Sewerage Services in A m erican Cities, 1880-1925.” Journal o f Econom ic H istory
62, no. 3 (2002); 734-72.
Trotter, Anne. “The M em phis Business C om m unity and Integration.” In Southern
Businessm en and Desegregation, edited by Elizabeth Jacow ay and D avid R.
Colburn. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State U niversity Press, 1982.
Tucker, D avid M. “M iss Ida B. W ells and M emphis Lynching.” Phylon 32, no. 2 (1971):
112 - 2 2 .
Tucker, D avid M. B lack Pastors and Leaders: Memphis, 1819-1972. M emphis:
M em phis State U niversity Press, 1975.
. “Black Pride and N egro Business in the 1920s: George W ashington Lee o f
M em phis.” Business H istory Review 43, no. 4 (1969): 435-51.
. L ieutenant Lee o f B eale Street. Nashville: V anderbilt U niversity Press, 1971.
. M em phis Since Crump: Boss ism, Blacks, and Civic Reformers, 1948-1968.
Knoxville: U niversity o f Tennessee Press, 1980.
Turner, A llegra W., with Jini M. Kilgore. Except by Grace: The Life o f Jesse H. Turner.
Jonesboro, Ark.: Four-G Publishers, 2004.
V an Slyck, A bigail Ayres. Free to A ll: Carnegie Libraries and Am erican Culture, 18901920. Chicago : U niversity o f Chicago Press, 1995.
W ald, K enneth D. “The V isible Empire: The Ku Klux Klan as an Electoral M ovem ent.”
Journal o f Interdisciplinary H istory 11, no. 2 (1980): 217-234.
W aller, A ltina L. “Comm unity, Class and Race in the M emphis R iot o f 1866.” Journal
o f Social H istory 18, no. 2 (1984): 233-46.

180

W allis, C. Lamar. “M emphis and Shelby County Public Library.” In Encyclopedia o f
Library and Inform ation Science, vol. 17, edited by A llen Kent. New York:
Dekker, 1976.
W ard, Richard. “G olden Age, Blue Pencils: The Hal Roach Studios and Three Case
Studies o f Censorship during H ollyw ood’s Studio Era.” M edia H istory 8, no. 1
(2002): 103-119.
W hite, Lisa A. “The ‘Saddle-C olored Sapphire’ versus the ‘Slim y R attlesnake’: The
R hetorical M elee o f Ida B. W ells and Edward Carm ack on the Subject o f
Lynching.” Tennessee H istorical Quarterly, 62, no. 4 (2003): 310-31.
W hite, Lisa A. “The Curve Lynchings: Violence, Politics, Economics, and Race
Rhetoric in 1890s M em phis.” Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 64, no. 1 (2005):
44-61.
W iegand, W ayne A. M ain Street Public Library: Community Places and R eading Spaces
in the R ural H eartland, 1876-1956. Iowa City: U niversity o f Iowa Press, 2011.
W illiam s, Charles. African-Am erican Life and Culture in Orange Mound: Case Study o f
a B lack Com munity in Memphis, Tennessee, 1890-1980. Lanham, Md.:
Lexington Books, 2013.
W illiams, Phoebe W eaver. “Segregation in M em phis.” in Law Touched O ur Hearts: A
Generation Rem em bers Brow n V. B oard o f Education, ed. Richard J. Bonnie and
M ildred W igfall Robinson. Nashville: V anderbilt U niversity Press, 2009.
W ilson, Louis R., and Edw ard A. Wight. County Library Service in the South: A Study o f
the R osenw ald County Library D em onstration. Chicago: U niversity o f Chicago
Press, 1935.
W ingfield, M arie Gregson. “The M em phis Interracial Com m ission.” West Tennessee
H istorical Society Papers 21 (1967): 93-107.
W renn, Lynette B. “Com m ission Governm ent in the G ilded Age: The M emphis Plan.”
Tennessee H istorical Quarterly 47, no. 4 (1988): 216-226.
W right, Richard. B lack Boy: A R ecord o f Childhood and Youth. New York: H arper &
Bros, 1945; N ew York: H arper Perennial, 1998.
Yust, W illiam F. “W hat o f the Black and Y ellow Races?” Bulletin o f the Am erican
Library Association 7 (1913): 158-70.

P R IM A R Y SO U R C E S
Edm und Orgill Papers, M ississippi V alley Collection, U niversity o f M em phis Libraries
181

Everett R. Cook Oral H istory Collection, M emphis Public Library and Information
Center.
L ib rary H isto ry C o llectio n , M em phis P u b lic L ib rary and In fo rm atio n C enter
O ral h isto ry co llectio n , M ississip p i V alley C o llectio n , U n iv ersity o f M em phis
L ib raries

REPORTS
Am erican Library Association. Access to Public Libraries: A Research Project P repared
f o r the Library Adm inistration Division, Am erican Library Association. Chicago:
A m erican Library Association, 1963.
Barker, Tom m ie Dora. “ Libraries o f the South: A Report on Developm ent, 1930-1935.”
Chicago: A m erican Library Association, 1936.
S hockley, A nn A llen. “A H isto ry o f P u b lic L ib rary S ervices to N egroes in the
S outh, 1 900-1955.” D elaw are S tate C ollege, 1960.
U nited States Bureau o f the Census. N egro Population 1790-1915. W ashington, D.C.:
G overnm ent Printing Office, 1918.
U nited States Bureau o f the Census. Fourteenth Census o f the United States Taken in the
Year 1920, vol. 5. W ashington, D.C.: Governm ent Printing Office, 1923.
U nited States Bureau o f the Census. Fifteenth Census o f the United States: 1930, vol. 3,
part 2. W ashington, D.C.: Governm ent Printing Office, 1931.
United States Code, 1958 ed. W ashington, D.C.: Governm ent Printing Office: 1959.

N EW SPAPERS
CA - M em p h is C o m m ercia l A p p ea l
P S - M em phis P ress-S cim ita r
M W - M em phis W orld
TSD - M em phis T ri-S ta te D efen d er
N ew Y o rk Tim es

182

J

