A CASE STUDY OF UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES:
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES
AS A MODEL ARCHIVE

Tammy M. Hansen
102 Pages

August 2015

Given the diversity of sizes, administrators, and archival theory, it would appear
logical to think that college and university archives would vary greatly in their
development, processes, collecting policies, and challenges. While there is some
variation, there are more similarities in college and university archives than there are
differences. This study of four state universities in Illinois examines theses similarities
and differences, comparing them with the Illinois State University Archives and with best
practices and standards set by the Society of American Archivists and the National
Archives and Records Administration.

A CASE STUDY OF UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES:
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES
AS A MODEL ARCHIVE

TAMMY M. HANSEN

A Thesis Submitted in Partial
Fulfillment of the Requirements
for the Degree of
MASTER OF SCIENCE
Department of History
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY
2015

ProQuest Number: 1599054

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 1599054
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© 2015 Tammy M. Hansen

A CASE STUDY OF UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES:
ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES
AS A MODEL ARCHIVE

TAMMY M. HANSEN

COMMITTEE MEMBERS:
Alan Lessoff, Chair
Patrice Olsen
April Karlene Anderson

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
There are so many people who have encouraged me, challenged me, and
sacrificed their time and my attention for me to finally attain this goal. I would like to
first thank my mom and dad, Jeanette and Jerry Thuotte, for always believing in me and
supporting me. My children, Douglas, Zachary, Sarah, Hannah, and Lance have had to
sacrifice time with and attention from me, and without their understanding, I would not
have been able to complete my assignments without huge amounts of parental guilt.
To my coworkers in the Dean’s Office of the College of Arts and Sciences – Dean
Greg Simpson, Carrie Wieburg, Val Ilyuhkina, Deborah Fox, Sally Parry, Joe Blaney and
Dagmar Persaud; and my former coworkers in Student Conduct and Conflict Resolution
– Suzette Walden Cole, Janice Blair, and Akilah Jones; I would not have been able to
accomplish what I have without your support and allowing me the time off I needed for
classes, research, and writing.
A big shout out to my partners in crime, Deb Shaw and Dana Davidson, for our
girls’ nights out and fun times in Chicago. They were and are much needed time away
from the toils of graduate school. Your support and encouragement has meant a great
deal to me.
Of course, without Garth Piercy, I do not know if I could have made it through the
past five years without your help. Thank you for all the coffee, breakfasts, lunches, and
dinners. Thank you for taking care of Atticus when I have been late at the library, at

i

class, writing, researching, or whatever I have had to do to get this done. Thank you for
the laundry and grocery shopping I did not have to do, and the errands I did not have to
run. Thank you for the encouragement, support and understanding.
And finally, thank you to my committee. My chair, Dr. Alan Lessoff, never let
me by with mediocrity. His patience and direction are much appreciated and sorely
needed. The advice he gave me about pursuing a thesis option only if I was passionate
about my topic was the best advice I was given in the last three years. I am also grateful
to the other committee members, Dr. Patrice Olsen who has been one of my best
cheerleaders throughout my time at Illinois State, and ISU Archivist April Karlene
Anderson who has taken so much of her valuable time to assist me in my research and
has always been willing to answer my questions and encourage me in this endeavor.
T. M. H.

ii

CONTENTS
Page
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

i

CONTENTS

iii

CHAPTER
I.
II.
III.

IV.

V.
VI.

INTRODUCTION

1

HISTORY OF ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES

9

HISTORIES OF THREE STATE OF ILLINOIS
UNIVERSITIES

34

RECORDS LOST: THE NEED FOR AN ACTIVE
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

53

COMPARISON OF THE UNIVERSITIES

70

CONCLUSION

94

REFERENCES

98

iii

CHAPTER I
INTRODUCTION
Professor Anderson is chairing her university’s centennial celebration committee.
The committee has decided that it would like to put together a slide show featuring
photographs of past presidents. Where could the committee get these photographs?
President Smith is considering a capital project to build a new dormitory. He heard that a
former president had had a similar idea, but it was rejected. President Smith wants to
know the details of that project and why it was rejected. Where could he get that
information?
For many colleges and universities, the answer to the above questions would be
the university’s archives. There, non-current records of administrative and historical
value are preserved for future use. These records consist of more than photographs and
administrative reports. Archival theorist T. R. Schellenberg defined records as
All books, papers, maps, photographs, or other documentary materials, regardless
of physical form or characteristics, made or received by any public or private
institution in pursuance of its legal obligations or in connection with the
transaction of its proper business and preserved or appropriate for preservation by
that institution or its legitimate successor as evidence of its functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, operations, or other activities or because of the
informational value of the data contained therein.1
Oddly enough, university archives are relative newcomers in the realm of archives, with

1

T. R. Schellenberg, Modern Archives: Principles and Techniques, (Chicago: The Society of American
Archivists, 1956), 16.

1

Harvard University officially establishing the first university archives in 1939. Other
colleges and universities soon followed, establishing their own archives.

Given the

diversity of sizes, administrators, and archival theory, it would appear logical to think that
college and university archives would vary greatly in their development, processes,
collecting policies, and challenges. Yet, I have found that, using the Illinois State
University (ISU) Archives as a model, while there is some variation, there are more
similarities in college and university archives than there are differences. This became
apparent during my examination and comparison of the archives at Southern Illinois
University at Carbondale (SIUC), Eastern Illinois University (EIU), the University of
Illinois (U of I), and the ISU archives.
At each archive, I researched their development, space, processes, collection
policy, records management policy, and previous archivists through available records and
interviews with the archivists. The findings for each archive will be laid out separately,
followed by a discussion of the findings and how they compared with each other, and
with archival theory and best practices.
Two factors that played a large role in academic archives developing along the
same line were the training and education of American archivists. There was not an
adequate manual in English that provided standardized archival procedures until T. R.
Schellenberg’s 1956 Modern Archives: Principles and Techniques, nor was there a 33
college and university archives would come from these early days of the profession.
Schellenberg believed an archivist should first have “a broad general training in
some field of learning, and secondly, a specialized training in archival principles and

2

techniques.”1 In his opinion, the best training an archivist could have was training in
history, because this provided “a knowledge of the development of his country and its
government…[and] training in research methodology.2 In addition to having advanced
training, preferably in history, Shellenberg held that an archivist’s training should then be
supplemented by archival training.3
Solon J. Buck, the National Archives’ second archivist and president of the
Society of American Archivists, referred to the body of knowledge an archivist should
have as “archival science.”4 This applied science, was, in his view, “compounded of
parts of many other sciences or fields of knowledge, together with certain principles and
techniques derived from practical experience.”5 Buck advocated for a solid background
in history and government, as well a more specialized knowledge in administrative
history or government history and in the field to which the documents in his custody
relate. To these, Buck added archival theory and archival history.
Buck also decried the lack of archival study programs in the United States. While
he acknowledged there was a large body of literature on the subject, he lamented that
“this literature is hard to find...[and] most of it [was] not available in English”6 He noted
that the staff of the National Archives had to be recruited without any specialized
knowledge in archival science due to the failure of institutions to provide archival
education. Buck taught what he believed to be the first course designed specifically for
archival training at Columbia University in 1938, which was not continued due to

1

Ibid., 130.
Ibid., 131.
3
Ibid., 131.
4
Solon J. Buck, “Training of American Archivists,” The American Archivist 4, no. 2 (April 1941): 85.
5
Ibid., 85.
6
Ibid., 87.
2

3

financial reasons.7 American University in Washington, D.C. began offering courses in
archival studies in the early 1940s. In 1955, American University began offering a
certificate in archival administration, with instructors such as Schellenberg and Oliver W.
Holmes.8 By 1954, other programs existed in North Carolina, Wisconsin, and Colorado
and continued to expand to other universities.9
Archivist H. G. Jones, however, believed that despite the expansion of
educational opportunities for archivists, as a profession, archivists had “failed in [their]
responsibility to [their] profession…to provide adequate, regular, and comprehensive
training.”10 He disagreed with the adequacy of Schellenberg’s recommendation that
archival studies be taught in library schools, as he did not believe that a librarian could
adequately teach the subject without having “active archival experience.”11 Instead,
Jones proposed a program to draw graduate history students into the archival profession.
This program would include an “in-depth study of recordmaking and recordkeeping,...an
intensive study of archival procedures and techniques,…[and] a supervised period of
inservice training in the repository.”12 However, since many archival positions, both
academic and non-academic, require an American Library Association-accredited
master’s degree in library science or library and information science, it would appear that
Schellenberg’s view prevailed.
Finally, in 2002, the Society of American Archivists endorsed a set of best
practices for archival study. These included not only course work, but also practical
7

Ibid., 88.
H. G. Jones, “Archival Training in American Universities, 1938-68,” The American Archivist 31, no. 2
(April 1968): 141.
9
Robert M. Warner, “Archival Training in the United States and Canada,” The American Archivist 35, no.
3-4 (July 1972): 349.
10
Jones, 148.
11
Ibid., 150.
12
Ibid., 152-153.
8

4

experience. For an institution to meet the standards, archival students had to have
“regular and frequent access to archives and manuscript repositories. Repository access
[could] take the form of class visits, research assignments in the repositories, and
opportunities for internships and other types of practical experience.”13
With the emphasis on practical experience in archives from the 1950s on, access
to adequately staffed and administered archives could be a challenge to some universities.
How was this challenge to be overcome? One way was for the university to have an
archives for its own records. However, the focus for American Historical Association
and the Society of American Archivists had been on state and federal governmental
repositories, not on repositories for colleges and universities. While institutions of higher
learning may have had archives for their research collections, most of them, seeing no
value in the preservation of their records, had no official repositories for their records. If
records were retained, many times they would be relegated to a storage closet or the
bowels of a building. It was not until the early 1950s that colleges and universities began
to realize the need for the adequate preservation and retention of their own records.
That is not to say that there was no interest in the preservation of university
records prior to the 1950s. In the mid-1800s, Jared Sparks gathered together whatever
Harvard College papers he could find and deposited them in the college’s library.14 In
the later 1800s, other presidents, professors, and librarians in New England colleges such
as Dartmouth, Columbia University, and Amherst, also made an effort to collect and
preserve their colleges’ respective records. However, these attempts and others that

13

“Guidelines for a Graduate Program in Archival Studies,” Society of American Archivists, accessed
March 2, 2015, http://www2.archivists.org/gpas.
14
John Melville Jennings, “Archival Activity in American Universities and Colleges,” The American
Archivist 12, no. 2 (April 1949): 155.

5

followed were “prompted almost certainly by historical rather than administrative
motives,” usually because of an upcoming centennial or bicentennial celebration.15
Even where attempts were made to collect and preserve records, the records
usually came under the control of a librarian rather than an archivist. Applying the
library techniques to archival material usually resulted in the dissolution of the records’
provenance, or the history of ownership, with materials being removed and scattered
around the holdings. No thought was given to more recent noncurrent records, which
“continued to languish in whatever quarters the creating offices cared or were able to
provide.”16
As colleges and universities grew, the output of records grew as well.
Administrators began to realize that their record storage and arrangement systems, as
well as their ability to have control over noncurrent records, were inadequate, to say the
least. Finding that, for example, the university was bound by agreements that
disappeared with the files of temporary heads of departments, led Harvard Corporation,
the governing board of the university at that time, to enact measures in 1939 to ensure the
success of their archival program and the preservation of records of both administrative
and historical significance.17 Both governing boards of Montana State University and
Fisk University also issued similar directives to ensure the preservation of records in
1945 and 1948, respectively.18
To follow up on this trend, the Society of American Archivists conducted a
survey in the summer of 1949 to “determine the extent of archival awareness” in colleges
15

Ibid., 155-156.
Ibid., 156.
17
Clifford K. Shipton, “The Harvard University Archives: Goal and Functions,” Harvard Library Bulletin
1, no. 1 (Winter 1947): 101-102, accessed March 5, 2015, http://pds.lib.harvard.edu/pds/view/2573358.
18
Jennings, 159.
16

6

and universities in the United States and Canada.19 What the committee found was
disheartening. Of the 150 surveys sent, 115 responses were received. Of those 115, 56
colleges and universities had archives, 15 preserved their records but had “no unified
archival program,” 11 kept some records, seven were “studying the problem with a view
to establishing archives,” 14 had records scattered throughout the university and were
“interested in establishing archives,” and 12 were “totally uninterested in archives.”20
Yet, there was a bright side to these data. Colleges and universities were
beginning to understand that a one- or two-room archives was not sufficient for housing
their administrative records, and they were beginning to employ full-time archivists.
Those that did not have archives were beginning to plan for them properly rather than
situating them in a dank basement or in a room in the library.
The committee conducted another survey in 1962. This survey was sent to the
original 1949 colleges and universities plus 200 others, with a response from 268
institutions. Again, the results were disheartening. Of those institutions, 113 had
archival programs headed by a full- or part-time archivist. However, the archivist was
likely to be a librarian who had been assigned to the role. The survey also found that
though institutions may have an archives, many respondents indicated that “a room in the
library or some other campus building had been set aside for valuable records, even
though no archivist had been appointed to supervise them or to decide what records
merited permanent preservation.”21
19

Dwight H. Wilson, “Archives in Colleges and Universities: Some Comments on Data Collected by the
Society’s Committee on College and University Archives,” The American Archivist 13, no. 4 (October
1950): 343.
20
Committee on College and University Archives, “Report of the Committee on College and University
Archives,” The American Archivist 13, no. 1 (January 1950): 63.
21
Philip P. Mason, “College and University Archives: 1962,” The American Archivist 26, no. 2 (April
1963): 162-163.

7

In 1966, the committee conducted a comprehensive survey to “ascertain, first, if
an institutional archives existed, and second, something about the nature and scope of the
operation.”22 Surveys were sent to 1,156 institutions in the United States and 46 in
Canada. They received responses from 836 institutions in the United States and 45 in
Canada. In the U.S., 278 institutions had no formal archives. On the bright side, 558 –
roughly 48 percent – of institutions had an archival program. However, only 53
institutions in both countries – 9 percent - employed professional archivists. Unchanged
was the fact that most archives surveyed were part of the library and had a librarian as
archivist.

22

Robert M. Warner, “The Status of College and University Archives,” The American Archivist 31, no. 3
(July 1968): 235.

8

CHAPTER II
HISTORY OF ILLINOIS STATE UNIVERSITY ARCHIVES

Illinois State University, the first of twelve public universities in Illinois, was
founded in 1857 as an institute of teacher education, with then-attorney Abraham Lincoln
drawing up the bond guaranteeing that the residents would meet their financial
obligations. It is located in the Town of Normal, which sits at the crossroads of three
major interstate highways, and along the St. Louis-to-Chicago railway. By 2015, ISU
had a student body of 20,762 on its 490 acre campus, with 71 undergraduate degree
programs, 42 graduate degree programs, and 10 doctoral degree programs. As of the last
financial audit in 2014, ISU showed revenues of $560 million and expenses of $550
million, leaving a positive balance of $10 million. ISU’s rich history and financial
stability have made it a model institution for creating and maintaining its own archives.
But that road has been bumpy, to say the least.
Like so many archives before and since, the ISU Archives was established
because of the realization of the necessity to preserve the institution’s records. Prior to its
official founding by the decree of ISU President Samuel E. Braden on March 31, 1970,
official records were scattered around the university in various offices, storage closets,
and basements. Historical artifacts, such as the Civil War sword of the first college’s
president Charles E. Hovey and letters from Hovey before he was university president,

9

were housed in a museum in Milner Library or again, scattered across the university or in
the homes of former professors and alumni.
Braden designated the University Library as the “collector of archival material
regarding Illinois State University,”1 with the archives being a part of the Special
Collections department. The archive’s mission was “to support the informational and
research needs of the University and the wider community by preserving records
pertaining to the origin and development of the University, including the achievements of
its officers, employees, and students, and making those records available for use.”2
Robert Sokan, whose specialty was rare books, was hired in 1969 as the special
collections librarian. Since archives fell under Special Collections, Sokan was named the
first archivist of Illinois State University. Sokan seemed less interested in the archives
than in the rare book collection ISU was amassing.3
A memo from Joe W. Kraus, university librarian, to the deans, department heads
and chairmen of university committees dated April 6, 1970 communicated the new
position and how it would impact the aforementioned. The memo stated that the library
would serve as the university archives to “preserve non-current papers that are likely to
be useful in interpreting the history of the University.”4 Kraus instructed university
employees to contact Sokan prior to discarding any substantial files.5
Sokan came to ISU from Illinois Wesleyan University, where he had taught
English and the humanities, having a master’s degree in English. However, after some
1

Samuel Edward Braden Presidential Papers, “Presidency Minutes, 1969-1970,” Dr. JoAnn Rayfield
Archives, Illinois State University, Normal, IL.
2
JoAnn Rayfield File, “Illinois State University Mission Statement,” Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives.
3
James Cunningham, interview by author, Normal, IL, April 15, 2015.
4
Memorandum by Joe Walker Kraus, April 6,1970, Joe Walker Kraus University Librarian (Dean) Papers,
Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives.
5
Ibid.

10

years, due to a paralyzed vocal cord – unbeknownst to his physicians, he had a slow
growing brain tumor - Sokan could not teach full time. He went to library school and
earned a master’s in library science from the University of Illinois with an emphasis in
rare books, and archives. He was subsequently offered the position of special collections
librarian at ISU. As the Special Collections librarian, his main duty was enhancing and
caring for the rare books collection, which was his passion. The archival duties, which he
knew were also part of his position, were secondary. 6
During his time at ISU, the archives and Special Collections were located in the
basement of the old Milner Library, presently Williams Hall. This was typical. In both
the 1969 and 1972 surveys of college and university archives, the majority of archives
were located in extra spaces, usually in the library, but basically anywhere on campus
that had extra space. Even in 1969, there were serious environmental problems with the
ISU library. Leaks were reported, as well as falling ceiling plaster due to those leaks.
These conditions occasionally led to the destruction of materials and the need for
conservation of materials affected by those conditions, such as leather and paper. Most
of these problems occurred in the annex to Williams Hall constructed in 1964. The annex
consisted of basement-to-roof metal library drawer shelving, connected across with metal
support beams at the tops. Flooring was laid across those supports. There was a gap
between the walls and the shelving, and when the roof leaked, this type of construction
allowed water to flow down the walls all the way to the archives in the basement. That
was a frequent occurrence in Williams Hall. Other leaks occurred due to air conditioning
units and burst pipes.
In his first annual report, Sokan reported that “non-current papers [were] being
6

Ann Sokan, interview by author, Bloomington, IL, February 4, 2015.

11

transferred to the Library from University offices as time and space permit.”7 Space and
time, issues faced by many university archives, plagued ISU’s archives as well. By the
time the archives was created, Milner Library was already having to store little used
books in other buildings, such as Stevenson Hall. Part of the problem was that, besides
taking the records of the university, the archives accepted records outside of its scope
such as correspondence of Hazel Buck Ewing regarding the suffragette movement, a
collection from Mr. and Mrs. Charles Funk, a collection of letters describing the
impressions of an emigrant from England, and papers from a number of
Bloomington/Normal women’s clubs. These records, while of local historical value,
were more appropriate for a manuscript collection than for the ISU Archives and took up
valuable space. Issues of time were reflected in the lack of adequate staffing – Sokan
was the only trained archival staff – and Sokan’s apparent disinterest in the archives.
Administrative policies were also detrimental to the growth of the archives at this
time, as well as to the archivists’ ability to obtain non-current university records. A
report from the Sub-Committee on Storage and Access of University Papers to the
Academic Senate in 1982 laid blame at the feet of past president David K. Berlo for the
lack of an “extant operational archives policy.”8 While I could find no reference to what
specific action Berlo took that affected the archives, I can speculate, given the
information on his presidency.
Berlo’s presidency ran from October 4, 1971 to May 30, 1973. During that time,
Illinois was in the midst of a financial crisis. Governor Richard B. Ogilvie had slashed
state universities’ budgets, and Berlo saw this as an opportunity to “set the University on

7
8

Robert Sokan, Annual Report, 1970, Records of Milner Library, Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives.
JoAnn Rayfield File, “Illinois State University Mission Statement,” Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives.

12

a new course.”9 Besides mandating a self-examination by all departments to determine
how they would handle both budget cuts of 15 and 25 percent and a budget increase of 15
percent, Berlo immediately cut programs such as master’s degrees in physics and
determined to phase out others, like home economics teacher education. Berlo also cut
the number of new teacher education majors who would be accepted, and he abolished
the Student Services division.
While those changes were enough to cause unrest in faculty and staff, the change
that I believe was the most detrimental to the archive’s ability to collect non-current
university records was Berlo’s attempt to downsize the administrative arm of the college.
Berlo believed that administration was top-heavy and needed to be overhauled. He
wanted to establish a “two-tiered system.”10 This system would have eliminated
departments based on academic disciplines. They would have been replaced by “a dozen
or so colleges or learning centers organized around broadly conceived programs. Faculty
could be readily shifted…from one such administrative unit to another as student demand
and societal need dictated.”11 The colleges would be responsible for programmatic
planning and administration would be responsible for budgets. Berlo began this plan in
1972, combining library science with speech communication, forming Information
Science. He also combined home economics with industrial technology, a combination
that really had no name that was “readily apparent to anyone.”12
While Berlo did not get everything he wanted, he did manage to have colleges
eliminated as fiscal units. So, on July 1, 1972, the college offices closed and the deans
9

John Freed, Educating Illinois: Illinois State University, 1857-2007, (Virginia Beach, VA: Donning Co.
Publishers, 2009), 326.
10
Ibid., 328.
11
Ibid., 328
12
Ibid., 329.

13

“were moved to the fourth floor of Hovey and given university-wide responsibilities.
The departments were left to fend for themselves.”13 In a report from the North Central
Association, the accrediting agency for the college, the association found that faculty
morale had declined, that the “University’s administrative structure was in a ‘state of
evolution’ with no clear plan for stabilizing the situation,”14 and that department heads
were “confused as to how to manage affairs because of the shuffling about of personnel
and offices and the separation of program and budget control.”15
According to Roger J. Champagne, Berlo’s administration of ISU
came at a time when one period of institutional development had ended and
another was beginning, a change common to higher education generally. Dr.
Berlo, like a number of other new presidents of the time was hailed as a “new
breed of administrator, one who was catapulted from the academic ranks to the
presidency…in order to restore campus peace and introduce fiscal accountability
and managerial efficiency through strong leadership. But in the history of higher
education, the so-called new presidential type actually represented a return to an
older style of institutional leadership characterized by the authority and power of
the president’s office.16
With the Academic Senate set to pass a vote of no confidence, and plagued by
accusations of fiscal misconduct, Berlo resigned in May 1973. The Board of Regents
named Gene A. Budig as acting president, then in November named him the twelfth
president of ISU. Budig quickly restored a “sense of administrative stability within the
University”17 by reestablishing the collegiate and administrative structures.
Even with the return to normal, the chaos caused by this realignment and
consolidation of power over that two-year period had lowered the morale of both faculty
and staff, and made them more protective of their records. Why would the
13

Ibid., 329.
Ibid., 329.
15
Roger J. Champagne, A Place for Education, Illinois State University, 1967-1977, (Normal, IL: Illinois
State University Foundation, 1978), 110.
16
Ibid., 113.
17
Ibid., 115.
14

14

administrators, deans, and secretaries want to give up their records to the archives? What
would become of their records – even if they were not current - if they did turn them over
to the archives? Would they be lost? Would they disappear somewhere? What if they
needed these records to substantiate financial needs or enrollment numbers? Would they
have access to them? This uncertainty and atmosphere of distrust had a far-reaching and
long-lasting effect on the records management program at ISU which will be discussed in
a later chapter.
In 1976, Milner Library, along with Special Collections, moved to their current
location. But lack of space and time still plagued the archives, which remained in
Williams Hall. During that year, the ISU Archives became part of the Illinois Regional
Archives Depository system (IRAD), accepting the non-current records of twelve Illinois
counties and receiving 278.5 cubic feet of material in 1977.18 The archives also accepted
collections outside of its scope, such as materials from the League of Women Voters and
papers from the Morgan-Washington House. Sokan’s answer to lack of space would be
to toss out an older box of records and replace it with the new box of records.19 That
would be unthinkable now, but it was within Sokan’s purview as archivist to dispose of
records, and since ISU had no record retention schedule, Sokan could dispose of any
records as he saw fit. I can only speculate what records he would have discarded, but
randomly destroying records would have gone against any archival training he had. I
would like to think that Sokan had much of the contents of the archive in his head rather
than listed in catalogs or finding aids. Memory-based finding aids were one of earliest

18
19

Robert Sokan, Annual Report, 1977-1978, Dr. Jo Ann Rayfield Archives.
Cunningham, interview.

15

finding aids and were in extensive use in the 1940s.20 It would be reasonable to believe
that that may have been the case, considering Sokan’s split duties and lack of staff. If he
knew what those boxes contained and that they had no archival value, nothing was lost.
If, however, the disposal really was random, there can be no estimate as to what history
was lost.
With the addition of IRAD, Sokan gained two interns for staffing IRAD, whose
positions were paid for by the State of Illinois. Those interns, however, were solely for
IRAD; they did not do any processing of university records. Sokan did have one intern
for ten hours each week to staff the reception area, once the library, and Sokan’s office,
moved to the new building.
In his 1982-1983 annual report, Sokan noted the overarching issue of a “lack of
University administrative policy” that kept the archives in limbo.21 That lack of policy,
which could be translated to neglect on the university’s part, exacerbated the issues faced
by the archives. The first issue was a lack of a library clerk trained in archival work to
assist the archivist. A full-time clerk would have allowed the archives to remain open 40
hours each week rather than the 15-20 hours and allow for more collections to be
inventoried. With only a part-time student worker, Sokan could do little except daily
upkeep. Lack of staff precluded providing any sense of organization to the collections.
He also suggested that a full-time archivist be hired. The second issue concerned the
leaks and water damage that continued to occur. Sokan hoped that that issue would be
solved soon.22

20

William Van Schreeven, “Information Please: Finding Aids in State and Local Archival Depositories,”
The American Archivist 5, no. 3 (July 1942): 170.
21
Robert Sokan, Annual Report, 1982-1983, Fred McCrae Peterson papers, Dr. Jo Ann Rayfield Archives.
22
Ibid.

16

Sokan retired in 1987, with librarian Laura Gowdy replacing him as head of
Special Collections and Archives, which had become two separate departments. Gowdy
started her career at ISU as a cataloger in Milner Library in 1967. She moved into the
Teacher Materials Center (TMC) in 1969 and stayed in that position until moving into
Special Collections and Archives in 1987. Gowdy went into the position “totally
unprepared.”23 While she had a degree in library science, the only training she had for
the archives was the auditing of one semester of an archives class at the University of
Illinois after getting the archivist position.
Having a librarian as head an archives was not unusual, as revealed in the 1962
and 1966 surveys discussed in the previous chapter. While both a librarian and an
archivist may both earn a master’s degree in library science, the training for a librarian
versus an archivist are different. Librarians learn to catalog books topically, while
archivists rely on provenance and respect des fonds. Librarians also describe at the item
level, i.e. each individual book, while archivists describe at the collection or series level,
i.e. Papers of President Smith (collection level), or Papers of President Smith –
correspondence, meeting minutes (series level). One beginning level class on archives
would not have adequately prepared Gowdy to head the archives any more than one class
in business management would prepare an accountant to head a corporation.
During her time over the archives, the archives received records from IRAD,
which was supervised by history professor Dr. Jo Ann Rayfield. But otherwise there was
very little coming into the university archives from the offices and colleges around
campus. When a government official came from Springfield, IL and explained that the
university should be keeping its records, Gowdy sent out letters to the academic offices.
23

Laura Gowdy, interview by author, Normal, IL, December 12, 2014.

17

She received little cooperation, as “usually the secretaries kept their own stuff, thank
you.”24 The university was supposed to set up a record retention policy, but Gowdy
stated that they never did while she was there.25
Besides the Berlo fallout, another factor was possibly at play in the reticence of
faculty and staff to turn over their records to the archives. According to Henry J.
Browne, secretary of the Society of American Archivists from 1955-1966, this reticence
may be “based on a misconception that there is no distinction between the private papers
which are a product of the personal activities of an official and the records which result
from his work for the institution. These latter he has no right to destroy willfully or to
keep, since they are institutional records and not his personal property.”26 The staff
seemed to view their respective department’s records as their personal property to
protect, and there was no university policy that stated otherwise.

The archives did

receive the papers from various retired faculty and staff, the archives of the Illinois
Association of Middle Schools, copies of job runs from ISU Printing, scrapbooks from
the local chapter of Delta Kappa Gamma, and alumni material. According to Gowdy, she
processed these materials following the procedures she learned from the class she audited
but could not recall specifics on how they were processed.
Staffing and space remained issues during Gowdy’s tenure. Gowdy, overseeing
both Special Collections and Archives, had her office in Milner Library, while the
archives was still in Williams Hall. This arrangement caused a significant inconvenience
to researchers desiring to use the archives, as well as a significant danger to archival

24

Gowdy, interview.
Gowdy, interview.
26
Henry J. Browne, “An Appeal for Archives in Institutions of Higher Learning,” The American Archivist
16, no. 3 (July 1953): 220.
25

18

records. Should a researcher wish to use records from the archives for any length of time,
they had to be retrieved from Williams Hall and transported to Milner Library. This was
done in all kinds of weather, exposing possibly fragile records to detrimental conditions.
The arrangement also caused the archives to be open only ten hours per week, the number
of hours that student help was available in the archives. This led to a reduction of use,
which in turn led to a reduction in hours, with Saturday hours being cut.
The environmental conditions in Williams Hall continued to deteriorate. Gowdy
and Rayfield constantly battled water, heat, and mold. In one instance, Rayfield came
into the archives in the morning to find the paint hanging from the ceiling “like icicles”
and water all over the floor in the archives due to a ruptured steam pipe valve.27 Rayfield
and Gowdy spent much of that day salvaging what they could. A number of IRAD
records were lost during this incident. About a year or so later, in the evening, a building
service worker noticed water in a classroom in Williams, used the shop vacuum to suck it
up, left the classroom, then came back and realized there was more water. The worker
notified the ISU police, who in turn notified Rayfield. Rayfield came into the archives
and spent the entire night and into the next morning sopping up water, salvaging IRAD
boxes which had been on the floor, removing Circus collection pieces from danger, and
doing general clean up. Thankfully, the type of shelving used in the old stacks allowed
for an inch deep trough that ran under the stacks, contained some of the water, but some
items were lost or damaged during this incident.
The temperature in the archives ranged anywhere from 55 degrees to 85 degrees.
The Society of American Archivists suggests a temperature range of 60 to 70 degrees

27

Dr. Jo Ann Rayfield, phone interview by author, April 8, 2015.

19

Fahrenheit.28 But, since the College of Business occupied part of Williams Hall and
needed heat for their offices and classrooms, the building was kept warmer. To keep the
archives from getting too hot in the winter, the archives staff had to run air conditioners,
and even that did not keep the conditions cool enough. The relative humidity in the
archives also fluctuated tremendously from 25 - 30 percent in the winter to between 80
and 85 percent in the summer.29 Even with dehumidifiers on around the clock, the
humidity could not be kept at an acceptable level.
Upon Gowdy’s retirement in 1992, Dr. Jo Ann Rayfield assumed the archivist
position part-time, handling both University Archives and IRAD. Rayfield began at ISU
in the fall of 1966 as an assistant professor of history, having her master’s degree. She
then earned her Ph.D. in history from Vanderbilt University in 1969. One of the things
Rayfield loved about being a historian was doing research in archives, and having her
own archives was “like winning the lottery.”30
But why put an historian in charge of the archives? Why not put another librarian
in charge? After all, Rayfield’s only experience with archives was doing research in
archives in Latin America, and researching in an archives is much different than heading
an archives. While there was no definitive answer in the papers in ISU’s archives, I can
only speculate as to the reasons. First, Rayfield was available and had been supervising
the IRAD interns. Second, historians played a crucial role in establishing archives and
the archival profession in the United States. According to Mattie U. Russell, J. Franklin
Jameson, the first executive secretary of the American Historical Association, is known
28

Guidelines for College and University Archives,” Society of American Archivists, accessed June 8, 2015,
http://www2.archivists.org/node/14805.
29
Special Collections and Archives Task Force Report, 1998, Special Collections, Milner Library, Illinois
State University, Normal, IL.
30
Rayfield, interview.

20

as the “Father of the National Archives.”31 It was historians Jameson and Waldo Gifford
Leland who pushed for a national archives, and it was a historian, Robert W. D. Connor,
who was appointed to head the National Archives as the first archivist of the United
States. T. R. Schellenberg, who held a Ph. D. in history, authored the first American
handbook of archival administration, Modern Archives: Principles and Techniques, as
well as The Management of Archives. Herman Kahn, one of the founders and presidents
of the Society of American Archivists, stated
the training one receives as an undergraduate and graduate student in history or
related subjects, which gives or should give one a knowledge of what scholarship
is, what research is, how research is conducted—the relationship of the scholar to
his sources, and the uses and limitations of various kinds of sources—the whole
story of man, and as a part of that story, how man has used the record in writing
his own story—all of those vast areas of human knowledge that make use of the
written record—it is when he is being trained in these fields that the potential
archivist is receiving the truly professional part of his training.32
Rayfield had already retired from her professorship, had been supervising the IRAD
interns, and had been Sokan’s choice for his replacement according to both Gowdy and
Rayfield. With both her history and her archival research backgrounds, and her
willingness to take the part-time archivist position, Rayfield was an obvious choice.
She recognized her lack of archival administration knowledge and experience so she
involved herself in archives discussion boards and listservs, attended conferences, and
read extensively to become more knowledgeable about archives and to keep up with
archival trends.
After taking over the archives, Rayfield found there was some order to it. Sokan
had pulled together all the presidential papers, board papers, and colleges and department
31

Mattie U. Russell, “The Influence of Historians on the Archival Profession in the United States,” The
American Archivist 46, no. 3, (July 1983): 280.
32
Herman Kahn, “Some Comments on the Archival Vocation,” The American Archivist 34, no. 1 (January
1971): 7.

21

papers, and placed each of those collections in rows, giving order to those major
collections. But Rayfield faced major challenges in the neglected archives. Limited
space, limited personnel, and poor conditions continued to be issues, as was gaining
physical and intellectual control of the archives.
Williams Hall was plagued still by leaks, both from the way the annex was
constructed as well as from broken pipes and dripping air conditioning units. A leak
from the air handling unit on the fourth floor in August of 1995 caused minor splash
damage to materials. Another leak from the fourth floor in August of 1996 caused water
to cascade down the stairs between the third and fourth floors. In 1997, mold became a
major enemy. In July, the archives and storage areas had to be closed for mold clean-up.
Again in August, the archives closed for mold and water clean-up. In February 1998,
disaster was narrowly averted. A leak from a broken pipe left several inches of water on
the floor. Ten IRAD boxes were lost and the water had run into the cage that held the
Circus Collection. Rayfield and IRAD interns were able to remove valuable items from
the water’s path, saving the collection from damage.
Heat and humidity problems still existed. The combination of heat and humidity
created the perfect environment for mold growth. The Office of Health and Safety found
mold levels so high in the summer of 1997 that the archives had to be closed to the public
for a few weeks. Professional clean-up personnel had to wear respirators.33 A few
months later, the archives again had to be closed due to mold. According to the Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), the Institute of Medicine (IOM) found there
was “sufficient evidence to link indoor exposure to mold with upper respiratory tract
symptoms, cough, and wheeze in otherwise healthy people; with asthma symptoms in
33

Special Collections and Archives Task Force Report, Milner Library.

22

people with asthma; and with hypersensitivity pneumonitis in individuals susceptible to
that immune-mediated condition.”34 Besides being a health hazard, mold is also one of
the four primary causes of material deterioration in archives.35 In addition, many pipes
were wrapped in asbestos and the ceiling had asbestos tiles, another known carcinogen.
Besides the poor environmental conditions, lack of space presented its own set of
challenges. By the time Rayfield became archivist, the archives had run out of shelf
space for presidential papers, ending with President Bone. Where would the succeeding
presidents’ papers – Braden, Berlo, Budig, Watkins & others – be placed? Rayfield had
to put things “wherever the hell you could find a place to put stuff.”36 This, in turn, led to
difficulties creating a shelf locator that was accurate and up-to-date for the collections,
informing staff where each collection was located within the archives. Now, that would
not be too difficult if, for example, all of President Braden’s boxes were together, apart
from the rest of the presidential papers, but if multiple boxes were scattered across the
archives in various locations, it would have been both time-consuming and confusing.
Imagine if one of the boxes had been placed in the incorrect location. That would lead to
another box, possibly not of the same collection, being placed where the correct box
should have been, and so on, creating a cascading effect that could wreak havoc in both
the physical and intellectual control of the archives. Rayfield also wanted to maintain a
relationship with the university community – faculty, staff and alumni – so she rarely
turned down anything offered to the archives, adding to the already crowded conditions.37
34

“Mold,” Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, accessed June 8, 2015,
http://www.cdc.gov/mold/faqs.htm#affect.
35
Gregor Trinkaus-Randall, James Reilly and Patricia Ford, “The Massachusetts Experiment: The Role of
the Environment in Collection Preservation,” The American Archivist. 77, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2014):
136.
36
Rayfield, interview.
37
Cunningham, interview.

23

Her vision for the archives was that it would not only be a repository for ISU’s noncurrent records with historical value, but also to be its institutional memory.
She confronted not only the problems of space for the archives collections, but
also the overflow from Special Collections, which had been moved to the new library. If
Special Collections did not have room for something, it was sent over to be stored in the
archives in Williams Hall. The archives would have had use of what was called “the
Cage,” if some of the larger pieces of the Circus Collection and the overflow from that
and other collections had not taken up that space. Not only did Special Collections take
up some of the space, it also made more work for Rayfield. As she was going through
archives boxes, it was not uncommon to find boxes and items from Special Collections,
the Circus Collection and the Rare Books collection. Rayfield told of one day finding an
unlabeled cubic foot box. She opened the box to determine what it contained. It was full
of dolls. She had no idea to which, if any, collection this box belonged. She called over
to Special Collections and asked if they were missing any dolls. They were not missing
any dolls. There had not been room for the dolls in Milner, so they had been sent to the
archives as overflow from the Lois Lenski collection, unlabeled.38
Rayfield also had the challenge of creating finding aids for the collections,
building upon the foundation laid by Sokan. Some of the older collections had been
processed to the item level, meaning that every letter, every memo, every note, had been
described and listed in a finding aid. Others were described only to the collection level,
meaning that if someone wanted to research, for example, President Bone’s speeches, if
the collection were processed at the collection level, the finding aid would have been
listed something like: Robert Gehlmann Bone Presidential Papers, 1927-1991, 45 boxes.
38

Rayfield, interview.

24

While Rayfield knew where things were in the archives, even the unprocessed material,
all that information was in her head. She wanted the collections inventoried and
described at the folder level, giving more information about what each box contained, but
not as much information as if they were processed to the item level.
However, she recognized that even with the best possible finding aids, if no one
was using the archives, how could she justify its existence to the university? So, she set
about building patronage and support at the same time as processing collections and
writing finding aids. Rayfield went to various departments and asked if they knew what
information the archives held for their departments. She then told them all about what
the archives had, “kind of showing off about what [she] knew about their department.”39
In this way, she garnered some interest from faculty and staff in the archives’ holdings,
turning to the archives to verify beginning dates of academic programs, departments and
the like.
In the fall of 1997, the dean of University Libraries, Clifton Jones, established a
task force to consider “whether or not the library should expand its existing Special
Collections and Archives Program.”40 The task force consisted of Teresa Thomason,
Eloise Cline, Nancy Fry, Sharon Hartzell, Jo Ann Rayfield, Mildred Rjaden and Joan
Winters. After approximately six months, the task force issued its report and
recommendations. The report cited concerns regarding the archives’ environmental
conditions and lack of space. Its recommendations were as follows: have a full-time
archivist; establish an effective records management program; expand the operating hours
for the archives to a full day; and house Archives and Special Collections in the same

39
40

Rayfield, interview.
Special Collections and Archives Task Force Report, Milner Library.

25

location with increased space.
Rayfield’s work of obtaining faculty and staff papers and promoting the archives
paid off through the preservation of some materials relating to the history of the
university that would otherwise have been destroyed. One such collection was the
Nelson Smith photographs. Nelson Smith served as university photographer from 1939
through 1991, capturing the history of ISU in photographs. Rayfield received a call from
Jerry Liebenstein, the university photographer in Marketing and Communications at that
time, telling her that the department had been given orders to put the photographs and
negatives from Nelson Smith out on the curb by the end of the work day and asking her if
she wanted them. Rayfield contacted a friend to help her, and they went over to
Marketing and Communications and loaded all they could into her small Toyota pickup.
She managed to get another day so she could complete the task. Within 24 to 36 hours,
they moved all the negatives – at least 400,000, according to Rayfield’s recollection - to
Special Collections because that facility had climate control, and all the proof cards to the
archives. These photographs are the archives’ photographic collection, not just a part of
it. If Liebenstein had not contacted Rayfield about these photographs, an irreplaceable
photographic documentation of the University’s history would have been lost.
The archives remained in Williams Hall battling the leaks and lack of climate
control through 2008, when it moved to the facility at Warehouse Road in north Normal.
The move was not an easy one, nor was it immediate. In 2003, one of Milner Library’s
goals was to move the archives to Warehouse Road, along with designing and
constructing a secure area for the archives and funding and construction of a cold room.
Those goals appeared again in 2004.

26

The move did not start until 2007. Rayfield organized the move from Williams
Hall. Packing began in the fall/winter of 2007 and the physical move began in January,
2008. It took months to move, as there was “way too much material to be done in one
shot,” according to Jim Cunningham, who worked two days each week in the archives
from April 2006 through May 2010. The document cases were packed into boxes in
order, and movers took them to the new facility. Besides the amount of material to pack,
another hindrance was the lack of boxes. For every transport, Rayfield, directed the
movers on the placement of the boxes. She, Cunningham, and Mark Schmitt, who also
worked in the archives, would then unpack the boxes, place the document cases on
shelving, then bring the boxes back to fill them up again. Rayfield could have used
movers to do the entire job of packing and moving, which would have been faster and
more efficient, but she “was very particular about who she would allow to even be in
those spaces with that material, let alone touch it.”41 Cunningham and Schmitt recall
using their personal vehicles to transport boxes and individual items, such as the Civil
War sword of ISU’s first president Charles Hovey, to the Warehouse Road facility.
Rayfield did not feel comfortable using University vehicles or movers for what she
considered the most valuable items in the archives.
The move gave Rayfield the ability to bring order to the archives. Having more
space allowed her to arrange the collections in the same structure as the university – the
presidential papers, then colleges, then departments, etc. Her plan hit a snag when she
realized she did not have the shelving she needed. Rather than purchasing new shelving,
the library acquired excess shelving from Illinois Wesleyan. The shelves were placed
back to back in the new archives, with the thought that document cases would be placed
41

Cunningham, interview.

27

on both sides. However, the shelves did not have the depth needed – a minimum of nine
inches per side – to accomplish this. Milner Library already was using another part of the
building for infrequently used books, and the shelving for those books was what Rayfield
needed. She called over to the library and asked if she could swap out shelves. She got
the okay, and began the labor-intensive task of removing the books, moving the larger
shelf to the archives space, moving the smaller shelf to the library space, and placing the
books on the smaller shelf. Rayfield’s inexperience with archives is apparent from this
incident, as an experienced archivist would have recognized that these shelves would be
insufficient. She stated that the depth of the shelving was something “she didn’t think
about in the beginning. I guess because I thought someone else would.”42
Moving to a new space did not solve all of the problems and created a new one.
Nearly a month after the move, Rayfield heard “plop, plop, plop” as she was working in
the archives.43 The roof leaked. Plastic sheets covered the boxes and shelving, and
buckets collected the rain water. Somehow, Facilities was able to find the money to repair
the roof without the loss or damage of any documents. There were also mice living in the
walls in between the archives and Property Control. Mark Schmitt, who worked in the
archives from April 2008 through February 2010 as a full-time archivist specialist had the
daily task of checking for mice when he arrived at the archives and would often find
them.44 He would then call pest control and someone would come out and deal with
them.
But a new challenge lay ahead for Rayfield after the move. “When you move the
archives away from campus, it makes it harder for patrons to get there,” stated Rayfield
42

Rayfield, interview.
Ibid.
44
Mark Schmitt, interview by author, Normal, IL, April 15, 2015.
43

28

regarding the drop in archives usage. It was difficult to justify the importance of the
archives if it was not being used. Rayfield and her staff, Jim Cunningham and Mark
Schmitt, had to make the archives more visible and accessible. Although Rayfield did
not have the skills for digital asset management, Schmitt did. He and Cunningham began
scanning images, with Rayfield at times identifying the people in the photographs.
Digitization had been an archives’ goal for some time. Beginning in the 2003 – 2004
annual report, the archives was to continue migration from print to electronic records,
including databases, monographs, periodicals and reference material, as well as to
develop a plan for implementing a digital assets management program.
Rayfield also recognized that even if she had a world-class archives, it would not
matter if it was not being used. She, Cunningham, and Schmitt answered many patrons’
requests for photographs of friends or relatives who attended ISU. That required a lot of
work, since the photograph collection did not have names attached to the photographs.
Cunningham recalled that many times, if he received a request for a team member’s
photograph, he would start with back issues of The Vidette from the years the alumnus
attended to find group photographs of the team listing the names, get a feel for what the
person looked like, then go through individual head shots until he found one or more that
resembled the person. He would then send the scans to the patron to determine if any of
the photographs were correct. If so, he would then get the negative and have a print
made.45 They also assisted patrons requesting aid with genealogic research, both from
the archives and IRAD.
Departments also came out to look at their files for fund-raising efforts and
centennial celebrations. Rayfield did not always wait for the departments to come to her.
45

Cunningham, interview.

29

For example, she knew that the Agriculture Department had its anniversary coming up,
so she told Cunningham to pull photographs relating to the department, digitize them, and
put them online. In that respect, she was proactive. “She had her finger on the pulse of
the University,” stated Cunningham.46
Rayfield retired in 2010, and Ross Griffiths, Director of Preservation and
Archives at Milner Library, served as interim archivist. There was a question as to
whether the archivist position would remain a part-time position or become full-time, but
it was clear to Griffiths and “to anybody who was paying attention to archives that a parttime position was not adequate for the amount of work that needed to be done.”47 Dr.
Sohair Wastawy, Dean of University Libraries at ISU, made a decision and secured the
funding for a full-time archivist.
Griffiths had the responsibility of crafting the job description and qualifications
for the new archivist. He knew he wanted someone with two degrees – a master’s of
library and information science and a second subject master’s, preferably in history. This
double degree would keep the archivist on par with the rest of the library staff. With the
archives already separated physically from the library, he wanted to keep any other
separation as minimal as possible.
After interviewing several candidates, the librarythey extended an offer to April
Karlene Anderson, who became the University’s first full-time archivist of the Dr. Jo
Ann Rayfield Archives on April 11, 2011. Anderson, who had a master’s in library and
information science and a master’s in history, came to ISU from the University of Central
Florida, where she had been senior archivist and an adjunct instructor in history. She

46
47

Cunningham interview.
Ross Griffiths, interview by author, Normal, IL, December 11, 2014.

30

faced a daunting challenge: develop finding aids, as well as procedures and practices to
catalog the collection.
When Anderson began, there was 12,000 linear feet in the archives, including
negatives, flat files, and photo drawers, and approximately 250 collections. There were
few finding aids and little intellectual control of the collection. Since that time, Anderson
has “radically transformed the archives.”48 She, along with archives assistant Jenna Self,
interns, and student workers, have reinventoried and condensed nearly 100 collections
down to 10,550 linear feet. Finding aids are now available for all processed collections
and are available on the archives’ webpage and through the Milner Library catalog.
However, those advances do not nullify the fact that the archives is housed in a
sub-standard building according to archival standards. The Warehouse Road facilities are
over 35 years old and have several factors that make them unsuitable for housing the
archives. First, the staff have no control over temperature and humidity levels. While
there are devices in the archives’ stacks that measure both, all Anderson can do is collect
the data but can do nothing to correct the levels should they fall out of the recommended
range. There is also the issue of water. Although the leaky roof was replaced, Anderson
has to battle water from another area. The building was built on a concrete slab and the
drainage around the building is inadequate. Water pools outside of the building and
seeps in under doors. Anderson has to keep absorbent tubes in front of the doors to
prevent the water from infiltrating the stacks. Security is also a problem. Property
Control, which occupies the other portion of the warehouse, had a theft over the winter.
There had been one key type for the entire building, and one code that has been passed
around to the employees there, as well as to Facilities and the building service workers.
48

Ibid.

31

There are no cameras in the Property Control area, and a single camera in the archives’
stacks, focused on one area. The thief could have gained access to the stacks and the
archives’ office area.
The other problem the archives faces is its location. While much better than its
previous location in Williams Hall as far as conditions, the location is a large obstacle.
The archives is three miles away from the university, and the nearest city bus stop is
about a mile away from the archives. While students can bike, walk, skateboard, etc. on
Constitution Trail from the university or the bus stop to archives, bad weather or limited
time can make that trip inconvenient for students without vehicles. Distance gives the
archives a negligible presence on the campus. One of the most common things Griffiths
and Anderson have heard is that people did not know ISU had an archives. To counter
that, Anderson has made and continues to make outreach to the university community
and its alumni through meetings, a blog, attending University events, presentations, and
digitizing such items as yearbooks and old photographs and making them available on the
archives’ webpage.
The development of the ISU Archives and its challenges have exemplified the
development and challenges of university archives presented in numerous books and
articles, and supported by a number of surveys. The archives was established by decree
of a university president and fell under the umbrella of the library, had librarians as its
first archivists, and was housed in facilities that were not ideal for an archival repository.
A lack of policy for obtaining official university records led to difficulty in obtaining
those records, and a lack of staff hindered the processing of existing records, as well as
those coming into the archives.

32

With such a past, what does the future hold for ISU’s archives? Griffiths is
exploring some major initiatives for the archives. He would like to see the digital
collection grow, but first the archives has to develop the capabilities to collect digital
materials. Because of the archives’ lack of technology, the capacity to collect digital
materials is limited. The other initiative, the “holy grail of the next couple of years,” is to
have the archives located on campus, adjacent to the library. Griffiths also recognizes
that Anderson is still grappling with a tremendous backlog of collections to process, new
records to accession, and finding aids to create. Added to those tasks are her outreach
efforts. Griffiths would like to add another full-time staff member to process collections
and supervise the interns and student workers in order to free Anderson for outreach
activities. With the budget issues facing state universities in Illinois, it remains to be seen
what goals will be met in the coming years.

33

CHAPTER III
HISTORIES OF THREE STATE OF ILLINOIS UNIVERSITIES

The three other Illinois universities I examined were Southern Illinois University
at Carbondale (SIUC), Eastern Illinois University (EIU), and the University of Illinois (U
of I). SIUC has a student body of 17,989 and does not have a degree sequence relating to
archives. EIU is the smallest of the universities, having an enrollment of 8,913 students,
and has a historical administration graduate degree that includes an introductory class on
archives. U of I is the largest of the universities, with an enrollment of 44,520 students,
and has a graduate degree in library and information science with numerous classes
relating to archival practices and processes.
Besides the size of the student body and the archive-related courses or degrees,
other factor may play a role in the development and support of the archives. The location
of the university is one of the factors. For example, both SIU and EIU of the universities
are fairly isolated, but one is located in an area near a national forest, and has numerous
historic sites and museums, two wine trails, and a number of national chain hotels. The
other has a few attractions, a nearby state park, and three hotels/inns. The other two
universities, ISU and U of I, are located at the intersection of major interstates. The
founding date could also be a factor, coupled with its administrator during its infancy.
One university had a full-time archivist from its beginning, while another has had only
part-time archivists.

34

Southern Illinois University at Carbondale was established in 1869 and was the
second teacher’s college in Illinois. Carbondale is located in southern Illinois, about 16
miles from the nearest interstate, and has a population of 26,363. It is a rural setting, with
much of the area part of the 240,000-acre Shawnee National Forest. SIU’s 2014 audit
showed revenues of $209 million and expenses of $199 million, with a positive balance
of $10 million. Its main campus is comprised of 1,136 acres. SIU offers 103
undergraduate degree programs, 78 graduate degree programs, and 34 doctoral degree
programs, with no courses in archives or archival administration.
SIU’s library opened in the same year as the university, 1869. Dr. Robert Allyn
served as both president and librarian.1 The original library burned to the ground in
1883. Until a new building was constructed in 1903, the library shared space in other
buildings. On June 7, 1904, the new Wheeler Library was dedicated. The university
attempted to secure funding for a library/museum in 1938, but no state funds were
appropriated for that project. In 1953, construction on a new library building began and
the current Morris Library opened its doors in January, 1956.2
With the opening of a new library came new opportunities. A Treasure Room
became the newest addition to the library, housing SIU’s special collections. Those
collections included rare books, examples of fine printing, rare items on Illinois history,
and other works that required special care.3 Each year, more items were added to the
Treasure Room. In 1956, seventeenth-century prints, a collection of gift annuals and

1

Delores M. Manfredin, “A History of the SIU Library, 1874-1950,” Ralph E. McCoy Papers, Special
Collections Research Center, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, Illinois.
2
Ralph E. McCoy Papers, Special Collections Research Center.
3
Ibid.

35

early American humor were all transferred to the Treasure Room.4 The Treasure Room
housed a manuscript collection rather than a university archives at this time and was
basically the university’s special collections. Collecting local historical artifacts and
photographs, such as the Coal Mining in Southern Illinois collection, was their focus.
Any university records that were not lost in the fire or destroyed by poor conditions from
being stored in basements and storage areas were held in offices.
There was no concerted effort to retain important and historic university records.
But change was coming with the appointment of Kenneth Duckett, former curator of
manuscripts for the Ohio Historical Society, as university archivist and manuscript
curator in 1965. Dean of Library Affairs Ralph E. McCoy stated that “as University
archivist, Duckett [would] devote a portion of his time to gathering and cataloging noncurrent records of the University itself.”5
In “A Report on the Growth and Development of the Libraries at Southern Illinois
University,” Duckett noted that in 1966 a number of university records had been
processed, including those from the Office of the President – 1916-1965, the Vice
President of Operations – 1960-1964, and Student Government, as well as faculty papers,
private papers, local history papers (labor records of Sahara Coal Company), oral
histories, SIU pictorial history, and university publications. The archives was now
collecting both university records and local history records as well.
In 1970, SIU began the Special Collections unit within Morris Library, led by
McCoy. Four departments were housed under this umbrella - Rare Books, Manuscripts,
University Archives and Illinois Regional Archives Depository (IRAD), with Duckett

4
5

Ibid.
Ibid.

36

serving as both archivist and curator. While working at SIU, Duckett authored Modern
Manuscripts: A Practical Manual for Their Management, Care and Use, an often-quoted
primer for archivists and curators. He may be best known for his controversial role in
preserving the Harding-Phillips love letters from probable suppression or destruction by
the family of President Warren G. Harding. The letters were released by the Library of
Congress in July 2014.
In 1980, Duckett retired from SIU and went to work at the University of Oregon.
David V. Koch replaced him as archivist/curator. He oversaw the archives, which
included “all papers that have a legal or historical relevance to SIU-C, from Board of
Trustees minutes to old editions of The Obelisk, the SIU-C yearbook…copies of all
theses and dissertations written by SIU-C students and most of the research papers
written by faculty.”6 Koch spent ten years as a rare book librarian before taking the reins
of Special Collections. During his tenure, Koch “built upon the earlier work of both
McCoy and Duckett in enlarging and enriching the collections.”7 Under his guidance, the
Special Collections unit was renamed the Special Collections Research Center (SCRC) in
2002.
During Koch’s time over the SCRC, the university began to expand its collection
of political papers of local, regional, state, and national significance. The papers include
those of U. S. senators Paul Simon and Roland Burris, U. S. representatives Ken Gray
and Glenn Poshard, Illinois representatives Kenneth Buzzbee and Jeanne Hurley Simon,
as well as St. Louis mayor Clarence Harmon. Records from the League of Women
Voters, the Peace Coalition of Southern Illinois, and the Carbondale Foundation for a
6

Ibid.
Gordon Pruitt, “David Koch Retires at July’s End,” Cornerstone 1, no.1 (Fall 2005): 5, accessed April 25,
2015, http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1012&context=morrisnews_cornerstone.
7

37

Better Environment are also included in this collection.
Koch retired in 2005. In 2006, Pamela Hackbart-Dean was named as head of the
Special Collections Research Center, “a vast collection of rare books, manuscripts,
correspondence and photographs. The center also holds the University archives, made up
of past legal and historical records of SIUC.”8 Hackbart-Dean, former head of special
collections at Georgia State University and director of the Southern Labor Archives,
wanted to increase the profile of the research center though outreach and publicity. At
the same time, the university hired Leah Agne Broaddus as a library faculty member as
well as archivist, relieving the director from archival duties for the first time.
In describing her duties, Broaddus, a graduate of Indiana University Bloomington
with a library science degree, stated that “SIUC has been collecting boxes of archival
material for years and storing them diligently. My job is to open the boxes, figure out
what is in them, where it comes from, and how it can be saved.”9

Her focus was not

divided among collecting local history, rare books and manuscripts, and university
papers, as previous archivists’ attention had been. Broaddus could devote her time to
unpacking, arranging, and describing the records of the university. She also helped steer
the archives though a move from Morris Library while it was being renovated and then
back to the new space. Hackbart-Dean, Broaddus and the archives staff took the
opportunity to deaccession or weed out old the collection prior to the move back to the
renovated library.10
8

Tim Crosby, “Director of Special Collections Named for Library,” News, June 16, 2006, accessed April
25, 2015, http://news.siu.edu/2006/06/061606tc6129.php.
9
“Focus on Library Faculty: Leah Broaddus,’ Cornerstone 3, no. 3 (Spring 2000): 10 accessed April 25,
2015, http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1002&context=morrisnews_cornerstone.
10
Pamela S. Hackbert-Dean, Leah Agne, & Julie Mosbo, “History on the Move: Relocating Special
Collections and Archives,” (January 2010): 49, accessed April 25, 2015, http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu
/morris_articles/57/.

38

Those moves had their share of difficulties and errors. For instance, upon their
final inspection of the temporary space, they discovered that 45 - 60 boxes had either
been inadvertently left behind or had not been included in the moving plan. They also
discovered that the moving manager had instructed the movers to disregard spacing
directions, leading to 6,000 boxes that had been shelved with no allowance for growth.11
Once that crisis was overcome, they found that the movers had placed adhesive tags on
the outside of boxes and some of the larger items, like leather-bound books, that had been
moved. The Preservation Unit trained a staff member to safely remove the tags with
microspatulas and special erasers.12
Broaddus left SIUC in 2011 and was replaced by Matt Gorzalski in August 2012.
Gorzalski came to SIUC from the History Center in Diboll, Texas, where he had been
archivist. He had a master’s in library and information science and a BA in history, and
he brought with him experience in digitization and database design.13 Since his hire, he
has made considerable progress dealing with electronic records, allowing the archives to
accession and store them. They are currently taking data off of legacy media, film, tape,
photographs, etc. The next step will be the migration from obsolete file formats and
media.14
As for the archives themselves, the SIUC archives uses stationary shelving in the
archives for the archival boxes, while moveable shelving holds the rare book collection.
Devices for monitoring humidity and temperature are located throughout the archives and
checked and recorded by the preservationist librarian. Variances in temperature and
11

Ibid., 51.
Ibid., 51.
13
Gordon Pruitt, “Matt Gorzalski Names University Archivist,” Cornerstone 7, no. 4 (Summer 2012): 10.
http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/morrisnews_cornerstone/27/.
14
Matt Gorzalski, interview by author, Carbondale, IL, November 25, 2015.
12

39

humidity can be corrected by the Physical Plant. Leaks, mainly from older pipes have
presented problems in the past, but there have been no water issues since he arrived in
2012.15
Just as with many archives, space and staff are issues. “We have a lot of space,
but we’re filling up fast,” stated Gorzalski.16 He estimates that the archives currently
holds about 20,000 cubic feet of records. He has been able to create more space through
reappraisal and deaccessioning. Even so, the Special Collections Research Center has to
use off-site storage for some unprocessed manuscript and political papers, as well as for
theses and dissertations. Gorzalski has one assistant to help with archival duties. He also
has interns and graduate assistants who help with reference services, front desk work,
processing collections and writing finding aids. But to get through the backlog of
collections, he estimates it would several years at the current level of staffing.17
The collections are particularly strong beginning in the 1940s through the present.
Any collections prior to that time are “hit-or-miss,”18 due to the lack of care, lack of a
collection policy, and lack of recognition of the importance of the records. Most of the
collections are described to the folder level. Some collections, like the Richard F.
Peterson Papers and the Thomas Frank Barton Faculty Papers, are described, at least in
part, to the item level. Still others, like those of the various colleges, i.e. College of
Engineering and Technology, College of Human Resources, etc., are described only to
the box level. The collections that have been processed have finding aids available
through Archon, an online searchable finding aid database, developed by Christopher

15

Ibid.
Ibid.
17
Ibid.
18
Ibid.
16

40

Prom, assistant university archivist at the University of Illinois. Unprocessed collections
are also listed, although with no information other than a name, the type of material, and
the extent of the holdings.
While the acquisition of non-current records for some departments is spotty and
inconsistent, other departments, such as the Theater Department, the Chancellor’s Office
and the Provost’s Office, “value their history more,” and thus the archives has more
documentation on them.19 But overall, Gorzalski is “impressed with the amount and
thoroughness of [their] holdings documenting the university and the frequency at which
records are accessioned.”20
Eastern Illinois University was founded in 1895 in Charleston, Illinois, home to
21,961 people. Its campus consists of 320 acres, about ten miles east of the nearest
interstate, I-57, which runs north to Chicago, and 18 miles north of Interstate 70, which
runs east to Indianapolis, Indiana. The area surrounding Charleston consists of mainly of
farmland. As of the 2014 audit, EIU showed revenue of $72 million and expenses of $75
million, leaving it at a deficit balance of $3 million. The university offers 49
undergraduate degree programs, and 29 graduate degree programs, including one in
historical administration, which provides an introductory course in archives.
According to retired EIU archivist Robert V. Hillman, EIU’s archives officially
began in 1989, when planning for the university’s centennial was beginning. Yet a 1972
list of college and university archives from the Society of American Archivists lists EIU
as having an archives that was established in 1967 with 147.7 feet of records, headed by
University Librarian B. Joseph Szerenyi, who was director of library services and dean of

19
20

Ibid.
Ibid.

41

library science.21 He retired in 1978. In a search of EIU’s online database, there are no
holdings for Szerenyi, and a search of EIU’s website brought up little information except
a commemorative program with his photograph, other archival photographs, and his
death notice in the EIU Annuitants Association Newsletter. So, there was some sort of
archives that collected university records prior to Hillman, but from the information
Hillman provided, the records in the archives were not accessioned or in any kind of
order.
When EIU hired Hillman in 1989 as a reference librarian, those records were in
boxes, several hundred of them. Sorting through these boxes and making sense of the
chaos became his job. The university needed someone to organize the files and help the
historian pull together items for the centennial book that he was writing. Hillman held a
BA in English and an MA in cultural studies, along with a master’s in library and
information science. Since Hillman had taken courses in archives at Brigham Young
University while earning his MLIS, he was assigned as the university archivist.22 Prior to
Hillman, EIU had had no archivist of any sort.
For much of his time as archivist, Hillman was a one-man show, and his time was
split between Booth Library’s reference desk (10 hours per week) and the archives (27
hours per week).23 However, if he was needed at the reference desk, the time he could
spend in the archives was reduced by that amount. He did have some student workers
and interns in the archives, but they were limited in what they were able to do since
Hillman had to supervise them. They mainly manned the reception desk and added
21

Society of American Archivists Committee on College and University Archives, College and University
Archives in the U.S. and Canada (Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan, 1972), 13, accessed June 14,
2015, http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015071441235;view=1up;seq=1.
22
Robert V. Hillman, interview by author, Charleston, IL, March 9, 2015.
23
Hillman, interview.

42

records to collections already processed. In 2009, Hillman received an assistant, Johna
Von Behrens. She helped process a number of collections and create on-line finding aids.
She left in May 2014. Hillman retired soon after, in December 2014.
After Hillman’s retirement, Bill Schultz was named interim head of archives.
Schultz was hired in 1995 as a catalog librarian. Although he is the interim archivist,
Schultz spends most of his time as a catalog librarian and in collections development. He
is able to devote about one day each week specifically to the archives, and that can be
reduced due to absences, meetings, and other duties as might be assigned. Schultz also
supervises the Illinois Regional Archives Depository (IRAD) interns and one student
worker. The student worker mainly focuses on utilitarian projects, such as weeding
collections, about eight to nine hours each week, leaving Schultz with all other archival
duties and not enough time to do more than tread water. At times, history or archival
students will devote time in the archives as part of a class project. One such project
involved a large-scale inventory of the stacks.
EIU’s archives was not what I expected. Since the university has a graduate
degree in museum studies with a course in archival administration, I thought the archives
would be at least on par with ISU’s and SIU’s archives. However, that was not the case.
Throughout the archives unit, unprocessed boxes of records are stored in cabinets and
shelving along the walls, on long work tables in a corridor, as well as in the workroom.
The archives room itself is located in the basement of Booth Library in a small, lowceiling room. The room is controlled for temperature and humidity, with devices placed
in various locations. It is an L-shaped room, approximately 28 feet long by 56 feet wide,
with the leg being approximately twenty feet by twenty-four feet. The ceiling is about

43

seven feet high. There was no fire suppression system in the archives, and pipes ran
along one of the walls. The left side of the room has nine mobile shelving units, while
the right side has eight mobile shelving units, each approximately twelve feet in length
and two feet wide. In addition, at the entrance of the room to the left, there are
approximately four rows of smaller shelves housing the rare books. More shelving for
rare books is located in the leg of the room.
Few of the collections have been processed and few finding aids are available
online or though the library’s catalog. Inventory lists are paper copies available in the
archives. The finding aids that are available online vary in description. Some, such as
the papers from the Office of the President, 1899-1933, are fully described to the item
level. Others are described to the folder level, and many to the box or series level.
Others, like the Eastern Illinois University Centennial collection, have no description at
all. With the time available to him as interim head of archives, Schultz is just trying to
“keep things afloat,” until the university hires an archivist.24 Given the financial
situation, Schultz does not anticipate that an archivist will be hired in the near future, if at
all.25
While EIU’s archives is struggling along, The Keep, EIU’s open access electronic
institutional repository, provides online access to faculty papers, administrative records,
special collections, historic photographs, conference materials, and exhibits, as well as
EIU’s yearbooks, senior scrapbooks, and master’s theses. The Keep, administered by
Booth Library but separate from the archives, was launched in 2012, and has over 30,000
documents available at a click of a button. According to a press release, The Keep tries

24
25

Bill Schultz, interview by author, Charleston, IL, March 9, 2015
Ibid.

44

“to include what we think will have an impact historically. This includes information and
images from EIU exhibits, conferences, video lectures, podcasts, posters, brochures,
newsletters and press releases, as well as hundreds of photos and documents from
University Archives.”26 EIU invested in a scanning center consisting of three Fujitsu
scanners and is staffed full time by the Institution Repository Librarian Todd Bruns, civil
service staff, and student employees. Many of the scanned documents have come from
EIU’s archives. I believe that because of its rural setting, with little to draw researchers,
EIU library administration saw The Keep as a way to promote its holdings more readily
than through a conventional archives. The records are scanned and placed online. There
are no archival supplies to purchase, no time “wasted” in foldering and labeling, no
worries about writing a finding aid, and no space or environmental issues. Professors and
students can easily upload their work to the site without contacting an archivist or filling
out forms, and it can be done from wherever there is an Internet connection.
The University of Illinois was founded in 1867 in Champaign-Urbana, Illinois,
which has a population of 125,176. Its campus consists of 785 acres, about just a few
miles from Interstate 57, which runs south from to Chicago, Interstate 72, which runs
west to Hannibal, Missouri, and Interstate 74.which runs east to Indianapolis and west
through Bloomington-Normal to Iowa. The area surrounding Champaign-Urbana is
rural, dotted with small towns. As of the 2014 audit, U of I showed revenue of $3.5
billion and expenses of $5.3 billion, leaving it with a deficit of $1.8 billion. The
university offers over 150 programs of study, over 100 graduate degree programs and
concentrations, including one in library and information science, and eighty-two doctoral

26

“EIU's Electronic Repository, The Keep, Reaches Patrons Worldwide,” Eastern Illinois University Media
Relations, August 1, 2013, accessed June 16, 2015, http://castle.eiu.edu/media/viewstory.php?action=880.

45

programs, including one in library and information science.
The University of Illinois (U of I) had pondered establishing an archives for many
years. In 1920, the Subcommittee of University Archives called for the establishment of
a “Central Office of University Archives to organize older records not essential to the
transaction of business in administrative offices.”27 The subcommittee also
recommended the establishment of another committee, the Standing Committee on
University Archives, to assess, inventory, and recommend an appropriate organization for
older records, and records created after 1904, under the direction of a university
archivist.28
The administration recognized that unless something was done, the chances of
valuable historical documents would be lost or destroyed. They noted that there had been
a report that former university president Andrew S. Draper had “all previous (to 1894)
correspondence destroyed with the exception of a single letter book which somehow
escaped.”29 President David Kinley did not act on these recommendations. However, a
university librarian, Phineas L. Windsor did act. Windsor, “an instinctive collector,”
began assembling university publications in “The Illinois Collection,” and stored faculty
papers in various nooks in the new library, finished in 1926.30
In 1946, the university hired Dr. Icko Iben as newspaper librarian and archivist.
This signaled that the administration was realizing the importance of archives and
preserving the university’s history. By 1962, Iben reported that the library, home to the
archives, held nearly 1,000 cubic feet of unprocessed archival material and another 1,790
27

Maynard Brichford, “The Illiarch,” in College and University Archives: Selected Readings, (Chicago:
Society of American Archivists, 1979, 19.
28
Ibid., 19.
29
Ibid., 19.
30
Ibid., 20.

46

cubic feet in offices around campus.31 This number was much lower than it should have
been, considering that a survey of 100 university offices in 1953 found that there were
“over 57,000 cubic feet of archival material.”32
In 1957 as the university began preparing for its centennial, history professor
Arthur Bestor, chair of the Committee on the Centennial History of the University,
continued to press for the establishment of an archives. In 1962, the university hired a
part-time archivist, Susan Shattuck, to start organizing the records of the archives. Then,
after forty-three years, in September 1963, the university hired its first full-time archivist,
Maynard Brichford, and, through presidential notification, the University of Illinois
formally established its archives.
Brichford found that although many records had been stored in attics, basements,
and other campus buildings, there had been no significant loss of records.33 The records
were gradually moved to their new home in room 19 in the basement of the University
Library. Like many archives located in renovated basement spaces, the archives was
plagued with water seepage, leaking pipes, varying temperature and humidity conditions,
and mold issues.34 Those conditions did not deter Brichford from continually adding to
the collection.
By 1979, the archives was reaching its capacity of 4,656 cubic feet. They
desperately needed more space. In 1985, a reading and search room was added to the
archives, allowing more shelving to replace tables. Improvements in lighting and climate
control were also implemented. Still, the archives lacked the space to adequately house

31

Ibid., 20.
Ibid., 20.
33
Brichford, 20.
34
William Maher, interview by author, University Library, University of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois.
32

47

new accessions. Four off-site storage areas were in use by that time to house unprocessed
records.
These records included records of student organizations as well as non-current
university records. Since space was an issue, the university planned to build or acquire
new space to house the archives if it could raise the money. That did not happen.
Records had to be stored off-site at four different facilities, causing “increased costs and
loss of efficiency in operations.”35 The archives continued on in its cramped quarters,
with 99 percent of its 10,564 cubic feet of storage space occupied, until an opportunity
arose to effectively split the archives.36
In 1989, the Student Life and Culture Archives (SLC) was founded through an
endowment from the Stewart S. Howe Foundation. The SLC “actively documents the
history and traditions of student life and culture at the University of Illinois through
alumni and student papers (including diaries, scrapbooks, correspondence, and
photographs), student organization records, administrative office records, oral histories,
and student publications.”37 This allowed for the transfer of student life-related records
to the new Archives, relieving some of the space issue.
SLC is housed in the Horticulture Field Laboratory building, just over a mile
away from the main archives. The space is very functional for the archives, since the
records vault is basically a 3-story cement cube surrounded by hallways with office space
and workrooms opposite it. The vault had been a storage bin for apples from the
university’s orchard, so it was constructed to be cool. While the temperature may have
35

Brichford, 23.
William J. Maher, “The Illini Archives: A Laboratory for Retrospective Research,” Illinois Libraries, 63,
no. 1 (March 1981): 270.
37
“About,” Student Life and Culture Archives, accessed April 27, 2015,
http://archives.library.illinois.edu/slc/about-2/.
36

48

been cool, there was still a need to have the archives vault retrofitted for temperature and
humidity control, as well having archival shelving installed. The main floor and
basement house the SLC collections, including the oral histories, while the third floor
holds the records of the American Library Association (ALA). There are also parts of the
Sousa collection, mostly large instruments, housed at SLC, as well as national association
archives for such entities as the Advertising Council, American Association of Law
Libraries, and the Third Armored Division Association.
SLC archivist Ellen Swain stated that 60 percent of all archives material is housed
in the Horticulture Building.38 While she was unable to provide dimensions for the three
vaults, the vault on one floor alone was larger than any of the archives examined. Swain
has one full-time staff member who has experience in archives and who is able to aid in
outreach, reference, electronic records, and class visits. This position is relatively new,
having started in 2014. Prior to that, the position had been filled by a staff member who
was interested in archives but with no experience or background in archives. Swain has
two graduate assistants, one who works with the ALA archives and one who is specific to
the Alpha Tau Omega archives. There are also three undergraduate students working in
the archives.
U of I is also home to the Sousa Archives, which “acquires and preserves
significant archival records and historical artifacts in multiple media formats that
document America’s local and national music history and its diverse cultures.”39 This
archives was not included in this study, as it fell outside the realm of the type of
university archives being examined.
38

Ellen Swain, interview by author, Student Life and Culture Archives, Champaign, IL, March 18, 2015.
“About,” Sousa Archives and Center for American Music, accessed April 27, 2015,
http://archives.library.illinois.edu/sousa/about/.
39

49

U of I archives houses other collections outside the scope of university records.
Some national Greek fraternity and sorority organizations, through an agreement with U
of I, have deposited their collections in the U of I archives. These collections, such as the
Phi Eta Sigma and the Pi Alpha Phi records, are overseen by U of I graduate students.
Other national organizations have also deposited their records with the university
archives. Those include organizations like the Council of Planning Librarians, the Art
Libraries of North America, the National Council of Teachers of English, and the
American Society of Cybernetics. Local and state collections include the Cahokia
Mounds collection, Champaign County Greenways and Trails Committee Records, and
Chicago, Paducah, and Thebes Railway Company Journal, 1912-1914 collection. These
collections, while not records of the university, are tied to papers or projects written or
conducted by U of I staff and students.
While space was, and still is, a problem - three off-site storage facilities are
currently in use - staffing was at least better than many other state university archives in
Illinois. In 1979, the archives staff consisted of a full-time archivist, a full-time office
person, four part-time graduate students and three part-time undergraduate students.40 By
1981, the staff had increased to include a half-time assistant archivist.41 As of 2015, the
archives staff consists of the university archivist, an assistant archivist, an archivist for
electronic records, an archivist for reference and user engagement, an archival reference
and operations specialist, two visiting archival reference and operations specialists as
well as a number of graduate and undergraduate students.
The abundance of staff - in comparison to the other three university archives

40
41

Brichford, 23.
Maher, 270.

50

examined – and a minimalist processing philosophy, which will be discussed later,
allowed for the accession and processing of a majority of their collections. Between
1974 and 1979, the staff was able to reduce the total percentage of unprocessed records
from 71 percent to 4 percent.42 In 1980, the archives contained 8,764.1 cubic feet of
processed records, and 233.4 cubic feet of unprocessed records (2.6 percent). That total
jumped substantially over six years, with the archives holding 11, 592.2 cubic feet of
processed records and 558.9 cubic feet of unprocessed records (4.6 percent).43 The
percentage has fluctuated over the years, but the backlog is not something Swain sees as
being resolved in the near future.44
The U of I archives also has the ability to store and preserve digital records. This
collection holds three terabytes of electronic records.45 To put that into perspective, a 74minute CD contains 650 megabytes.46 One terabyte is equal to 1,048,576 megabytes.
That means that 1,613 74-minutes CDs would be needed to hold one terabyte of
information. The U of I archives would need 4,839 74-minutes CDs to hold all its
electronic records. Stacking those CDs would result in a tower nearly 16 feet tall.
Burning songs onto those CDs, assuming the average song is five minutes long, would
result in over 71,500 songs.
What is in store for the University Archives? The main archives is due to move to
a larger space in May 2015. The new archives will be located on the first floor of the
University Library and will provide another 1,400 cubic feet of space and better climate
42

Brichford, 26.
William J. Maher, “The Illini Archives in the 1980s,” Illinois Libraries 69 no. 4 (October 1987): 584.
44
Swain, interview.
45
“University of Illinois Archives: Bringing History to Life,” University of Illinois, accessed April 27,
2015, http://archives.library.illinois.edu/.
46
“Technology Q & A,” Optical Storage Technology Association, accessed April 27, 2015,
http://www.osta.org/technology/cdqa8.htm.
43

51

control. Included in the new space is an improved public service space and a conference
room. The basement location will still house much of the collections, while the most
used collections will be moved to the new space. The SLC received a $1.1 million grant
for the replacement of its environmental system in all three vaults and for the installation
of a fire suppression system in the vaults. Construction is also underway at SLC for a
new vault to house overflow instruments from the Sousa Archives.
It does appear that location, size, degree offerings, as well as the archive’s first
administer had an effect on the development of these archives. U of I and SIU both have
other historical sites and museums in the area for researchers, as well as leisure activities
should the researcher be inclined to partake of them. What person would not like to be
able to tack a day onto his or her stay in an area to explore some part of the area he or she
is visiting? Or maybe the researcher has brought along family to make the trip a
business/vacation. There is also an abundance of lodging in both areas, making attending
events like Homecoming easier for those who live out of state and want to return to their
alma mater and relive the history and traditions they hold so dear. That kind of support,
with some outreach from the archivist, leads to additions to collections. In U of I, the
hiring of a professional full-time archivist at the founding of the archives meant that
records were not left in boxes for some poor archivist in the future to find and deal with.
The records were instead processed according to archival protocol the first time.

52

CHAPTER IV
RECORDS LOST: THE NEED FOR AN ACTIVE
RECORDS MANAGEMENT PROGRAM

One thing that all these university archives have in common is the need to
preserve records of legal and historical value. Prior to having archives, the preservation
of those records was haphazard. Very few people think of the records they are creating in
the present from a future perspective. That letter from the university president to the
women’s dean discussing the women’s curfew, the resolution from the Student
Government calling for a full week’s break at Thanksgiving, the email from the dean of
the college to a chair discussing possible cuts in classes – the record creators knew that
any action resulting from those communications would have an effect on university life
but rarely believed that those letters, resolutions, or emails had value enough to be
preserved. The creators were thinking in the moment, creating a record for a specific
purpose, and once that purpose was complete, the record could be thrown out, placed in a
file, deleted (as in an electronic document or email), or just shoved in a drawer. The
amount of lost history from not preserving the day-to-day documentation of business is
incalculable.
There were people who did recognize the value of those records. Librarians,
secretaries, history professors, and administrators have preserved records over the years,
sometimes because they recognized their value, or because they wanted to preserve their

53

own, or someone else’s, legacy. Motivation was irrelevant in the long run; it was the
preservation of the records that was important. The creation of university archives gave a
home to those preserved records. While the environmental conditions were many times
far from perfect, as seen in Illinois State University’s (ISU) Williams Hall, the archives
provided a central location for important historical and legal records. Yet, there was
resistance. Departments, offices, and people hung onto their records, or destroyed
records that appeared to be past their usefulness without regard to their possible value.
Professors tossed their syllabi, and did not give a thought to depositing copies of their
articles and research written and conducted while employees of the university into the
archives. What was needed was an active records management program to educate
departments regarding the appropriate disposition of inactive records.
What exactly encompasses a records management program? Does that mean that
all records are kept in perpetuity? What about records containing confidential
information; will that information remain confidential? What kind of records are saved?
What constitutes a record? Why is a records management program necessary? How does
a records management program relate to the archives? Those would be typical questions
asked when the concept of a records management program is introduced.
A records management program is concerned with these records through their life
cycle – from their birth, through their useful lifespan, and when they are obsolete. As
part of a records management program, a retention schedule determines which records
have continuing historical or legal value and should be retained, how long the records
must be retained, and their disposition, i.e. are the records to be destroyed or should they
be sent to the archives. Following a records management program ensures that there are

54

“no gaps in the information which should be filed,” allowing for an administrative history
of a college, unit, department, or office, as well as efficient access to non-current records
as necessary.1
All the universities examined have some kind of records and information
management program (RIM). The State of Illinois notified the state universities in 1983
that the State Records Act (5 ILCS 160/1) applied to universities as well as other state
agencies.2 This act required that state agencies, not dispose of any records in violation of
the act, as the records are the property of the State of Illinois and are to be “to be
available for the use, benefit, and information of the citizens.”3 The records were to be
made and preserved “containing adequate and proper documentation of the organization,
functions, policies, decisions, procedures, and essential transactions of the agency4 The
agency, in this case the universities, “shall provide for effective controls over the
creation, maintenance, and use of records in the conduct of current business.” The
universities are required to appoint a records officer who will apply “standards,
procedures, and techniques to improve the management of records, promote the
maintenance and security of records deemed appropriate for preservation, and facilitate
the segregation and disposal of records of temporary value,” and “shall provide for
compliance” with the statute.5 This law also applies to electronic and “born digital”
records.
1

Margaret Cross Norton, “Services and Resources of an Archives,” in Norton on Archives: The Writings of
Margaret Cross Norton on Archival and Records Management, ed. Thornton W. Mitchell (Carbondale:
Southern Illinois University Press, 1975), 73.
2
“Administration and Consulting,” Southern Illinois University Records Management, accessed April 30,
2015, http://recordsmgmt.siu.edu/administration-and-consulting/index.html.
3
State Records Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes, ch. 5, no. 160, sec. 1.5 (2003), accessed May 4, 2015,
http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=86&ChapterID=2.
4
State Records Act, Illinois Compiled Statutes, ch. 5, no. 160, sec. 9 (2003), accessed May 4, 2015,
http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=86&ChapterID=2.
5
Ibid.

55

While the universities had established their archives as repositories for their
records, there were no policies in place besides instructions to check with the archivist
prior to destroying records. This statute made unauthorized destruction of records a Class
4 felony punishable by up to three years in prison. This spurred the universities to
establish record retention schedules so staff would know how long to keep records and
when the records could be archived, disposed of, or destroyed. The term “disposed of” is
vague, maybe purposefully so. It leaves it open whether the records are to be destroyed
or turned over to the archives. For example, in ISU’s records retention program, under
the heading Administrative Correspondence, the policy states that correspondence should
be kept in the office for three years. Then, it can be disposed of, with confidential
material being shredded or destroyed in some other secure manner. So, the term disposed
of gives some leeway for the archivist to go through the papers, retaining the
correspondence of historical, fiscal, or legal value. When Anderson retrieved records
from the Dean’s Office in the College of Arts and Sciences, a staff member had to sign a
form giving the records to the archives and stating that any unwanted material should be
returned to the office or destroyed by the archivist. Most university archives do not retain
confidential records like personnel files, faculty evaluations, or student grades due to
privacy issues. However, U of I, SIU, and EIU have some grades and evaluations within
various collections. ISU does not have any collections listed containing grades, but some
collections do contain program, course, faculty, and chair evaluations.
Southern Illinois University established its records retention program in 1990.6
ISU began crafting its records retention program to bring itself into compliance with state
law in 2006, and had an approved program by 2007. The University of Illinois
6

“Administration and Consulting,” Southern Illinois University Records Management.

56

established a task force in February 2010 to develop a policy, which the U of I delivered
in December, 2010. The records manager at Eastern Illinois University did not know
exactly when the program began there, but she stated that it was soon after the state
required it.7
The development of the programs is not the focus of this chapter, but rather the
condition of each program. According to the National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA), an effective RIM program requires senior management support;
a clear definition of program objectives, responsibilities, and authority; allocation of
sufficient resources to administer the program; assignment of the program to an
appropriate office within the agency’s organizational structure; continuous training for
records and information management staff; and regular interval evaluations to monitor
compliance and program effectiveness.”8
SIU’s record management program is a department in the university’s library,
under the direction of Michael Reiman. The program’s mission is to “provide a sound
records management program to ensure the University retains the necessary information
to meet legal, financial, administrative, research, and historical needs set forth in the State
Records Act, for the orderly gathering and processing of University information in the
most cost-effective manner.”9
A records management program also works in conjunction with the archives to
“maintain a vital records protection program”10 through a retention schedule. For
7

Cathy Kimball, interview by author, Charleston, IL, March 9, 2015.
“Records and Information Management Self-Evaluation Guide,” National Archives and Records
Administration, accessed May 4, 2015, http://www.archives.gov/records-mgmt/publications/records-andinformation-management-self-evaluation-guide.pdf.
9
“Welcome to Records Management,” Southern Illinois University Records Management, accessed May 5,
2015, http://recordsmgmt.siu.edu/.
10
“Administration and Consulting,” Southern Illinois University Records Management.
8

57

example: Val is the secretary for the College Council and is responsible for taking notes,
then creating the meeting minutes for each meeting. The creation of the meeting minutes
would be the birth of the record. Val then distributes the minutes to the council members,
posts them to the college website, and files the minutes in a folder for the 2014-2015
year. The minutes for that year remain in Val’s filing cabinet for five years as per ISU’s
retention schedule. This represents the use and maintenance of the record’s life cycle.
Every summer, Val goes through her files, while referring to the retention schedule to see
what can be removed and sent to the archives or shredded. In the summer of 2020, she
removes the file of meeting minutes from 2014-2015 and arranges to send it to the
archives for permanent retention, as per ISU’s retention schedule. This part is the
disposition of the record’s life cycle. An active records management program ensures
that records that should be retained in the university archives actually make it there in a
timely manner.
In SIU’s retention schedule there are ten units, with various departments listed
within that unit. The person charged with maintaining the office/department records has
to know to which unit the office/department reports. For example, if Susan works in the
History department and is ready to dispose of/archive records, she would find History’s
retention schedule within the Provost and Vice Chancellor unit. Each department is
responsible for its own records and for following the retention schedule that applies to
that department, but it is not mandatory for departments to dispose of or archive records
once their retention period has passed. Some departments do opt to hold onto their
records past their retention dates should staff have a need to reference them. An audit

58

completed last year placed the estimated compliance rate at 70 percent.11 It also revealed
that the university’s administrative side was proactive in following the retention
schedules, while the academic side was weak. Since the audit, Reiman states that the
academic side has been contacting the department for consultation services.12
With so much business and correspondence being conducted via email, the
archival profession is in the midst of determining how best to preserve and store
electronic records. In the meantime, SIU has forged its own policy regarding electronic
records. Electronic record retention is addressed in the Records Management Policy
Manual, available on the Records Management webpage. The Records Management
Department also provides guidance regarding email, having readily available information
from the Office of the Secretary of State regarding the state’s policy on what must be
retained and where it should be stored.
Besides providing consultation services, the Records Management Department
has a number of resources available on its website to provide guidance and instruction for
those responsible for departmental records. Checklists are provided for preparing records
for filming and imaging. Specific instructions regarding preparation of records for
disposal are provided, from the removal of staples to the size of the boxes accepted. Of
course, should staff have any questions, contact phone numbers and emails are also
provided.
EIU’s records management program is a department under the vice president for
business affairs. As the custodian of records, Cathy Kimball has the responsibility for
administering the program. The position was full-time from 1986 to 2001, until the first

11
12

Michael Reiman, interview by author, email, May 1, 2015.
Ibid.

59

custodian retired. The position then became part-time until Kimball assumed the position
in 2014, when it became full-time again. When she began, the record storage area was
not well organized. Kimball reorganized the area and used a barcode system to identify
boxes by department.
Kimball’s goals for the department are threefold: policy, training, and
enforcement.13 Her supervisor changed enforcement to encouragement, since disposing
of or archiving records that are past their retention period is not mandatory. To
encourage departments to consistently follow their retention schedules, Kimball provides
training to the departmental staff responsible for records – the Departmental Records
Coordinator (DRC) - and has a presentation for new employees during new employee
orientation.14
EIU’s Records and Information Management homepage provides users with the
definition of a record, as well as what constitutes a record with historical, archival, or
research value. Links are provided for other definitions, and to a webpage that describes
what RIM is and why it is important. It also states that “Each employee has an important
role to play in protecting the future of the organization by creating, using, retrieving, and
disposing of records in accordance with the organization’s established policies and
procedures.”15 The webpage includes instructions on how to manage email, how to name
and organize files, training materials for DRCs, retention schedules, instructions
regarding how to retrieve records, how to archive records, and best practices.
Regardless of whether the records are to be disposed of or archived, a fully

13

Kimball, interview.
Ibid.
15
“What is Records and Information Management,” Eastern Illinois University Records and Information
Management, accessed May 1, 2015, http://www.eiu.edu/recordsmanagement/what.php.
14

60

completed form must accompany the box. All forms are available on the RIM website
under the specific topic, i.e. “Record Disposal Request.” Instructions for completing the
form are available by clicking the “Records Disposal Request” tab on the left side of
homepage. The rest of the process is explained, including what to include in the email
that must be sent to the EIU Records Manager.
At U of I, the records and information management services (RIMS) unit is
located under the chief information officer, who reports to the vice president for
academic affairs. The university created a task force in 2010 that would
recommend a structure to deliver a set of services across the University that
[would] support the development and maintenance of policies related to the
management of data records and information resources created or received in the
course of transacting the business functions of the University; provide assistance
related to the management of these data, records, and information resources; [and]
ensure the capture, preservation, and future accessibility of data, records, and
information resources of enduring value.16
That task force recognized that an archivist alone would not be able to devote the amount
of time necessary to oversee an active records management program, and that “such a
program would…help to protect vital University records, limit legal liability, support the
preservation of historic records, promote scholarship and teaching excellence, improve
operational efficiencies, and increase efficiency in responding to requests for
information.”17 The task force recommended the creation of a RIMS program placed
under a top-level university executive that would work with the archivist and other
experts “to create and sustain shared services and a collaborative working environment
regarding records…”18

16

“Final Report,” Records and Information Management Services (RIMS) Task Force, University of
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana, accessed May 11, 2015, https://uofi.app.box.com/s/q96pqv6acgw0ri8fmz5y.
17
Ibid.
18
Ibid.

61

Joanne Kaczmarek is the director of the program at the main campus in
Champaign-Urbana. Other U of I campuses will not be discussed in this examination.
Kaczmarek has a staff that includes a coordinator, three assistant directors, and a business
and information management specialist. Its purpose is to “provide a cohesive approach to
the effective management of records and information resources throughout the University
of Illinois, across all departments and campuses.”19 The department’s objectives include
protecting vital U of I records by establishing records management plans for departments
and developing methods for “trustworthy and efficient purging of information
resources”;20 improving operational efficiencies by reducing duplication, streamlining
existing systems, and aligning U of I’s business practices with state laws and regulations;
and promoting scholarship and teaching excellence through preserving historic records,
standardizing policy development, and increasing “opportunities for collegial
collaboration around data management.”21
According to Kaczmarek, while it is desirable for units to consistently follow their
retention schedules, it is not mandatory.22 To encourage compliance, the RIMS team
provides training for units, as well as self-paced training modules available from their
webpage. Through their webpage, they provide a guide for records and information
management, policies regarding the preservation of electronic records and email,
information on scanning records, record retention schedules, storing inactive records,
how to transfer records to the archives, as well as decision trees to aid in scanning,
defining a record and the record disposal process. A comprehensive FAQ section covers
19

“Records and Information Management Services,” University of Illinois, accessed May 11, 2015,
https://www.uillinois.edu/cio/services/rims/.
20
“About RIMS,” University of Illinois, accessed May 11, 2015,
https://www.uillinois.edu/cio/services/rims/about_rims/.
21
Ibid.
22
Joanne Kaczmarek, interview by author, email, May 1, 2015.

62

the most commonly asked questions and other questions related to records management.
Illinois State University’s Records Management program is housed under the
provost’s office. Assistant Vice President for Academic Administration Salvatore
Catanzaro – the university records Officer – is “designated as the individual to whom
offices submit their Disposal Forms for signature before submission to the State Records
Commission.”23 No department for records management exists at ISU, so units manage
their own records. The administration believes that “keeping the management of records
decentralized minimizes administrative costs.”24
The homepage of the records management program consists of tabs at the top for
the President’s Office, Academic Affairs, University Advancement, Student Affairs,
Finance and Planning, Records Disposal Certificates, and Forms. The text explains the
Illinois State Records Act and the university’s process to become compliant with the act.
A link is provided for staff to learn how to use the site “to determine what to do with a
record.”25
Clicking on the link opens a Microsoft Word document titled, “How to Use this
Website to determine what to do with a Specific Record.” The first step instructs the user
to locate the document in the “Applications” section of the website. Going back to the
website, there is not an “Applications” tab. Where do I go to find “Applications?” In
clicking the tabs, I found an “Application Cover Page” in Word and as a PDF, which was
not what I was looking for as it was an application for records disposal. I decided to
begin clicking the tabs to find “University-Wide Documents,” which I did locate under

23

Salvatore Catanzaro, interview by author, email, May 14, 2015.
Ibid.
25
“Records Management,” Illinois State University, accessed May 4, 2015,
http://recordsmanagement.illinoisstate.edu/.
24

63

the president’s office tab. I was able to follow the instructions fairly easily and as I went
through them, I noticed a note that stated that University-Wide Documents were located
in the President’s Office.26 The document also states, in bold letters, “You are not
REQUIRED to dispose of records if the retention period has passed. You are
PERMITTED to dispose of them, according to the terms of the application and disposal
certificate.”27 It does caution that the university archivist should be consulted if there is
any doubt about whether a record should be sent to the university archives. Beyond the
contact information related in the instructional document, no other support or instructions
are provided on the webpage.
Since the State Records Act makes the unauthorized disposal of records a felony,
the four universities examined emphasize the legal disposal of non-current records. To
aid users, SIU, EIU, and U of I provide varying degrees of support and instruction
regarding record management, retention schedules, storage, and legal disposal. These
three also provide useful tools such as a definition for what constitutes a record, FAQs,
manuals and guides, new employee training, departmental training, and consultation
services to aid in efficient filing. The ISU records management program does not offer
any support beyond phone numbers and email addresses of the records officer and his
office support person. SIU, EIU, and U of I also have active electronic records
management systems to store and preserve emails, electronic records, and born-digital
records. These systems are still works in progress, but they are working to bring the
systems into compliance with the Government Electronic Records Act passed in 2010.
ISU’s Records Retention policy makes no mention of electronic records, yet state law is
26

“How to Use this Website to determine what to do with a Specific Record,” Illinois State University,
accessed May 4, 2015, http://recordsmanagement.illinoisstate.edu/.
27
Ibid.

64

very specific regarding retention schedules, databases, file formats for permanent
retention, storage media, access, backup copies, and how the records are identified. I
believe that if the state were to audit the university’s compliance with this law, the
university would be found non-compliant.
For example, according to law, electronic records are considered the same as nonelectronic records and should follow the same retention schedules. According to ISU’s
retention schedule, faculty evaluations are to be retained in the office for five years. This
includes the Department Chair evaluations. In the College of Arts and Sciences, this
evaluation is created online and the results are maintained in a survey platform, i.e.
SelectSurvey, SurveyMonkey, etc. Since the ballot and results constitute a “born digital”
record, both the ballot and the results should be treated as if they were hard copy and held
for five years, and, after seeking and receiving permission from the State Records
Commission, should be destroyed. The office has maintained those records in the survey
platform, but only because office staff had previous knowledge of the records
management program. If that had not been the case, staff may have seen no reason to
keep past results and may have deleted them, which, according to Illinois law, is a felony.
Yet, if there is no information provided to new employees in an office manual or in an
orientation, how are they to be aware that there is a records management program?
There is a plan in the works through ISU’s LEAPForward initiative, which began
in 2013. ISU is also the only one of the universities examined that specifically informs
users that they are not required to dispose of records. While the disposal of non-current
records is not required by state law, Robert Chayse Boots, archival program director for
the Illinois State Archives, stated that “from a risk management perspective, it is

65

recommended that agencies dispose of their records as soon as their life-cycle has been
met, and an approved Disposal Certificate has been provided through this office.”28 SIU,
EIU, and U of I records management programs actively encourage departments to follow
the retention schedule through support and training. ISU’s records management program
does nothing to encourage departments to follow the retention schedule.
Why be concerned with the disposal of non-current records? First, disposing of
the appropriate records saves money and space. As records accumulate in an office, file
cabinets become full, requiring the purchase of more filing cabinets. The more filing
cabinets an office has, the less space it has. Eventually, the office would be forced to
move the overflowing cabinets to another space, possibly a nearby room. In a university,
classroom and office space is normally at a premium. To use a room to store records that
would otherwise be destroyed is wasting limited resources.
Second, disposal of non-current records is more efficient. If a Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) request came through, wading through years and years, and files
and files of unimportant records to find that one record, even in the most organized filing
system, would be a daunting task. Being able to quickly and efficiently pull the pertinent
record for the FOIA request would please the General Counsel or whichever office
handles those requests and save the university from a lawsuit. If the archives received a
FOIA request for a record that should have been in the archives, but was not, that request
would have to be routed to the appropriate office, and that office had better have that
information, or be in violation of state law.
Third, disposal of non-current records protects vital information. Student records,
personnel files, student disciplinary records, as well as other records contain confidential
28

Robert Chayse Boots, interview by author, email, May 14, 2015.

66

information that cannot be released without permission, if at all. Departments would not
want to permanently store these records in their space, and they cannot be haphazardly
dumped into a trash can after their lifecycle is complete, nor can the archives take them
because of privacy issues. A good records management program indicates how the
records are to be disposed of, usually by shredding.
While the retention schedules guide departments and offices through the disposal
process, they also guide them in what should be preserved permanently by maintaining
the records in the department indefinitely, transferring the records to the archives, or
sometimes both. While the reasons for preserving records may seem straight forward,
office staff may not think beyond the record’s current use.
Of course, records have historical value. For a university, records preserve
institutional memory. The letters of past presidents, the scorebooks, shot charts, and
programs from ISU’s basketball, football and baseball teams coached by Joseph T.
Cogdal from 1927 through 1965, student election results, and syllabi from professors all
add to institutional memory.
Besides historical value, records have legal, fiscal, and evidential value. A FOIA
request for a record that had been destroyed when it should have been preserved would
most certainly be costly to the university. Personnel files, budget files, search files for
open positions, disciplinary files, contracts, and other such records are important to have
readily available for a period of time should accusations of wrongdoing arise. These files
documenting procedures and agreements are valuable evidence in an investigation or
lawsuit.
Why are offices and departments not disposing or archiving their records? Lack

67

of personnel is the main reason Michael Reiman hears from SIU’s departments.29 At
EIU, Cathy Kimball hears that the departments “need the information.”30 She
acknowledges that may be true, but questions how much records that are five or six years
old or older are needed. Some departments want to keep them forever.31 She, like
Reiman, also hears that there just are not enough staff to do the job.

But, records with

long-term value can be sent to the State Records Center and can be retrieved with twentyfour hour notice.32 While the task is daunting at first when viewing file cabinets full of
years’ worth of records, once the initial task of organizing, boxing and labeling files past
their retention date has been completed, a time-consuming endeavor in the first year, the
task need only be performed once per year after that. SIU, EIU and U of I all provide
guidance, training, and consultation in organizing and maintaining filing structures to aid
the process.
Why is the records management program at ISU not promoted? I am able to
speak from experience regarding the lack of promotion of the program at ISU. When I
first started at ISU in 2007, no mention was made of any record management program in
my orientation. My office, Community Rights and Responsibilities – the student conduct
office - kept paper files on all students and organizations with disciplinary records. There
were six five-drawer lateral file cabinets, 67 inches tall and 42 inches wide, full of files.
We were running out of space and needed to either get rid of records or obtain more file
cabinets. The coordinator mentioned that we could dispose of some of the records – the
ones that were seven years old or older - once we had permission from the associate dean.
29

Reiman, interview.
Kimball, interview.
31
Ibid.
32
“Records Management Reference Manual for Illinois State Government Agencies, 2014,” Illinois
Secretary of State, Illinois Archives, Records Management Division, 8.
30

68

We eventually received permission to dispose of records that were seven or more years
old, except for suspension and dismissal records, which were kept indefinitely. A few
more years went by, and we were once again facing a space shortage. By that time, I had
stumbled across the University Archives while investigating what I could do with Student
Government records, so I began searching for some sort of direction as to what to do with
university records. That’s when I came across ISU’s records management program and
the retention schedule. I found out that we were keeping discipline files two years too
long. While for some records, that may not matter; for discipline records, it could make
the difference of a student getting hired, as the FBI, CIA, and other agencies frequently
asked for disciplinary histories. We were disclosing information that should have been
destroyed, according to the retention schedule. If I had not searched for this information,
I never would have been aware that ISU had a records management program and the
office would have continued to release student conduct information that should have been
destroyed. I left the office shortly after that discovery, and the error has since been
corrected. If the records management program had been promoted and adhered to, this
would not have happened.
The question remains, why has the state not made following the retention
schedules mandatory for state agencies?

69

CHAPTER V
COMPARISON OF THE UNIVERSITIES
According to the Society of American Archivists (SAA), “an effective archival
program requires a mandate from the president or governing board that authorizes the
archivist to identify records of enduring value, document their physical location, preserve
them, and establish methods of control that provide ready and consistent access to
archival holdings.”1 For all four of the archives, those holdings include not only
university records, but also records of local, regional, and state significance that have
been donated to and accepted by the university archives, although April Anderson is
trying to find new homes for the collections that fall outside of the scope of university
records. To meet these measures, an archive must have resources such as professional
and support staff, facilities to house the collections in a safe and secure environment, an
adequate budget for personnel, supplies, and equipment, and also a “technologically
current environment.”2
The ISU archives was officially founded by President Samuel E. Braden on
March 31, 1970 as a repository for official university records. The archivist position was
a part-time position until Anderson, ISU’s first full-time archivist, started in 2011. ISU
archives also employs a full-time archivist assistant who does much of the processing.
There is also a part-time position for a
1

“Guidelines for College and University Archives,” Society of American Archivists, accessed May 21,
2015, http://www2.archivists.org/node/14801.
2
Ibid.

70

graduate student, and plenty of projects for interns and volunteers.
For Southern Illinois University and Eastern Illinois University, it is unclear
whether their archives were established from a presidential mandate. Neither archive had
much information pertaining to the history of their respective archives. It appears likely
that SIU’s archives did at some point receive authority from its president or board of
trustees since its stated mission is the preservation of “the academic, athletic and
administrative legacy of the university from 1874 to the present.”1 EIU seems to have
developed from the need to organize information for the university’s centennial, even
though there had been an archivist prior to that time. Whether its president ever
mandated its existence as a repository for its records is unknown. Both archives had
part-time archivists who had other library or special collection duties outside of archives.
SIU’s archivist position became full-time in 2005, and included teaching duties, which is
not uncommon. EIU’s archivist position remains part-time. EIU and SIU have no other
full-time staff for their archives. Both universities have graduate student help, but EIU’s
graduate students are not able to process collections, due to the small amount of time the
interim archivist is in the archives to provide supervision. On occasion, there are classes
that take on a processing project for EIU’s archives.
U of I’s archives were formally established in 1963. U of I had a full-time
professional archivist – as opposed to a librarian – in 1963, before the majority of
colleges and universities had even established archives. Only 9 percent of colleges and
universities in the United States and Canada employed professional archivists in 1966,2
making their archival development at that time atypical. U of I has an assistant archivist,
1

“University Archives Collection,” Morris Library, Southern Illinois University, accessed May 21, 2015,
http://www.lib.siu.edu/university-archives
2
Warner, “The Status of College and University Archives,” 235.

71

an electronic records archivist, a reference archivist, an archival reference and operations
specialist, as well as two visiting archival reference and operations specialists. Again, U
of I is atypical of colleges and universities, as less than one-third of college and
university archives had more than one full-time professional, according to a 1980 survey
of college and university archives.3
Safeguarding records from theft, damage, and destruction is a primary concern for
archivists. That is why security in an archives is an essential component of archival
management. Security includes such things as proper storage of records, protection from
fire, water, insects, and rodents, proper environmental conditions, and of course, theft.
But archivists have to balance record safety and security with public access. The SAA
has set standards for archival facilities. The standards provide guidance on fire
protection, security, materials and finishes, lighting, functional spaces, and equipment, as
well as for site evaluation and construction.4 The conditions found currently in each
archives will be summarized and compared to the standards set by the SAA. The
standards are in the midst of revisions, but most of the information has not changed. If
the information is in the revision process, it will be noted.
Like many institutional archives, all the university archives examined were first
housed in spare spaces in university library basements, barely adapted to suit their
function. It was not uncommon for water and heating pipes to run through these spaces,
leaking and damaging records. Environmental controls were the same as those for the
library, with little to no ability to control temperature and humidity levels apart from the
3

Nicholas C. Burckel and Frank Cook, “A Profile of College and University Archives in the United
States,” American Archivist 45, no 4 (October 1982): 415.
4
“Archival and Special Collections Facilities: Guidelines for Archivists, Librarians, Architects, and
Engineers,” Society of American Archivists, accessed May 21, 2015,
http://www2.archivists.org/category/standards-type/guidelines.

72

library conditions. Security beyond controlling stack access depended largely upon
security within the library.
Since that time, the ISU archives moved from its former location on campus in
what is now Williams Hall to its current location on Warehouse Road in 2008. The
facility, while superior to the former location, is not the ideal location. The warehouse is
built on a slab that has sunk over the years, making conditions right for water to seep in
under the doors due to poor drainage. The SAA guidelines state that “all walls, ceilings,
and floors of stacks must be constructed of masonry” to ensure the best fire protection.5
The building housing the archives is a metal warehouse. The floors are concrete, but the
walls are of corrugated metal and one section of the interior wall is a conventional wall
with wooden studs and particle board. Ceiling-mounted water sprinklers provide fire
suppression. The facility has been home to mice and other rodents, a condition which is
constantly monitored by staff. As for environmental controls, humidity sensors are
placed among the stacks and read on a daily basis. However, to control temperature and
humidity, facilities must be called, and even they are limited in their ability to keep levels
within acceptable ranges.
Security at the ISU archives is adequate. The building itself is locked at 4:00
p.m., and security patrols periodically throughout the night. The archives area is separate
from the rest of the warehouse and offices, and is locked, with only three people having a
key. Maintenance and cleaning staff must request access. The records area in the
archives is surrounded by tall wire fencing and access is gained through either a
padlocked gate or a locked doorway set into the fencing. There is also a security camera
in the stack area. The overhead doors, which give access to the archives’ side of the
5

Ibid., 22.

73

building, are secured with sensors and padlocks. There are no windows in the archives
area. While only staff have access to the stacks and must bring requested records to the
reading room, the reading room itself is isolated from view of staff. SAA guidelines state
that the reading room should be “designed to provide clear supervision of all researchers
by archives staff and/or monitors and contain as few visual barriers as possible.”6 Since
the arrangement does not allow this, security cameras are installed in the reading room,
feeding to Milner Library. Sensors and motion detectors are on the rolling overhead
doors. Handles have also been removed from emergency exit doors and replaced with
inside crash bars to prevent the ability to pry those doors open with a crow bar. The
building also has two separate alarm systems, one for the warehouse and one for the
archive offices.
ISU is not alone in having an archival repository that does not meet SAA
recommendations. EIU’s archival facility is the least acceptable for meeting
recommended environmental conditions. Water pipes run through the archives,
increasing the odds of water damage to the collections. There is also no fire suppression
system in the archives, nor are there smoke alarms within the vault itself. “If the library
goes, the archives are going with it,” stated interim archivist Bill Schultz.7 There are
humidity sensors located on the shelving throughout the vault, and temperature and
humidity can be adjusted by facilities staff. The floor is concrete, but with a wooden
platform down the middle aisle. Wood and wood composites are not recommended
flooring material as wood can attract pests such as termites, and can also emit “volatile

6
7

Ibid., 39.
Schultz, interview.

74

acids” and formaldehyde, which will oxidize to form formic acid.8
Since EIU’s archives is located within the library, security staff are present,
providing adequate security. The doors to the archives department are locked, as is the
vault. There are no windows in the basement facility, further enhancing security.
However, the door to the department is constructed of glass and wood, and there are
boxes of unprocessed records unsecured in the hallway and other accessible rooms. The
records in these areas, some stored in cardboard boxes, are not subject to the same
environmental controls as those in the vault. The small reading area is clearly visible to
staff, and access to the vault is limited to the archivist.
SIU’s facilities are newer, with renovations completed in 2009. The floors are
concrete in the basement and in the second floor stacks, but linoleum in the first floor
stacks, a material not recommended for use in an archives since it is “often finished with
polyurethane and is installed using adhesives,”9 emitting gases that are damaging to
holdings. The ceilings are concrete, but the walls in all the stacks are drywall with wood
framing, something the SAA discourages due to flammability.
SIU has surveillance cameras in the reading room and at the entrance to the
department. There are also a series of locked doors that are designed to prevent access to
the area after operating hours. To access the department, a visitor must enter through the
Hall of Presidents and Chancellors. That door locks automatically at 4:30 p.m. Then, the
door to enter the department also locks automatically at 4:30 p.m., and only those with a
key fob can gain access after that time. The first floor stacks can only be accessed
through a locked door in the processing room, which also is locked. An elevator is the
8

“Archival and Special Collections Facilities: Guidelines for Archivists, Librarians, Architects, and
Engineers.” 104.
9
Ibid.,106.

75

only access to the second floor stacks and the basement stacks. The elevator, which must
be operated with an access fob, is also in the processing room. The processing room is
the most vulnerable of the rooms, as it faces an exterior wall and is lined with large
windows. However, if an intruder were to gain entry to the processing room, there would
be no easy access to the stacks.
U of I’s main archives and visitor space were upgraded in May 2015. New
stationary shelving holds the most used collections. The floor in the new space is
linoleum, which is not recommended. The walls are drywall, with interior walls having
wooden studs. Office furniture and equipment are housed in the same area, which the
SAA advises against due to the furniture’s combustibility and the equipment’s potential
for igniting a fire. The archives’ original basement location where much of the collection
will remain is better in some ways and worse in others. The floor, ceiling, and walls are
concrete. However, water pipes run through the area and tend to leak. When I visited the
archives, plastic sheeting was draped over some of the stacks to prevent damage from
leaking pipes. Being on the basement level, they every once in a while have water
seepage, but since the stacks are a few inches off the floor, the water does not pose a
threat. Environmental controls, on the other hand, were nearly impossible to manage.
The space opened into the reading area, with no doorways. The reading area had to be
kept at a comfortable temperature for patrons, which was not the best for the collections.
Humidity levels were also difficult to keep within acceptable levels, even with the sensor
data. Facilities could make adjustments, but as with the other archives, they could do
little to keep both temperature and humidity stable.
The Student Life and Culture Archives (SLC), while in a space not specifically

76

designed for archives, has one of the best facilities. The archives vaults are all concrete –
walls, floor, and ceiling. Since they were originally built to store apples, the vaults
remain cool throughout the seasons. Even so, the building had to be retrofitted to provide
adequate temperature and humidity control. Humidity sensors are placed throughout the
stacks and are read on a daily basis. Water has not been an issue in the vaults and no
pipes run through the vaults. However, this means that there was not a fire suppression
system within the vaults. That will soon be rectified by a $1.1 million grant to upgrade
the environmental system and install a fire suppression system in the vaults.
Security at the main U of I archives is similar to the other archives examined, with
locked doors, limited access, and security patrols. Other security measures are in place,
but, at the request of archivist William Maher, the specifics of U of I’s archival security
will not be discussed. At the SLC security of the records is “an issue,” according to Ellen
Swain.10 The building is shared with Public Archeology, Facilities and Service, and the
Sousa Archives, meaning that there are four different groups who must have access to the
building. Facilities opens the building at 7 a.m. and is supposed to lock it up between
5:15 p.m. and 6:00 p.m. However, Swain has had to call Facilities to come lock the
building on some days, as it had been 8:00 p.m. and it had not been locked yet. All
archives spaces are locked, including offices, storage rooms, work rooms, and the like,
and remain locked throughout the day until staff need access.11 Archives staff have
access to the keys during the day, but the keys are locked up at night in a secure location.
Four archivists have a key to access the key box, and three have a key to the building.
Spare keys are locked away in an undisclosed location. The library keeps a record of all

10
11

Swain, interview.
Ibid.

77

employees who have keys assigned to them. The area is patrolled by University Police,
and may be more heavily patrolled than other archives, as SLC is next to the President’s
house and to student housing. The budget issue raised its head in SLC’s attempt to make
the archives more secure. After a break-in in 2012, Swain and administrators
investigated getting an alarm system. Lack of funds prevented the purchase and
installation of a system.
Funding has historically been a problem for many university archives. Of course,
an adequate budget varies according to need – what may be adequate for the university
archives at EIU may not be adequate for U of I. ISU’s archives does not have its own
budget line, nor do any of the other universities examined. The budgets are part of the
overall library budget, so rather than Anderson receiving, for example, $100,000 to spend
throughout the year, she has to stand in line at the trough in the hope of being able to
receive monies for need-based extras such as mobile shelving. This is not unusual for
institutional archives to have their budgets subsumed into their parent unit. According to
a 1985 archival institution census, only 42 percent of all academic archives surveyed
reported that they had separate budgets.12
Funding for these university archives can be tied to the size of the university and
the age of the archives. U of I is the largest university examined, having over 44,000
students, and has the oldest established archives. They also have had a full-time archivist
longer than any of the other universities. Their active records management program
funnels non-current records, both paper and electronic, to the archives to document the
administrative and cultural history of departments, colleges, registered student

12

Paul Conway, “Perspectives on Archival Resources: The 1985 Census of Archival Institutions,”
American Archivist 50, no. 2 (Spring 1987): 180.

78

organizations, athletics, and alumni.
ISU, having a total enrollment of just over 20,200 students, and an archive
officially founded in 1970, finally realized the value of its archives in 2011 when the
university hired a full-time professional archivist. The library administration found funds
to not only hire a full-time archivist, but also an archivist assistant, recognizing that the
job entailed not just processing but also outreach. Having an assistant freed Anderson to
be able to conduct outreach activities. However, while the university values its “fun”
history – old photographs and memorabilia – its records management program, or lack
thereof, indicates that university administration believe saving administrative costs is
more important than preserving administrative history. But how much is truly being
saved? Rather than being able to build the archival holdings by focusing her outreach on
alumni, and former faculty and staff, Anderson must spend much of her outreach time
gathering records that should already be going to the archives regularly through the
records management program.
SIU, while a bit smaller than ISU, with an enrollment of nearly 18,000 students,
hired a professional archivist in 1965, five years prior to ISU, but only two years after U
of I. While the archival duties at SIU were only a portion of the position, the position
was filled with a professional archivist, not a librarian or a rare books specialist or a
history professor. This put the archives ahead of ISU developmentally, so when the
archivist position at SIU became full-time, that archivist did not have to go back and
reprocess collections. Their archives also contains records from a wider array of
departments than ISU due to its active records management program, and the collection
of electronic records for the archives can also be attributed to its records management

79

program.
The only archive that would qualify as substantially underfunded is EIU, which is
the smallest of the universities examined with just under 8,900 students. It is evident that
the archives does not receive an adequate amount of funding, given that the previous
archivist was only part-time, and interim archivist Schultz is quarter-time. Schultz was
not sure how long he would serve as interim archivist and had doubts as to whether EIU
would even hire a new archivist. While their records management program, faculty, and
staff send records to the archives, there is no one to process them and make those records
available for research. The Keep, EIU’s online institutional repository, receives more
support than the EIU’s archives, and with more staff and modern equipment, is better
funded.
Technology-wise, ISU archives lags behind both U of I and SIU archives, which
have the ability to receive and preserve electronic records as well as paper records. In the
area of electronic records, ISU also lags behind EIU. While EIU’s records management
program collects electronic records, that ability has not filtered down to the archives due
to the inadequate funding and staffing of the archives. If EIU ever does put more money
into its archive, the electronic records will be there, should the university choose to house
them there. However, with funding, staff, and technology already in place, it seems more
likely that The Keep will house the electronic records. As of now, ISU does not have a
program in place for the collection or preservation of electronic records, but a plan is in
the works and should be up and running by December 2015.
Comparing the four archives to the SAA standards for an adequate archives, all
the archives examined fall short in one way or another. That being said, both U of I and

80

SIU come the closest to that ideal, while ISU lags behind in the technology area. EIU’s
archives, both the traditional archives and The Keep, do not come anywhere near being
an adequate archive in any of the categories listed by the SAA.
Moving on now from what physically makes an adequate archive to archival
processes, I will explore various processing theories and if and how each archivist uses
those theories in processing the collections. I will then examine how the archivists utilize
various forms of outreach to engage users and promote their respective holdings.
There are multiple ways collections can be processed, each with its own
advantages and disadvantages. No one way is the correct way, but there are minimum
standards for processing a collection – respect des fonds, provenance, and original order.
Respect des fonds refers to the individual, family, or organization that created the
records, while provenance refers to the history of ownership of the items or records.
Basically, records from the university president’s office will remain separate from
records from a vice president’s office, and so on, even if some of the records are
regarding the same topic. Original order is the arrangement of records that has been
established by the creator. This does not mean that if the archivist receives a file
crammed full of correspondence from the Dean of the College of Arts and Sciences that
the correspondence has to remain in that same order. It does mean that that file of
correspondence stays intact, with the contents having been arranged in a logical order, if
the archivist so chooses. As the SAA states, “The principle of respect for original order
does not extend to respect for original chaos.”13 Both ISU archivist Anderson and SIU
archivist Gorzalski will rearrange records to bring order to records if there is none.

13

“Glossary,” Society of American Archivists, accessed May 20, 2015,
http://www2.archivists.org/glossary/terms/o/original-order.

81

Not all archivists agree with the idea of creating an artificial order. U of I
archivist William J. Maher stated that “archivists do not rearrange the material they
receive to create the illusion of greater accessibility or rationality in the records because
doing so would violate the integrity and meaning of the records.”14 While archival theory
can and does evolve – Maher’s book was published in 1992 – in Understanding Archives
and Manuscripts, published in 2006, James M. O’Toole and Richard J. Cox stated, “the
archivist accepts the order and arrangement the records already have, rather than trying to
make one up after the fact.”15 This is in direct conflict with the SAA’s views. Neither is
necessarily incorrect; it is up to the individual archivist to choose which way a collection
is processed. If a collection is a high-use or high-profile collection, an archivist may
choose to spend the time putting order to a folder of unorganized records; if it is not, the
record folder may stay in the same arrangement as it was received. Regardless of
whether the archivist chooses to organize records within a folder or not, these records are
never to be mixed with records from another creator, or in with another folder within
those records. The only exception to that would be if the record was obviously misfiled,
such as if a press release from President Bowman regarding presidential scholar award
recipients was filed in with athletic director candidate records.
From the outside, processing archival records takes little more effort than
receiving a box of records, looking over the records in case records have been misfiled,
then putting the box on a shelf. In reality, the next step in arranging records, the
arrangement and description of the records, is where archival theory varies as widely as

14

William J. Maher, The Management of College and University Archives (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press,
Inc., 1992), 76.
15
James M. O’Toole and Richard J. Cox, Understanding Archives and Manuscripts (Chicago: Society of
American Archivists, 2006), 104.

82

archivists themselves. The first step is accessioning the records. Usually, an accession
record is created, which notes the records' date, title, the extent, condition, transferring
office or donor, any conservation needs, and any access restrictions. Some archives will
make that information available in their online database, if one exists, to inform users that
the collection exists in an unprocessed form at the archives.
Accessioning is standard practice, laying “the basis for most of the subsequent
handling of records and manuscripts.”16 An archives will have some sort of accession
record, even if it exists only as a paper record. Funding, staffing, backlog and the
importance of the record group play a role in whether the record group is made available
in an online database. For example, EIU has a very limited online database due to
funding, staffing, and backlog. Much of the archival collection is not available to be
searched in its online database, and they make that known with a note on their webpage
stating that “inventory lists are available at the Archives,” indicating that there are more
collections available, but the list is in hardcopy only.17 There is no list of accessioned
records available online. U of I, SIU, and ISU have at least some of their accessioned
records online as unprocessed material. The amount of accessioned unprocessed records
for these institutions depends more on staffing, backlog, and the importance of the record
group than on funding.
The next step is arrangement and description. There are numerous methods of
arranging and describing record groups. Archivists usually use a combination of methods
to arrange and describe their holding, sometimes within one record group. The idea is to
get collections processed as efficiently and thoroughly as possible to both preserve the
16

Maher, The Management of College and University Archives,” 69.
Booth Library, University Archives, Eastern Illinois University, accessed May 21, 2015,
http://www.library.eiu.edu/archives/.
17

83

collections and to make them available for use.
The National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) lays out the
traditional method of processing collections. When processing a collection, NARA
recommends removing metal fasteners, unless those fasteners are stainless steel due to
the damage that could be caused to the documents from these objects rusting.18 They also
recommend transferring records to acid-free folders if there is any question as to the type
of folder already housing the records.19 O’Toole and Cox stated that folded documents
should be flattened out, and rusting staples and paper clips be removed.20 But going
through a collection, whether small or large, and removing those items is a timeconsuming task. The archivist must go item by item to ensure there are no items that
could be damaging to the records and that all folded records have been flattened. This is
basically arrangement at the folder level, something that archival authors since the mid1960s have dismissed as “having little utility and being thoroughly impractical for
modern collections.”21 Yet, how else is an archivist to accomplish those tasks?
At both the ISU and SIU archives, Anderson and Gorzalski follow the traditional
method of processing, and rarely have collections described at the item level. The only
time that type of processing would occur would be if the collection was high-profile
collection. Most of the collections are described at the folder level, although some
collections, such as the June Rose Colby papers in the ISU archives, appear to be
processed at the item level while in actuality they are processed at the folder level. This
18

National Archives and Records Administration, Preservation of Archival Records: Holdings
Maintenance at the National Archives, Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler, Technical Information Paper Number 6
(1990), accessed May4, 2015, http://www.archives.gov/preservation/holdings-maintenance/.
19
Ibid.
20
O’Toole and Cox, 104.
21
Mark A. Greene and Dennis Meissner, “More Product, Less Process: Revamping Traditional Archival
Processing,” American Archivist 68, no. 2 (September 2005): 213.

84

is because each manuscript in the collection has its own folder.
Weeding is another time-consuming, labor-intensive task. Weeding is the
removal of materials that have no archival value. Some weeding is done during appraisal
when the archivist first inspects the materials. There may be records that the archivist is
unable to take, such as employee evaluations. These records would be removed before
the archivist takes possession of the records. Maher suggests that any weeding done
during processing should be done at the folder level.22 Yet Maher seems to contradict
himself when discussing preservation. One of the steps he includes along with removing
fasteners, and refoldering in acid-free folders is “weeding of duplicate and nonarchival
documents.”23 It is difficult to weed out duplicate and nonarchival documents if
processing is not done at the item level. The amount of weeding done again depends on
the collection and on the archivist. However, if an office follows the retention schedule
provided by the records management program, much of the weeding would be complete
before the archivist receives the records. That, of course, would not be the case for
donated records, say a professor’s papers. The archivist would then have the task of
sorting through those papers and removing duplicates and non-historical papers, like a
phone message that stated, “Call Bill.”
Description is “the creation of an accurate representation of the archival material
by the process of capturing, collating, analyzing, and organizing information that serves
to identify archival material and to explain the context and records systems that produced
it, as well as the results of these processes.”24 One of the principles of description is that

22

Maher, The Management of College and University Archives,” 49.
Ibid., 115-116.
24
Society of American Archivists, Describing Archives: A Content Standard, (Chicago: Society of
American Archivists, 2013), xvi.
23

85

the level of description corresponds to the level of arrangement. So, if an archivist
chooses to describe a collection to the item level, the collection should be arranged at the
item level. Accordingly, if a collection is described at the box level, the collection should
have been arranged at the box level. However, as has been shown previously, collections
are many times arranged at the item level through weeding and preservation, but these
collections are still described at the folder level.
Unless sufficiently staffed to handle such laborious processes, it is inevitable that
an archive will have a backlog of collections to process. In archives such as U of I, EIU,
and SIU where records come into the archives on a regular basis, incoming records and
collections will far outnumber the number of records and collections being processed,
leading to an ever-growing backlog. In a 2003-2004 survey of repositories, Mark A.
Greene and Dennis Meissner found that 34 percent of repositories stated that over half of
their holdings were not processed, and another 60 percent stated nearly a third of their
holding were unprocessed.25 Another outcome from the survey was that 90 percent of the
repositories weed duplicates, which brings processing down to the item level,26 and 85
percent refolder records in acid-free folders.27 The Greene/Meissner survey also found
that 82 percent of repositories “sometimes, usually, or always create finding aids with
collection- and series-level descriptions; 76 percent create finding aids with a biography
or administrative history; and 74 percent create container lists with folder-level content
description.”28
Greene and Meissner connected backlog to the traditional processing method and

25

Greene and Meissner, 210.
Ibid., 215.
27
Ibid., 230.
28
Ibid., 230.
26

86

proposed a more efficient processing method than the traditional method of processing.
They believed that those labor-intensive, time-consuming processes hampered archivists
from efficiently processing collections and making them available to users. Their
guidelines “[expedite] getting collection materials in the hands of users, [assure]
arrangement of materials adequate to user needs, [take] the minimal steps necessary to
physically preserve collection materials, [and describe] materials sufficient to promote
use.”29 Rather than taking the large amount of time to remove fasteners, the authors
advise leaving them and housing the records in a repository with proper climate control,
where “with good climate control, metal fasteners should not rust.”30 As for refoldering
collections in acid-free folders, something NARA holds as an essential component of
preserving records,31 Greene and Meissner note that “no studies have been done on the
effect that standard manila folders have on collection material when stored in proper
environmental conditions,” nor have any studies been conducted on the effect of buffered
folders when stored in the proper environmental conditions.32 Thus, do archivists spend
time on a process that may or may not significantly affect records?
In working with collections in the ISU archives, I have seen some collections,
such as a container from the Berlo collection, where the staples were not removed. While
I was processing the records of the Student Government Association as a project in the
Archives and Manuscripts class, Anderson instructed me to remove all paper clips and
staples and replace them, if necessary, with plastic paper clips. Why the difference in
processes? It depends on the archivist and the condition of the fasteners. Some archivists
29

Ibid., 212.
Ibid., 231.
31
National Archives and Records Administration, Preservation of Archival Records: Holdings
Maintenance at the National Archives.
32
Greene and Meissner, 231.
30

87

insist that all potentially damaging fasteners be removed. Others, like Anderson, have the
fasteners removed if they are already rusted or pose an imminent threat to the records.
The Student Government collection was fairly small, only two linear feet, but had
fasteners that were rusting, hence the need to remove them. With having to remove
fasteners, weed the records, and create order out of chaos, it took me a minimum of two
months working five hours per week, along with the two or three days when I was able to
spend seven hours processing. So, I estimate that it took me a minimum of 54 hours to
process a collection of 2 linear feet.
U of I follows the practice Greene and Meissner laid out, More Product, Less
Process (MPLP), although according to Maher, the university was processing collections
using minimal processing under archivist Maynard Brichford in the 1960s. As a result,
their backlog is small for the size and number of records and collections they receive. In
a review of their database, descriptions and finding aids for some of the collections were
by item, such as the Folke Dovring Papers. A few were topical, like the Robert D.
Carmichael papers, with box numbers following the topic indicating which box or boxes
contained the information. Still others, like the Robert Gehlmann Bone collection at U of
I, are described at the box level.
What implications did the survey find regarding description? Since the goal is to
“maximize the accessibility of collection materials to users,” Greene and Meissner
believe that “arrangement, preservation, and description should all work in harmony.”33
This means that if an archivist intends to describe a collection at the series level then the
collection should not have any arrangement or preservation done at any other level. For
example, archivist Anna Adams received six linear feet of records from the Dean’s Office
33

Ibid, 240.

88

of the College of Arts and Sciences. The records can be organized into three categories –
awards, finances, and programs. Each of those categories would be a series. Adams
wants to make this collection available as soon as possible, so she decides to describe this
to the series level. The only arrangement, preservation, or description done would be on
that same level. However, Adams decides that the awards series should be processed to
the folder level so users would be aware of the various awards like Outstanding College
Researcher and Outstanding College Teacher. Adams is certainly able to do that, and she
would arrange, preserve, and describe the awards series down to the folder level.
One drawback to using minimal processing would come in the descriptive aspect.
With only a general description of the collection, researchers would know that the
collection is available but would not know if the collection contained the information
needed. Hopefully, the researcher would make an inquiry regarding the collection and
reference staff would then have to sort through the collection to obtain an answer about
contents. That process would take a bit more time for the researcher and for reference
staff, but if the collection had not been made available, the researcher would not have
known it was out there. But just because a collection has been minimally processed does
not mean that it has to remain that way. Should backlog decrease significantly, or if there
is substantial interest in the collection, it can then be processed more thoroughly.
In Anderson’s process, description and the creation of a finding aid are tied
together. A finding aid is “a single document that places the materials in context by
consolidating information about the collection, such as acquisition and processing;
provenance, including administrative history or biographical note; scope of the collection,
including size, subjects, media; organization and arrangement; and an inventory of the

89

series and the folders.”34 The finding aid is written in EAD (Encoded Archival
Description) and once completed, is added to the webpage. It then becomes searchable.
Anderson’s backlog comes mainly from the fact the most of the collections had not been
processed or were processed incorrectly. She also had to start from scratch when creating
her finding aids and putting them online.
SIU also uses EAD, much like ISU. Gorzalski describes collections usually to the
folder level, but if photographs are part of the collection, such as the College of
Agricultural Sciences collection, the collection is also described at the item level. Most
of the other collections, such as the Graduate Council collection, are described to the
folder level. Gorzalski attributes his backlog to lack of staffing rather than to the method
of processing.
U of I’s archives, all three of them, write finding aids using EAD. However, if
there is more detailed description at the folder level for older collections, there is a
downloadable PDF containing that description. Having had an archivist from the outset,
the collections were processed correctly, and all that had to be done was write the EAD
finding aid and attach the already existing finding aid in the form of a PDF.
The few collections available on EIU’s website are described to the item level,
like the Office of the President, 1899 -1933 collection. Others, such as the Eastern
Illinois University Centennial collection, are described at the collection level – the
description for this collection states that it is a collection of administrative records.35 Still
others are described to the series level. Most of the collections I reviewed were described
34

“Glossary,” Society of American Archivists, accessed May 20, 2015,
http://www2.archivists.org/glossary/terms/f/finding-aid
35
Eastern Illinois University Centennial collection, Eastern Illinois University Archives, Charleston, IL,
accessed May 20, 2015. http://booth.library.eiu.edu/archon/index.php?p=collections
/controlcard&id=111&q=centennial.

90

very minimally, leading me to believe that they were also processed minimally. That
would make sense considering the severe straights the archives is in with less than an
adequate staffing and funding.
Several studies have attempted to quantify the cost of processing collections. A
1978-1979 study conducted by W. N. Davis, Jr. found that it took staff, which consisted
of archivists and clerical staff, eight hours per cubic foot to process a collection.36 A
1980 study conducted by Maher concluded that it took staff 3.0 hours per cubic foot to
process office records and 6.9 hours per cubic foot to process personal papers.37 If an
average of those three times (approximately 6 hours) was used to calculate the time to
process a collection of 44 linear feet (assuming the containers were one foot by one foot
by one foot), it would take about 264 hours to process that collection, or 35 work days at
7.5 hours each day. It is not difficult to see why archives have such a backlog. Greene
and Meissner suggest that their MPLP approach could bring processing time down to an
average of four hours per cubic foot.38 Using the example of processing a collection of
44 linear feet, the time to process that collection at a minimal level would be
approximately 176 hours, or about 23 days at 7.5 hours per day.
Another area where I found discrepancies between the four archives was their
archival databases. Each university archive can be searched by entering a term, or by
browsing the collections alphabetically by collection, digital content, subject, creator,or
record group. It should be fairly straightforward: if a researcher wanted to find out about
ISU President Bone, he or she could enter “Bone,” or browse under the “Bs” to find the
36

W. N. Davis, Jr., “Budgeting for Archival Processing,” The American Archivist 43, no. 2 (Spring 1980):
211.
37
William J. Maher, Measurement and Analysis of Processing Costs in Academic Archives,” College and
Research Libraries 43, no. 1 (January 1982): 62.
38
Greene and Meissner, 253.

91

collection. U of I’s database is a little less intuitive, but still simple. It has tabs for
campus unit, name, subject, series title, and image/E-record title. As I was looking for
the collection from the Graduate School of Library and Information Science, I looked
under “L” for library under the “Name” tab. I found nothing. I then realized that
“Name” would lead me to names of people or organizations. I then looked under “L” in
the subject tab and found the collection. SIU and EIU, while having the same tabs as
ISU, does not have the ease of use. For example, as I browsed in SIU’s database, the
Sidney Fox papers were under “S” rather than “F.” That would be fine if the collection
were also under “F,” but it is not. The same holds for EIU. The Burl Ives collections
was under “B” for Burl. It is a small issue, but when dealing with an archive, there is an
expectation that rules of alphabetizing are adhered to.
As far as outreach goes, U of I, ISU and SIU utilize social media and blogs. ISU
and SIU both have Facebook pages, as does SLC archives at U of I. All three use Twitter
and have blogs. The only outreach EIU does is through The Keep. EIU’s traditional
archives has no social media presence. At U of I, SIU, and EIU, since the records
management programs overlap with the archives in funneling records to the archives, the
archivists do not have to do much outreach on campus. Maher and Swain at U of I, and
Gorzalski at SIU are able to focus their attention on alumni, and when other records fall
into the scope of the outside collections the archives house, on collecting records relating
to local, regional, and state history. Anderson has to focus much of her outreach time on
ISU faculty and staff, informing them of the existence of the archives and collecting
records that should already be coming to her automatically through the records
management program. She does have exhibits during Homecoming and other events

92

with high-alumni traffic and in December spoke at an ISU alumni reception in
Springfield, Illinois.
The archives at ISU shares many traits with the other three universities. ISU and
SIU archives use the traditional method of processing and description, but vary the level
of description when the collection warrants it. ISU, SIU, and U of I archives use social
media to engage faculty, staff, and alumni. ISU and U of I archives were founded
through a university presidential decree as the official repositories of university records
for their respective universities. ISU and SIU hired full-time archivists at around the
same time. All four university archives are housed in spaces that are not ideal for
preserving archival records and make use of interns and graduate students. The one main
difference between ISU’s archives and the other university archives is that ISU’s archives
do not have an active records management program that directs university records to the
archives. Given all these similarities, both SIU and ISU are fairly typical university
archives, while U of I and EIU are atypical, with U of I at the high end of the scale and
EIU at the lower end of the scale.

93

CHAPTER VI
CONCLUSION

Is the archives at Illinois State University a model Illinois university archive in
development, processes, collecting policies, and challenges? In three of the four
categories – development, processes, and challenges - I believe that it is. In reviewing
the histories of the four archives and comparing them to each other and to various
surveys conducted on college and university archives, ISU fits well into the typical model
of a university archives.
The ISU archives is very typical of university archives in that it began in the early
1970s, as did over 50 percent of public university archives. The archives is also housed
under the umbrella of the university library and was headed by special collections
librarians or history professors until a professional archivist was hired. This, too is
typical of public universities, as in 1962, 91 percent of university archives were headed
by librarians, and in 1979, 89 percent were housed in libraries and 82 percent reported to
library administration. As discussed in chapter four, both its previous and current spaces
were adapted for archival use, but those spaces do not meet the SAA standards for an
archival repository. In 1979, even at its current location, the archive building would be
typical in that 57 percent of archives could not have their temperature controlled
separately from the rest of the building, and 70 percent could not adjust humidity levels.

94

As for processing, the methods for processing collections are within the standards
for processing archival collections, as per chapter four. Materials are rehoused in acidfree boxes and folders. Most collections are processed at the item level but described at
the folder level, with finding aids available through an online database written in EAD.
Like 60 percent of other university archives, there is a significant backlog of collections
to be processed. The archivist also spends much of her time in outreach activities aimed
at both university employees and alumni.
Challenges faced by the ISU archives are also typical for university archives. The
challenges include funding, staffing, space, security, and environmental conditions. As
discussed in chapter four, all of the universities examined struggled with these elements
in one way or another. Even the archive at U of I, the largest and best funded university
of the four examined, has funding, space, security, and environmental condition issues.
The ability to obtain enough funding at a public university is not an easy task, as many
factors affect the overall funding. State politics play an important role in deciding budget
allocations for public universities. In Illinois, public universities face the specter of
double-digit cuts in funding, with numbers as high as 31 percent being tossed around.
For the archives to survive, it must have proven itself as a part of the overall mission of
the university.
Where ISU falls short, through no fault of its own, is in collecting policies.
Anderson does a tremendous job in her efforts to obtain college and departmental
records, but can only go so far. She is hindered in her efforts by ISU’s lack of a
substantial records management program. Granted, Illinois state law does not mandate
that a records management schedule be followed unless records are to be destroyed, but

95

ISU is the only state university examined that does not have an active records
management program, and is the only university to specifically tell its personnel on the
records management site that they do not have to follow the retention schedule for the
destruction or archiving of records, as long as the records that should be destroyed or
archived are appropriately disposed of at some point in time.
How can these deficiencies be corrected? First, ISU’s archives needs an oncampus presence. Whether it be a new building or an existing building adapted to house
the archives, having the archives physically on the campus would increase its visibility
and aid Anderson in her outreach efforts.
Second, university administration need to view the archives as the institutional
repository for its non-current records, and not just a place to house university
memorabilia. One way to accomplish this would be putting more emphasis on the
records management program. Another way would be for the library to recognize the
archives as a distinct entity from itself and set up a budget line for the archives that would
be sufficient to hire a civil service worker for the office work, as well as another archivist
to process collections and supervise graduate assistants, IRAD interns, and volunteers.
Of course, none of these this can come to fruition without adequate funding.
Without funding, an archive cannot be staffed, capital improvements cannot be made,
archival supplies cannot be ordered, nor can a records management unit be formed. The
use of graduate students and interns eases some of the funding and staffing problems, but
only temporarily. Students may stay at an archive for a semester, for two years, or
anywhere in between. Then a new crop comes in and must be trained, taking precious
time away from processing and outreach activities. As funds become tighter, one of the

96

first things a department can cut is the graduate student workers. Grants are also a way to
ease funding shortages, but they are usually for specific projects. Vying for evershrinking pool of grant money in a highly competitive field of equally deserving
programs leaves no guarantees of funding for a project for any length of time.
The one thing that could infuse some monies into the archives would be
transferring the records management program to the archives. This would allow the
university to salvage its administrative history, as well as save itself from more state fines
for a non-compliant records management program. While departments still could not be
forced to archive or dispose of their records according to the retention schedule,
Anderson could, with the help of designated department records managers – the office
staff that is already in place in the offices – educate departments, help them with file
arrangement, and encourage departments to follow the retention schedule by showing
them the advantages of following the schedule, i.e. easier access to records, and fewer
filing cabinets and storage needs. With relatively little funding, possibly the cost of an
additional staff member, the archives could then be seen by university faculty, students,
and staff as more than a place full of fun artifacts from the past, but as a repository of
university administrative history, having both a practical value and a research value.

97

REFERENCES
Primary Sources
Braden, Samuel Edward, Presidential Papers. Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives, Illinois State
University, Normal, IL.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. “Mold.” Accessed June 8, 2015.
http://www.cdc.gov/mold/faqs.htm#affect.
Eastern Illinois University Centennial collection. University Archives, Charleston, IL.
Accessed May 20, 2015. http://booth.library.eiu.edu/archon
/index.php?p=collections/controlcard&id=111&q=centennial
Eastern Illinois University Records and Information Management. “What is Records and
Information Management?” Accessed May 1, 2015. http://www.eiu.edu
/recordsmanagement/what.php.
Illinois Secretary of State, Illinois Archives, Records Management Division. “Records
Management Reference Manual for Illinois State Government Agencies.” 2014.
Illinois State University. “How to Use this Website to determine what to do with a
Specific Record.” Accessed May 4, 2015.
http://recordsmanagement.illinoisstate.edu/.
Illinois State University. “Records Management.” Accessed May 4, 2015.
http://recordsmanagement.illinoisstate.edu/.
Morris Library, Southern Illinois University. “University Archives Collection.” Accessed
May 21, 2015. http://www.lib.siu.edu/university-archives.
National Archives and Records Administration. Preservation of Archival
Records: Holdings Maintenance at the National Archives. Mary Lynn
Ritzenthaler. Technical Information Paper Number 6 (1990). Accessed May 4,
2015. http://www.archives.gov/preservation/holdings-maintenance/.
National Archives and Records Administration. Records and Information Management
Self-Evaluation Guide. Accessed May 4, 2015. http://www.archives.gov/recordsmgmt/publications/records-and-information-management-self-evaluationguide.pdf.
98

Rayfield, JoAnn File. Dr. JoAnn Rayfield Archives, Illinois State University, Normal, IL.
Records and Information Management Services (RIMS) Task Force, University of
Illinois, Champaign-Urbana. “Final Report.” Accessed May 11, 2015.
https://uofi.app.box.com/s/q96pqv6acgw0ri8fmz5y.
Sousa Archives and Center for American Music. “About.” Accessed April 27, 2015.
http://archives.library.illinois.edu/sousa/about/.
Student Life and Culture Archives. “About.” Accessed April 27, 2015.
http://archives.library.illinois.edu/slc/about-2/.
Southern Illinois University Records Management. “Administration and Consulting.”
Accessed April 30, 2015. http://recordsmgmt.siu.edu/administration-andconsulting/index.html.
———. “Welcome to Records Management.” Accessed May 5, 2015.
http://recordsmgmt.siu.edu/.
State Records Act. Illinois Compiled Statutes, ch. 5, no. 160, sec. 1-26 (2003). Accessed
May 4, 2015. http://www.ilga.gov/legislation/ilcs/ilcs3.asp?ActID=86
&ChapterID=2.
University Archives, Booth Library, Eastern Illinois University. Accessed May 21, 2015.
http://www.library.eiu.edu/archives/.
University of Illinois. “About RIMS.” Accessed May 11, 2015.
https://www.uillinois.edu/cio/services/rims/about_rims/.
———. “Records and Information Management Services.” Accessed May 11, 2015.
https://www.uillinois.edu/cio/services/rims/.
———. “University of Illinois Archives: Bringing History to Life.” Accessed April 27,
2015. http://archives.library.illinois.edu/.
Secondary Sources
Brichford, Maynard. “The Illiarch.” In College and University Archives: Selected Readings, 1930. Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 1979.
Browne, Henry J. “An Appeal for Archives in Institutions of Higher Learning.” The American
Archivist 16, no. 3 (July 1953): 213-226.

Buck, Solon J. “Training of American Archivists.” The American Archivist 4, no. 2 (April
1941): 84-90.
Burckel Nicholas C. and Frank Cook. “A Profile of College and University Archives in
the United States.” American Archivist 45, no 4 (October 1982): 410-428.

99

Champagne, Roger J. A Place for Education, Illinois State University, 1967-1977.
Normal, IL: Illinois State University Foundation, 1978
Conway, Paul. “Perspectives on Archival Resources: The 1985 Census of Archival
Institutions.” American Archivist 50, no. 2 (Spring 1987): 174-191.
Crosby, Tim. “Director of Special Collections Named for Library.” News (June 16,
2006). Accessed April 25, 2015. http://news.siu.edu/2006/06/061606tc6129.php.
Davis, Jr., W. N. “Budgeting for Archival Processing.” The American Archivist 43, no. 2
(Spring 1980): 209-211.
“EIU's Electronic Repository, The Keep, Reaches Patrons Worldwide.” Eastern Illinois
University Media Relations, August 1, 2013. Accessed June 16, 2015.
http://castle.eiu.edu/media/viewstory.php?action=880.
“Focus on Library Faculty: Leah Broaddus.’ Cornerstone 3, no. 3 (Spring 2000): 1-11.
Accessed April 25, 2015. http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article
=1002&context=morrisnews_cornerstone.
Freed, John. Educating Illinois: Illinois State University, 1857-2007. Virginia Beach,
VA: Donning Co. Publishers, 2009.
Greene, Mark A. and Dennis Meissner. “More Product, Less Process: Revamping
Traditional Archival Processing.” American Archivist 68, no. 2 (September 2005):
208-263.
Hackbart-Dean, Pamela S., Leah Agne, & Julie Mosbo. “History on the Move:
Relocating Special Collections and Archives.” (January 2010): 31-53. Accessed
April 25, 2015. http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/morris_articles/57/.Jennings, John
Melville. “Archival Activity in American Universities and Colleges.” The
American Archivist 12, no. 2 (April 1949): 155-163. Accessed March 1, 2015.
http://americanarchivist.org/doi/pdf/10.17723/ aarc.12.2.j8217m30733353k6.
Jones, H. G. “Archival Training in American Universities, 1938-68.” The American
Archivist 31, no. 2 (April 1968): 135-154.
Kahn, Herman. “Some Comments on the Archival Vocation.” The American Archivist
34, no. 1 (January 1971): 3-12.
Maher, William J. “The Illini Archives: A Laboratory for Retrospective Research.”
Illinois Libraries 63, no. 1 (March 1981): 269-274.
———. “The Illini Archives in the 1980s.” Illinois Libraries 69 no. 4 (October 1987):
584-587.

100

———. The Management of College and University Archives. Lanham, MD: Scarecrow
Press, Inc., 1992.
———. Measurement and Analysis of Processing Costs in Academic Archives.” College
and Research Libraries 43, no. 1 (January 1982): 59-67.
Mason, Philip P. “College and University Archives: 1962.” The American Archivist 26,
no. 2 (April 1963): 161-165.
Meyer, Linda M. “Historian as Archivist: History, Archives, and Outreach at Colorado
State University.” Journal of Archival Organization 9, no. 3-4 (July-December
2011). 226-236..
Norton, Margaret Cross. “Services and Resources of an Archives.” In Norton on
Archives: The Writings of Margaret Cross Norton on Archival and Records
Management, edited by Thornton W. Mitchell, 70-85. Carbondale: Southern
Illinois University Press, 1975.
Optical Storage Technology Association. “Technology Q & A.” Accessed April 27, 2015
http://www.osta.org/technology/cdqa8.htm.
O’Toole James M. and Richard J. Cox. Understanding Archives and Manuscripts.
Chicago: Society of American Archivists, 2006.
Pruitt, Gordon. “David Koch Retires at July’s End.” Cornerstone 1, no. 1 (Fall 2005): 17. Accessed April 25, 2015. http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu/cgi
/viewcontent.cgi?article=1012&context=morrisnews_cornerstone.
———. “Matt Gorzalski Named University Archivist.” Cornerstone 7, no. 4 (Summer
2012): 1-7. Accessed April 25, 2015. http://opensiuc.lib.siu.edu
/morrisnews_cornerstone/27/.
Russell, Mattie U. “The Influence of Historians on the Archival Profession in the United
States.” The American Archivist 46, no. 3, (July 1983): 277-285.
Schellenberg, T. R. Modern Archives: Principles and Techniques. Chicago: The Society
of American Archivists, 1956.
Shipton, Clifford K. “The Harvard University Archives: Goal and Functions.” Harvard
Library Bulletin 1, no. 1 (Winter 1947): 101-108. Accessed March 5, 2015.
http://pds.lib.harvard.edu/pds/view/2573358.
Society of American Archivists. Archival and Special Collections Facilities: Guidelines
for Archivists, Librarians, Architects, and Engineers. Accessed May 21, 2015.
http://www2.archivists.org/category/standards-type/guidelines.

101

———. Describing Archives: A Content Standard. Chicago: Society of American
Archivists, 2013. Accessed May 15, 2015.
http://files.archivists.org/pubs/DACS2E-2013.pdf/.
———. “Glossary.” Accessed May 20, 2015. http://www2.archivists.org/glossary.
———. “Guidelines for College and University Archives.” Accessed May 21, 2015.
http://www2.archivists.org/node/14801.
———. “Guidelines for a Graduate Program in Archival Studies.” Accessed March 2,
2015. http://www2.archivists.org/gpas.
Society of American Archivists Committee on College and University Archives. College
and University Archives in the U.S. and Canada. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan, 1972. Accessed June 14, 2015.
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015071441235;view=1up;seq=1.
Trinkaus-Randall, Gregor, James Reilly and Patricia Ford. “The Massachusetts
Experiment: The Role of the Environment in Collection Preservation.” The
American Archivist. 77, no. 1 (Spring/Summer 2014): 133-150. Accessed June 8,
2015. http://americanarchivist.org.libproxy.lib.ilstu.edu/doi/pdf/10.17723
/aarc.77.1.kk006ng471327l5j.
Van Schreeven, William. “Information Please: Finding Aids in State and Local Archival
Depositories.” The American Archivist 5, no. 3 (July 1942): 169-178.
Warner, Robert M. “Archival Training in the United States and Canada.” The American
Archivist 35, no. 3-4 (July 1972): 347-35.
———. “The Status of College and University Archives.” The American Archivist 31,
no. 3 (July 1968): 235-23.
Wilson, Dwight H. “Archives in Colleges and Universities: Some Comments on Data
Collected by the Society’s Committee on College and University Archives.” The
American Archivist 13, no. 4 (October 1950): 343-350.

102

