DESIGNING FOR LEARNER METACOGNITION AND ACADEMIC INQUIRY:
AN INVESTIGATION OF THE STRIPLING INQUIRY MODEL
by
Brenda L. Boyer
SUZANNE DUNN, PhD, Faculty Mentor and Chair
MOLLY LANE, PhD, Committee Member
NANCY HAAS, PhD, Committee Member
James A. Wold, PhD, Interim Dean, School of Education

A Dissertation Presented in Partial Fulfillment
Of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Philosophy

Capella University
December 2014

UMI Number: 3681152

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3681152
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Brenda Boyer, 2014

Abstract
Instructional designers continue to seek inquiry models that address the needs of
secondary learners transitioning to higher education. This mixed method study
investigated the effect of learner reflections generated by instruction designed by the
Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003) on metacognitive awareness and inquiry task
outcomes. A concurrent embedded strategy allowed for simultaneous collection of
participant quantitative metacognitive awareness levels, inquiry outcomes and qualitative
data regarding participant experiences during the inquiry process. The sample was
comprised of 138 participants ages 16-18 from two Mid-Atlantic public high schools.
Treatment groups at each site received instruction designed according to the Stripling
Inquiry model; control groups received their teachers’ regular instruction. Inquiry
instruction for the treatment group was delivered via seven videos and was scaffolded
with the Stripling reflection prompts. Participants in both groups kept reflection journals.
Control participants reflected as they wished; treatment participants reflected via the
Stripling prompts. The self-report Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw &
Dennison, 1994) was used to measure metacognitive awareness with a pre- and post-test.
Participant inquiry outcomes were assessed with a field-tested inquiry outcomes rubric.
While no statistically significant differences were found between treatment and control
group results for either metacognitive awareness or inquiry outcomes, qualitative findings
from reflection journals were markedly different between the groups. Participants
reflecting via the Stripling prompts demonstrated deeper levels of reflection, engaged
iteratively with the inquiry process, and used a wider variety of tools to achieve their
goals.

Dedication
This work is dedicated to my wonderful, supportive family. I could not have
achieved this goal without my husband, Merick, and my boys, Wyeth, and Ethan.
Special thanks go to my parents, Mark and Barbara Stewart. Your continuing love and
support have made all the difference in my life. Thanks for always believing in me. I am
forever grateful.

iii

Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Dr. Suzanne Dunn, my original mentor, for her ongoing
dedication to the learning process and her support and encouragement throughout my
doctoral journey. Thanks to Dr. Patricia Ryan for graciously stepping in to be my mentor
for the home stretch. Thanks also to my committee members, Dr. Molly Lane and Dr.
Nancy Haas for their willingness to serve and their kindness and support. My gratitude
also extends to Dr. Barbara Stripling, not only for generously granting permission to use
her model, but also for extending her friendship and support. Final thanks go to Dr.
Gregory Schraw for use of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory, and ALA publishing
for use of the Stripling reflective framework.

iv

Table of Contents
Acknowledgments

iv

List of Tables

viii

List of Figures

ix

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

1

Introduction to the Problem

1

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework

2

Statement of the Problem

5

Purpose of the Study

6

Research Questions

6

Rationale, Relevance, and Significance of the Study

7

Nature of the Study

11

Definition of Terms

13

Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations

18

Organization of the Remainder of the Study

21

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW

22

Introduction to the Literature Review

22

Theoretical Framework

24

Review of Research Literature and Methodological Literature

29

Chapter 2 Summary

74

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY

76

Introduction to Chapter 3

76

Research Design

78
v

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures

84

Instrumentation

87

Data Collection

89

Field Test

92

Operationalization of Variables

92

Data Analysis Procedures

92

Limitations of the Research Design

97

Internal Validity

98

External Validity

99

Expected Findings

100

Ethical Issues

101

Chapter 3 Summary

103

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

104

Introduction

104

Description of the Sample

105

Summary of the Quantitative Results

106

Detailed Analysis

106

Qualitative Research Design and Introduction to the Analysis

109

Summary of the Qualitative Findings

110

Thematic Analysis of Metacognitive Awareness

111

Thematic Analysis of Inquiry Outcomes

122

Emerging Themes

130

Chapter 4 Summary

133
vi

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION

136

Introduction

136

Summary of the Results

136

Discussion of the Results and Findings

138

Discussion of the Results and Findings in Relation to the Literature

145

Limitations

150

Implication of the Results for Practice

151

Recommendations for Further Research

152

Conclusion

154

REFERENCES

156

APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK

171

vii

List of Tables
Table 1. Frequencies and Percentages for Participant Demographics

105

Table 2. Means and Standard Deviations for Total Metacognitive Awareness

107

Table 3. ANOVA Results for Total Metacognitive Awareness

107

Table 4. Means and Standard Deviations for Inquiry Outcome Scores

108

Table 5. ANOVA Results for Inquiry Outcome Scores

108

viii

List of Figures
Figure 1. Representation of Concurrent Embedded Data Collection

79

Figure 2. Metacognitive Awareness Codes

111

Figure 3. Phases of the Stripling Inquiry Model

122

ix

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Introduction to the Problem
	  

Young adults are coming of age in a digital environment offering vast amounts of

information in myriad formats. The skillful management, understanding and use of
information, known collectively as information fluency skills, are considered crucial to
lifelong learning agility and college and workplace success (American Association of
School Librarians (AASL), 2009; Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL), 2000; Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009; Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Partnership for
21st Century Skills (P21), 2011; Riedling, 2006). Despite the abundance of information
and critical nature of information fluency, students transitioning from high school to
university remain relatively underprepared for the rigors of academic research and
inquiry (Barnes & Slate, 2010; Conley, 2008; Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010;
Oakleaf & Owen, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2012). While various approaches for
instruction in information fluency and research/inquiry exist, recognized learner
inadequacies highlight the necessity to employ critical thinking and metacognitive
reflection as core elements of inquiry instruction (Conley, 2008; Head & Eisenberg,
2010, Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2012). Designers of inquiry
instruction continue to seek models that can effectively accomplish this goal.

1

Background, Context, and Theoretical Framework
Information fluency is widely recognized as a trait required for success in the 21st
century workplace as well as in education (P21, 2011; AASL, 2009). The term
information fluency encompasses skills ranging from the access, evaluation and
management of information sources to the ethical use of information for knowledge
construction and creation of new works (AASL, 2009; Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009;
Stripling, 2007). Research and inquiry skills are implicit within information fluency
competencies; however, recent, large-scale studies such as the 2010 and 2013 Project
Information Literacy reports (Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and the Pew Internet
Project, How Teens Do Research in the Digital World (Pew Research Center, 2012),
provide evidence that young adults transitioning from secondary school to higher
education are largely underprepared to conduct academic level research and inquiry.
The Project Information Literacy Progress Report (Head & Eisenberg, 2010)
investigated college learner research and information fluency practices and found that
learners employ a narrow set of lower-order thinking skills and approaches to information
inquiry and “grapple with what college-level research assignments mean and what is
expected of them in the process of intellectual discovery” (p. 36). Recommendations
included the need to promote information fluency practices and inquiry thinking prior to
learner transition to higher education. The 2013 PIL report (Head, 2013) extended this
recommendation by calling for increased cooperation between secondary schools and
colleges after finding the extent to which college freshmen struggle in making the
transition to college-level research. The 2012 Pew Internet Project (Pew Research
Center, 2012) confirmed 2010 Project Information Literacy findings by noting that while
2

the expansive digital landscape offers high school-age learners the opportunity to
“become more self-reliant researchers,” the teachers surveyed expressed concerns about
the quality of students’ research skills, critical thinking, and supporting dispositions (p.
2). The Pew researchers concluded these concerns “actually reflect a slow response from
parents and educators to shape their own expectations and students’ learning
environments in a way that better reflects the world today’s students live in” (2012, p. 7).
Efforts to reconcile instructional environments with learners’ digital, multimodal,
and information-rich world have manifested as both educational standards and
instructional design models. The Partnership for 21st Century Skills (P21) (2011), the
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE) (2007), and Common Core
State Standards (National Governors Association, 2010) have set forth guidelines and
standards needed for success in a global, digital world. Information fluency standards
have been correspondingly established and updated to reflect perceived changes and
additions to skills and knowledge learners require. Current learning standards from the
American Association of School Librarians (AASL) (2007), and Association of College
and Research Libraries (ACRL) (2000) guide the development of information fluency
skills. These standards additionally address inquiry processes as important to learner
success and point to the ability to become an agile, lifelong learner, someone who is
metacognitive and has learned how to learn, as imperative.
Instructional design solutions to this problem have emerged in the form of
information fluency skills instruction, research steps, and inquiry process models
(Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990; Kuhlthau, 1993; Kuhlthau, Maniotes, & Caspari, 2007;
Stripling, 2003). Despite the existence of these models, secondary school learner
3

research remains largely content-oriented and uses linear steps in lieu of higher level,
reflective thinking needed for the process of knowledge construction (Joseph, 2010;
Loertscher, Koechlin, & Zwann, 2009; Pew Research Center, 2012). The inquiry process
is ideally iterative (Jansen, 2011; Kuhlthau, Maniotes, & Caspari, 2007; Stripling, 2003)
and requires learner metacognition. Metacognition has been connected to effective
strategy use (Vrugt & Oort, 2008), information fluency self-efficacy (Kilic-Cakmak,
2010), academic achievement (Young & Fry, 2008; Zulkiply, Kabit, & Ghani, 2009),
college readiness (Conley, 2007), and transfer of knowledge to future situations
(Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000). Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000) posited
that a “‘metacognitive’ approach to instruction can help students learn to take control of
their own learning by defining learning goals and monitoring their progress in achieving
them” (p. 18). Metacognitive strategies must be activated in conjunction with inquiry for
successful learning, making inquiry learning more complex and challenging (Blumenfeld,
Kempler, & Krajcik, 2006, p. 481).
Metacognitive awareness can be introduced, practiced, and sharpened through
inquiry instruction that demands active reflection (Jones & Dotson, 2010; Koechlin &
Zwaan, 2010; Stripling, 2003, 2007). Reflection is one of the key learning dispositions,
or “habits of mind” recognized as necessary to lifelong learning by the Association of
School Librarians (AASL, 2009, p. 40), and is crucial for long-term transfer of skills and
knowledge (Jones & Dotson, 2010; Milam, 2009). Considering the utility of
metacognitive reflection and the need for secondary learners to engage in higher levels of
critical thought, Berger (2010) described the inquiry process as “permeated with
reflection and critical thinking, so that the result of inquiry is not only deep learning
4

about the inquiry question, but also the development of skills for independent learning”
(p.16). Designers and practitioners striving to serve the needs of secondary school
learners while meeting current educational standards need an instructional model
focusing on the higher level, metacognitive thinking that supports inquiry and potential
academic success. The Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003) meets this definition.
Uniquely focusing on the iterative nature of inquiry and the requisite thinking
strategies that accompany each part of the inquiry cycle, the Stripling Inquiry Model
(2003) has been adopted by the New York City School Library System (2010) as well as
the Library of Congress (Stripling, 2009; Woyshner, 2010). Considering the Stripling
model’s focus on reflection, its use by notable educational bodies and potential for wider
adoption under the Common Core State Standards (2010), further investigation into its
applicability for fostering the disposition of metacognitive reflection and successful
inquiry outcomes is warranted. Constructivist in nature, the Stripling Inquiry Model is
student-centered and predicated on the interpretation of experience (Bruner, 1986),
metacognition (Flavell, 1979; Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000), and socio-cognitive
learning (Vygotsky, 1978), and is aligned to problem-solving (Savery, 2009). The
Stripling model (2003) is viewed and considered through the theoretical lenses of
constructivism (Jonassen & Land, 2000) and metacognition (Flavell, 1979).
Statement of the Problem
While many approaches to information fluency instruction exist, preparing
students for the rigor of academic-level research and inquiry remains an ongoing
challenge for designers of information literacy instruction (Farmer, 2011; Oakleaf &
Owen, 2010; Small, Arnone, Stripling, & Berger, 2012). Specifically, learners
5

transitioning from high school to university remain largely underprepared to engage in
the higher-level thinking required for academic level inquiry (Head, 2013; Head &
Eisenberg, 2010; Oakleaf & Owen, 2010, Pew Research Center, 2012). Learner
reflection and metacognitive practices have been identified as crucial to inquiry learning
(Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Jones & Dotson, 2010; Stripling, 2003), critical thinking
(Magno, 2010) and college readiness (Conley, 2008; Pew Research Center, 2012), and
are considered a requisite disposition for lifelong learning (AASL, 2009, p. 40). As
expectations for learner inquiry practices continue to expand at the academic level,
designers and practitioners of secondary school information fluency instruction continue
to seek designs that will foster both higher level thinking and metacognitive practices
required for academic inquiry.
Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of learner reflection
generated through instruction designed using the Stripling Model (2003) on learner
disposition of metacognition and inquiry performance.
Research Questions
1. What is the effect of learner reflection on metacognitive awareness when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?
H10 : There is no statistically significant difference between metacognitive awareness
levels when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the
Stripling model.

6

H1A : There is a statistically significant difference in metacognitive awareness levels
when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling
model.
2. What is the effect of learner reflection on inquiry task outcomes when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?
H20 : There is no statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
H2A: There is a statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
3. What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner metacognitive
awareness?
4. What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner inquiry task
outcomes?
Rationale, Relevance, and Significance
Rationale for the Study
Designers of information literacy instruction face the challenge of preparing
students for the rigor of academic-level research and inquiry (Farmer, 2011; Oakleaf &
Owen, 2010, Small, et al., 2012). This challenge was confirmed by the 2010 Project
Information Literacy Progress Report (Head & Eisenberg, 2010), the 2013 Project
Information Literacy Report, Learning the Ropes: How Freshmen Conduct Course
Research Once They Enter College (Head, 2013), and the Pew Research Center (2012)
study that found young adult learners are hampered by lower-level thinking and
approaches to college-level research. Recommendations included that inquiry instruction
7

emphasizing higher-level thinking occur prior to learners’ entrance to college. The value
of information fluency and inquiry for lifelong learning is well established; various
models for the design of this instruction exist. Uniquely focusing on the iterative nature
of inquiry and the requisite thinking strategies that accompany each part of the inquiry
cycle, the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) has been adopted by the New York City School
Library System (2010) as well as the Library of Congress (Stripling, 2009). Considering
the value of learner reflection and metacognitive practices with the increasing call for
inquiry in Common Core State Standards (National Governors Association, 2010), the
Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) warrants further investigation.
Quantitatively and qualitatively exploring this study’s research questions will
advance the scientific knowledge base by uncovering the effects of learner reflection
generated from instruction based upon the Stripling model (2003) and offering
practitioners a wider picture of the secondary learner’s inquiry journey, thus adding to the
to the knowledge base of learners and learning processes, transfer context and
instructional strategies (Richey & Klein, 2007). Results of previous research (Bowler,
2010; Wolf, Brush, & Saye, 2003b) collectively suggest that metacognitive reflection
should be integral, aligned to the inquiry cycle, and directly instructed. This higherorder, reflective thinking constitutes the core of the Stripling model (2003) and guides the
passage of learners iteratively between inquiry phases.
Relevance of the Study
The nurturing and development of learner metacognition through the integration
of a design model is a question of interest to the instructional design (ID) profession
continually striving to create the right mix of ingredients to foster successful learning.
8

Exploring the effect of learner reflection generated by instruction designed using the
Stripling model on specific learning outcomes situates this study within three facets of
the Richey & Klein (2007) instructional design and development knowledge base:
•

Learners and learning processes (by measuring the learner metacognitive
characteristics and inquiry task achievement)

•

Learning and transfer context (by measuring metacognition, a disposition known
to affect transfer)

•

Instructional strategies (by employing a scaffold corresponding to the specific
model and measuring effectiveness of that model) (Richey & Klein, 2007, p. 3-4).

Through this investigation of the effect of learner reflection produced by instruction
designed according to the Stripling Model (2003) on metacognition and inquiry
outcomes, the study provides a measure of additional external validation for the model.
Richey and Klein (2007) noted “external validation of the impact of the products of a
model’s use” provides evidence of effectiveness beyond “user testimonials” (p. 23). The
instructional design field may benefit from a study that quantitatively measures and
qualitatively explains learner metacognitive awareness and learning outcomes resulting
from the application of a unique, reflection-based model of inquiry. Making thinking
processes central to its design, the Stripling model may point the profession toward even
greater emphasis and incorporation of learner reflection within design work targeting
secondary and academic learner inquiry. Underpinning this study’s purpose is the need
to test the utility of the model’s focus on the requisite thinking processes of inquiry. The
9

instructional design field can benefit from a study that expands the knowledge base of
metacognition theory by quantitatively measuring and qualitatively explaining learner
metacognitive awareness and learning outcomes resulting from the application of this
unique, reflection-based model of inquiry.
Significance of the Study
Applying the Stripling model to learner-selected inquiries expands theory by
offering both a novel example for inquiry processes as well as further information to aide
future designs of inquiry-based instruction. The Stripling Model of Inquiry (Stripling,
2003) provides the conceptual framework for exploring a means by which designers can
create inquiry instruction that fosters metacognitive and inquiry outcomes. Examining
the effects of outcomes generated by the Stripling Inquiry design model (2003) on learner
disposition of metacognition and inquiry performance offers insight into a unique design
problem that holds far-reaching implications. Adequately preparing learners for the
challenges of academic level inquiry in a changing information landscape may create a
stronger foundation for independent lifelong learning. By shifting the focus of inquiry
away from linear research steps to the requisite thinking that must accompany skilled and
iterative inquiry, the Stripling Model overtly moves inquiry instruction to the
constructivist realm, allowing for a richer, learner-centered environment.
Constructivist learner-centered environments demand critical thinking (Savery,
2009), as do standards of ACRL (2000), Partnership for 21st Century Learning (2011),
and the Common Core State Standards (2010) implemented in 2014. Educational
practitioners will now need to utilize instructional designs that overtly promote critical
thinking, metacognitive reflection, and inquiry skills that serve learners for the long term.
10

Investigating a model of design that could potentially fit these purposes may benefit
teachers, librarians, and most importantly, the learners themselves. As Project
Information Literacy (Head & Eisenberg, 2010) advised, higher-order thinking skills and
metacognitive habits need to be instructed as part of the inquiry process long before
learners enter higher education. Should the reflection generated by Stripling-based
instruction yield growth in metacognitive awareness levels and benefit inquiry task
outcomes, it has much to offer current practitioners and young adult learners who need a
solid method for tackling the highly challenging task of academic inquiry.
Nature of the Study
Facing the problem of preparing transitioning secondary learners for college-level
research, designers and practitioners of information literacy instruction continue to seek
models that will foster higher level thinking and metacognitive learner practices required
for academic inquiry. Investigating the Stripling model’s potential usefulness to this end,
this study employs a mixed methods approach using a concurrent embedded strategy.
Investigations of other research / inquiry models such as Kuhlthau’s Information Search
Process (Kuhlthau, 1993) and The Big6 (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990) have been either
primarily qualitative in design (Wolf, Brush, & Saye, 2003a; Bowler, 2010) or focused
solely on outcomes and, despite labeling of these models as metacognitive tools, none
utilized measures of learner metacognitive growth. Likewise, despite its focus on
reflection, previous literature on the Stripling model has been primarily descriptive in
nature (Small et al., 2012; Stripling, 2003, 2009) and has not quantitatively explored the
metacognitive and inquiry outcomes.

11

The concurrent embedded strategy provides this study the benefit of perspectives
from both methodologies, offering a clearer picture of the research question (Creswell,
2009). This strategy allows qualitative data “that explores the processes experienced by
individuals” to support the predominant quantitative method addressing “the outcomes
expected from the treatments” (Creswell, 2009, p. 214), potentially deepening insights
gained. One data collection phase occurs, “during which both quantitative and qualitative
data are collected simultaneously” (Creswell, 2009, p. 214). Creswell (2009) noted a
prime benefit to a concurrent embedded strategy to be not only that perspectives from
different types of data are collected but also that because “both forms of data are not
equal in size and rigor,” the study remains “manageable for the time and resources
available” (p. 216). The quantitative data represents outcomes of the treatment; the
qualitative data concerns participant processes during treatment.
Learner personal reflections, as the primary outcome generated through this
instruction, demand qualitative exploration as well as quantitative measurement of their
effect. This study utilizes quantitative research questions to investigate the role of learner
reflection during the inquiry process in affecting inquiry achievement as well as
metacognitive awareness. By comparing the Stripling model-based instruction to a
control (i.e., no other specific model), this study will determine the extent to which the
Stripling Model (2003) could be tapped for instructional designs of inquiry that have
metacognitive practices, critical thinking and college readiness as learning outcomes.
Qualitative research questions focused on revelations of individual metacognitive
awareness and inquiry task outcomes documented in participant journals relate

12

specifically to the AASL (2009) habits of mind for far transfer as well as the “process of
intellectual discovery” called for by Head and Eisenberg (2010, p. 36).
Definition of Terms
College Readiness
College readiness is a term generally used to encapsulate the variety of skills and
dispositions a learner entering university should have in order to be successful. The
Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Career (PARCC, 2013), a
recently developed secondary school assessment system, broadly defines readiness as
including “critical thinking, communicating effectively, and problem solving” (PARCC,
2013, p.1). Conley (2007) likewise points to these “key cognitive strategies” that are
“intentional, practiced behaviors” and isolates research as centrally important skill
needed for success (p.12-14). Derived from Conley’s (2007) definition, college readiness
in this study is limited to representing the learner’s employment of higher order, critical
thinking processes to perform research and inquiry at a level suitable for academia.
Critical Thinking
Critical thinking is used in this study as a generalized term referring to higher
level thinking processes such as analysis, synthesis, evaluation and creation according to
the revised Bloom’s taxonomy (Anderson & Krathwohl, 2001). Critical thinking and
metacognition are intertwined; Magno (2010) described critical thinking as occurring
“when individuals use their cognitive skills or strategies” to increase the likelihood of “a
desirable outcome,” and that these skills are “facilitated through metacognition” (p.137).
Information Fluency

13

Originally termed as “information literacy” (Zurkowski, 1974), information
fluency is the modern, collective term for a set of skills needed to successfully navigate
and proficiently utilize the wide range of information resources available. Stripling
(2007) noted, “The term ‘information fluency’ is now accepted in the field as a
replacement for ‘information literacy’ because students must not only know the skills, but
also apply the skills fluently in any personal or academic situation” (p. 25). These skills
generally include capabilities for locating, accessing and evaluating information, as well
as ethically using information when creating an expression of knowledge gained through
an inquiry process.
Inquiry
Stripling (2003) defined inquiry as “a relationship between thinking skills and
content” (p.6). While inquiry encompasses the act of researching and systematically
investigating a question in order to come to a new understanding, it is cognitive and
metacognitive processing that drives inquiry. AASL (2009) noted in its standards,
“Inquiry provides a framework for learning” as well as “the disposition to use those
skills, along with an understanding of their own responsibilities and self-assessment
strategies” (p. 11). Implied in inquiry is an understanding that the goal of research is new
knowledge construction rather than merely finding answers and reporting information,
giving “an authentic purpose” for searching (Deskins, 2012, p. 21).

Inquiry Model
An inquiry model is a representation of the components, elements, or stages of an
investigative system conceived to guide instructional designers, educational practitioners
14

and learners themselves through the iterative thinking process of inquiry. Berger (2010)
described this process as “permeated with reflection and critical thinking” resulting in
“development of skills for independent learning” (p.16). Focusing on thinking processes
and prompting reflection, the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003), fits this description and
will be investigated here for its utility.
Inquiry Learning
Inquiry learning is that which results from the act of performing inquiry (i.e. a
systematic cognitive exploration). This learning emerges from a constructivist process of
problem solving undertaken by learners and should “result in new understandings for
learners, but not final answers” (Small et al., 2012, p. 3). Participants in this study
received inquiry instruction according to the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) that includes
iterative phases of connection, wonderment, investigation, construction, expression, and
reflection.
Inquiry Task Outcomes
Learning outcomes from an inquiry task performed by learners. These outcomes
can include levels of synthesis, analysis, evaluation and creation as well as the products
that are expressions of this learning. For this study, inquiry task outcomes include the
level of achievement learners attain through the creation of a written research paper that
serves as an expression of the learner’s new knowledge construction. Inquiry task
outcomes are a dependent variable associated with the reflection generated through
instruction designed according to the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) and are measured
using a task outcome scoring rubric (research question two) and are interpreted via
participant reflection journal data (research question four). Further description of how
15

inquiry task outcomes have been operationalized in this study is offered in Chapter 3,
Methodology.
Metacognition
Colloquially described as thinking about thinking, metacognition is the ability to
recognize and monitor one’s own cognitive processes (Flavell, 1979). Flavell (1979)
further described metacognition as comprised of three facets: knowledge of self,
knowledge of tasks, and knowledge of strategies. Various definitions have appeared in
the literature over the past three decades. Shamir (2013) recently defined metacognition
as being a “conscious, task-oriented process in which learners take an active part in the
organization and control of their thinking” (p. 98).
Metacognitive Awareness
Metacognitive awareness is the level of personal cognizance learners may possess
or express concerning their own knowledge of cognition and regulation of cognition.
Schraw and Dennison (1994), developers of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory used
in this study, conceptualized this concept as cognizance of “the ability to reflect upon,
understand, and control one’s learning” (p.460). Joseph (2010) extended the definition
to include the use of “practical problem-solving skills to resolve learning difficulties”
(p.99). Metacognitive awareness is a dependent variable associated with the reflection
generated through instruction designed according to the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003)
and is measured here using the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw &
Dennison, 1994) (research question one), and interpreted via participant reflection journal
data (research question three). Further description of this instrument and how

16

metacognitive awareness has been operationalized in this study is offered in Chapter 3,
Methodology.
Reflection
Reflection is a deliberate cognitive process during which the learner remembers,
considers and evaluates research acts, information, and inquiry processes they have used
in order to become more aware of successes or failures of strategies used, other possible
strategies, planning subsequent inquiry / research steps, appraising self performance, and
evaluating inquiry work. Reflection is foundational to metacognition and is considered a
key element in the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003). Reflection is guided in this study
through the implementation of the Stripling reflective prompt framework (Small et al.,
2012, p.15).
Research
Callison (2006a) defined student research as “engaging with text and other media
to analyze, extract, synthesize, and infer information” to address questions (p. 4).
Considered a foundational act performed during the process of inquiry, research is
defined in this study as a systematic process of accessing, evaluating, and using
information in order to not only answer a pre-determined question or problem, but to also
engender a line of logical reasoning resulting in the construction of new knowledge.
Rubric
A rubric is an assessment tool that calibrates learner performance from lowest and
basic levels of performance through proficient and advanced levels. Donham (2005, p.
265) defined three attributes for effective rubrics: explicit criteria to identify
performance, structured feedback so the learner understands his/her performance, and,
17

advance dissemination of the instrument so the learner knows expected performance
levels before attempting the task (as cited in Callison 2006e, p. 517-518). Further
description of the assessment rubric used in this study in conjunction with research
question two is provided in Chapter 3, Methodology.
Scaffold
Scaffolding is a means of supporting learners during the learning process.
Advance organizers, questioning, modeling, feedback, and peer assessment are all
examples of scaffolds. This study utilizes Stripling reflection prompts (pre-written
questions that serve to stimulate critical, reflective thinking) as the chief scaffolding
device (Small et al., 2012, p.15).
Stripling Inquiry Model (2003)
Model for inquiry learning developed in 2003 by Barbara Stripling. This model
involves six iterative phases: connect, wonder, investigate, construct, express, and reflect.
Based on constructivism, the focus of the Stripling Model is the thinking processes that
must accompany learner research and inquiry phases. This model is the basis for the New
York City Information Fluency Continuum (New York City School Library System,
2010, 2012) as well as the preferred inquiry system for primary source research promoted
by the Library of Congress (Stripling, 2009). Investigating the utility of the Stripling
model is the primary focus of this study.
Assumptions, Limitations, and Delimitations
Assumptions
There are several assumptions underlying this study. Topic-related assumptions
include that (a) the problem of college readiness is one about which educators at all levels
18

are concerned, (b) instructional designers are in need of validated models for the design
of inquiry instruction, (c) information fluency is a valuable skill set needed by all
members of the 21st century digital society, (d) metacognition is critical skill required for
successful learning at the secondary and higher levels, and (e) inquiry is an effective
means of learning. Theoretical assumptions underscoring the study include trusting the
learner-centered approach promoted by constructivism, and that tenets of constructivism
are represented and can be activated through the instructional design of inquiry learning.
Methodological assumptions include that (a) the sample is as representative as
possible of the larger population, (b) the sample size is large enough to test for statistical
significance, (c) the MAI instrument (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) enables an accurate
view of high school learners’ metacognitive awareness, (d) participants gave candid
responses to the MAI instrument, (e) the field-tested inquiry task outcome scoring rubric
accurately measures participant achievement, and (f) following the prescribed qualitative
coding and analysis as represented by Miles and Hubermann (1994) and Creswell (2009)
accurately portrays the data found in participant journals.
Assumptions concerning ethical considerations for this study include that
participants were treated fairly and had complete control over the choice to participate
throughout the study, and that all data is kept confidential.
Limitations
Limitations of this study include that the quantitative instrument, the
Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994), is a self-report
measure, making the data fully dependent upon the accuracy and honesty of the high
school-age participants, creating a potential threat to internal validity. Another potential
19

limitation for quantitative analysis could be smaller sample size, due to mortality, or nonparticipation. Although controlled for via bracketing, a potential threat during qualitative
data analysis is the chance of misinterpretation through researcher bias (Marshall &
Rossman, 2011). One final limitation is that the overall success of the implementation of
the Stripling-based instructional design is dependent upon the understanding of the
design and its skillful deployment by the classroom teacher responsible for the
instruction, introducing a potential threat to internal validity.
Delimitations
The scope of this study has been bounded in the following ways: (a) population,
(b) literature, and (c) methodological analyses. Population is restricted to secondary
learners that are from age 16 to 19 who are planning to go on to higher education, rather
than including a wider range of secondary age students. While the study could
potentially benefit all learners, this restriction serves to focus the study on just those
learners that are currently preparing to make the transition from high school to college
and are therefore most representative of the population discussed in the Pew Research
Center (2012) study and are soon to assume the position previously held by participants
of the Project Information Literacy studies (Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010).
The literature reviewed has also been delimited in regard to the broad array of
research on metacognition. Only those aspects of metacognition research most relevant
to this study are included such as its relationship to inquiry, academic achievement, and
college readiness. Excluded are studies exploring or debating the construct of
metacognition or its components and those that focus solely on the development of other

20

psychometric instruments to assess metacognition. These types of studies are beyond the
scope and purpose of this investigation.
Finally, methodological analysis in this study is delimited to reflect the desire to
investigate external validity of the Stripling Model (2003) as an effective instructional
design model for inquiry instruction (Richey & Klein, 2007). As a result, the measures
taken strictly reflect the model’s utility toward inquiry success (research questions two
and four), and broad metacognitive awareness (research questions one and three), rather
than exploring internal relationships within the construct of metacognition.
Organization of the Remainder of the Study
Chapter 2, Literature Review, will present the theoretical framework for this study
as well as present, analyze, synthesize and critique literature that is foundational,
representative, or related to the problem introduced in Chapter 1. Chapter 3,
Methodology, will describe the research methodology used to investigate the problem
and answer the research questions. Following data collection and analysis, Chapter 4,
Data Analysis and Results, will describe the data and analyses utilized along with the
results of these analyses. The dissertation will conclude with Chapter 5, Conclusions and
Discussion. This chapter will offer (a) a summary of the findings, (b) the conclusions
drawn from the data analyses of Chapter 4, (c) implications of these conclusions for
practice, (d) the relationship of the findings to the literature review, and (e)
recommendations for practice and future research efforts.

21

CHAPTER 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
Introduction to the Literature Review
The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of learner reflection
generated through instruction designed using the Stripling Model (2003) on learner
disposition of metacognition and inquiry performance. Broad goals for this literature
review are that it will:
•

Establish the need for this study by presenting evidence of the underlying
problem the study addresses,

•

Offer evidence for the critical importance of metacognition for inquiry
learning, and

•

Justify the selection of the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) as an appropriate
design model for inquiry instruction focused on metacognition.

This study is based upon the theoretical frameworks of metacognition and
constructivism. Metacognition, or one’s ability to consider, evaluate, and regulate his/her
own cognition (Flavell, 1979; Shraw & Dennison, 1994), is widely regarded as an
essential disposition or habit of mind for effective learning and transfer (Bransford,
Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Shraw & Dennison, 1994). Constructivism, a learning theory
based upon the idea that learning optimally occurs when the learner constructs new
knowledge (Jonassen & Land, 2000), provides the broader theoretical lens through which
inquiry and metacognition are viewed in this study. This chapter will review these
22

theoretical frameworks along with (a) literature related to the problem of research /
inquiry readiness of learners entering higher education, (b) foundational literature
concerning concepts undergirding the instructional design model used for this study, and,
(c) methodological issues found in previous explorations of these various elements.
Foundational literature reviewed is organized into the following themes:
•

Readiness of secondary learners for challenges of academic-level inquiry and
how this related to metacognition and information fluency.

•

Metacognition and its relationship to academic achievement, learning transfer,
and inquiry learning.

•

Information fluency and inquiry models and their relationship to
metacognition.

•

Reflection and its role in metacognition and inquiry learning, and how this
key tool of metacognition has been scaffolded during instruction.

Exploring the issue of the readiness of secondary learners for inquiry and research at the
academic level will elucidate potential solutions recognized and recommended by the
literature to address this problem. In doing so, this theme supports the need for this study
by highlighting particular elements instructional designers should consider when creating
inquiry instruction. Metacognition and information fluency are among these key
elements; therefore, to fully address the central problem of this study, metacognition must
be explored in terms of academic achievement, transfer and inquiry. Reviewing the
literature on metacognition serves to clarify its importance to learning and justify its
place as a potential outcome of inquiry instruction.

23

The literature on information fluency and inquiry models is then explored as a
means to discover how the construct of metacognition has been treated in relation to
information problem solving. Investigations into the utility of different information
problem solving models for generating learner reflection and metacognition will provide
points of comparison with the Stripling Model (2003) and establish the potential
contribution made by this study to the instructional design knowledge base. Finally,
literature related to the theme of reflection will be reviewed. The role of reflection as an
integral learning activity for metacognitive awareness and how it has been scaffolded in
other cases is presented as supportive evidence for the structure of the designed
instruction employed in this study.
The literature review was conducted via the Capella University digital library’s
vast collection of education databases including Proquest Education Journals, Academic
Search Premier, and Education Research Complete. Each database was searched by
utilizing these search terms in various combinations: metacognit* (truncation to yield all
terms related to this stem such as metacognition, metacognitive), and self-regulation;
terms associated with the sample: young adults, high school student, high school learn*
(yields learner, learners, learning); secondary school learners, college freshmen; college
readiness, inquiry; information fluency, and information literacy. In addition, researchbased professional practitioner texts on metacognition, inquiry, and information fluency
were reviewed.
Theoretical Framework
Constructivism and metacognition are the two theoretical frameworks supporting
this study. Both theories investigated in this study have been discussed in the literature
24

related to the problem of college readiness (Conley, 2007; Head & Eisenberg, 2010),
inquiry learning (Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Joseph, 2010; Small et al., 2012; Stripling,
2003), and the Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003; Small et al. 2012).
Constructivism
Constructivism is a learning theory (Jonassen, 1999; Jonassen & Land, 2000)
predicated upon earlier theories of interpretation of experience, or meaning making
(Bruner, 1961, 1986), and socio-cultural learning (Vygotsky, 1978). Bruner (1961, 1986)
considered and classified the mental representations learners develop for understanding
experience and focused on the process of discovery for much of his work on learning.
Questioning and prompting via teacher or other means of scaffolding and reflection upon
the learning process itself were part of Bruner’s vision for “guided practice in inquiry”
that ensures success of discovery learning (Driscoll, 2005, p. 236). Socio-cultural
learning as envisioned by Vygotsky (1978) focused on the internalization of social
occurrences and interactions of learners. Social interactions with experts, teachers and
peers provide a level of scaffolding, or support, for the learning process (Vygotsky,
1978). The concepts of social negotiation and critical reflection on varied perspectives
introduced into the learning environment converge in constructivism. Allen (2008)
stated, “A constructivist approach to teaching and learning hold that the learner, through
interaction and experience with an object or process, creates knowledge” (p. 21). A
constructivist approach is one that moves away from transactional learning (where
students simply return learned information and knowledge to the teacher) to
transformational learning where students actively build new knowledge through the
experience of learning with instructional scaffolds (Duffy & Cunningham, 1996;
25

Jonassen, 1999; Jonassen, Peck, & Wilson, 1999). For knowledge construction to occur,
the learning event is more student-centered as learners engage in self-monitoring,
reflection and evaluation of progress (Thomas, Crow, & Franklin, 2011, p. 85). Key
assumptions inherent in constructivism include that learning is active, not passive;
knowledge is constructed, not transmitted, and is deeply personal; learning is informed
and improved through social contexts (e.g., peer interaction and review); and, personal
reflection is needed for knowledge transfer to occur (Driscoll, 2005; Jonassen & Land,
2000). Inclusion of personal reflection, self-monitoring, and evaluation in discussions of
constructivism reinforces the essential role of metacognition in constructivist learning
environments.
Metacognition
Metacognition has been widely recognized and studied as an important element of
learning. Flavell (1979)’s seminal description of this mental construct as “one’s stored
knowledge or beliefs about oneself and others as cognitive agents, about tasks, about
actions or strategies, and how these interact to affect the outcomes of any sort of
intellectual enterprise” (p. 906), was derived from the assumption that “cognitive
strategies are invoked to make cognitive progress, metacognitive strategies to monitor it”
(p. 909). Schraw and Dennison (1994) classified metacognition as an “ability to reflect
upon, understand, and control one’s learning” (p. 460). More recently, Shamir (2013)
defined metacognition as being a “conscious, task-oriented process in which learners take
an active part in the organization and control of their thinking” (p. 98). In general terms,
metacognition is thinking about thinking, or as Callison (2006d) colloquially defined it,
“knowing what we know and what we don’t know” (p.435). In the frequently cited How
26

People Learn, Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000) recognized opportunities for
learner reflection and metacognition to be a vital consideration when creating learning
events. While metacognitive components have been investigated in learners of various
ages including elementary students (Sarac & Karakelle, 2012; Sperling, Howard, Miller,
& Murphy, 2002) metacognition definitions tend to coincide with Piaget’s description of
the formal operations stage (above age 11), when individuals are able to consider and
judge various perspectives, including their own. The ability to critically judge
perspectives places metacognitive activity in the top tier of Bloom’s original taxonomy,
evaluation (Bloom, Krathwohl, & Masia, 1956), and paves the way for learners to reach
creation, the highest level of the revised Bloom’s taxonomy (Anderson & Krathwohl,
2001). Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000) noted that because metacognition is
primarily an “internal dialogue, many students may be unaware of its importance unless
the processes are explicitly emphasized by teachers” (p.17). Without explicit
acknowledgement, it is possible that learners will not be able to leverage metacognition
to advantage their learning processes. This investigation explores the utility of reflection
generated from instruction specifically designed to underscore the importance of
metacognition and guide the development of this internal dialogue.
Constructivist tenets and metacognition figure prominently in discussions of
instructional design of inquiry learning experiences and information problem solving
(Deskins, 2012; Farmer, 2011; Grassian & Kaplowitz, 2009; Harada & Yoshina, 2010;
Jansen, 2011; Kuhlthau, Caspari, & Maniotes, 2007; Loertscher, Koechlin, & Zwann,
2009; Small et al., 2010; Stripling, 2003; Stripling, 2010; Wolf, Brush, & Saye, 2003b).
Allen (2008) noted the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) advocates
27

a constructivist approach in its learning standards by recognizing that learners in higher
education still need to “learn how to learn,” but warns that purely constructivist
environments are challenging without adequate learner prior knowledge and support (p.
33). This caveat along with recognition of the necessary role played by mediating agents
in the foundational theories of Bruner (1961, 1986) and Vygotsky (1978) demand that
various supports to metacognition be present in a constructivist learning event. Scaffolds
for the generation of learner reflection including student journals, peer interaction, and
direct instruction are therefore built into the instructional design utilized for this study.
Quantitative dependent variables of inquiry outcomes and metacognitive
awareness are both derived from and interpreted in terms of metacognitive and
constructivist theoretical frames. Schraw and Dennison (1994) described metacognitive
awareness as a cognitive skill that “allows individuals to plan, sequence, and monitor
their learning in a way that directly improves performance” (p.460). This description was
derived from Schraw and Dennison’s theoretical understandings of metacognition and
how it is manifested in learners in two main categories: knowledge of cognition and
regulation of cognition (Flavell, 1987; Schraw & Dennison, 1994). Metacognitive
awareness is quantitatively measured in terms of knowledge of cognition and regulation
of cognition in this study using the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw &
Dennison, 1994).
Inquiry outcomes for this study are measured in terms of the higher-order thinking
(analysis, synthesis, evaluation) believed to be stimulated in constructivist learning events
and supported by metacognitive reflection. Students’ reflection journals provide
qualitative data that was analyzed and interpreted in light of these theories in order to
28

more fully explain the phenomena of metacognitive awareness and inquiry outcomes
through the lens of learners’ described experiences.
The findings of this study extend the instructional design knowledge base by
providing further evidence of the utility of a constructivist, reflection-focused approach to
the design of inquiry learning.
Review of the Research and Methodological Literature
This chapter is organized by the following themes: (a) learner preparation to
conduct academic level inquiry and how this relates to metacognition, and information
fluency; (b) metacognition and it relationship to academic achievement, critical thinking,
transfer and inquiry; (c) information problem-solving / inquiry models and the
relationship to metacognition, and, (d) the concept of reflection, its relationship to
metacognition and inquiry, and how reflection can be supported within instruction. Each
theme comprises a discussion of literature that provides foundational background to the
problem and subsequent instructional needs, the independent variable for this study (i.e.
the instructional design that incorporates the Stripling Model (2003), and rationales for
the research design, methodology and setting employed in this investigation. These key
themes are followed by a review of methodological issues, and a synthesis and critique of
previous research informing this study.
Learner Preparation for Academic Level Inquiry
Current literature concerning the transition from high school to college highlights
serious inadequacies in the readiness of young adults to meet the information problemsolving challenges awaiting them in higher education. This section of the chapter will
present research concerning the state of information fluency of young adult learners in
29

order to more fully elucidate the background of this study’s research problem of and the
related instructional design considerations.
Young adults, information fluency and college readiness. The preparation of
young adults for learning experiences after high school is a topic that has captured the
attention of educators (Barnes & Slate, 2010; Conley, 2008; Farmer, 2011; Oakleaf &
Owen, 2010), government and business leaders and agencies (National Governors
Association, 2012; Conley, 2007; P21, 2011; PARCC, 2013), and professional
associations (ACRL, 2000; AASL, 2009; ISTE, 2007). Addressing what Conley (2008)
called the gap “between college-eligible and college-ready” (p. 6), the literature on
college-readiness ranges from individual cases studies (Nordell, 2009) and small
investigations (Oakleaf & Owen, 2010) to large-scale projects (American College Test
(ACT), 2009; Conley, 2007; Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010; Pew Research Center,
2012). Barnes and Slate (2010) described the current state of secondary education as
“bleak” in that “most students are not prepared to participate fully in academic endeavors,
the workforce, or civic life” (para. 2). Barnes and Slate (2010) based the academic
portion of this dire statement on results from the 2009 American College Test (ACT)
report, Measuring College and Career Readiness: The Class of 2009, that projected only
23% of the graduating class of 2009 had the likelihood of success in their first college
courses (ACT, 2009). Evidence of potential difficulties of the high school to college
transition has also come from the 2013 Project Information Literacy Report (Head, 2013),
the 2010 Project Information Literacy Report (Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and the Pew
Internet in American Life Project, How Teens Do Research in the Digital World (Pew
Research Center, 2012). These three large studies focused on the information problem30

solving competencies of teens and young adults, offering a state-of the-art view of this
population’s information fluency.
The 2013 Project Information Literacy Report, Learning the Ropes: How
Freshmen Conduct Research Once They Enter College (Head, 2013), utilized an online
survey of 1,941 high school and college respondents from the U.S. as well as 35
interviews from first-term freshmen, and “comparative analysis of library resources in 30
U.S. high school and 6 college and university libraries” as the basis for its findings (p. 1).
This report described college-level research as something that:
Entails learning and using information competencies and strategies. We define
competencies as the skills and knowledge needed to solve an information
problem. This means students both understand what action needs to be taken to
execute the task and how to perform that action. (Head, 2013, pp. 5-6)
The necessity of developing strategic application of competencies among freshmen was
reflected in the project results. “Most freshmen said their research competencies from
high school were inadequate for college work,” with 51% expressing concern over
“learning to navigate” college libraries, 74% struggling with developing keywords and
search strategies, and 43% reporting that, having located information sources, they “had
trouble making sense of, and tying together, all the information they had found” (p.3).
The earlier Project Information Literacy Report, Truth be Told: How College
Students Evaluate and Use Information in the Digital Age (Head & Eisenberg, 2010),
presented findings that counter common assumptions about young adults’ sagacity in the
digital information landscape. The project researchers administered a 22-item online
survey to over 112,844 students at 25 geographically diverse college campuses, with a
31

final sample size of 8,353 respondents (p.42). In addition, 25 interviews were conducted
and analyzed. The researchers removed freshmen from the sample because they wanted
to discover attitudes and strategies that were likely to be ingrained and routine to these
older upperclassmen. The investigators found that while over half of the learners in the
sample employed writing routines for assigned research, less used research strategies, and
few students (under 26%) had developed time saving research routines (p.19). The
authors concluded that students are relying on very basic information fluency skills,
engaging with information through lower-order thinking tactics, and struggling to fully
understand research assignments and what is required for “the process of intellectual
discovery” (p. 36). Lower-order thinking was defined by the authors as using
“procedural memorized routines, techniques and rules for conducting research,” and
higher-order thinking as “interpreting, synthesizing, and creatively manipulating”
information to arrive at new understandings, “meanings, interpretations, and knowledge”
(p.37). Correspondingly, the sample rated themselves as skilled at basic information
fluency tasks such as developing search terms or performing basic evaluation of sources,
but, “considered themselves to be at a great disadvantage” with more advanced research
tasks such as “defining and narrowing a research inquiry” (p. 37). By their own
descriptions, many participants in this study equated the research / inquiry process with
simply finding the right answers. One surprising result in Project Information Literacy
(2010) was that college students reported enacting constraints to “head off complex
information landscapes that change and grow” such as resources developed through Web
2.0 capabilities (p. 39). This limited means of information management is surprising in
light of both the rich array of digital resources available to these learners and the assumed
32

digital skills of this generation (Rosen, Carrier, & Cheever, 2010). Similar findings
emerged from the Pew Internet in American Life Project How Teens Do Research in the
Digital World (Pew Research Center, 2012).
The Pew Internet and American Life Project is an ongoing series of research
studies conducted by the Pew Research Center, a “nonpartisan, non-profit, “fact-tank”
that provides information on the issues, attitudes and trends shaping America and the
world” (2012, p. 10). The 2012 Pew study focused on research practices of secondary
students and produced similar findings to the Project Information Literacy Report (Head
& Eisenberg, 2010). The Pew researchers noted that while the expansive digital
landscape offers secondary learners the opportunity to “become more self-reliant
researchers,” the teachers surveyed expressed concerns about the quality of students’
research skills, critical thinking, and supporting dispositions (p. 2). Specific teacher
concerns included the level of student skills for assessing the quality of information,
student time management, and the generally lower “critical thinking capacity” witnessed
in the classroom (p. 2). Teachers characterized students as overwhelmed by the quantity
of available information and generally low in level of determination and patience when
challenged by information that is harder to find. Echoing attitudes of the college-age
learners from Project Information Literacy, the teachers participating in the Pew study
reported that for their secondary students, research “has shifted from a relatively slow
process of intellectual curiosity and discovery to a fast-paced, short-term exercise aimed
at locating just enough information to complete an assignment” (p. 3-4).
The Pew study used a 30-minute online survey, administered to 2,067 teachers
(95% who were public school teachers) and a series of focus groups of teachers and
33

students in early 2012 (Pew Research Center, 2012, p. 8). A limitation of this study
affecting generalizability is that 56% of the teachers surveyed teach AP (advanced
placement) or other accelerated courses, thus being more representative of higher
achieving learners (p. 9). This fact, however, makes the findings even more
disconcerting. If the concerns raised by the Pew study stemmed from higher achieving
learners, what implications do they hold for the wider general population of future
college learners?
Low level, self-limiting information problem-solving practices like constraining
the breadth of resources, failing to discern the quality of information, or inability to
analyze found information (Buckheit, 2010; Gross, 2005; Head & Eisenberg, 2010;
Oakleaf & Owen, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2012) are at the heart of the challenge of
readiness for college. Learners entering higher education may hold misconceptions of
their own level of information fluency, expecting the skill set developed in high school to
adequately serve them in college (Neuman, 2012; Nordell, 2009; Oakleaf & Owen,
2010). Head and Eisenberg (2010) stressed the importance of solidifying inquiry /
research skills in high school because college-age learners participating in Project
Information Literacy reported integrating “basics from high school into their research
repertoire for college – and often made few changes” (p. 21).
Oakleaf and Owen (2010) also called for increased information fluency
instruction to close preparedness gaps, citing instructional needs revealed through a study
of freshman course syllabi (VanScoy & Oakleaf, 2008). These instructional needs
included the necessity for freshmen to be able “to employ a number of high-level inquirybased research skills, …display emotional resilience by persisting despite challenges,”
34

and, demonstrate the ability to “construct understandings, draw conclusions, and create
new knowledge” (Oakleaf & Owen, 2010, p.53). How these skills might become
solidified for secondary learners then becomes the focus of much discussion.
Instructional design considerations. Based on their findings, Head and
Eisenberg (2010) recommended that information fluency and research practices must be
developed in a manner not limited to a “narrow set of approaches” for inquiry, but should
instead emphasize the higher level thinking the inquiry process demands and that this
instruction transpire long before learners enter college (p. 41). Neuman (2012)
additionally pointed out the necessity for information fluency skills to be directly
connected to content areas in schools, citing the Common Core State Standards “key
design considerations” to include opportunities for students “to gather, comprehend,
evaluate, synthesize… information and ideas; to conduct research in order to answer
questions or solve problems” and to “analyze and create” various forms of media
(National Governors Association, 2010, p. 4 as cited in Neuman, 2012, p. 27).
Common Core State Standards (National Governors Association, 2010) and the
Partnership for College and Career Readiness (PARCC, 2013) are new sets of standards
and related assessments designed to help schools better prepare students for their futures.
The National Governors Association and the Council of State School Officers authored
the Common Core, representing a move by governmental agencies and associations to
address perceived learning gaps in education. PARCC, funded through a grant from the
U.S. Department of Education, is a consortium of states developing English and math
assessments aligned to the Common Core to help determine levels of learner
preparedness for future career and learning endeavors. PARCC assessments are to be
35

implemented in participating states during the 2014 - 2015 school year. Most
importantly, the Common Core standards call for deeper learning that invokes critical
thinking, nonfiction information sources, and inquiry across disciplines.
Relationship to metacognition, inquiry, and information fluency. Conley
(2008) pointed out that “current measures of college preparation are limited in their
ability to communicate to students and to educators the true range of what students must
do the be fully ready to succeed in college,” and named “cognitive and metacognitive
capabilities” to be essential critical capacities for success (p. 24). Conley’s 2007 report,
Redefining College Readiness for the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation pointed to “selfawareness and intentionality” as important attributes of entering college students,
stressing that metacognitive practices are intentional strategies that should become “a
habitual way of working” resulting in persistent self-monitoring and transfer of strategies
between learning events (p.13). Among Conley’s recommendations to secondary
educators was the need to have students “demonstrate progressively more control and
responsibility for their learning as they approach the college level” (p. 25).
In his case study of freshmen preparedness for the sciences, Nordell (2009) noted
the need for stronger inquiry and learning strategy skills at the secondary level, citing the
amount of independent learning expected in college and the corresponding imperative
capacity for learning strategy adjustment. Despite instituting learning strategy practices
under the umbrella of study skills, Nordell (2009) noted “the students who need the help
the most are the least likely to seek it out” (p. 41), and posited that this problem is
compounded by “the fact that most higher education faculty have little or no training in

36

study skills or learning strategies” (p. 36), reinforcing the need for new college learners to
have well-developed metacognitive practices prior to matriculating.
Recognized learner inadequacies highlight the necessity to employ critical
thinking and metacognitive reflection as core elements of inquiry instruction (Conley,
2008; Head & Eisenberg, 2010, Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2012;
Winne & Nesbit, 2009). Standards from the American Association of School Librarians
(AASL) (2007), and the Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL) (2000)
guide the development of information fluency skills. These standards additionally
address inquiry processes as important to learner success with an ultimate goal for
students to become agile, lifelong learners. Stafford (2011) noted that AASL standards
recognize the need for a wider view of learner dispositions to be addressed beyond basic
search skills and redefine inquiry and research around a central context of reflection and
metacognition (p. 9).
In their study focused on promoting a deep approach for nurturing self-direction,
Silen and Uhlin (2008) posited “If the intention is to enhance the students’ ability to
become self-directed learners, and prepare for life long learning in their professions, it is
essential to recognize that students becoming responsible and independent is a learning
process in its own right” (p. 461). This sentiment echoes the call of the research
discussed thus far in this chapter and reinforces that this learning process cannot occur
without well-developed metacognition. Research has pointed to the need for better
learner preparation for the challenges of academic inquiry. The solutions and
recommendations given underscore the necessity to bring more attention to
metacognition and critical thinking while promoting a firmer grasp on information
37

fluency and inquiry skills. It is clear that metacognitive awareness is a critical element to
be accounted for within instructional designs for information fluency and inquiry
instruction.
The Key Role of Metacognition in Learning
The term ‘metacognitive’ connotes “the ability to be intentional and reflective
about one’s thoughts” (Oakleaf & VanScoy, 2010, p. 381). Oakleaf and VanScoy (2010)
described expert learners to be those who “were aware of their mental processes,” able to
articulate a problem and goals and alter strategies if necessary to reach those goals (p.
381). This section will review literature concerning the role of metacognition in learning
specifically targeting areas of interest related to college readiness: academic achievement,
inquiry, critical thinking and transfer.
Metacognition has been explored in the research relative multiple concepts and
constructs. For example, Winne and Nesbit (2009) and Vrugt & Oort (2008) investigated
the connection of metacognition to effective strategy use. These discussions evidenced
the relationship between study strategies and the deeper, reflective practices of
metacognitive learners. Another group of researchers have examined metacognition’s
association with information fluency (Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Kilic-Cakmak, 2010).
This research pointed to metacognition as essential to the development of learner selfefficacy in exercising information fluency skills. Closely-related to information fluency,
the widely-explored construct of critical thinking has metacognition at its core (Choy &
Cheah, 2009; Halpern, 1998; Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Magno, 2010; Martinez, 2006). To an
even wider extent, metacognition has been linked to academic achievement (Hall, Smith,
& Chia, 2008; Young & Fry, 2008; Zulkiply, Kabit, & Ghani, 2009), college readiness
38

(Conley, 2007; Head & Eisenberg, 2010), and transfer of knowledge to future situations
(Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000). These studies will be discussed in greater depth
in subsequent sections of this chapter. In addition to the scholarly literature on
metacognition, the advent of the Common Core State Standards movement has also
inspired an abundance of practitioner articles addressing critical thinking, metacognition
and inquiry learning. Growing attention to metacognition is testament to its critical place
in learning as well as a sign that educators are increasingly seeking methods to embed
this important disposition within learning events.
Metacognition and achievement. Academic achievement is an obvious area of
concern when addressing the problem of college preparedness. Metacognition is widely
recognized as a key disposition, or “habit of mind” needed for individual growth and
learning (AASL, 2009). Hall, Smith, and Chia (2008) identified metacognition as playing
a vital role toward the goal of academic success and college degree completion, but
confirmed along with Head and Eisenberg (2010), Conley (2008), and Pew Research
Center (2012) that metacognitive skills are optimally developed before college. In their
widely-cited meta-analysis of research on variables linked to learning, Wang, Haertel,
and Walberg (1990) identified metacognitive factors “including comprehension,
monitoring, use of self-regulatory, self-control strategies, and use of strategies to
facilitate generalization of concepts” to be the “most important” variables for learning (p.
37). This revelation underscored the importance of metacognition not only for immediate
learning achievement, but also as a catalyst for ongoing learner growth since it is an
“alterable variable” that may, with training and practice, “help the great majority of
students to reach higher achievement levels” (Wang, Haertel, & Walberg, 1990, p. 37). If
39

metacognition is alterable, a logical question is whether this alteration is dependent on the
learner’s intelligence and developmental age.
Research focused on this question has identified metacognition as separate from
and only “partly dependent” on intelligence (Veenman & Spaans, 2005, p. 171) and to be
a stronger predictor of learning achievement than intelligence (Veenman, Wilhelm, &
Beishuizen, 2004). Veenman and Spaans (2005) also concluded that metacognitive skill
increased with age for their sample (n = 32) of secondary school students and that
developing these skills benefits learners as they progress through educational programs,
matching the Veenman, Wilhelm and Beishuizen (2004) investigation of metacognitive
development across four age cohorts (fourth, sixth, and eighth graders, and university
students). Kuhn and Dean (2004) and Schraw and Moshman (1995) also recognized the
development of metacognition with maturation. For instructional designers, an essential
concern then is how to effectively support the development of metacognition as learners
mature.
Dignath and Buttner (2008) confirmed that self-regulated learning “can be
fostered effectively at both primary and secondary school level” (p. 231). For secondary
students, Dignath and Buttner (2008) found effect sizes to be the highest when strategies
included metacognitive reflection. Zulkiply, Kabit, and Ghani (2009) found a significant
positive relationship between metacognitive awareness and academic achievement among
secondary learners ages 14 through 19 using test scores as the measure of performance.
While demonstrating the connection to achievement, this study did reveal significant
differences in the metacognitive awareness levels of the younger (age 14 – 16) versus
older (ages 17 – 19) learners. The older group showed higher levels of metacognitive
40

knowledge, metacognitive regulation, and overall awareness (Zulkiply, Kabit, & Ghani,
2009, p.102). This result reaffirms earlier studies that identified differences in
metacognition with maturation (Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Veenman & Spaans, 2005). These
findings collectively support the selection of secondary learners ages 16 to 19 as ideal for
the present research.
Young and Fry (2008) also investigated the relationship between
metacognitive awareness and academic achievement in college-age learners. The Young
and Fry approach was to apply the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI; Schraw &
Dennison, 1994) to look for a correlation to global measures such as learners’ cumulative
grade point averages. Significant correlations to academic achievement were found,
along with strong correlations between metacognitive factors for regulation of cognition
and knowledge of cognition (Flavell, 1979; Schraw & Dennison, 1994). Regulation of
cognition concerns a learner’s ability to select, enact, or alter strategies as needed
(Schraw & Dennison, 1994; Sperling, Howard, Miller, & Murphy, 2002). This mental
flexibility signals why metacognition is vital to lifelong learning: it is foundational to
meeting the learning agility called for by business, industry, government, and education
leaders (P21, 2012; PARCC, 2013). Vrugt and Oort (2008) not only saw the connection
between metacognition and effective strategy use but also recognized that regardless of
age, university students who were more effective self-regulators out performed their more
experienced counterparts. Adding to the importance of the regulation of cognition factor,
Cao and Nietfeld (2007) demonstrated quantitatively that college students’ recognition of
their learning difficulties (i.e. knowledge of cognition) alone was not enough to prompt
them to adapt or change strategies.
41

Both the Veenman and Spaans (2005) and Veenman, Wilhelm, and Beishuizen
(2004) studies pointed to metacognitive ability as the starting point for learners faced
with unfamiliar situations. Metacognitive awareness, or being cognizant of one’s
knowledge of their own thinking, learning strategy use and options helps learners assess
prior knowledge against new information, and makes thinking explicit (Joseph, 2010;
Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Schraw & Dennison, 1994). The metacognitively aware, expert
learners described by Oakleaf and VanScoy (2010) were assumed to more accurately
predict their own learning performance outcomes (i.e. grades or scores) and achieve at
higher levels than learners lacking metacognitive skills. This assumption has been
supported frequently in the research (Hall, Smith, & Chia, 2008; Schraw, 2001; Wang,
Haertel, & Walberg, 1990; Winne & Nesbit, 2009; Young & Fry, 2008; Zulkiply, Kabit,
& Ghani, 2009).
While metacognition is widely connected to achievement in the literature, not all
studies unilaterally support the connection. In a longitudinal study designed to predict
achievement, Kuyper, van der Werf, and Lubbers (2000) tracked Dutch students from
grade one through the end of their secondary education and found that compared to other
factors such as achievement motivation and fear of failure, metacognitive variables did
not as strongly relate to achievement. This study is, however, greatly in the minority, and
results, according to the authors, may have been affected by the operationalization of
metacognitive and regulation variables as broad measures (p. 201). The majority of
studies demonstrate clear relationships between metacognition and achievement as well
as to elements of successful learning and inquiry such as critical thinking.

42

Metacognition, inquiry, critical thinking and tranfer. The need for
metacognition and critical thinking within inquiry learning is evident in the literature
(Deskins, 2012; Jansen, 2011; Kilic-Cakmak, 2010; Manlove, Lazonder, & de Jong,
2009; Michalsky, Zion, & Mevarech, 2007; Schraw, Crippen, & Hartley, 2006; Small et
al., 2012). For example, Micahlsky, Zion, and Mevarech (2007) pointed to
metacognition for better inquiry performance by noting that when learners “explain,
justify, evaluate and revise their ideas” during an investigation of a topic or event, their
developing metacognitive awareness in turn benefits inquiry because these learners are
becoming “more strategically oriented” and “systematic in their thinking” (p. 396). In a
wider analysis of contemporary research on self-regulated learning in the sciences,
Schraw, Crippen, and Hartley (2006) presented findings supporting the conclusion that
knowledge construction occurs through inquiry teaching because it stimulates “active
engagement in the learning process” through the use of strategies and “increases
motivation to succeed” (p. 118). These statements reinforce the symbiotic nature of
inquiry and metacognition: each stimulates the growth or success of the other. Schraw et
al. (2006) identified factors underlying the benefits of inquiry learning to include the
frequent inclusion of expert communication as well as increased motivation and
reflection (p.119). This explanation corresponds to Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal
development as key to socio-cognitive growth and reinforces the constructivist nature of
inquiry learning, as students “reflect upon their thoughts and negotiate ideas with peers
and teachers,” promoting metacognition (Wen, Tsai, Lin, & Chuang, 2004, as cited in
Michalsky et al., 2007, p. 396-397). Inquiry learning is further advanced for learners as
increased belief in their own “control over learning processes” promotes deeper
43

information fluency self-efficacy and knowledge construction processes (Kilic-Cakmak,
2010, p. 201). In a synthesis of three experimental studies concerning the use of a nonembedded online cognitive regulation support tool designed for scaffolding selfregulation during inquiry with high school-age learners (ages 16 to 18), Manlove,
Lazonder, and de Jong (2009) found mixed results on learning outcomes, suggesting that
metacognitive supports need to be embedded within the inquiry task to be more effective.
From their findings, Manlove, Lazonder, and de Jong (2009) posited for learners lacking
prior inquiry experience, scaffolds must be designed to provide ample practice of
requisite skills before “implementation in a formal inquiry setting” (p. 802). These
authors also considered the effects of having supports embedded within the inquiry
learning task as opposed to being a separate task, and how peer collaboration played a
role in outcomes. Results of using the non-embedded support tool demonstrated that
tools for scaffolding self-regulation should be embedded within the inquiry-learning task
itself (i.e. their use a required part of the activity) and not a separate entity (p.801). When
the high school students in the Manlove et al. (2009) studies worked in collaborative
pairs there tended to be greater “elaboration and better structure” to their work (p. 801).
This result lends further support to the body of literature on the benefits of peer
collaboration for enhancing critical thinking in constructivist environments.
An objective of Common Core standards and a routinely stated goal for inquiry
learning environments, critical thinking is largely regarded in as dependent upon learners’
metacognition (Brown, 2004; Choy & Cheah, 2009; Ku & Ho, 2010; Martinez,
2006). Kuhn and Dean (2004), noted that the term, “critical thinking” is broadly applied
in practitioner discussions (Martinez, 2006) where it often lacks precise definition, and
44

identified metacognition as the “bridge” for connecting instructional needs of
practitioners to scholarly research where the term is identified by more specific (i.e.
measurable) constructs. In other words, the construct of critical thinking is best viewed
through the lens of metacognition. Various qualitative studies of university students have
connected critical thinking to metacognition (Choy & Cheah, 2009; Ku & Ho, 2010;
Kuhn & Dean, 2004). Ku and Ho (2010) for example, investigated critical thinking in
college students of similar achievement levels and found metacognitive strategy use to
directly impact the performance of critical thinking tasks, with those who performed
better on the tasks demonstrating higher strategy usage during think-aloud protocols. In a
study of instructor perceptions of critical thinking, Choy and Cheah (2009) employed
different scaffolds such as prompts and questions to encourage critical thinking in
university students who had to activate metacognitive strategies to process information.
Magno (2010), in a larger quantitative study of college students (n = 240), found factors
of critical thinking to be significantly related to factors of metacognition (p.149) and
identified metacognition as a “significant path to critical thinking” where learners can
activate specific strategies to accomplish a learning goal (p.137). For middle and high
school learners, Kuhn and Dean (2004) found qualitative evidence that fostering
metacognitive skills in the classroom was highly beneficial for promoting critical
thinking in terms of composing and defending arguments as part of inquiry. Halpern
(1998) also identified metacognition as a prime element in her model for the teaching of
critical thinking and promotion of transfer of knowledge, but cautioned that
metacognitive skills need to be made explicit and supported during instruction, since
transfer cannot occur if the learner is not aware first of the need for a specific strategy, a
45

point also made by Ku and Ho (2010), and supported by the Manlove et al. (2009) series
of studies. Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000) additionally asserted that knowledge
transfer is greater when metacognitive approaches that increase personal awareness such
as modeling or scaffolding are employed within learning events. To fully leverage their
developing metacognitive skills for future transfer, learners must first be aware of them.
Metacognitive awareness. Awareness of personal metacognition can be
developed and is a means for gauging metacognitive practices (Mok, Lung, Cheng,
Cheung, & Ng, 2006; Ritchhart, Turner, & Hadar, 2009; Schraw & Dennison, 1994;
Wang et al., 1990). Mok, Lung, Cheng, Cheung, and Ng (2006) found metacognitive
awareness developed over time and benefitted learning in university students, as did
Ritchhart, Turner, and Hadar (2009) for school-age children in grades three to 11. In a
more comprehensive study, Leutwyler (2009) reviewed evidence from earlier studies to
determine if patterns existed for the self-reported use of metacognitive strategies among
students (n = 1,432) in grades 10 to 12. Leutwyler (2009) contradicted evidence of
Veenman, Wilhelm, and Beishuizen (2004) and Veenman and Spaans (2005) concerning
growth of metacognitive awareness during high school. For this sample, there was no
evidence of increase or growth in “students’ self-reported use of metacognitive learning
strategies,” or “growth of metacognitive skills between the ages of 14 and 22”
(Leutwyler, 2009, p. 119). Counter evidence to Mok et al. (2006) findings of progressive
development of metacognitive awareness is provided by Vukman and Licardo (2010)
who studied how aspects of metacognitive self-regulation related to achievement across
age groups spanning high school to university (ages 14 through 23). Although
“correlations between metacognitive self-regulation and school performance were
46

statistically significant in all age groups,” students’ self-reporting of regulatory actions
decreased from ages 14 to 18, then increased until age 22 (p. 266). The findings of
Vukman and Licardo (2010) and Leutwyler (2009) are compelling evidence that high
school-age learners may not readily recognize their existing metacognitive abilities or
actions.
Bereiter and Scardamalia (1989) suggested that “many students reach young
adulthood with inadequately developed strategies for managing their own cognitive
behavior in learning” (p. 367) and that learners need metacognitive frameworks for
problem-solving, identifying what needs to be learned or questions that remain
unanswered (i.e. what they do not know), and adapting and using new knowledge
(p.377). Cao and Nietfeld (2007) demonstrated quantitatively that college students’
recognition of their learning difficulties was not enough to prompt them to adapt or
change learning strategies and recommended that a “more robust intervention to promote
metacognitive skills among college students” was needed (p. 39). Metacognitive
strategies can be taught and learned (Dignath & Buttner, 2008; Joseph, 2010) using a
variety of instructional strategies such as modeling, tools for self-assessment, and social
learning supports through a “community of scholars” (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989, p.
388). Qualitative analysis of concept maps used by learners in grades 3 through 11
prompted Ritchhart et al. (2009) to assert, “the very act of unpacking what it means to
think can help students become more metacognitive, more self-directed as learners, and
better thinkers” (p. 157). In her discussion of how ineffective strategy use by secondary
learners can be rectified, Joseph (2010) suggested that the inclusion of metacognitive
practices within instruction could help students “practice these skills over time,
47

increasing the chance that these valuable thinking strategies will strengthen their practical
intelligence and become part of their repertoire as learners” (p.102). Schneider (2008)
bolstered this idea by explaining that the enactment of metacognitive strategies in turn
“leads to expansion and refinement of specific strategy knowledge” (p. 115). Shamir
(2013) further supported the need for this growth among young learners, stating
“conscious student activation of metacognitive processes has crucial implications for
teaching because the responsibility for learning is shifting from the teacher, as chief
mediating figure, to that of the student” (p.98), a statement aligning to the Hacker,
Dunlosky and Graesser (2009) definition of metacognition as the driver of learner
agency. Agency implies students are prepared to “take charge” of their learning by being
aware of it, evaluating their learning needs, generating strategies to meet the needs and
implementing the strategies (Hacker, Dunlosky, & Graesser, 2009, p.1). Metacognition’s
role in promoting student agency and corresponding self-efficacy, responsibility, and
control for active learning reinforces its importance in constructivist learning situations
such as information problem solving and inquiry.
Current research on metacognition supports a strong connection to academic
achievement by highlighting how elements such as regulation of strategies, critical
thinking, and the development of personal metacognitive awareness paired with ongoing
metacognitive practices can promote agency and transfer to future learning. The studies
included focused primarily on secondary school to college-age learners, populations
similar to the one targeted by this investigation. Two important understandings emerging
from this review are that metacognition is a changeable learning variable (Dignath &
Buttner, 2008; Joseph, 2010; Wang et al., 1990) that can be positively affected through
48

explicit instruction (Halpern, 1998; Ku & Ho, 2010; Schraw et al., 2006), continued
practice (Mok et al., 2006; Ritchhart et al., 2009; Schraw et al., 2006), and appropriate
frameworks and scaffolds (Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989; Bransford et al., 2000; Cao &
Nietfeld, 2007; Choy & Cheah, 2009; Dignath & Buttner, 2008; Kuhn & Dean, 2004;
Manlove et al., 2009; Michalsky et al., 2007; Ritchhart et al., 2009). This evidence
supports the crucial nature of the role of metacognition, confirming the call for increased
metacognitive practices made by the Pew Research Center (2012), Project Information
Literacy (2010), and Redefining College Readiness (Conley, 2007). The resultant sense
of agency metacognition engenders underscores its value to constructivist learning
(Hacker et al., 2009; Schraw et al., 2006; Shamir, 2013). Another need identified for
college preparedness is information fluency and inquiry skills.
Information Fluency, Information Problem Solving, and Inquiry
Preparing learners to meet challenges they will face in college has become an
imperative for educators and policy makers looking to bridge the high school to higher
education gap. Key recommendations brought forth in prior research (Conley, 2007,
2008; Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010; Oakleaf & Owen, 2010; Pew Research
Center, 2012) point to the need for learners to have stronger information fluency, inquiry
skills, and well-developed metacognitive processes. This section of the chapter will
explore information fluency models and their utility as design models scaffolding
metacognition during inquiry / research learning events.
Information fluency skills have been widely recognized as an essential core
element for college and workplace success and lifelong learning agility (AASL, 2009;
ACRL, 2000; Burhanna (Ed.), 2013; P21, 2011; PARCC, 2013, Riedling, 2006).
49

Instructional designs for information fluency and problem solving and have the primary
purpose of guiding learners through a research / inquiry process. The pressing need for
these designs has been revealed through the large-scale studies reviewed above such as
Project Information Literacy (Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and The Pew
Research study (2012). The largest difficulties college students in Project Information
Literacy (Head & Eisenberg, 2010) encountered when performing research such as
defining a topic (66%), narrowing a topic (62%), determining credibility of sources
(41%), and knowing simply how to get started with research (84%), are evidence of the
need for information fluency skills to be well-ingrained into secondary school
curriculums (p.25). Without this pre-existing skill set, countless college-age students
face an even greater obstacle when tasked to conduct research. Many of these students,
when faced with research assignments, will, as Head and Eisenberg (2010) found, enact
self-limiting tactics like utilizing a limited set of resources, using only the most basic
evaluative skills for determining source value, and working only to the professor’s basic
expectations (p.35). Other difficulties outlined in the Head and Eisenberg (2010) study
point to the necessity for stronger metacognitive skills. For example, uncertainties such
as “knowing if a good job is done” (46%), “deciding if done” (37%), trouble getting
started with the research process (84%) (p. 25), and uncertainty in performing “selfassessment of their research efforts” (41%) (p. 30) indicate that self-regulation and
knowledge of personal learning strategies are wanting. Based on their findings, Head and
Eisenberg (2010) recommended that “developing higher level, more independent,
creative problem-solvers in college” will occur by “building in more systematic and
measured instruction and learning of research and information skills in high schools, or
50

earlier” (p.41). Likewise, the 2013 Project Information Literacy study pointed out the
gap in students’ research knowledge between high school and college, questioned to what
extent AASL standards are being met in secondary schools, and stressed the need for
“coordinated efforts” for information literacy to be “taught in a progressive and
contextual manner” (p. 30). It is logical then that models for inquiry / research integrate
information fluency and metacognitive skills within the process.
Models for information problem solving, inquiry and research. Models for
the inquiry / research process have been developed and used to varying degrees over the
past 50 years. The advancement of models is marked by a progression from linear, fixed
models to iterative, flexible models, coinciding with changing trends in education. The
progression is demonstrated through the very terms used to name the instruction the
models guided. In the early days, the term “bibliographic instruction” alluded to just that:
instruction in how to use various library tools. Later, models were called ‘information
problem solving’ because that was exactly the function of the instruction: to help learners
answer a specific question through a series of steps to follow. Now, the term ‘inquiry’ is
used, connoting a more constructivist idea of problem solving through exploration. In his
extensive review of major movements and documents concerning information fluency
and inquiry, Callison (2006c) traced the “evolution from a narrow library skill base to a
more open and demanding critical thinking process” (p. 17). This movement has
coincided with a transformation of the institution of the school library away from a
warehouse repository to that of a functional laboratory for active learning. Key events
along this path include the original AASL national standards for school libraries
developed in 1960 that recognized the library’s role in independent learning and inquiry;
51

the 1988 and 1998 national guidelines, each titled Information Power, that defined “the
shift away from teaching tools and location toward instruction in critical thinking based
on selection, use, analysis, and synthesis of information to meet the intellectual needs of
individual students” (Callison, 2006c, p. 19); and, Carol Kuhlthau’s development of the
Information Search Process model in the 1980s which marked the first connection
between the teaching of information skills and constructivism (p.21). During this same
time period, Barbara Stripling, a future president of both AASL (1996-1997) and the
American Library Association (2013-2014), began to question how and where effective
thinking skills could be integrated with the instruction of information skills (Stripling,
1989). Since 2000, Callison (2006c) observed, there has been tremendous growth of
interest among practitioners toward integrating and instructing information skills through
inquiry, evidenced by works such as Harada and Yoshina (2004), Small and Arnone,
(2000), and Stripling (2003). This trend has continued with recent professional titles by
Zmuda and Harada (2008), Grassian and Kaplowitz (2009), Harada and Yoshina (2010),
Kuhlthau, Caspari, and Maniotes (2007), and Small et al. (2012). Pinto, Cordon, and
Diaz (2010) provided empirical evidence of the continued interest and growth of
information fluency in libraries and academia through a terminological and statistical
analysis of publications dating 1977 to 2007, concluding that not only is information
fluency important, but the need to develop corresponding effective instruction is also
prevalent in the literature.
The use of student-centered inquiry as an instructional approach signals that a
shift is being made from basic information problem-solving (a teacher-centered
construct), to a more constructivist design. Stripling (2003) made a clear distinction
52

between the constructs of information problem solving and inquiry stating, “In an
information problem-solving model, the emphasis seems to be more on finding
information to answer a problem or need and less on the student’s mental processes to
learn (e.g., asking good questions, constructing new understandings)” (p.5). Information
problem-solving is generally a teacher-driven, linear process that leads correspondingly
to the generation of reports of existing information, rather than authentic research
experiences yielding new knowledge for learners. Reporting primarily invokes basic
information location and access skills. Research and inquiry, on the other hand, require
active, critical thinking and self-regulation of this thinking. In other words, skilled
conduct of inquiry demands metacognitive skills. To this end, “inquiry is a relationship
between thinking skills and content” and “may be more likely to engender long-lasting,
in-depth learning by each individual” (Stripling, 2003, p. 5-6). Results of the various
college readiness studies cited previously evidence Stripling’s statement by confirming
how students tend to use information-problem skills to just get by when what they really
need are higher-level thinking skills promoted through inquiry. Nazari (2011) confirmed
Stripling’s definition of inquiry in terms of the connection between thinking skills and
content in a case study of online distance learning geography students, concluding that
information literacy was needed “not just as a set of transferrable skills, but as an enabler
for independent, connective, transferable” learning (p. 345). A hallmark of both
metacognition and information fluency, the issue of transfer needs to be addressed.
Transfer of knowledge is considered one of the many benefits of metacognition.
As learners develop stronger self-regulatory skills and deeper knowledge of themselves
as learners, they can more readily adapt to novel learning experiences. Instructors
53

frequently assume that learners have learned content and will automatically transfer this
knowledge to a new situation. Herring (2011b) acknowledged that this assumption
existed and tested it in regard to information fluency skills in three classes from three
separate secondary schools with students ages 11 – 12. Observations, diaries,
questionnaires, and interviews were qualitatively analyzed, producing results showing
that despite teacher and librarian beliefs of transfer, only a small minority of the students
were actually transferring their information skills into new learning (p.13). Herring
concluded instructor assumptions of transfer “appear to be based not on practice, but on a
view that transfer is an inevitable consequence of learning” (p.13-14). In a related
publication, Herring (2011a) discussed transfer and a variety of related assumptions made
about information fluency and presented recommendations for practice including that a
“culture of transfer” be initiated in schools so learning occurs in a more holistic, interrelated form that promotes relevance (p. 36). This recommendation aligns with Common
Core State Standards (National Governors Association, 2010), and Hacker et al. (1998)
discussions of metacognition, as well as Stripling’s definition of inquiry as promoting
“long-lasting, in-depth learning” (Stripling, 2003, p. 5-6). Kilic-Cakmak (2010) asserted,
“When reflection on learning to be information literate is added to the experience of
information literacy, students are assisted to be aware of the opportunity to transfer the
processes to everyday life, community and workplace” (p. 195). With these connected
goals of transfer, metacognitive development, and inquiry in mind, it is important to
compare and contrast models for inquiry / research with the Stripling model.
Among the variety of models developed for research and information fluency,
Kuhlthau’s Information Search Process (ISP; Kuhlthau, 1994), Eisenberg and
54

Berkowitz’s (1990) Big6 model, and the Stripling inquiry model (2003) are frequently
discussed in the literature. An integral difference between these popular models is that
ISP and Big6 are classified as information search models offering generally linear
processes, while Stripling (2003) is an iterative inquiry model. A discussion of how these
models differ in terms of metacognitive utility follows.
Information Search Process. Carol Kuhlthau developed the Information Search
Process in 1994, and since then it has been used in various settings to guide learners
through the process of research from selecting a topic, through the steps of locating and
accessing information, to the development of the final product of the research. ISP has
been extensively tested and is widely adopted as a framework for library research
(Callison, 2006b, p.39). The model was unique at its inception in that it included an early
exploratory phase to precede research steps, stressing the need for researchers to first
grasp what it is they are looking for, and also that it also focused on the process of
research instead of just the product (Kuhlthau, 1994). In developing the model, Kuhlthau
considered the feelings and emotional stages learners experience during the research
process (such as frustration, uncertainty, relief, satisfaction), and made clear to
practitioners that conducting research was a complex process during which learners
needed guidance. In bringing attention to the complexity of research, Kuhlthau’s ISP is
regarded as a pivotal point in the growth of information fluency as an essential skill for
learning (Callison, 2006b). ISP is still considered a viable model for research and has
been investigated in relation to student perceptions of research and research anxiety
(Kracker, 2002), information seeking and mediated search (Spink, Wilson, Ford, Foster,
& Ellis, 2002), searching in a virtual environment (Byron & Young, 2000) and group55

based searching (Hyldegard, 2006). Bowler (2010) used ISP as the basis for a case study
of ten teens (ages 16-18). Participants were interviewed and kept journals for the purpose
of revealing what attributes of metacognition were related to the information search
process. The study uncovered thirteen attributes which the author offered as a taxonomy
of metacognitive traits that could be used to help guide teens’ information searching.
Eisenberg and Berkowitz Big6 process. Another highly popular information
problem-solving model is the Eisenberg and Berkowitz Big6 process (1990). Big6 is
widely used in school settings as a framework for research as it stresses a simple, linear
process that will yield needed information. Big6 is composed of easy to follow steps:
task definition, information seeking, location and access, information use, synthesis, and
evaluation (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990). Wolf, Brush, and Saye (2003b) used
Eisenberg and Berkowitz’s model as a scaffold for achievement and attitudes of 35 eighth
grade students when they were solving an information problem in social studies class. In
a mixed method design, the treatment group was given initial instruction on the Big6
model, and then prompted during use of a database on African American Civil Rights.
The prompts “directed students in the ways to think about each event they were
examining” (Wolf, Brush, & Saye, 2003b, p. 326). Students had to write an article based
on what they learned from the database and also completed a Likert-survey about their
attitudes during the unit. Teacher interviews and observations provided qualitative data.
The authors concluded that an “information problem-solving model might act as an
effective metacognitive scaffold for students engaging in complex research-based
activities (Wolf et al., 2003b, p. 336).

56

Stripling Inquiry Model. ISP and Big6 are just two of numerous information
search models that are widely used and therefore provide points of comparison to the
model used in this study, the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003). Offering an inquiry
emphasis Stripling differs in orientation from these other models. Despite being utilized
in two studies directly related to metacognition (Bowler, 2010; Wolf et al., 2003b) ISP
and Big6 models primarily target the process of finding information. The Stripling
Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003) has at its core the requisite thinking that accompanies the
inquiry discovery process. While research skills are an essential part of the inquiry
process, they are not its point of origin. Neuman (2011) isolated a crucial difference
between information problem-solving models and learning models, conceding that while
Big6 and ISP “have long structured library media specialists’ instruction in information
seeking, neither makes a direct connection to the learning that is (or should be) the result
of information seeking in a school environment” (p. 24). Neuman has, in fact, created an
information-learning model called I-LEARN that proposes to extend the work of Big6
and ISP (Neuman, 2011). This model does target the learning that is derived from
information seeking and promotes the importance of the librarian as a support to learners
as they engage in meaning-making (p. 25). I-LEARN, however, does not extend as
deeply into actual thinking processes as does the Stripling model.
Developed in 2003, the Stripling Inquiry Model is predicated on constructivist
tenets and promotes the idea that learning is constructed in a socio-cognitive setting via
attention to the metacognitive processes. Stripling (2010) stated, “Students have to
progress beyond being literate about information, and even beyond being able to use
information fluently, to being capable of inquiry that generates new understandings” (p.
57

19). The model is designed to be iterative in nature, allowing the learner to move
recursively through the six phases: connect, wonder, investigate, construct, express,
reflect (Stripling, 2003). Stripling (2003) characterized inquiry as placing “students at
the heart of learning by empowering them to follow their sense of wonder into new
discoveries and insights” (p. 4). Berger (2010) described Stripling’s model as
“permeated with reflection and critical thinking, so that the result of inquiry is not only
deep learning about the inquiry question, but also the development of skills for
independent learning” (p. 16). Critical thinking, reflection, and attention to the
generation of new understandings underscore the model’s constructivist origins as well as
insinuate why linear information problem solving models lead to lower-level information
reports prone to plagiarism: they do not require deeper thinking (Gordon, 1999). In a
case study of information literacy in higher education, Johnston and Webber (2003)
labeled problem-solving models as “prescriptive guidelines which encourage surface
learning” (p.335). Gross (2005) further outlined reasons why information problemsolving models do not garner the desired learning outcomes when used for instruction.
These reasons included that there is no mechanism for learners to “recognize errors in
information seeking,” nor for instructors to see how learners use feedback or the extent of
the learner’s concept of self-efficacy (Gross, 2005, p. 158). Unlike the prescriptive
models, the inquiry process is iterative (Jansen, 2011; Stripling, 2003) and taps
metacognition as a key to the discovery learning process.
The Stripling model targets the thinking processes of learners as they move
recursively through phases of discovery. In the Connect phase, learners are making
personal connections to potential topics, finding relevance of topics to themselves and
58

their prior knowledge. In the Wonder phase, students generate a variety of questions
related to the topic and determine what it is that they want to explore. During the
Investigate phase, learners employ their research skills to follow the lines of inquiry they
have selected. When learners believe they have investigated their questions and ideas
fully, they begin to build new understandings from their newly synthesized and analyzed
information, activities of the Construct phase. In the Express phase, the learner
contemplates how best to share their new knowledge with others. In the Reflect phase,
students look back over their inquiry process and the product they created to evaluate the
effectiveness of both. Each phase of the model is accompanied by metacognitive
reflection prompts that push learners to question the depth of their inquiry process and aid
the determination of when and if they are prepared to move into a new phase or back to
an earlier phase. Research supports the utilization of this type of metacognitive support.
Kilic-Cakmak (2010) found in a study of information literacy self-efficacy in 119 online
college-age learners that “information literacy self-efficacy of students increases when
they frequently use metacognitive strategies and highly believe that they have control
over learning processes” (p. 201). Similarly, Blumenfeld, Kempler, and Krajcik (2006)
noted when metacognitive strategies are activated during inquiry the task becomes more
complex and challenging, but ultimately, drives more meaningful learning.
The attention the Stripling model affords critical thinking, reflection and the
construction of new knowledge has led to its adoption by librarians and other educators
looking to expand their learners’ knowledge via inquiry. Two notable bodies, the Library
of Congress and the New York City Department of Education, have adopted the Stripling
Inquiry Model as the framework for learning. The Library of Congress utilizes Stripling
59

for its Teaching with Primary Sources initiative. Woyshner (2010) explained that it is
Stripling’s iterative format that makes the model appealing for historical inquiry, and the
emphasis on reflection encourages deeper thinking. The Library of Congress Teaching
with Primary Sources website (2013) instructs teachers on the value of inquiry through
Stripling’s words: “Inquiry is a process of active learning that is driven by questioning
and critical thinking. The understandings that students develop through inquiry are
deeper and longer-lasting than any pre-packaged knowledge delivered by teachers to
students” (para. 1). Most importantly, inquiry is described to teachers as “recursive and
reflective throughout” (para. 1). The Teaching with Primary Sources program has
supported teacher professional development in 43 states and has reached over 10,000
teachers to date (Library of Congress, About the Program, 2013).
Stripling (2003) stated, “The overall framework of inquiry is essentially the same
for every content area, but the embedded process skills are applied in discipline-specific
ways” (p. 6). Proof of the flexibility of the Stripling framework is seen in the New York
City Information Fluency Continuum (NYC Department of Education, 2012). Based
entirely on Stripling’s six-phase model, the Continuum is a comprehensive scope and
sequence for inquiry learning from grades K-12 and is aligned to both the AASL
standards and the Common Core standards. This alignment as well as its adaptable
nature underscores the utility of Stripling Inquiry Model for the design of inquiry
instruction.
These three major models for information fluency learning differ primarily in
orientation and focus and, subsequently, how they are applied. The Big6 and ISP models
provide strong, well-documented guidance for learners in the quest of performing
60

research to find an answer to a specific question or problem. While efficient for this
purpose, these models are largely regarded as prescriptive, linear step-by-step procedures
(Gross, 2005; Johnston & Weber, 2003; Neuman, 2011). As an inquiry model, the
Stripling process supports open-ended, authentic research and critical thinking that
pushes learners beyond surface learning (Berger, 2010; Library of Congress, 2013; Small
et al., 2012; Stripling 2003). Considering the call for inquiry by the Common Core State
Standards (National Governors Association, 2010) and the Stripling Model’s
constructivist nature, potential for generating metacognitive reflection, and its adoption
by notable educational bodies, the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) warranted further
investigation. Since the functioning of this inquiry model hinges upon metacognitive
reflection, the role of reflection in learning is now reviewed.
Role of Reflection in Inquiry Learning
Reflection is a highly regarded practice across various domains of learning and is
recommended for both learners and teachers as a tool for self-improvement (Booth, 2011;
Jones & Dotson, 2010; Koechlin & Zwaan, 2010; Kwon & Jonassen, 2011). The act of
reflecting is a metacognitive one: the learner is tapping memory, questioning past
practices and considering future steps. As noted above, inquiry models require high
levels of critical thinking in order to forge successful learning. Metacognitive reflection
built into instructional routines reinforces and strengthens critical thinking and paves the
way for subsequent transfer (Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Jones & Dotson, 2010; KilicCakmak, 2010; Milam, 2009; Stripling, 2003). Previous research (Bowler, 2010; Wolf et
al., 2003a; 2003b) on metacognition with information problem-solving models suggested
that reflection must be integral to the learning assignment and directly instructed.
61

Various studies have confirmed that metacognitive awareness can be developed and
sharpened through inquiry with active reflection (Jones & Dotson, 2010; Koechlin &
Zwaan, 2010; Schraw et al., 2006; Stripling, 2003). An examination of the role of
reflection for inquiry and means for scaffolding this important learning practice follows.
The connection between reflection and inquiry is supported in the literature.
Pedaste, Maeots, Leijen, and Sarapuu (2012) utilized a web-based scaffold tool (Young
Researcher) to support inquiry learning for students ages 14-15. Correlations between
learners’ self-regulatory activities and level of inquiry skills were found, supporting the
role of reflection for inquiry learning (p. 93). In their meta-analysis of 84 studies on selfregulation, Dignath and Buttner (2008) found learning effect sizes to be greatest when
metacognitive reflection was part of the instruction, as opposed to just teaching students
about strategies. The reflective activity served to solidify the strategies; when used
without reflection, the strategies alone did not produce better learning outcomes or even
strategy use (p. 255). Kwon and Jonassen (2011) also found that college students who
actively reflected performed better in problem-solving situations, regardless of levels of
prior knowledge (p. 261). These three studies reinforce the assertion of various authors
that metacognitive reflection can be learned and does benefit learning (Joseph, 2010;
Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Michalsky et al., 2007; Wang et al., 1990). To this end, scaffolds
for learner reflection must be embedded within the inquiry instruction (Koechlin &
Zwaan, 2010; Manlove et al., 2009; Schraw et al., 2006).
Scaffolds for reflection during inquiry. Pedaste et al. (2012) attributed the
correlation they found between reflection and inquiry skills to the use of specific
scaffolds within the design of the inquiry instruction (p. 93). These scaffolds consisted of
62

questions and prompts asked at specific junctures in the learner’s inquiry. Quintana,
Zhang, and Krajcik (2005) described the purpose of metacognitive scaffolds to include
helping learners understand and plan, monitor and regulate, and reflect (p. 235). The
utility of making the practice of metacognitive reflection explicit for learners is a strong
reason for embedding scaffolds into inquiry (Quintana, Zhang, & Krajcik, 2005).
Scaffolds found to be successful for supporting reflection during inquiry include
reflective question prompts (Bannert, Hildebrand, & Mengelkamp, 2009; Chen &
Bradshaw, 2007; Deskins, 2012; Joseph, 2010; Koechlin & Zwaan, 2007; Kuhn & Dean,
2004), reflection journals (Isaacson, 2005; Kurt, 2007; McGuinness & Brien, 2007;
McKinney & Sen, 2012), peer discussion (Donham, 2010; Manlove et al., 2009; Silen &
Uhlin, 2008), teacher modeling (Donham, 2010), and rubrics (Donham, 2010; Mueller,
2008).
Rubrics and social learning. Rubrics are rating scales designed to determine
how well a task has been completed. Rubrics were among the recommendations of Head
and Eisenberg (2010) as a means for learners to actively engage in self-assessment,
prompting recall and reflection on the processes they use for learning. Mueller (2008)
called for the use of rubrics to aide the growth of information literacy and metacognition.
Donham (2010) described rubrics as a tool for communicating between teacher and
student, also noting the use of rubrics for metacognitive self-assessment.
Rubrics are a natural starting point for teacher modeling. Once the tasks for
learners have been defined, the teacher can model the process by demonstrating or
thinking aloud for learners to witness how reflection is performed by an expert (Donham,
2010; Stripling, 2003). The use of modeling within an inquiry event also reinforces
63

Vygotsky’s zone of proximal development (Vygotsky, 1978), as does peer discussion.
Donham (2010) asserted, “talking is a way of learning because it requires the learner to
construct in language descriptions of their own work” (p.20). Pointing to the value of
peer interaction in information fluency learning, Walton and Hepworth (2011) concurred,
“social factors involved in learning are understated and rarely exploited in IL
[information literacy] teaching and learning settings” (p. 473). Choi, Land, and Turgeon
(2005), on the other hand, cautioned that although peer questioning “served a critical role
in facilitating learner’s reflection and knowledge reconstruction” (p. 483), online
questioning alone did not improve the quality of the questions asked nor the learning
outcomes for the 39 college students in their study (p.504). Silen and Uhlin (2008) also
found that college-age learners did not readily see the value of discussing their learning,
feeling it was “a waste of time” (p. 471), leading the researchers to conclude that teacher
intervention was necessary for this particular scaffold to be more readily accepted and
understood by learners. The results from Choi, et al. (2005) and Silen and Uhlin (2008)
suggest that designers may want to incorporate a variety of scaffolds in addition to peer
discussion.
Journaling. Question prompts and journaling are a becoming a common tool for
chronicling the inquiry / research process. McGuinness and Brien (2007), Kurt (2007),
and McKinney and Sen (2012) all found journaling to be a valuable exercise for learners
during the research process. Despite these successful uses of journaling, the authors of
these separate studies had recommendations for future use of reflection journals. By
reviewing journal writings, McGuinness and Brien (2007) witnessed the students in their
study move through “an iterative, problem-strewn process” ending mostly in satisfaction
64

(p. 21). However, these authors found that journals were not consistently used, a point
that they believed diminished the overall value of journals to the students. They
recommended that the journaling be a formative part of the experience, submitted long
before the end of the project. Isaacson (2005) enacted such an intervention by requiring
bi-weekly reflective journaling from his college students. McKinney and Sen (2012)
found journals to be useful and could be mapped to learning outcomes, but they also
found the depth of learner reflection to be variable among students.
The success of reflection journals may rest upon the quality of the questions or
prompts provided to learners (Koechlin & Zwaan, 2007). Koechlin and Zwaan (2007)
provided guidance for the design of reflective questions by suggesting that questions:
•

Stress process over product

•

Push to deepen understanding

•

Stimulate curiosity

•

Provoke deep thoughts

•

Prompt analysis and synthesis

•

Encourage transfer

The Stripling reflection questions meet each of these criteria with different
prompts designed for either the beginning or end of each inquiry phase. The purpose of
these prompts is to have the learner deeply assess his/her own learning process to make
the determination of whether or not they are ready to move into the various phases of the
inquiry experience. Designed in this way, the Stripling reflection questions are meant to
support the metacognition of independent learners (Small et al., 2012).

65

Chen and Bradshaw (2007), believing that scaffolding would support
metacognitive skills, found in the qualitative portion of their mixed-method study that the
intentional reflection helped learners’ “awareness of gaps and detect biases in their
knowledge bases” as well as played a mediating role between learners and instructors, but
cautioned that “excessive question prompts” could cause cognitive overload (p. 370).
Chen and Bradshaw (2007) recommended also that “opportunities to interact with experts
and their peers” also be present (p. 370). Joseph (2010) asserted that when students
question their peers, they have to focus and organize their thinking, an event in itself that
is metacognitive.
This section of the chapter has discussed the value of reflection for learning and
how reflection has been treated in relation to inquiry. What the research has offered
about how learner reflection has been scaffolded in various ways is also included. Along
with the guidance of the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) and the corresponding reflective
prompts, the foundational literature here has helped to shape decisions made concerning
the design of the inquiry instruction created for this study. A complete description of the
instructional design employed in this study appears in Chapter 3.
Review of Methodological Issues
To address the larger problem of learner college readiness for performing
academic level inquiry / research with metacognitive awareness, this study employs a
concurrent embedded design for the purpose of investigating the effect of reflection
generated through instruction designed using the Stripling Model (2003) on learner
disposition of metacognition and inquiry performance. A mixed methods design, the
concurrent embedded strategy allows for simultaneous collection of qualitative and
66

quantitative data (Creswell, 2009). This design was selected because it fits the needs of
this study to explore and measure the diverse yet inter-connected concepts of learner
inquiry outcomes in light of reflection and metacognitive awareness. Creswell (2009)
noted that in using this strategy, the data are not equal in size or rigor, with the qualitative
data serving in a supporting and explanatory role to the quantitative results (p.216).
These data are collected concurrently so a more comprehensive picture of what is
occurring throughout the learning event can emerge through analysis of personal learner
reflections as they are happening. In this way, the different types of data can be
integrated yet remain manageable (Creswell, 2009, p. 216). The concurrent embedded
strategy suits the needs of this study because it offers an appropriate path for testing an
instructional design model such as Stripling. With its focus on thinking and reflection,
the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) is relatively unique among inquiry / research
processes for high school age learners. Reflection is such a highly personal event that
looking at final instructional outcomes alone would be inadequate. The concurrent
embedded approach has been utilized to provide deeper views in studies as diverse as
satisfaction with college majors (Amelink & Creamer, 2010) and professional coping
strategies (Gupta, Paterson, Lysaght, & von Zweck, 2012).
Previous research into metacognitive awareness in secondary or college-age
students has largely been either quantitative (Bannert et al., 2009; Kuyper et al., 2000;
Leutwyler, 2009; Magno, 2010; Pedaste et al., 2012; Vukman & Licardo, 2010; Young &
Fry, 2008; Zulkiply et al., 2009) or qualitative (Bowler, 2010; McGuinness & Brien,
2007; Mok et al, 2006; Ritchhart et al., 2009). Mixed methods were employed for
investigating information problem-solving and metacognition by Wolf et al. (2003b) and
67

Chen and Bradshaw (2007). Veenman, Van Hout-Wolters, and Afflerbach (2006) called
for “multi-method designs, which at present is scarcely available in the literature on
metacognition” noting, “research on metacognitive instruction often merely reports
product measure (i.e., the effects on learning outcomes)” (p. 9). In a meta-analysis of 255
studies on constructs of metacognition, Dinsmore, Alexander, and Loughlin (2008) also
suggested that mixed methodologies are needed to more deeply explore “thoughts,
explanations, and justifications of those who are engaged in academic tasks for which
monitoring or regulation would be anticipated” (p. 406).
A concurrent embedded approach supports the call of Dinsmore et al. (2008) by
tempering quantitatively measured inquiry learning outcomes and metacognitive
awareness levels with qualitative analysis of learner reflections occurring throughout the
inquiry process. Qualitative data for this study are collected from learner reflection
journals compiled during the extent of the research / inquiry project. This data is used to
explore and provide explanations for quantitative data comprised of two data sets: scores
for inquiry task outcomes and metacognitive awareness measures. Inquiry task outcomes
are generated using an outcomes rubric; metacognitive awareness measures are taken
using a well-established instrument, the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI;
Schraw & Dennison, 1994). Descriptions of these two instruments appear in Chapter 3;
however, it is important to acknowledge here that the MAI is a self-report measure.
Dinsmore et al. (2008) pointed out that among studies of metacognition, self-report
measures are heavily relied upon without adequate corroboration for what subjects might
report through other measures (p. 405). Ku and Ho (2010) also suggested more
assessment of metacognitive activities “during the process” is needed in the research in
68

order to provide a more accurate view into these activities (p. 254). Journal reflections
meet this description and served as data collection tools to answer research questions
three and four. The concurrent design of this study counterbalances the learner selfreported MAI results with quantitative inquiry task outcomes and qualitative data from
reflection journals that offer a broader view into actual participant experiences. In this
way, the concurrent embedded strategy suits the needs of this study because it offers an
appropriate path for testing an instructional design model such as Stripling. With its
focus on thinking and reflection, the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) is relatively unique
among inquiry / research processes for high school age learners. Reflection is such a
highly personal event that looking at final instructional outcomes alone would be
inadequate. Inquiry results, metacognitive awareness, and actual reflections collected in
journals collectively will provide evidence for the efficacy of instruction created using
the Stripling model.
Synthesis of Research Findings
A review of the current research points to the multi-faceted nature of any
instructional design targeting both inquiry and learner metacognition. Strengthening
current understanding of metacognition and how learners’ awareness of it may affect
learning outcomes is important, as is a clearer understanding of how reflection could be
supported within a research / inquiry event. Addressing the problem of learner college
readiness in terms of information fluency, inquiry / research, and metacognition requires
models of instruction that can comprehensively address these inter-related facets
learning. While many models for information fluency instruction exist, the large majority
of these are classified as information problem-solving models rather than inquiry models.
69

Information problem-solving models such as the Big6 (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990)
and ISP (Kuhlthau, 1994) are popular and effective models for following a linear process
to arrive at answers for specific questions. Despite helping students understand how to
perform research, this prescriptive process does not usually lead to higher-level critical
thinking and knowledge construction (Gordon, 1999; Gross, 2005; Johnston & Webber,
2003; Neuman, 2011). To achieve this, the literature points to iterative inquiry as a
means to foster critical thinking and metacognitive reflection.
Constructivist in nature, the Stripling model (Stripling, 2003) offers a thinking
and reflection-based approach to the design of inquiry instruction. Literature reviewed
emphasizes that deep, transferable learning is difficult in the absence of metacognitive
skills (Conley, 2007, 2008; Head & Eisenberg, 2010; Neuman, 2012; Nordell, 2009; Pew
Research, 2012). With few exceptions (Kuyper et al., 2000), the great majority of studies
confirmed the necessity of metacognition to achievement and information fluency (KilicCakmak, 2010; Young & Fry, 2008; Zulkiply et al., 2009), but also demonstrated that
learners cannot fully take advantage of these skills if they lack awareness of them
(Leutwyler, 2009; Vukman & Licardo, 2010). Further studies such as Cao and Nietfeld
(2007) posited that learning strategy awareness alone was not enough for college students
to adapt and change strategies. Reflection on learning and strategies must be scaffolded
during instruction to help learners become more adept at exercising their strategic options
(Bereiter & Scardamalia, 1989; Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Pedaste et al. 2012; Quintana et al.,
2005). Considering that other literature has asserted that metacognitive strategies can be
learned (Dignath & Buttner, 2008; Joseph, 2010; Michalsky et al., 2007; Schraw et al.,
2006; Wang et al., 1990), it can be inferred that an instructional model promoting
70

reflection and metacognition as an integral part of the entire learning event is needed.
The Stripling Inquiry Model offers this type of well-integrated design by incorporating
research skills into the overall metacognitive process of intellectual discovery (Berger,
2010; Small et al., 2012; Stripling, 2003, 2010). This model is growing in popularity and
has been adopted by notable educational bodies, but to date its utility has not been fully
investigated in terms of metacognitive awareness.
Metacognition studies have largely been single method; the literature has called
for a broader view to be taken in regard to this construct (Chen & Bradshaw, 2007;
Dinsmore et al., 2008; Veenman et al., 2006). This study offers a unique look at the
metacognition within an inquiry-based instructional design that targets the generation of
reflection. Inquiry outcomes, measures of metacognitive awareness, and learner
reflections collected concurrently provide insight into the utility of the Stripling inquiry
Model (2003) for addressing the larger problem of preparing learners for more rigorous
levels on academic inquiry.
Critique of Previous Research
This chapter has explored the research on various facets of metacognition and
information fluency learning. While the topic of metacognition garners a wide range of
research, the studies included here were those that targeted learners within the scope of
the identified problem of preparing secondary students for the rigors of college-level
inquiry (approximately ages 14 – 20). Research on metacognition and metacognitive
awareness generally followed a single qualitative or quantitative methodology, limiting
the view the results were able to offer (Chen & Bradshaw, 2007; Dinsmore et al., 2008;
Veenman et al., 2006). Quantitative studies focused primarily on connecting
71

metacognition to learning outcomes (Bannert et al., 2009; Kuyper et al., 2000; Pedaste et
al., 2012; Young & Fry, 2008; Zulkiply et al., 2009) or in determining metacognitive
awareness (Cao & Nietfeld, 2007; Magno, 2010; Vukman & Licardo, 2010). While the
majority of these studies utilized larger sample sizes of 90 to nearly 1,500 participants,
they were limited in their capability for deeply explaining results beyond the quantitative
variables themselves. This limitation was especially true of the Leutwyler (2009) study
that served as counter evidence of the “development of students’ self-reported use of
metacognitive strategies during high school” (p. 111). This large, longitudinal study of
1,492 learners in grades 10-12 found no increase in self-reported use of these strategies.
Based solely on self-reported strategy use, the study did not employ other means of
explanation to the results. This study, however, does support the supposition that young
adults in high school may not be fully aware of their metacognition.
Qualitative studies reviewed had the opposite problem: they could provide rich
explanations, but had very small sample sizes (Bowler, 2010; Herring, 2011b, Mok et al.,
2006) affecting transferability; or, when a larger sample was used, such as McGuinness
and Brien (2007), data analysis of 109 student journals had to be carried out by external
graders, creating a consistency problem acknowledged by the authors, as well as a
validity issue (p. 37). Another interesting issue affecting validity was revealed by
Dignath and Buttner’s (2008) meta-analysis of studies investigating self-regulation. In
the 84 studies reviewed, the authors discovered that effect sizes of treatments “were
higher when the training was conducted by researchers instead of regular class teachers”
(p.256). The authors noted this is a problem since interventions must be readily workable
in the classroom; however, the larger problem inherent in this revelation is how
72

researcher influence and bias may have affected the overall validity of the included
studies where this was the case.
Along with metacognition, information fluency and inquiry development
represents the other key recommendation made by the literature outlining the problem of
college readiness. While professional literature abounds with descriptions and anecdotal
evidence, studies that empirically address the intersection of information fluency,
information problem solving, or inquiry with metacognition are minimal. Bowler’s
(2010) study based on Kuhlthau’s ISP (1994) and Wolf et al.’s (2003) study on the use of
Eisenberg and Berkowitz’s (1990) Big6 model are in this small minority. In each study,
the authors were investigating metacognition in relation to information problem solving.
Through qualitative analysis of student think alouds, journals and interviews, Bowler
(2010) was able to identify from her small sample of 10 students evidence of
metacognition as they progressed through the steps of Kuhlthau’s ISP model (1994).
Big6, (Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990) was the information problem-solving model
used by Wolf et al. (2003b) to determine if the model could serve as a metacognitive
scaffold as students used a social studies database. The authors used a mixed-method
approach that included Likert-scale questionnaires about learners’ feelings toward the
unit being studied and toward conducting future research and three interviews from
among the 35 eighth-grade participants. Limitations here include the small sample size
as well as the fact that the primary researcher presented the instruction (p.325), affecting
validity.
The literature demonstrated that for the purpose of building reflection and tapping
metacognitive capabilities, an inquiry approach is more comprehensive than basic, linear
73

information problem-solving. The focus the Stripling model lends to reflection and
critical thinking throughout the iterative cycle of inquiry makes it an ideal model to
investigate in terms of metacognitive awareness and inquiry outcomes. Previous
literature on the Stripling model has been primarily descriptive in nature (Small et al.,
2012; Stripling, 2003, 2009) and has not empirically explored its relationship to
metacognitive and inquiry outcomes. This study therefore advances the literature on
inquiry learning and metacognition by offering a novel approach for investigating these
constructs concurrently.
Chapter 2 Summary
Extant research has elucidated the urgent problem of learner college readiness in
terms of information fluency and research skills. The studies considered in this review
suggest that secondary schools address this issue with greater emphasis on developing
students’ research / inquiry skills and metacognitive awareness. There is evidence
supporting the value and utility of promoting metacognitive practices for high school-age
learners and the need for connecting metacognition to academic achievement, transfer of
knowledge, and inquiry learning. Constructivism (Jonassen, 1999) and metacognition
(Flavell, 1979) are ubiquitous concepts found in this literature and constitute the
theoretical frameworks guiding this study. Constructivism provides an appropriate
framework for the type of learner-centered, knowledge-building exercises inquiry entails.
Metacognitive awareness is a natural extension of constructivist learning and provides a
lens through which learner reflection is gauged in this study.
Despite the existence of a variety of information fluency approaches, the literature
makes evident the continuing need for an instructional design model that better prepares
74

secondary learners for the rigors of academic inquiry. Widely-recognized Big6
(Eisenberg & Berkowitz, 1990) and ISP (Kuhlthau, 1994) information problem-solving
models were explored and found limited in regard to their capacity to promote reflective
and metacognitive practices in learners, instead working in favor of the linear steps to
finding information answers. Investigations into these models (Bowler, 2010; Wolf et al.,
2003b) also showed the difficulty of embedding metacognition into models oriented to
basic information problem solving rather than inquiry.
The constructivist Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003) was reviewed to
demonstrate its different and unique focus on thinking processes and reflection, how this
serves Common Core State Standards, as well as its usage by the Library of Congress and
the New York City Department of Education, notable educational bodies. Despite this
recognition, the model has not been empirically tested for outcomes the reflection it
generates should logically produce: successful inquiry projects and heightened
metacognitive awareness. To this end, this review justifies the selection of the Stripling
Model of Inquiry as the instructional design concept employed for investigation in this
study. Considering the personal nature of reflections, this study goes beyond quantifiable
measurements and includes qualitative data garnered from learner reflection journals via
a concurrent embedded strategy. In doing so, this study extends the instructional design
knowledge base concerning learners and learning processes, transfer context and
instructional strategies (Richey & Klein, 2007) by utilizing this mixed methodology to
reveal a wider picture of metacognitive reflection within an inquiry event.

75

CHAPTER 3. METHODOLOGY
Introduction to Chapter 3
This chapter discusses the methodological approach employed in this study and
has the purpose of delineating how the various constructs described in Chapter 2 have
been operationalized to explore and measure inter-relationships of metacognition,
learning outcomes, and reflection when the Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003) is
the foundation of instruction. The chapter addresses:
•

Purpose and research questions of this study

•

Research design enacted for investigation and data analysis

•

Instructional design comprising the treatment

•

Population, sampling, and related procedures

•

Instruments and data collection and analysis processes

•

Limitations, expected findings and ethical issues involved in this study

Purpose of the Study
The purpose of this research was to investigate the effect of learner reflection
generated through instruction designed using the Stripling Model (2003) on learner
disposition of metacognition and inquiry performance.

76

Research Questions and Hypotheses
Four research questions guided this investigation:
1.

What is the effect of learner reflection on metacognitive awareness when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?

H10 : There is no statistically significant difference between metacognitive awareness
levels when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the
Stripling model.
H1A : There is a statistically significant difference in metacognitive awareness levels
when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling
model.
2. What is the effect of learner reflection on inquiry task outcomes when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?
H20 : There is no statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
H2A: There is a statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
3. What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner metacognitive
awareness?
4. What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner inquiry task
outcomes?

77

Research Design
A mixed-method approach using the concurrent embedded strategy was employed
to investigate the instructional design utility of the Stripling Model (2003) in relation to
learner metacognition and inquiry outcomes. The intent in using this mixed-method
approach was to benefit from both methodologies, thereby deepening the potential
insights to be gained (Creswell, 2009). A concurrent embedded strategy facilitates the
mixing of data by encouraging cross-utilization of frameworks. Creswell (2009) defined
concurrent embedded strategy as having only one data collection phase “during which
both quantitative and qualitative data are collected simultaneously” (p.214). Data
collection for this study spanned the duration of the participants’ inquiry project. The
concurrent embedded strategy specifically allowed qualitative data to compliment the
predominant quantitative method in this study. Quantitative data was collected on the
outcomes of the treatment; qualitative data was collected about participant processes
during treatment. Qualitative participant journal data were concurrently viewed and
collected throughout the instructional event, utilizing the Metacognitive Awareness
Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) framework for coding related to the dependent
variable of metacognitive awareness and the Stripling phases for coding related to task
outcomes. Creswell (2009) noted that a prime benefit of a concurrent embedded strategy
is that perspectives from different types of data are collected and because “both forms of
data are not equal in size and rigor” the study remains “manageable for the time and
resources available” (p. 216). Thus, the qualitative data were collected concurrently
throughout the experimental treatment period, framed by the quantitative Metacognitive
Awaressness pre- and post-tests and final inquiry outcome scores. See Figure 1.
78

Figure 1. Representation of concurrent embedded data collection used for this study
showing the overlap of qualitative data collection with quantitative events and treatment
period.

The quasi-experimental quantitative portion of this design investigated the effect
of the independent variable, learner reflection generated through the instruction, on
dependent variables of learner metacognitive awareness (research question one) and
inquiry task outcomes (research question two). Measurement of the dependent variable
of learner metacognitive awareness (research question one) occurred using the MAI
(Schraw & Dennison, 1994). This self-report inventory is intended for adolescent to
adult populations and includes 52 items developed to measure overall metacognitive
awareness as well as the two main factors of metacognition, regulation of cognition and
knowledge of cognition (Schraw & Dennison, 1994). Measurement of the second
dependent variable, inquiry task outcomes, was completed using the inquiry task
outcomes scoring rubric adapted by the researcher, with permission, from a widely
available example rubric (Valenza, 2003). The rubric was field-tested with an expert
panel prior to the study to ensure age appropriateness and content reliability.
The qualitative portion of the study explored how learners expressed
metacognitive awareness and attitudes about the inquiry process as evidenced by entries
79

in their reflection journals. Two qualitative research questions guided this portion of the
study: what do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner metacognitive
awareness (research question three); and, what do reflections in participant journals
reveal about learner inquiry task outcomes (research question four). Creswell (2009)
noted in a concurrent embedded strategy “one method could be used within the
framework of the other method” (p. 215). Cross-utilization of frameworks was applied in
this study by using the metacognition framework of the two MAI factors (Knowledge of
Cognition and Regulation of Cognition) and corresponding subscales as starter codes for
content analysis of journal entries regarding variations in metacognitive awareness
(research question three). The phases of the Stripling Model (2003) – connect, wonder,
investigate, construct, express, and reflect, served as the starter codes for exploring the
data collected from learner inquiry efforts (research question four). Analyzed in this
manner, the qualitative data played a secondary yet explanatory role for the interpretation
of the quantitative data, broadening perspectives for addressing the research problem.
Using these two frameworks for analysis expedited the transformation of qualitative data
for interpretation in relation to quantitative findings, curbing a potential limitation of the
concurrent embedded strategy (Creswell, 2009). In addition to balancing the potential
shortcomings of self-report measures such as the MAI, application of the concurrent
embedded strategy also offered the study a richer description of participant learning
outcomes.
Instructional Design Comprising the Treatment
To investigate the utility of the Stripling Model as a basis for the instructional
design of an inquiry project, participant (n = 138) class groups were randomly assigned to
80

treatment and control groups. The independent variable for this study was the presence
or absence the Stripling Model (2003) in the design of the inquiry instruction (see
Appendix A) including learner reflective journaling performed using the Stripling
reflection prompts (NYC School Library System, 2010). The control group received
inquiry instruction designed without the Stripling model or the Stripling model’s
reflective journaling prompts. Both groups were assigned to experienced instructors (i.e.,
more than ten years of teaching experience) at two research sites and engaged in an
inquiry research project for the language arts class using a self-selected literature topic
(site one) or self-selected topic (site two). As best practice, the scoring rubric for the
project was provided to both groups at the outset of the inquiry, ensuring all learners were
aware of requirements of the class project. The rubric served as the instrument for
measuring the dependent variable of inquiry task outcomes (research question two).
The inquiry project the participants were tasked to perform at site one (all juniors,
age 16) centered around ten short stories and challenged learners to delve into literary
criticism texts in order to construct new understandings, make arguments, synthesize, and
provide evidence as they drew their own conclusions about the themes, motifs, symbols
or other concepts that captured their attention in the original pieces of literature. The
stories included were taken from the customary, standard canon found in language arts
curriculums and have been required reading within this particular language arts course for
more than ten years. Research tools available as participants explored their ideas were
literary databases commonly found in many high schools. Although the teacher has
taught this project for many years, this was the first time it would be conducted as an
inquiry project. Previously, the teacher provided background information and key
81

information to the students who largely used the original story text as their only evidence.
Expanding this traditional project into an inquiry project demanded not only that students
use additional resources, but also that they receive instruction in how to perform inquiry.
Participants in the control group received the teacher’s customary guidance for research;
treatment groups received inquiry instruction according to the Stripling Model.
The inquiry project the participants were tasked to perform at site two (all seniors,
ages 17-18) was an open topic research paper. Participants could select any topic to
explore via inquiry. Research tools available to all participants included an array of
research databases commonly found in high schools. As at site one, site two control
group participants received the teacher’s customary guidance for research; treatment
groups received inquiry instruction according to the Stripling Model.
The delivery medium for the instructional content to the treatment group was
video. Seven videos designed using the Stripling reflection prompts comprised the
instruction: one as an overview to the entire inquiry process, then a separate video for
each of the six phases of the Stripling model (connect, wonder, investigate, construct,
express, and reflect). The videos provided fidelity to the instruction by ensuring all
members/sections of the treatment group received the same information. The videos also
made it possible for the instruction to be available for review at any time during the
inquiry process at the point of need of learners. Each instructional video presented the
selected inquiry phase in terms of what it meant in terms of inquiry, how it supported
successful progression through inquiry, examples of how the phase applied to examples,
and the questions learners should ask themselves at the start and end of the phase to
ensure success. In addition to the instructional videos, treatment participants had an
82

additional scaffold to their critical thinking in the form of peer group discussions where
they could share, discuss, and challenge one another’s ideas throughout the process. In
addition, the treatment group had two formal, full-class peer discussions when the teacher
and class members deemed them necessary, as well as the availability of graphic
organizers to use throughout the inquiry process.
Prior to the start of the inquiry / research, participants took the Metacognitive
Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) as a pre-test to ascertain initial
metacognitive awareness levels. The projects at each site commenced with the teachers
explaining the projects and ensuring that all students had equal access to research
materials via their school’s library and online databases. The treatment groups received
instruction for the inquiry process (via the instructional videos) at various times
throughout the project timeframe, as each phase became appropriate to their discovery
process. Both treatment and control participants recorded ideas, reactions, and processes
in reflection journals. The treatment group members were provided the Stripling
reflection prompts as a guide to their reflections at each point in their research / inquiry
processes. Control group members were instructed to simply record reflections in their
journals. All students had the inquiry task rubric from the start of the project so they had
full disclosure of the teacher’s expectations for the project. Participant inquiry projects in
the form of research papers were submitted to the teacher at the end of the project
timeframe. Participants then completed the MAI as a post-test, and made final journal
reflection posts after the teacher returned their project scores to them.

83

Target Population, Sampling Method, and Related Procedures
Target Population
The sample for this study was drawn from the larger population of secondary
school learners (ages 16-19) that intend to continue on to higher education. This
population, colloquially labeled as “Millennials” and assumed to have digital facility
(Rosen et al., 2010), are facing the imminent challenge of academic level research as well
as new national standards for inquiry set by the Common Core State Standards. While
the digital landscape in which these learners live offers greater opportunity for selfreliance and independently developed research skills, wide-scale research has provided
counter-evidence of these assumed developments (Barnes & Slate, 2010; Head &
Eisenberg, 2010; Pew Research Center, 2012). Research has indicated the necessity for
higher-order critical thinking, inquiry skills, and corresponding metacognitive awareness
to be promoted in this population in order to close the gap “between college-eligible and
college-ready” (Conley, 2008, p. 26). As defined by Schraw and Dennison (1994),
metacognitive awareness is learners’ “ability to reflect upon, understand, and control
one’s learning” (p.460). Reflection, being a recollection and evaluation of acts,
processes, and strategies, is foundational to this developing awareness and inquiry task
outcomes (AASL, 2009; Stripling, 2003). For this population, college-readiness is
greatly contingent on the proficiency of inquiry / research skills developed through
practices invoking metacognitive reflection.
Sampling Method
Participants of this study were high school juniors and seniors (ages 16-19), in ten
separate sections of an academic/honors level language arts class in two Mid-Atlantic
84

suburban public high schools. “Academic / honors level” connotes sections designed for
college bound learners. Jones and Kottler (2006) noted the prime concern is the “the
extent to which the selection procedure is likely to produce participants who will help
answer the identified research questions” (p. 60). Participants were selected through
cluster sampling, “intact groups representing clusters of individuals rather than choosing
individuals one at a time” (Onweugbuzie & Collins, 2007, p. 287), or, as Jones and
Kottler (2006) simply described, the use of a “naturally occurring group of people”
(p.62). This mode of sampling was also purposive, as the participants were typical cases
of college-bound learners and were accessible to the researcher in the exact setting the
instructional design in question is targeting (Jones & Kottler, 2006). The qualitative
portion of the study required selected participant journals as data sources. Krathwohl and
Smith (2005) noted, “the key to qualitative sampling is choosing those cases from which
one can learn the most” (p. 128). To that end, three participant journals were selected
from both the treatment and control groups based upon initial MAI pre-test scores, using
one high, one medium, and one lower-scoring participant from each group at each site for
a total of 12 journals. This form of stratified purposive sampling had the intent of
identifying target cases in each group that might shed the most light on the potentially
varied levels of outcomes, facilitating comparisons (Miles & Huberman, 1994) by adding
the ability to distinguish differences stemming from, or despite, initial metacognitive
levels.
Sample Size
In an effort to achieve “proximal similarity” to the wider population (Trochim,
2006, para. 3), each section of participants (one control, one treatment group) exceeded
85

the minimum of 30 learners required to detect “moderate effect sizes with .80 statistical
power at the 5% level of significance” and allowing for potential attrition (Onweugbuzie
& Collins, 2007, p. 288; Campbell & Stanley, 1963). In order to meet this requirement,
two rounds of recruitment and data collection occurred, one at each of the IRB-approved
research sites.
Setting
The setting for this study was two suburban, public high schools in the MidAtlantic region of the U.S. Participants were recruited and completed treatment activities
(taking the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory, completing reflection journal entries) in
the 11th grade academic/honors language arts classroom (site one) and 12th grade
academic/honors language arts classroom (site two).
Recruitment
Once site permission was obtained, the school administrators and the researcher
considered which class groups most accurately fit the target population of this study.
Using administrator recommendation, it was determined that the intact 11th grade
academic / honors class sections best matched the targeted population at site one. Intact
12th grade academic/honors class sections matched the targeted population at site two.
All learners in these classes intend to go on to higher education and have limited or no
known experience with inquiry learning. Recruitment occurred just prior to the start of
the assigned inquiry / research project. The researcher engaged personal visits to each
section of learners on the same day. During this initial contact, the purpose of the study
was explained in basic terms. Membership in any of the academic/honors level classes
constituted successful screening for possible participation in the study. The roles of
86

participants were delineated as completing the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory
(Schraw & Dennison, 1994) twice (as a pre- and post-test) and allowing the researcher to
collect data from their reflection journals. Anonymity and confidentiality were also
explained and assured. After fully explaining the study and answering any initial
questions, assent and parental permission forms (for minors) and consent forms (for those
already age 18) were disseminated. Information explaining the study, the tenets of
informed consent, and how consent/assent could be withdrawn were given to all
prospective participants and their parents or guardians. It was made clear throughout the
presentation that participation was entirely optional. The researcher was also present and
available the following day in the school’s library to answer any learner or parent
questions regarding the study. Approximately 120 potential participants were contacted
and 63 returned parental permission and assent forms (age 16) to participate from site
one. Only 58 of these participants completed the project, so a second round of
recruitment and data collection took place at site two. Approximately 95 potential
participants were contacted at site two; 80 returned consent forms (18 years old) and/or
parental permission and assent forms (17 years old).
Instrumentation
The Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI; Schraw & Dennison, 1994) was
used to measure the dependent variable of learner metacognitive awareness (research
question one). This self-report inventory includes 52 items related to one of two scales,
Regulation of Cognition (35 items) and Knowledge of Cognition (17 items). Knowledge
of Cognition items focus on “awareness of one’s strength and weaknesses, knowledge
about strategies, and when and why to use those strategies” (Sperling, Howard, Staley, &
87

DuBois, 2004, p. 123). A sample Knowledge of Cognition item is “I am good at
organizing information.” The Regulation of Cognition scale “measures knowledge about
planning, implementing, monitoring, and evaluating strategy use” (Sperling et al., 2004,
p. 123). A sample Regulation of Cognition item is “I focus on the meaning and
significance of new information.” Schraw and Dennison (1994) found the MAI reliable
in two experiments with 307 college undergraduates. The two factors were found reliable
(α = .90) and inter-correlated (r = .54). In addition to this statistically significant
relationship, internal consistency of the two scales ranged from .93 to .88 (p. 471).
Pintrich, Wolters, and Baxter (2000) further confirmed the reliability of the MAI to
measure learner awareness in terms of knowledge and regulation. Sperling et al. (2004)
found the MAI to be significantly correlated with other self-report measures including the
Learning Strategies Survey (Kardash & Amlund, 1991) and the Motivated Strategies for
Learning Questionnaire (Pintrich, Smith, Garcia, & McKeachie, 1991). The convergence
of self-report measures targeting adolescents to adults found by Sperling et al. (2004)
supports the MAI’s suitability for measuring high school-age learners’ metacognitive
awareness. The validity of the MAI has been confirmed by recent studies (Coutinho &
Neuman, 2008). In the varied studies employing this instrument, populations have
ranged from adults to adolescents as young as 14, with some studies such as Burchard
and Swerdzewski (2009) focusing on learners in the early stages of their college
experience, and using the MAI as both a pre- and post-test measure. The MAI was
unaltered from its original form and remained a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1
–Never true about me to 5 –Always true about me, yielding interval data in the form of a
numeric total score and scores for the knowledge and regulation subscales. Completion
88

time for the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory was approximately ten minutes (Schraw
& Dennison, 1994).
The second dependent variable, learner inquiry task outcomes (research question
two), was measured by a scoring rubric that evaluates how well each participant
performed on the inquiry project. This instrument was adapted with permission from
Valenza’s (2003) widely and freely-shared sample rubric and was field-tested using a
four-member panel of secondary language arts / inquiry experts prior to the start of the
study. The rubric represents the summative assessment applied in this inquiry instruction
and measured how well learners performed each phase of the inquiry project as well as
the final product (in this case, a written research paper). Rubric category point scores are
combined for a resulting percentage score (i.e. grade).
The qualitative data collection source was participant reflection journals. Both
the treatment and control groups were required to journal for the class project. The
treatment group utilized the Stripling reflective question prompts (NYC School Library
System, 2010) that correspond to the inquiry instruction they received based upon the
Stripling Model (2003). The control group received the teacher’s usual inquiry
instruction and did not have specific prompts for journaling. Participants shared their
online journals with the researcher through Google Docs, making data readily accessible
throughout the study.
Data Collection
The Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) was
administered online twice during the participants’ regular class periods with the teacher
present to answer any questions that may have arisen. The instrument served as both a
89

pre-test to ascertain starting levels of awareness, and as a post-test to determine any
change that occurred during the treatment period. The online administration was done
via Quia, an online assessment platform. The MAI was unaltered from its original form
and remained a 5-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 –Never true about me to 5 –
Always true about me. Two separate (but identical) online sites ensured segregation of
treatment and control group responses. Quia is password protected; only the researcher
could access results of both the pre- and post- administration of the MAI. Completion
time for the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory was approximately ten minutes (Schraw
& Dennison, 1994).
Administering the MAI followed this process:
1. Participants entered regular language arts classroom on the day prior to the
start of inquiry instruction
2. Participants were given the appropriate web link to the Quia site housing the
MAI (one site for control, one for treatment group)
3. Basic identification data was collected (assigned identification number)
4. Participants took the MAI as pre-test (approximately 10 minutes)
5. Participants completed the post-test MAI at the close of the
instruction/treatment period to supply comparison data for research question
one (metacognitive awareness).
Qualitative data collection entailed ongoing content analysis of participant
reflection journals from the start of the instruction/treatment through the post-test MAI
and reactions to final inquiry task scores. Both the treatment and control groups were
required to journal for the class project. The treatment group utilized the Stripling
90

reflective question prompts (NYC School Library System, 2010) that correspond to the
inquiry instruction they received based upon the Stripling Model (2003). The control
group received the teacher’s usual inquiry instruction and did not have specific prompts
for journaling. Participants shared their online journals with their teacher and the
researcher through Google Docs, making data readily accessible throughout the study.
Along with accessibility, the use of Google Docs allowed the researcher to view journal
entries in an invisible, unobtrusive manner as the participants did not know when nor
how often their writing was viewed, serving to reduce any potential researcher effect on
what they may have chosen to write. The six participant journals selected via the
stratified purposive sampling described above (one high, one medium, and one lowscoring MAI pre-test from each group) were viewed on a weekly basis as participants
moved through the instructional phases of connect, wonder, investigate, construct,
express, and reflect. Reflective journaling took place on teacher-selected days during the
instruction / treatment period. Journals of the six identified learners (three from the
treatment group, three from the control group) from each site (totaling 12 journals)
supplied this data. Observed data in the form of phrases or terms were recorded on
digital coding charts that began with starter codes matching metacognitive traits related to
knowledge and regulation of cognition (research question three) and Stripling instruction
phases (research question four).
Collection of quantitative data for the second dependent variable, learner inquiry
task outcomes (research question two), occurred at the end of the learners’ inquiry
project. The field-tested scoring rubric was used to evaluate how well each participant
performed on the inquiry project. The classroom teacher scored each participant’s
91

research paper according to the rubric. The researcher received the participant inquiry
task outcome scores directly from the classroom teacher the day they were completed.
Field Test
The inquiry task outcomes scoring rubric was field-tested in January, 2013, by a
panel of four experts. All reviewers of this instrument are practitioners in the field of
secondary language arts with experience ranging from 13 to 36 years and are well versed
in the evaluation and assessment of secondary student research and writing. All panel
members expressed unequivocal approval of the rubric for assessing the learners’ inquiry
product, the research paper.
Operationalization of Variables
The dependent variable of metacognitive awareness was operationalized through
use of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994). The MAI
measures the construct of metacognitive awareness by yielding interval data in the form
of a numeric total score along with scores for the knowledge of cognition and regulation
of cognition subscales. The dependent variable of inquiry task outcomes was
operationalized through the field-tested scoring rubric described above. The rubric
yielded an achievement percentage score.
Data Analysis Procedures
Research Question One
What is the effect of learner reflection on metacognitive awareness when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?

92

H10 : There is no statistically significant difference between metacognitive awareness
levels when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling
model.
H1A : There is a statistically significant difference in metacognitive awareness levels
when reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
Analysis of First Dependent Variable. Analysis of learner metacognitive
awareness occurred twice; first, using the MAI as a pre-test measurement to determine
initial levels of metacognitive awareness, and later, as a post-test. An ANOVA (Analysis
of Variance) was used to determine variance between and within the two groups and
whether this variance is significant. This allowed the researcher to determine whether the
treatment had an effect on metacognitive awareness (research question one). Steps for
analysis included:
1. Individual numeric responses for the MAI were collected on the Quia site.
Individual scores generated from the responses were: total metacognitive
awareness, knowledge of cognition (KC) scale and regulation of cognition
(RC) scale.
2. A numeric identification number was assigned to each participant (i.e.,
removal of any personally identifying information) and raw data (case i.d.
number, total score, KC score and RC scores will then be transferred to score
sheets for input into the SPSS statistical software package (SPSS version 22).
3. Descriptive statistics (range, mean, standard deviation, frequency) for both
control and treatment groups were generated.
4. Initial comparisons between control and treatment groups were drawn.
93

5. Following treatment period, post-test MAI was administered in the same
fashion as described above.
6. An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) analysis was executed using SPSS to
determine significance of variance within groups (From pre- to post-test) and
between control and treatment groups at p < .05 level.
Data was protected through passwords to the Quia site used to house the MAI and
corresponding results. All participant answers were viewed only by the researcher.
SPSS statistical software was loaded on to the researcher’s personal, password-protected
laptop computer and results of statistical tests were also housed in a password-protected
file. Raw data on Quia was destroyed (deleted) at the close of the study.
Research Question Two
What is the effect of learner reflection on inquiry task outcomes when the
instructional design follows the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003)?
H20 : There is no statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
H2A: There is a statistically significant difference in inquiry task outcomes when
reflection is generated through instruction designed following the Stripling model.
Analysis of the Second Dependent Variable. Analysis of learner inquiry task
outcomes occurred at the end of the five-week span of the learner’s inquiry project.
Outcomes were measured and based upon final inquiry achievement scores (percentile
grade). An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) analysis was done to determine if the
difference between the mean scores of the treatment and control groups is actually due to
the treatment (research question 2). Steps for analysis included:
94

1. Raw data for the second dependent variable consisted of percentile scores
recorded on paper rubrics used to score participant inquiry tasks (i.e. research
papers) by the classroom teacher.
2. Final individual case scores were entered into SPSS using the established
identification number for each participant and separated into treatment and
control groups.
3. Descriptive statistics (range, mean, standard deviation, frequency) were
generated.
4. Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was executed to using SPSS to determine
significance of variance of inquiry task scores between control and treatment
groups at p < .05 level.
Data was protected with the list of inquiry task outcome scores placed in a locked
file cabinet while data was being transferred to the SPSS statistical software. The
original rubrics were returned to the individual participants as these contain the final
scores they achieved on the inquiry task (research paper). Expedient entry of this data
was necessary as participants needed to write a reaction to their individual scores in the
reflection journals.
Research Questions	  Three and Four
Qualitative research questions three and four (what do reflections in participant
journals reveal about learner metacognitive awareness; and, what do reflections in
participant journals reveal about learner inquiry task outcomes) required content analysis
of participant reflection journals to occur throughout the project. Reflection journals
were particularly useful to this study of metacognition as they represented data from the
95

natural classroom setting, revealed participants’ thoughts and emotions, helped to define
the study’s context, and offered explanatory information for the quantitative analyses
(Marshall & Rossman, 2011). Three participant journals were selected from both the
treatment and control groups based upon initial MAI pre-test scores, using one high, one
medium, and one low scoring participant from each group. This form of stratified
purposive sampling was used with the intent of identifying target cases in each group that
might shed the most light on the potentially varied levels of outcomes, facilitating
comparisons (Miles & Huberman, 1994) by adding the ability to distinguish differences
stemming from, or despite, initial metacognitive levels. Starter codes for qualitative
analysis of metacognitive awareness (research question three) were taken from the
metacognition framework of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI) factors
knowledge of cognition and regulation of cognition. Knowledge of cognition includes
declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge; regulation of cognition includes
information management strategies, debugging strategies, planning, comprehension
monitoring, and evaluation. Participant journals revealed the existence and extent of
these metacognitive activities in the learners’ own words. Constant comparative analysis
of data found in the journals focused on the meaning learners ascribed to the instructional
events and evidenced metacognitive awareness or lack thereof based on the initial codes
and could be used to inductively uncover other themes related to the participants’
experiences during the inquiry project.
Starter codes for qualitative analysis of inquiry efforts (research question four)
were the phases of the Stripling Model (2003) (connect, wonder, investigate, construct,
express, and reflect). Among the selected cases, the frequency of journal content relating
96

to the codes could also prove a useful means for supporting or refuting quantitative
findings (Marshall & Rossman, 2011). Digital coding charts (one for metacognitive
awareness (question three) and inquiry efforts (question four) were used to track and
analyze the emergence of themes based upon meaning of participants’ written data,
uncovering similarities and differences between and within learners in control and
treatment groups. Creswell’s (2009) recommended procedure to analyze data was used
for each research question:
1. Journal entries were read for general tone and meaning.
2. Separate coding of data for metacognitive awareness and inquiry effort began
with starter codes described above.
3. Relationships between descriptive passages and codes were explored, with an
eye to new, different, or unusual codes emerging from the data.
4. Descriptions of participant experiences were developed based on emergent
data themes.
5. Narrative passages were collected to represent these experiences.
6. Interpretations of learner experiences in relation to quantitative data could be
made.
7. Mixing of qualitative and quantitative data occurred as qualitative data was
compared, analyzed and integrated with the quantitative data in the discussion
section of the study.
Limitations of the Research Design
Limitations of this study include relatively small sample size, limiting
generalizability to the wider population. In addition, the Metacognitive Awareness
97

Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) is a self-report measure, potentially limiting its
reliability, as is the case with any instrument that depends upon the honestly of the
respondent. Despite being a self-report measure, however, the MAI has been found to be
reliable (Pintrich, Wolters, & Baxter, 2000; Schraw & Dennison, 1994).
Internal Validity
Internal validity was supported through the control for extraneous variables. For
example, at each site, both treatment and control groups had the same teachers and were
comprised of multiple sections of the teacher’s entire roster, supporting an equitable mix
of participant skills, abilities, and prior knowledge. Dependability through treatment
integrity was also well supported, with fidelity to the designed instruction ensured by the
creation of the seven instructional videos to guarantee that the instruction would be
presented exactly as designed.
Validity was also ensured by the instruments utilized in this study. The
Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) is a well-established
and widely used tool for assessing metacognitive awareness in participants ranging in age
from adolescence to adulthood. As described in the instrumentation section above, the
MAI has been found reliable (Pintrich, Wolters, & Baxter, 2000; Schraw & Dennison,
1994), correlated to other self-report measures (Sperling et al., 2004), and valid
(Coutinho & Neuman, 2008).
The second instrument, the inquiry task outcomes rubric, also was field-tested and
deemed appropriate for the accurate assessment of a secondary student’s adeptness for
writing a research paper. In addition, the mixed-methods research design employed in
this study provided means for triangulation by incorporating qualitative data into the
98

analysis of quantitative findings. Finally, the threat of differential selection (differences
in existing intact groups) could also be ruled out, since the school administrators
described the class sections from which participants were drawn to be balanced as far as
achievement levels. Appointment of sections to treatment or control was determined
solely on balancing the numbers of participants.
Regarding the credibility of qualitative findings, dependability is provided
through the triangulation of the qualitative findings with the quantitative results and the
thick descriptions that emerged from the data. Credibility is also supported by secure
data handling procedures as participant journals, coding documents, raw MAI data, and
statistical results were stored securely online then transferred to offline documents which
are locked in a secure location.
External Validity
Transferability and generalizability of this study are enhanced by a sample
comprised of average college-bound high school juniors and seniors. No interaction
effect due to selection biases relative to the experimental variable existed, as participants
in each group represented normal ability levels, had no prior understanding of the concept
of metacognitive awareness and no prior experience with inquiry learning. Nor was there
an interaction effect of testing (Campbell & Stanley, 1963), where pre-testing can alter
the participant’s responsiveness to the experimental variable, as this effect was mitigated
through the use of a control group (Lodico, Spaulding, & Voegtle 2010, p. 249). Testing
effect was also controlled for in that in addition to a long period of time between pre- and
post-tests, the MAI does not solicit right/wrong answers, but rather prompts participants
to gauge how often they believe they enact the various strategies included in the
99

inventory. The Hawthorne effect (behavior affected by study participation) could be
ruled out, as the students were performing a type of assignment that was usual to them,
had no knowledge of being in either a treatment or control group, and had no reason to
attempt to outperform other members of the class, as the scores they were working
toward were entirely individual (Lodico et al., 2010).

The fact that all participants

engaged in the same classroom activities helped to control for treatment diffusion as well
as reactive arrangement, or, how “being in a study can affect one’s feelings, behaviors
and attitudes” (Lodico et al., 2010, p. 249). This effect was also controlled for by the
length of the study as well as providing participants enough information about the study,
removing the need for participants to wonder about and react to their assumed motives of
the study. Although the content of participants’ inquiry in this study was literary
language arts at site one and general topics at site two, the implementation of the
Stripling model as made here could be readily replicated and applied to other secondary
school content areas. Results of this study may be transferrable to other secondary school
settings where instructors are looking for a means for college-bound learners to practice
iterative inquiry and metacognitive processes in order to develop these essential skills
before matriculating.
Expected Findings
It was expected that data analysis for H1, metacognitive awareness (research
question one), would yield some level of difference within groups (i.e., differences
between individual pre- and post- MAI scores), based upon previous studies using the
MAI as a measurement tool (Burchard & Swerdzewski, 2009; Young & Fry, 2008).
Differences between treatment and control groups were also expected, considering the
100

increased level of metacognitive reflection participants in the treatment group would
undergo throughout the entire treatment period (Bowler, 2010; Wolf, Brush, & Saye,
2003b).
It was expected that data analysis for H2, inquiry task outcomes (research question
two), would also yield significant differences between treatment and control groups, as
directed metacognitive reflection used for the treatment group could potentially lead to
better inquiry task performance (Young & Fry, 2008; Wolf, Brush, & Saye, 2003b).
Themes emerging from participant journals were used to answer research questions three
and four, providing deeper insight into the results of H1 and H2 by illuminating how or
why these differences between treatment and control groups occurred (Bowler, 2010).
Ethical Issues
Researcher's Position Statement
Conflict of interest assessment. The researcher does not have any financial,
personal, or academic conflicts of interest that might hamper the integrity of this study.
Position statement. The researcher has been a professional librarian and
instructor of student research for nearly 30 years. While she has served in a professional
capacity at each research site (one over 15 years ago, one during this study), this
association has not affected the integrity of this study. Personnel at site one have
changed and all those with whom the researcher worked for this study (school principal,
classroom teacher, and students) were unknown prior to embarking on this study. While
the researcher was employed at the second site during the time of this study, the
necessary controls for conflict of interest were implemented including the use of other
library personnel to serve participants when in the library, use of intact groups with
101

treatment and control assigned to the same teachers, and use of numeric identification of
participants.
During the span of a three-decade long career, the researcher has explored various
means for instructing learners in the nuances of research and inquiry and thus holds an
attitude of academic curiosity in this exploration of a potentially useful instructional
design model. No biases or conflicts of interest have colored this investigation.
Ethical Issues in the Study
Due to the nature of this study and its necessary involvement of school-age
minors, extra care was taken by the researcher to ensure that participants were protected
from harm in terms of protecting their privacy, ensuring that participation was strictly
voluntary, and that for those who did chose to assent, anonymity and confidentiality were
assured. Recruitment was held in the students’ regular classrooms, a place where they
were comfortable, in the presence of their regular teachers. As potential participants, the
students received explanations of the concept of informed consent/assent, the need for
parental permission to also be attained, and the differences between anonymity and
confidentiality. Confidentiality was explained as the researcher taking steps to ensure
that participants’ personal information and data be kept confidential and also locked in
password-protected forms. Anonymity was explained as the researcher taking steps to
ensure that neither they, their teacher, nor the school itself would be identifiable in this or
any other written reports. Anonymity was also preserved by having the participants use
an identification number instead of their names when taking the MAI online. The teacher
also reported participants’ final inquiry scores to the researcher by this number. For
participant journals on Google Docs, confidentiality was assured as only the participant,
102

the teacher and the researcher knew which written entries belonged to which participant.
At the close of this study, all online forms were deleted and any printed records will be
maintained for Capella University’s prescribed time period in a locked file.
Chapter 3 Summary
An investigation into the utility of the Stripling Model (2003) for the instructional
design of an inquiry-learning event hinges upon the reflection of the individual learners.
The model was designed to iteratively move learners through the inquiry process by
guiding and scaffolding their critical thinking through various reflection prompts. To
fully explore this unique approach to the instruction of inquiry / research, this study
employs a mixed-method, concurrent embedded strategy. This strategy benefits the
investigation by allowing for the simultaneous collection of qualitative and quantitative
data, and utilizing the qualitative data in an explanatory role for the quantitative findings.
For this purpose, three different data collection instruments were employed: the
Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994), a field-tested inquiry
task outcomes scoring rubric, and online participant reflection journals. The primary data
analysis was comprised of analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine if differences
between and among treatment and control participants was statistically significant. The
concurrent embedded strategy allowed for cross-utilization of frameworks, thus the
subscales of the MAI and the phases of the Stripling model are enacted as starting codes
for qualitative data analysis. Findings from this study may be applicable to other
secondary students who are learning how to conduct inquiry / research with the longerterm goal of transferability to the academic setting.

103

CHAPTER 4. DATA ANALYSIS, RESULTS AND FINDINGS
Introduction
This investigation into the efficacy of the Stripling Inquiry Model in regard to
metacognitive awareness and inquiry outcomes was conducted utilizing a concurrent
embedded methodology. This mixed methods approach allowed for the collection of
qualitative data throughout the duration of the participants’ inquiry projects, framed by
quantitative pre- and post-tests, and final collection of inquiry outcome scores. This
chapter presents the quantitative results and qualitative findings uncovered using the
concurrent embedded approach. ANOVA analyses were used to make comparisons of
treatment and control groups in terms of quantitative metacognitive awareness scores and
final inquiry outcome scores. Coding of 12 participant journals (six from treatment
participants, six from control) provided a qualitative look at participants’ inquiry
experiences as they happened. The benefit of this methodology as noted by Creswell
(2009) is that perspectives from different types of data are collected, offering a wider
picture of the research questions. As the concurrent embedded methodology of this study
stresses that one data type is primary and the other provides explanatory information, this
chapter presents results of both sets of analyses and is organized with quantitative results
presented first, followed by qualitative findings.

104

Description of the Sample
Participants of this study included 138 high school juniors and seniors (ages 1619), in ten separate sections of college bound, academic/honors level language arts
classes in two mid-Atlantic suburban public high schools. Participant demographics are
presented in Table 1.

Table 1
Frequencies and Percentages for Participant Demographics
Demographic
n

%

Gender
Female

92

67

Male

46

33

Juniors (age 16)

58

42

Seniors (ages 17/18)

80

58

Control

72

52

Treatment

66

48

Grade level

Group

Participants who were high school juniors were from site one, seniors from site
two. Originally, 63 juniors at site one were recruited to participate. Five participants
were withdrawn from the study - one due to extended illness, two due to dropping the
teacher’s course, and two due to non-completion of the inquiry project. The 80
105

participants recruited from site two all completed the study. Since two sites were used in
the study during two separate data collection periods, a total of twelve participant
journals (three control and three treatment journals, or six from each site) were reviewed
for qualitative analysis.

Summary of the Quantitative Results
Research questions one and two comprised the quantitative portion of this study.
H0 for Research Question One
No statistically significant differences between metacognitive awareness levels
were found when reflection was generated through instruction designed following the
Stripling Model.
H0 for Research Question Two
No statistically significant differences were found in inquiry task outcomes when
the instructional design followed the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003).
Detailed Analysis
Research Question One
What is the effect of learner reflection on metacognitive awareness when the instructional
design follows the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003)?
To examine research question one, a one-way ANOVA was conducted to
determine if there were significant differences in total metacognitive awareness between
the control and treatment groups. Prior to analysis, the assumption of normality was
assessed through a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test. The result of this test was not
significant (p = .200), so the assumption of normality was met. Levene’s test was then
106

conducted to assess for equality of variance. Results of Levene’s showed no significance
(p = .449), suggesting the assumption of equality was met. Descriptive statistics for total
metacognitive awareness are shown in Table 2. Results of the ANOVA did not show
significant differences in total metacognitive awareness scores between groups, F(1, 136)
= 2.31, p = .131, partial η2 = .02. Results for total metacognitive awareness are shown in
Table 3.

Table 2
Means and Standard Deviations for Total Metacognitive Awareness
Pretest
Posttest
Group
M
SD
M

SD

Control

176.18

19.51

182.99

19.04

Treatment

180.82

21.09

187.68

20.95

Table 3
ANOVA Results for Total Metacognitive Awareness
Source
SS
df
MS

F

Group

1499.83

1

1499.83

2.31

Error

88386.25

136

649.90

p
. .131

Partial η2
.02

Research Question Two
What is the effect of learner reflection on inquiry task outcomes when the instructional
design follows the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003)?
107

To examine research question two, a one-way ANOVA was conducted to
determine whether there were significant differences in inquiry outcome scores between
control and treatment groups. Prior to analysis, the assumption of normality was assessed
through a Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test. Results of this test were significant, p < .001,
suggesting a violation of normality. However, the F test is robust against violations of
normality (Howell, 2010). Equality of variance was checked with Levene’s test. Results
were not significant, p = .427, suggesting this assumption was met. Descriptive statistics
for inquiry outcome scores are shown in Table 4. Results of the ANOVA did not show
significant differences in inquiry outcome scores between treatment and control groups,
F(1, 136) = 0.25, p = .620, partial η2 = .00. Results for inquiry outcome scores are shown
in Table 5.

Table 4
Means and Standard Deviations for Inquiry Outcome Scores
Group
M

SD

Control

87.72

11.99

Treatment

88.65

9.75

Table 5
ANOVA Results for Inquiry Outcome Scores
Source
SS
df
MS
Group

29.74

1

29.74

Error

16395.43

136

120.56
108

F

p

Partial η2

0.25

.620

.00

Qualitative Research Design and Introduction to the Analysis
The qualitative portion of analysis within this mixed, concurrent embedded
approach took place through the collection of participant research journal entries made
throughout their inquiry experiences. Participants in the control group were asked to
reflect in their online journals at a minimum of six intervals during the inquiry process.
Reflection instructions for the control group were to simply reflect on their
research/inquiry processes. No specific prompts were given beyond this basic instruction
concerning what a reflection might include. Participants in the treatment group were
asked to reflect in their online journals at the beginning and end of each of the six phases
of the inquiry process (connect, wonder, investigate, construct, express, reflect) for a
minimum total of twelve reflection prompts. These reflections were made from highly
specific prompts that accompany the Stripling Inquiry model (Small et al., 2012).
Qualitative participant journal data were concurrently viewed and collected
throughout the instructional event, utilizing The Metacognitive Awareness Inventory
(MAI; Schraw & Dennison, 1994) framework for coding related to the dependent
variable of metacognitive awareness and the six Stripling Model phases for coding
related to task outcomes. Coding of qualitative data followed Creswell’s (2009)
recommended procedure for analysis as described in Chapter 3. This procedure began
with weekly collection and reading of participant journal entries for general tone and
meaning. Starter codes derived from the MAI subscales of Knowledge of Cognition and
Regulation of Cognition were used for analysis of research question three; the six phases
of the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) – connect, wonder, investigate, construct, express,
109

reflect – were used for analysis of research question four. Participant reflections were
also explored for relationships over time. Through these activities, descriptions of
participant experiences could be developed. Representative narrative passages of these
experiences were collected. Finally, relationships to quantitative results could be
determined.
Summary of Qualitative Findings
Qualitative findings provided a deeper look into the experiences of participants in
this study. Research questions three and four probed what reflections made by
participants during the inquiry process would reveal about their metacognitive awareness
and movement through the phases of inquiry. There was a marked difference between
reported reflections in terms of both quantity and quality. Control group reflections were
primarily brief statements in response to being asked to reflect with simple statements
such as “I think I’m doing well;” “I don’t know how to start this thing;” “I’ll worry about
it closer to the due date;” or, “I don’t have any questions.” These short statements were
not frequently elaborated upon, so specific concerns or confidences held by the
participants could not be isolated or addressed by the teacher.
In contrast, treatment group’s reflection journal entries tended to be longer,
deliberate, and contained more specific statements such as: “I am coming up with strong
points because in my reading I found…;” or, “I found coming up with guiding questions
to be easy because I’ve thought about this a lot and I develop daily questions so I know
what to look for in my sources.” In treatment journals, in nearly every instance, short
statements such as “the sources I found are good and very useful to me” were followed
by explanations that described in detail how the source answered a specific question,
110

gave examples or provided factual evidence to use in the project. Detailed findings for
research questions three and four follow.
Thematic Analysis of Metacognitive Awareness
What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner metacognitive awareness?
To analyze participant experiences in terms of metacognitive awareness,
Knowledge of Cognition and Regulation of Cognition subscales of the Schraw and
Dennison (1994) Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (MAI) were used as starter codes.
Figure 2 provides a breakdown of these codes.

Figure 2. Metacognitive Awareness Codes

The six control group journals (three reviewed from each site) and six treatment
group journals (three reviewed from each site) represented a low, medium, and high preMAI score from each site. These participant journals offer a look into what learners were
thinking and feeling as they worked through their inquiry projects. Overall, the control
111

group provided far less evidence of metacognitive reflection for both knowledge of
cognition and regulation of cognition (32 total instances) than the treatment group (99
total instances). As suggested by Marshall and Rossman (2011), the frequency of journal
content related to starter codes was useful for making comparisons. Findings for research
question three follow, organized by theme with control findings presented first, followed
by treatment group findings.
Reflections Related to Knowledge of Cognition
This metacognitive awareness category concerns learner awareness of his/her own
declarative, procedural, and conditional knowledge. Treatment journals guided by the
Stripling Inquiry Model prompts provided a more detailed view of participants’
metacognitive awareness than journals of the control group. Similar to the control group,
the treatment group reflections revealed less about participant knowledge of cognition
than regulation of cognition.
Declarative knowledge. Declarative knowledge involved statements of basic
facts of understanding. An example of an instance of a participant’s declarative
knowledge would be a statement referring to how the use of advance searching skills
such as limiters could make online searching for information more precise.
Control group findings. No statements reflecting awareness of declarative
knowledge were present.
Treatment group findings. An example of declarative knowledge found among
treatment participants included one writing about how using search limiters would make
his/her online searching more precise: “using limiters helped me rule out unwanted
sources.” Other evidence of declarative knowledge came in this form of expression of
112

confidence in research skills and instances when participants described how prior
knowledge was going to be useful: “Background information I learned in my classes will
help me to understand what I read for this project.”
Procedural knowledge. Evidence of participant awareness of procedural
knowledge was found in writings that described processes, steps, or strategies that would
help the learner accomplish a task or gain information.
Control group findings. Procedural knowledge in control journals was evidenced
with statements about personal organization: “reading ideas from someone else has
helped with my own organization” or certainty or uncertainty about the inquiry process:
“I think I’m not that prepared. Where’s a good place to start, once you find your topic?”
“I am unsure how to start this thing;” “I will do fine with this paper;” and, “finding
sources is easy for me;” but these statements were not elaborated upon.
Treatment group findings. Treatment group participants provided evidence of
knowledge of their cognition most frequently through procedural knowledge (eight
instances). These statements consisted primarily of self-evaluative remarks about their
previous experiences with inquiry project procedures: “Finding evidence is something I
struggle with;” “When I’m reading I go back, re-read, to find info I missed” (also a
comprehension monitoring strategy), “I think I’m kind of prepared to do research, but
I’m not very confident;” “I consider my previous research projects successful in that I
achieved my goals and learned about subjects I was interested in.” This last participant
later reflected on new procedural knowledge gained from this project: “I learned a decent
amount about forming keywords and the research process. Organizing my main ideas
from my reading on graphic organizers helped me integrate effective quotes much
113

easier.” Another participant pointed to graphic organizers as important to her inquiry
learning procedure stating, “I thought more about my topic when I did graphic
organizers…” and going on to describe specifically how this activity changed his/her
thinking about their topic.
Conditional knowledge. Participant awareness of conditional knowledge was
uncovered through statements that described circumstances that would support specific
outcomes. Minimal evidence of conditional knowledge was found.
Control group findings. Conditional knowledge was expressed only in terms of
self-knowledge: “I want something I like so I can write a good paper.”
Treatment group findings. Conditional knowledge was expressed only in terms
of believing that strong performance was only possible if they found the topic personally
interesting.
Reflections Related to Regulation of Cognition
This metacognitive awareness category involves learner’s awareness of his/her
own strategy use, including those for information management, debugging, planning,
comprehension monitoring, and evaluation as shown in Figure 2. Control journals
offered more evidence of these participants’ regulation of cognition than their knowledge
of cognition. Information management and evaluation were most frequently seen
regulation strategies in control group reflections (eight instances of each), followed by
planning (five instances). Debugging and comprehension monitoring were less evident
among control participants with only two and one instances, respectively.
Treatment group participants most frequently discussed strategies of information
management (27 instances) and evaluation strategies (21 instances), followed closely by
114

planning strategies (22 instances). Comprehension monitoring and debugging were
strategies least mentioned in treatment journals at eleven and five instances respectively.
Information management strategies. Strategies of information management
were seen through descriptions of steps taken by participants to locate, evaluate, interpret,
and organize information.
Control group findings. Information management corresponded with planning as
control participants expressed hopes of finding information by using the library, that they
might not have enough research, that social media might help them find information, or
that they had found information that could help them in writing: “based on information I
have found so far… I should be able to fully discuss…” Other reflections evidencing
information management related it directly to writing with statements like, “There are
statements to support my position. I’ll gather more and narrow down to the ones to use.”
Treatment group findings. Information management strategies were evident in
descriptions of how treatment participants determined topics (“I used databases to help
make a decision based on the amount of info available;” “I picked this topic because of
the different directions that can be taken”), and how they located information at different
points in the process. Choosing vetted information sources based on their appearance in
databases and inclusion of references was another information management strategy: “I
know the info is good in [database]. I will know also where they got their information
from.”
Information management strategies described included using graphic organizers,
flow charts, and outlines to arrange ideas and evidence, with two participants specifically
describing how organizing information revealed gaps in their information. Based on
115

these gaps, one participant described going back and limiting the scope of the topic and
changing his/her questions. The other described his/her plan to find the needed evidence
to fit into the flowchart. These examples demonstrate how for many of the participants,
planning and information management strategies overlapped. For example, on
participant narrowed down his/her research questions to what was manageable for the
scope of the assignment then planned which resources would be most helpful to start and
specifically noted trying to find a variety of sources. This same participant noted, “one
thing leads to another,” to express the iterative nature of the search he/she was
conducting. Another participant expressed a plan to use search limiters to “get more
recent info” and talked about using advanced search features online. Yet another, stating,
“I believe I have enough information,” went on to describe the variety of the sources
he/she used and the differences between the information found in each.
Debugging strategies. Debugging strategies were seen in participant journals
through descriptions of problem solving thought processes or steps taken to get past
obstacles in their inquiry processes.
Control group findings. Debugging for control participants included catching
faulty practices: “I was writing in a random order and it did not do me any good. I have a
lot of reorganizing to do;” and, “I was very aware of my confusion and stress.” Problem
solving ways to make their chosen topic work “It will work if I switch up wording”
(referring to keywords for searching), and acknowledgment of previous mistakes with
writing projects such as grammar were found; however, these ideas were not expanded
upon in either instance.

116

Treatment group findings. Three of the treatment participants specifically
described how they used several question stems to consider different options for a final
research question, and how the questions they developed became the paths for knowledge
construction based on information they found. These different paths also led students to
describe times when they had “to go back and re-think;” “go and get more information
because my ideas changed;” or, “I have thought a lot about what these connections
mean… I need to figure out…” demonstrating how they debugged (problem-solved) by
allowing their inquiry become more iterative. One participant specifically wrote how a
peer roundtable discussion helped him/her to see problems with the scope of their own
project and how and why having a peer point this out mattered. Another pointed to the
value of peer review to aide in making revisions of the thesis statement. These examples
illustrate how debugging and comprehension monitoring overlapped at times.
Planning strategies. Evidence of planning was found when participants
described what actions they were taking to move themselves along in their inquiry
processes.
Control group findings. Regulation of cognition through planning by the control
participants included instances of setting schedules to work on the project, determining
the order of the work to be done (“I will write a little, then go back and read more
articles,” “I will make an outline asap to collect my thoughts”); and, strategizing their
writing process (“I’ll use details to support my main idea so I can better argue…;” “I’ll
use feedback from classmates to help my writing”). Some statements showed the
inability to plan due to uncertainty about the process: “I’m not sure. I guess I’m doing all

117

right. I have all my sources and data. I’m just going to be unsure as to how to start this
thing but I guess we’ll get to that once it becomes closer to the due date.”
Other instances of planning were related to information management as
participants expressed hopes of finding information by using the library, that they might
not have enough research, that social media might help them find information, or that
they had found information that could help them in writing: “based on information I have
found so far… I should be able to fully discuss…”
Treatment group findings. Planning strategies were highly evident in treatment
journals. Participants wrote about their expectations of what certain sources would yield
(“I expect to find a lot of statistics about…”), how their research questions should guide
their research, and organizing their writing. One described how and where he/she
planned to incorporate quotes into their writing, while another described how to leverage
the graphic organizer for writing, stating, “I am writing all my thoughts out on paper…
then I’ll go back and try to put them into some sort of logical order. To do this, I will
reference the graphic organizer I made.” Another participant also referenced the value of
the graphic organizer to planning their writing: “The best way to organize it [the paper] is
the way I presented it in my organizer, though some concepts blend together…” One
other learner wrote about his/her plan to frequently read their paper aloud as a means to
revise their writing.
Comprehension monitoring strategies. Descriptions of actions taken in order to
process and understand information or come to conclusions based upon found evidence in
their research comprised instances of comprehension monitoring.

118

Control group findings. There was only one instance of comprehension
monitoring found in the control group journals, and this was an expression of uncertainty:
“I’m not sure. I guess I’m doing all right. I have my sources and data. I’m just going to
be unsure as to how to start this thing.”
Treatment group findings. Phrases coded for comprehension monitoring showed
participants had the ability to do what they needed to do in order to understand.
Reflections included mentions of what the topic meant to them personally, and how this
would help them understand found information; how using graphic organizers helped
them integrate quotes and information; and, why a certain research database was selected
because “that is the easiest for me to use and there are some really good features.”
Another flag for comprehension monitoring was the phrase: “I need to get these questions
answered so that I can figure out why…”
Comprehension monitoring often overlapped with debugging strategies (see
debugging section above). One participant specifically wrote how a peer roundtable
discussion helped him/her to see problems with the scope of their own project and how
and why having a peer point this out mattered. Another pointed to the value of peer
review to aide in making revisions of the thesis statement.
Evaluation strategies. Evaluation strategies were found when participants
described judgments they made throughout their inquiry processes. These judgments
appeared primarily in terms of the value of resources, the degree to which certain steps or
processes were useful, and overall personal performance of inquiry.
Control group findings. Evaluation was evident in control journals as it related
to information management. One participant broadly assessed the databases that could be
119

used for his/her topic, decided that social media sources would not be useful, stating,
“Many sources on my topic are opinionated.” Further evidence of evaluation as a
regulation strategy included one participant stating that a peer’s suggestions about his/her
thesis might be helpful (but did not describe how). Two control participants provided
evaluative statements concerning their projects, what worked, what did not work, and
how they might improve scores on the next paper.
Treatment group findings. Evaluation strategies evident in treatment journals
fell into three types: evaluation of inquiry sources, formative evaluation of selfperformance, and final evaluation of performance. One learner wrote in the first journal
entry: “I am in way over my head considering that I nor really any of my peers have
gotten the real opportunity to write a research paper,” thus evaluating where they were in
terms of preparation and skills going into the inquiry assignment. Another participant,
reflecting on previous projects done in school wrote, “I am confident that I will do well
and that I’m prepared to do research.”
Later in the process, participants wrote about how they selected some sources
over others, how their keywords worked or did not work for searching, and what gaps
they found in their research. One learner evaluated his/her own writing, recognizing the
need to expand their personal writing skills to make the paper “more appealing because
right now it’s kind of plain and boring.” Another participant noted he/she was “drawing
conclusions that make sense” but noted that they still needed to boost the evidence for the
conclusions. This same participant later evaluated how well his/her graphic organizer
aided the synthesis of information. One participant who had contacted experts to
interview for the project evaluated how easy the process of contacting an expert went,
120

and how the information gained from the interviews helped him/her to connect the main
points in their paper.
Final evaluative reflections from treatment journals described what these learners
believed they gained from the inquiry and reflection experiences. One such entry noted
reflecting was valuable to “evaluate my writing and thought processes more in depth than
I normally would have” and that “my paper was stronger because I put more thought into
it.” This same participant evaluated both the process and product in the final entry: “For
the next paper, I need to analyze the evidence better. I need to go beyond just stating
evidence and put more into how it connects to my thesis.” Another evaluated the
importance of the resources he/she used as well as the helpfulness of having to write
reflections. This learner connected his/her success to these two things as well as the
importance of feeling connected to the chosen inquiry topic.
One participant reflected in the final entry, “I should have spent more time writing
my paper. I think I should have read more sources. I learned that research takes a while.
In the future I will try to find more information sooner.” A different participant wrote, “I
think my inquiry process went well. I learned a lot of new things about my topic that I
didn’t think of in the beginning.” Another evaluated their performance as, “I could’ve
read more into my sources to get a better understanding and go more in depth. I will take
these steps with me to college so I can understand how to write a research paper better
and easier in the future.”

121

Thematic Analysis of Inquiry Outcomes
What do reflections in participant journals reveal about learner inquiry task outcomes?
To uncover participant experiences related to the Stripling Inquiry process, the six
phases of the model were used as coding themes. The six iterative Stripling phases are
shown in Figure 3.

Figure 3. Phases of the Stripling Inquiry Model (Stripling, 2003)

Coding using the Stripling Phases as Themes
Using the specific phases of inquiry as coding themes revealed if and how
participants experienced these phases. The phases of inquiry are distinctive and have
specific associated activities. Each phase is described below, followed by control, then
treatment findings.
Reflection journals for the control group were comprised mostly of brief
statements without too much elaboration or explanation. Of the six control journals
122

(three from each site), only one held reflections that corresponded with all six of the
Stripling inquiry phases. One had reflections that matched only the Connect and Reflect
phases, two had entries that coincided with the Connect, Investigate, and Reflect phases,
two participant journals ended at the Construct phase.
Treatment group reflections were much more detailed and complete than those of
the control group. Of the six treatment journals (three from each site) reviewed, only one
lacked entries aligned to each Stripling phase.
Connect. Connect phase was evident when reflections concerned how
participants were making connections to topics, whether for personal reasons or interests,
or because of prior knowledge or future goals.
Control group findings. Initial connections were some of the most detailed
entries, as participants connected their topics to themselves, family traditions, life
outlook, hobby, concerns about the world, and prior knowledge. One wrote that he/she
had “read a lot about his issue and something needs to be done” and that someone needs
to “bring it out of the shadows.” Another whose topic was related to a personal hobby
expressed the desire to justify and explain why this hobby is important. One recognized
the value of a personal connection for developing a “focused, better-argued paper.”
Another participant wrote about an initial connection to one topic, then, in a subsequent
entry, changed his/her mind stating, “A lot of things will work, but I don’t want it to just
work. I want something I like so I can write a good paper.”
Treatment group findings. Treatment participants made connections to their
inquiry topics on a personal level. For example, “One of the goals in my life is to live
without regrets” was a statement that justified a participant’s choice of what he/she
123

deemed to be an important social topic. Another participant connected to a topic because
it was “extremely interesting to me and I really cannot wait to learn more about…” and
stated, “I have many intriguing questions,” showing evidence of wondering about
potential research paths while initially connecting to the topic. One participant
personally connected to a topic because he/she had suffered from the disorder under
investigation. Another participant also stated, “I personally feel as though I have lived
through this topic” and expressed a desire to want to help others. This particular learner
also shared, “I’m actually excited to learn something new that I’ve always wanted to have
time to study” noting he/she liked to “have time to contemplate topics and how ideas
relate.” Only one participant struggled to select a topic because he/she wanted to pick
something that had a pre-determined answer before spending any time researching. This
same participant asked some questions in the wonder phase, but still was focused on
getting the project done and eliminated several ideas prior to doing any research because
he/she presumed there would not be enough information to support those ideas. When
this particular participant began performing research in the investigate phase, he/she then
returned to the wonder phase and purposely developed questions to investigate, based on
information found: “I’ve noticed ample essays that…all seem to tie in evidence of…”
This was similar to another participant who practiced iterative questioning throughout the
inquiry process, each time returning to his/her information sources to keep developing
his/her ideas.
Wonder. Wonder was signaled by reflections that explored possible questions
that the topic suggested to the learners, what value the topic held for them or the world,
and, possible avenues of inquiry to take in relation to the topic.
124

Control group findings. Concerning the Wonder phase, where learners are
exploring various avenues to take for their projects, only two participants briefly explored
potential ideas, but these were non-specific. One expressed concern that not enough
people knew about the topic and how terrible it was, but did not explore any possible
avenues of investigation. The other expressed that because there was “a lot of history”
about the topic, he/she would find a lot of information, but again, was non-specific about
what possibilities existed.
Treatment group findings. Evidence that each of the participants in the treatment
group wondered widely about their topics was seen as they generated multiple questions
and expressed their curiosity about their topics. Eventually each of these participants
noted they needed to narrow down their questions as one participant stated, “to ones I
could possibly answer through the research I can conduct.” The exploration of questions
continued into the investigate phase for most of these participants as a seamless,
simultaneous activity.
Investigate. Reflections related to the Investigate phase focused on how the
participant conducted research. Mentions of search strategies, tools and sources used,
options considered, and information fluency skills enacted during research processes all
signaled that a learner was in the Investigate phase.
Control group findings. Descriptions of Investigation, the phase of conducting
research, also were meager. Reflections were mostly in regard to finding resources that,
as one participant wrote, “confirm that my ideas are on track,” or, as another said, their
resources “matched up with ideas I previously had” and that they had found “multiple
ideas and statements I can use.” Others just stated they had found sources, offering no
125

estimation of the value of the sources, or any description of a plan or strategy for
research. Only one of the control participants discussed the plan for research to include
certain databases to search, expressed optimism that “I like my topic, so finding sources
is easy for me,” and provided an estimation that social media wouldn’t be useful as a
resource: “Twitter won’t help me – I don’t trust it.”
Treatment group findings. One treatment participant noted how his/her ideas
kept expanding with additional information; another noted how he/she need to do “a little
more digging” to clarify ideas. Three participants talked at length about their
investigation strategies, naming the use of databases, advanced searching shortcuts and
use of limiters for searching, new keyword combinations they developed, and
information organizing strategies. One wrote in detail about how he/she would use social
media to connect with and interview experts in the field to help gain understanding. This
same participant wrote about how he/she vetted the sources used. Four of the six
participants expressed confidence in the sources they were using: “I think I will mostly
use [database name] because that is the easiest for me to use and there are really good
features that help me get what I need;” “This book is written by a professor who
continues to write on this subject… up to the present day. The author also wrote a lot of
other publications… making me more inclined to trust a publication of his.” There were
six instances of participant reflection on their and others’ research strategies based upon
the peer roundtable discussions that took place, with statements such as, “people found
bad sources, but made up for it when our discussions brought up different angles to take
to their papers instead of the one they already thought of…” The theme of recognized
value of peer discussions is presented below in the emerging themes section.
126

Construct. The Construct phase was evident when reflections showed how
participants went about seeing connections through the process of analysis, comparing
information, or synthesizing information to construct new knowledge. Discussions of
thinking strategies and descriptions of tools or processes used to aide construction were
all signals that a learner was in this phase of inquiry.
Control group findings. Construction of knowledge in the control group journals
was evident primarily in terms of writing (express phase). These participants did not
appear to work on constructing new knowledge as a distinct activity, but rather went
directly to expressing ideas in writing. See the express control group findings section for
more details.
Treatment group findings. All but two of the treatment participants described in
detail how they actively constructed knowledge. Of the two who did not, one simply did
not reflect on construction. The other talked about his/her sources and where the
information taken from them would “go in the paper,” showing that for this particular
learner, the project was approached more as a report of information rather than an act of
new knowledge construction. This point was evidenced in that the focus of his/her
construction phase was on making their writing less “boring.” This participant would
later write in the final reflection, “for the next paper, I need to analyze the evidence
better. I need to go beyond just stating evidence and put more thought into how it
connects to my thesis.” This final statement evidences growth on the part of this learner
that occurred only by his/her reflection on what had or had not been done during the
inquiry process. The remainder of this group described how using some sort of graphic
organizer or flowchart helped them sort their ideas and see connections between main
127

ideas. One specifically noted each of his/her main ideas as they developed, and
acknowledged how construction would continue during the express phase: “My thesis
might change the further I go into writing my paper.” This participant also noted, “As I
did my graphic organizers I thought more about… instead of just…” demonstrating how
his/her ideas kept expanding. A different participant wrote extensively on his/her
knowledge construction process, iteratively noting when their ideas shifted, or they
revisited information sources. This participant alluded to construction with, “the
relationships I’m finding…” and “I have thought a lot about what these connections
mean.” This participant also acknowledged and explored differing opinions related to the
topic and later described how his/her concepts began to overlap and “flow into one
another” evidencing synthesis of ideas. Converse to the control group, the treatment
group tended to more frequently describe actively constructing ideas and they wrote far
less about the act of writing the paper.
Express. The Express phase became apparent when reflections showed how
participants made decisions about how to express new knowledge in writing their inquiry
papers, or with steps taken or tools used to aid their writing.
Control group findings. Construction of knowledge in the control group journals
was evident primarily in terms of writing (express phase). These participants did not
appear to work on constructing new knowledge as a distinct activity, but rather went
directly to expressing ideas in writing. One wrote that he was “confident in my
arguments” but mostly worried about his writing. Another used some question stems to
consider paths, but these were all questions probing basic facts (how many/can x
happen?), so the resulting thesis was not robust and reflected the student’s own belief
128

held initially about the topic. Another control participant did use a strategy of writing
several iterations of his/her thesis statement, but again this was more for the purpose of
writing than constructing knowledge: “I just want to write my ideas then try to go back
and fill in gaps for information later.” This approach was echoed by yet another
participant who noted his/her goal was to “prove a point” he already felt strongly about.”
This student also remarked that he received feedback from a peer who suggested the topic
be broadened, but did not mention whether he took this advice or not. As these
participants overlapped knowledge construction with writing, only one participant had a
distinctive statement regarding expression: “I’m unsure how to start this thing, but I guess
we’ll get to that once we get closer to the due date.” This same participant did not write
anything about his ideas, performing research, or organizing his/her ideas, suggesting that
the student did not see the path between connecting to a topic and writing the paper to
have other distinctive activities.
Treatment group findings. Among the six participants, the only descriptions of
the writing process included the need to go back to information sources after developing
a rough draft, referring to organizers made to make the paper flow logically, converting
the organizer to an outline for easier writing, and, reading drafts out loud to “catch small
mistakes.” This group revealed a primary focus on building their ideas; writing the paper
was the expression of this work.
Reflect. Finally, the Reflect phase was shown through presentation of final
thoughts on the whole process of inquiry, and if or how what participants learned might
help them in the future (transfer).

129

Control group findings. Final reflections by this group included just two
statements recognizing the value of reflection, one remarking that, “journaling helped a
little” for getting ideas together, another stating, “These journals actually helped me a
little to organize my ideas and create a plan for writing the paper.”
Treatment group findings. Final reflections from the treatment group concerned
both process and product. Points made included the value of the journal as a place for
“writing down all my ideas” and metacognitive reflection: “Thinking about what I was
thinking about made a positive difference in my writing and overall grade.” Another
reflected on how elements of the research process such as developing good keywords,
using organizers for information, and reaching out to experts helped him/her get “better at
research” and also to do a “more effective” job writing. Another noted his/her
opportunity to “evaluate my writing and thought process more in depth more than I
normally would” helped their paper be “stronger because I put more thought into it.”
This same learner acknowledged that he/she needed to “go beyond just stating evidence”
and make stronger connections in the future. Another pointed to time management
errors, stating, “I should have spent more time writing my paper. I think I should have
read more sources. I learned that research takes a while. In the future I will try to find
more information sooner.”
Emerging Themes
As participant journals were read and coded according to themes related to
research questions three and four, other themes began to emerge from this data. These
themes included that these high school-age learners:

130

•

Confused research/inquiry with the act of writing a paper, with a focus on
completion of the project (rather than knowledge construction) (13 instances)

•

Found inquiry to be a more challenging process than what they had previously
experienced when creating projects for school (6 instances)

•

Recognized the value of high quality information sources (9 instances)

•

Recognized the value of graphic organizers as a scaffold to knowledge
construction (13 instances)

•

Recognized the value of peer review (9 instances)

Research, Writing and the Challenge of Inquiry
Reflections in participant journals suggested that the concepts of research/inquiry
and writing a paper were intertwined for some of these high school age learners.
Evidence of this theme was found in five of the six control group journals in 13 instances
where participants expressed that they just want to get to the writing and not spend so
much time researching and developing ideas. Said one control group participant: “This
process is moving a little slow. I just want to sit down and knock this rough draft out,
then go back and make whatever edits are necessary. I don’t have any questions.”
Another control participant noted he/she wanted to “write the paper first, then go back
and add in [evidence] later.” Other control participants made comments such as “let’s
just write it;” and, “I don’t care about doing research, I want to begin now.”
Treatment participants, while also making references to getting the paper done,
such as “this will take a long time;” and “I’m worried about my writing,” mostly
appeared to grasp the idea that they were taking part in a process, and that concerns about
the writing would be dealt with later. Said one treatment participant, “Usually I would
131

just throw myself into writing as I go, but now I have spent a long time preparing and
learning… I feel really good about it and I’ve learned to prepare more.” Another wrote,
“Everyone agrees that this is one of the first times we actually have to research a topic
and then write about it instead of reading a paper and answering questions given to us.”
This final statement also alludes to the related emergent theme of inquiry being a more
challenging learning process than they had previously experienced. One control
participant expressed this challenge as a frustration, “I know what I want to write, but
having to do these journals is making me overthink everything,” reflecting the challenge
that inquiry posed him/her.
Recognizing the Value of Information Sources
In nine written instances, participants from both treatment and control groups
recognized the value of having high quality information resources at their disposal for the
project. For the control participants, descriptions of resources such as, “I have many
sources, so I feel confident;” or, “I found a lot of good sources on the databases” were
generalized acknowledgments without details on how they had come to these value
assessments. Treatment descriptions of information sources offered more detail. For
example, two wrote about how they each selected a topic based on the amount of
information present in a database and how the articles matched their interests in the topic.
Another reviewed the value of the information read when writing about his/her changing
ideas about the topic at hand stating, “I never thought about it this way, but the more I
think about it, the more it makes sense.” For this learner, the value of information
resources connected directly to his/her capability to construct new ideas. This was true of
another treatment participant who read some information, then wrote his entire rough
132

draft (express phases), then went back to the investigate and construct phase to locate
deeper information: “I feel like the new sources added depth and credibility to my paper.”
This learner also exemplified the iterative nature of inquiry.
Recognizing the Value of Graphic Organizers as a Scaffold
Among treatment participants there was frequent writing (13 instances) done
concerning the usefulness of graphic organizers, flowcharts, or outlines as scaffolds to
their own knowledge construction. Specific examples relating to this theme are included
above in the description of treatment group Construct phases reflections.
Recognizing the Value of Peer Feedback
Participants in the treatment group recognized the value of peer feedback to their
projects. Statements like, “the search terms he suggested really helped me… my ideas
became more straightforward;” “having someone else look at my questions… really helps
to get an outside look at the topic;” and, “the peer review reminded me to make sure I
keep my fact gathering broadened” exemplify this recognition. The peer roundtables also
supported the participants in making decisions to move iteratively through their inquiry:
“In class we talked about stuff that kinda [sic] snuck up on us. By this I mean that when
we looked something up about our topic we then found something else that was new and
interesting.”
Chapter 4 Summary
This chapter presented the quantitative results and the qualitative findings
emerging from this mixed methods study investigating the Stripling Inquiry Model. The
sample was comprised of 138 high school juniors and seniors from two Mid-Atlantic
public high schools. Research question one concerned whether a statistically significant
133

difference in final metacognitive awareness levels existed between treatment and control
groups. Although the treatment group had a slightly higher mean metacognitive
awareness score, this difference was not statistically significant and the null hypothesis
was accepted. Research question two concerned whether a statistically significant
difference existed in final inquiry outcome scores (i.e. research paper scores). Again, the
treatment group had a slightly higher mean inquiry outcome score, but this difference was
not statistically significant and the null hypothesis was accepted.
Qualitative findings gathered concurrently during the inquiry period, however, did
show differences in both the amount and quality of descriptions and details in participant
journal reflections. Entries from twelve participant journals (six from each research site,
three treatment, three control) were concurrently read, reviewed, and coded for research
questions three and four. Research question three concerned what reflections would
reveal about participant metacognitive awareness. These reflections were coded
according to metacognitive subscales of knowledge of cognition and regulation of
cognition. Overall, the control group provided far less evidence of metacognitive
awareness than the treatment group. Both groups exhibited less about their knowledge of
cognition than their regulation of cognition. Treatment participants provided a great deal
more evidence of regulation strategies (86 instances) than control participants (24
instances). Planning, information management, and evaluation were the main strategies
used by treatment participants. As there were no statistically significant differences in
final, self-reported metacognitive awareness scores between groups, these differences in
actual enactment of metacognitive strategy use would not have been uncovered without
qualitative methods.
134

Research question four asked what participant journals revealed about inquiry
outcomes. These reflections were coded by the six Stripling inquiry phases – connect,
wonder, investigate, construct, express, and reflect. Again, a marked difference was seen
in the amount and quality of treatment reflections compared to control reflections.
Treatment reflections were more detailed and exhibited a stronger grasp of inquiry and
research processes than did those of the control group. Since quantitative inquiry scores
among students did not yield statistically significant differences, this finding would not
have been evident had this study utilized only quantitative methods. Other themes that
emerged from the qualitative findings included the confusion these high school students
had in distinguishing research from the writing process, the heightened challenge that
inquiry provided these learners, and the value participants recognized in information
sources and scaffolds such as graphic organizers and peer review. Discussion of the
results of this study and implications this investigation may hold for future research and
practice are presented in Chapter 5.

135

CHAPTER 5. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
Introduction
The purpose of this study was to investigate the efficacy of the Stripling Inquiry
Model (2003) for the design of inquiry instruction for secondary school students (ages
16-19). A mixed methodology was employed to carry out this study using a concurrent
embedded strategy. This strategy allowed for the continual collection of qualitative data
found in participant reflection journals throughout the instructional event, offering an
explanatory or alternate view of quantitative data derived from pre- and postadministration of the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994),
and the participants’ inquiry outcome scores. This chapter summarizes and discusses the
results and findings of this mixed-methods study, and situates this study within the extant
body of knowledge. How the results of this study relate to the theoretical framework and
literature reviewed is explored. Finally, limitations of this study and implications for
practice and further research are presented.
Summary of the Results
This mixed methodology study was conducted with participation of 138 collegebound high school junior and senior students in two Mid-Atlantic suburban public high
schools. Four research questions were designed to explore the effect of reflection
generated by inquiry instruction based on the Stripling model. Two quantitative
questions included how treatment and control groups compared in terms of self-reported
136

metacognitive awareness (research question one) and inquiry outcomes (research
question two). Two qualitative questions probed participant metacognitive awareness
revealed in their reflections (research question three) and the inquiry outcomes (research
question four).
ANOVA analyses formed the basis for comparison of treatment and control
groups for research questions one and two. While the means for the treatment group
were higher for both pre-test and post-test, this difference in metacognitive awareness
was not statistically significant (p = .131). Furthermore, while the treatment group had
an overall higher mean, the difference in final inquiry outcomes scores was not
statistically significant (p = .620).
Counter to the quantitative results, the qualitative findings of this study (research
questions three and four) suggest that the control group was not as metacognitively aware
as the treatment group. Both groups most frequently described their knowledge of
cognition in terms of procedural knowledge. Regulation of cognition was most
frequently evident in terms of information management strategies and evaluation
strategies for both treatment and control groups. Also consistent between groups was that
debugging and comprehension monitoring were the least described strategies. Evaluation
and planning strategies were noticeably different with treatment group describing use of
these strategies in more than double the instances than control group.
Research question four explored how participant reflections evidenced their
inquiry experiences through the six Stripling model phases. Key differences between
reflections of the treatment and control groups were in the amount and quality of
reflections. Control participants tended to write brief statements, with little or no
137

explanation or elaboration. Treatment journals frequently held explanations or examples
elucidating participant experiences.
While both treatment and control groups described strong connections to their
inquiry topics, only the treatment group deeply explored potential paths for their research
and continued to do so as they moved into formal research activities (i.e. the investigate
phase). In the investigation phase, the treatment group more frequently evidenced use of
research strategies through descriptions of what they were doing and active questioning.
Of the six inquiry phases, knowledge construction proved the most different between
groups. Control participants did not show evidence of distinct activities to build their
new knowledge, but rather appeared focused on completing the written assignment.
Conversely, treatment participants described strategies, tools and ideas that evidenced
active knowledge construction. In final journal entries, treatment participants wrote
about both their final products and the process with which they had engaged.
In addition to the six inquiry phases, other themes that emerged from participant
reflections included confusion participants had in distinguishing the research process
from a writing process, the challenge inquiry presented to these novice researchers, and,
finally, the recognized value of information sources and scaffolds such as graphic
organizers and peer review.
Discussion of the Results and Findings
The four research questions of this study were designed to explore the efficacy of
the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) by asking how the reflection generated through
instruction designed by this model affected participant metacognitive awareness and

138

inquiry outcomes. Data analysis yielded a lack of statistically significant differences
between treatment and control groups in the quantitative portion of this study.
Research Question One
Possible explanations for the lack of statistical significance for metacognitive
awareness (research question one) include participant maturation over the data collection
period, and that the MAI is a self-report measure. For the majority of participants in this
study (80 of the 138) the inquiry process spanned five months of their senior year of high
school. This long time span occurred due to an unusually high number of missed school
days (15, or three weeks) due to winter weather in the Mid-Atlantic region (11 days), and
spring vacations (four days) as well as the necessity for the teachers to interject other
assignments into this time period in order to meet other curricular requirements. Thus, it
is possible that natural maturation of these young adult participants may have affected
how they rated themselves in the post-MAI (Kuhn & Dean, 2004; Veenman & Spaans,
2005). In addition, the MAI has problems inherent to any self-report measure in that it
relies solely on the judgment of participants to rate their own metacognitive habits, a
problem commonly acknowledged in metacognition literature (Dinsmore et al., 2008; Ku
& Ho, 2010). One approach to counterbalance this issue could have been to have the
teacher rate the level of metacognitive awareness their students regularly exhibit. The
problems inherent in self-report measures were recognized by the researcher and
prompted the use of qualitative measures for balance in this study.
Research Question Two
There are two possible explanations for the lack of a statistically significant
difference between treatment and control participant inquiry outcome scores. First, there
139

was an unexpected effect of the teachers involved. Each teacher involved in this study
was a veteran teacher (over ten years of experience), who, while not experienced in using
this particular approach to inquiry, had wide experience in helping learners in the writing
process. As part of their regular practices, each teacher utilized one-on-one conferencing
to continually guide and assist learners with their writing and processing of information
and allowed submission of multiple drafts to help all students be successful. Therefore,
the teachers’ regular instructional techniques may have played a larger mediating role and
compensated to some degree for participant differences in inquiry, critical thinking and
writing skills.
A second explanation lies with the design of the inquiry outcomes scoring rubric.
While this comprehensive scoring rubric was designed and field tested to measure overall
inquiry outcomes, the rubric categories related to writing-specific tasks may have
compensated for weaker inquiry / critical thinking skills. The research question therefore
could have been written to require measurement specifically about the critical thinking
categories of the rubric, rather than the overall outcomes. Despite the lack of statistical
significance in differences between treatment and control groups’ self-reported
metacognitive awareness and inquiry outcome scores, the qualitative findings for
research questions three and four did show marked differences between the groups.
Research Question Three
Decidedly, treatment participants who were guided by the Stripling reflection
prompts spent more time and effort than the control group in writing reflections of their
inquiry processes. As previously noted, treatment journal entries tended to be longer and
more detailed, including examples and explanations. For the control participants, who
140

were simply instructed to reflect, the journals were largely regarded as an additional task
they had to complete, and they did not readily see any value to this exercise. These
reactions match those found by Silen and Uhlin (2008), whose college-age participants
did not see the necessity or value of discussing their learning. The incompleteness of
control group journals and minimal entries lend further evidence that this group did not
consider reflection to be important to their individual learning processes. As control
participants did not view reflection as necessary, this may have decreased for them the
overall value of journaling as occurred in the McGuinness and Brien (2007) study.
Although treatment group participants were also initially reticent about journaling
according to their teachers, their journal entries indicated a growing awareness that the
thinking they were prompted to do was helpful, a response similar to findings of
McKinney and Sen (2012). Overall, treatment participants provided evidence of being
more aware of the fact that they were learning a process, not just creating a product (i.e.,
research paper). Their journal entries contained more frequent evidence of iteration in
their inquiry, noting times when they went back and did more investigation, rethought
their research questions, or revisited graphic organizers later in the process in order to
reconsider ideas or help them with their written expression. These findings are similar to
Chen and Bradshaw’s (2007) mixed-methods study that qualitatively found that
intentional reflection helped learners identify problems or gaps in their own knowledge.
Evidence uncovered in treatment journals indicates a likelihood that the high school-age
learners in the present study are becoming more self-aware and intentional in their
inquiry practices, a target disposition described by Conley’s (2007) Redefining College
Readiness, Project Information Literacy (Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and Pew
141

Internet Project (Pew Research Center, 2012), as well as AASL and ACRL standards for
high school and college-age learners.
As suggested by Marshall and Rossman (2011), the frequencies of specific codes
provide comparative evidence. Treatment participant journals provided evidence of
metacognitive awareness nearly three times as often as control participants (99 instances
versus 32 instances), suggesting greater conscious recognition of personal metacognitive
habits. That both groups exhibited knowledge of cognition most often through
procedural knowledge reflects that these high school students were well aware that they
were undertaking a large process. The treatment group expressed regulation of cognition
strategies more often than control participants. This is likely a result of the quality of
Stripling reflection prompts, as they require the student to really ponder if he/she has
considered all options before entering each inquiry phase. Of particular interest among
regulation of cognition strategies were the differences in evaluation strategies. Where
control participants wrote a few esoteric evaluative statements about sources and selfperformance, treatment participants wrote detailed descriptions of evaluating sources for
usefulness, made formative statements of how they were progressing and final product
evaluations, and, most importantly, reflected on what they will do in future inquiry
assignments. In doing so, these participants demonstrated the types of metacognitive
reflection called for by PIL (Head 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and transfer of
strategies between learning events needed for college readiness (Conley, 2007, p. 13).
Research Question Four
Like the findings of research question three regarding the metacognitive
awareness of these high school students, the findings for research question four also told
142

a deeper story of differences in individual inquiry experiences. That the treatment group
provided much more detail and demonstrated a stronger grasp of the inquiry process not
only reflects the rigorous quality of the Stripling reflection prompts but also the fact that
these particular learners engaged much more deeply with their research topics and the
overall process of inquiry learning. As previously noted, treatment participants actively
wondered (i.e., questioned) by developing a variety of potential research questions and
carried this activity into the investigate and construct phases. When investigating, these
participants took the time to critically evaluate their information sources and continued to
explore options. They leveraged the scaffolds of peer roundtable discussions and graphic
organizers for continuing questioning and knowledge construction. How (or whether)
treatment and control participants described their knowledge construction processes as
either just writing or active knowledge building, and, the degree to which they reflected
on process and final product underscores the key difference not visible in the quantitative
outcomes: that learners using Stripling prompts engaged more deeply with their learning
process and appeared to have gained a greater grasp of inquiry. As a result of this level
of reflection, these learners may have a greater likelihood of transfer to future inquiry
events, as Head and Eisenberg (2010) found that college students rely heavily on, and
make few changes to, research habits they learned in high school (p.21).
The additional themes that emerged also proved interesting. First, these themes
confirmed some of the problems recognized by Head (2013) and Head and Eisenberg
(2010) in the Project Information Literacy reports in that process and product are
confused for high school age students to whom “research” automatically means writing a
paper. This problem was recognized in the 2010 PIL study that found that over half of
143

the college students in the study employed writing routines but only 26% had developed
research routines (Head & Eisenberg, 2010, p. 19). PIL also pointed out how students
can be so intent on completing the project at hand that they limit the array of sources
used, do not actively evaluate sources, nor know when finished whether they have
actually done a sufficient job or not (Head & Eisenberg, 2010). The emerged theme of
inquiry being more challenging than what these learners had previously been tasked to
perform in school echoes findings of the 2012 Pew Internet study and reaffirms the PIL
2010 recommendation for inquiry and research skills to be taught earlier in a student’s
career. Further confirmation of the PIL concern that research was being equated with just
finding the right answer was seen in this study with the expressions of some learners in
regard to just getting the project done; or that they wanted to write the paper, then to fit
evidence from information sources to match their personal intention for their papers.
This concern suggests that the participant considered informational evidence as
something to match his/her specific intention, instead of a building block for new
understanding. When the goal was getting the paper written, knowledge construction was
not a primary concern. For those using the Stripling approach, the process was slowed
down and they were aided in becoming more intentional through reflection.
Other emerging themes countered issues described in the PIL reports. For
example, participants in this study recognized the value of information sources, and the
use of peer review and scaffolds like graphic organizers as means for performing inquiry.
Treatment participants also specifically described developing keywords for searching,
exploring a variety of research questions, and vetting sources. Each of these skills was
among those found lacking in participants of the Project Information Literacy studies.
144

The fact that students receiving the Stripling treatment did exhibit these skills is
testament to its utility as it did help learners become more intentional and experienced in
their research practices.
Discussion of the Results and Findings in Relation to the Literature
The quantitative results and qualitative findings of this study provide affirmation
and in some cases, contrasts to the literature reviewed in Chapter 2. These connections
with the literature as well as the theories framing this study are presented here.
Relationship between the Results and Findings and the Theoretical Framework
Recommendations from large-scale studies such as Project Information Literacy
(Head, 2013, Head & Eisenberg, 2010) and the Pew Internet Project (Pew Research
Center, 2012) include that students be prepared for the challenge of performing research
and inquiry long before they enter college. Standards emanating from educational bodies
such as AASL (2009), ACRL (2000), and the recently enacted Common Core State
Standards (2010) point to inquiry skills, constructivist approaches and metacognitive
practices as crucial to the development of lifelong learning. Wang et al. (1990) identified
metacognitive factors to be “the most important” variables for learning (p. 37).
Considering these points, this study investigated the constructivist-based Stripling Inquiry
Model (2003) in relation to metacognitive awareness and inquiry outcomes. The model
is constructivist as it is learner-centered in its focus on the requisite thinking that must
accompany successful, iterative inquiry. Viewed though the lens of metacognition
theory, the qualitative findings of this study provide additional evidence to confirm that
learners who engage metacognitively are more inclined to use effective learning
strategies (Winne & Nesbit, 2009; Vrugt & Oort, 2008), and have greater information
145

fluency self-efficacy (Kilic-Cakmak, 2010). Students in the Stripling treatment group
utilized metacognitive reflection prompts and evidenced a far greater number of
regulation of cognition strategies than those not in the group. They also independently
enacted information fluency skills such as keyword development, source evaluation, and
advanced search strategies, demonstrating greater information fluency self-efficacy.
The findings of this study also support the Bransford, Brown, and Cocking (2000)
supposition that a “‘metacognitive’ approach to instruction can help students learn to take
control of their own learning” by prompting them to define and monitor their own
progress toward learning goals (p.18). Students in the Stripling treatment group
demonstrated decision-making and self-efficacy as they worked toward the goal of new
knowledge construction, evidencing both self-monitoring and control of their learning.
This finding also meets Berger’s (2010) definition of an inquiry process “permeated with
reflection and critical thinking” with results going beyond the immediate inquiry project
and potentially contributing to “the development of skills for independent learning” (p.
16), as well as Shamir’s (2013) definition of a “process in which learners take an active
part in the organization and control of their thinking” (p. 98). These are the habits of
mind described by AASL (2009) and signposts to the “process of intellectual discovery”
as described by Head and Eisenberg (2010, p. 36). Although control participants had
equally successful quantitative inquiry outcomes, qualitative evidence of their
development of information fluency and critical thinking was not found in their reflection
journals, making it more difficult to predict if this group will achieve transfer of skills to
their college experience. In other words, it is more difficult to determine, based upon the

146

qualitative findings, whether the control group had as much of a transformational
learning experience as did the Stripling group.
Relationship between the Results and Findings and the Literature Reviewed
The results and findings of this study relate to the literature reviewed concerning
metacognition, information fluency and inquiry, reflection, and instructional scaffolds.
Metacognition. The importance of metacognition to learning is widely
acknowledged in the literature (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Hall et al., 2008;
Magno, 2010; Wang et al., 1990; Young & Fry, 2008), along with its role to inquiry and
information fluency (Harada & Yoshina, 2010; Kilic-Cakmak, 2010; Micahlsky et al.,
2007; Oakleaf & VanScoy, 2010). Results from this study supported that metacognitive
strategies can be taught and learned (Dignath & Buttner, 2008; Joseph, 2010, Wang et al.,
1990) and indicated that both treatment and control groups experienced metacognitive
growth over the course of the study. Although the difference between experimental
groups was not statistically significant, this result may be explained by the long time span
of this study for the majority of the participants as well as that metacognition has been
found to increase among secondary students (Veenman & Spaans, 2005) and be highest
among the older students (Zulkiply et al., 2005). Kuhn and Dean (2004) and Schraw and
Moshman (1995) also recognized metacognition as developing with maturation.
In contrast, research by Vukman and Licardo (2010) and Leutwyler (2009)
provided evidence that high school students may not accurately recognize their
metacognitive habits. While metacognition has been shown to play a strong, positive role
in inquiry learning (Kilic-Cakmak, 2010; Oakleaf & VanScoy, 2010), participants in this
study who claimed higher metacognitive awareness did not necessarily have higher
147

inquiry outcome scores. This result may support the Vukman and Licardo (2010) and
Leutwyler (2009) studies and brings into question the validity of self-report measures like
the MAI.
The fact that participants in both groups in this study experienced gains in
metacognitive awareness and performed well on their inquiry projects is a positive
indication that they are growing as self-regulators and may be stronger as college
freshmen (Vrugt & Oort, 2008), and more confident in new, unfamiliar situations
(Veenman & Spaans, 2005; Veenman et al., 2004). As noted in the previous section, the
frequency of strategy use by the students receiving the Stripling instruction, in particular,
bodes well for the development of personal agency (Hacker et al., 2009) and the
possibility of the transfer of these skills to college (Conley, 2007; Head, 2010; Pew
Research, 2012).
Information Fluency and Inquiry. The reflections of the learners in the
Stripling treatment group were dramatically more detailed than those of the control
group. These learners presented evidence of what Schraw et al. (2006) called “active
engagement” in their inquiry learning process (p.118). As Micahlsky et al. (2007) found,
learners like these who can “explain, justify, evaluate and revise ideas” are becoming
“more systematic in their thinking” and will likely have successful inquiry experiences
(p. 396). The fact that the majority of the participants in the study had successful inquiry
projects (i.e., no significant difference between groups) may, as noted in a previous
section, be attributed to the mediating factor of the teachers’ use of one-on-one
conferencing. This supposition is supported by Vygotsky’s (1978) zone of proximal

148

development and research by Schraw et al. (2006), who identified frequent expert
communication as a factor benefitting inquiry.
The emergent theme of learners confusing inquiry / research with the writing
process and desire to find quick answers to a research question suggests that these
participants previously were expected to engage in information problem solving instead
of the higher order thinking demanded by inquiry, a distinction in instructional design
made by Stripling (2003), Johnston and Webber (2003), and Gross (2005).
Reflection and Instructional scaffolds. Research-supported scaffolds employed
in this study included reflection journals (McGuinness & Brien, 2007; McKinney & Sen,
2012), rubrics (Donham, 2010), and Stripling reflection prompts, graphic organizers and
peer review / roundtable discussions (Manlove et al., 2009; Silen & Uhlin, 2008).
The value of metacognitive reflection for learning and knowledge transfer is
widely recognized (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 2000; Jones & Dotson, 2010; KilicKacmak, 2010; Koechlin & Zwaan, 2010; Kwon & Jonassen, 2011). The fact that these
learners found inquiry to be difficult is supported by Blumenfeld, Kempler, & Krajcik
(2006) who noted that metacognitive strategies used in conjunction with inquiry
strategies make inquiry learning more challenging. Reflection was hard work for some of
the participants who acknowledged that they had not been challenged this way previously
in their school experiences. Evidence of this difficulty could be seen in the limited
amount of reflection and detail supplied by control participants. Manlove et al. (2009)
and Quintana et al. (2005) suggested that metacognitive supports are most effective when
embedded within inquiry tasks and Halpern (1998) posited that metacognitive skills must
be made explicit to learners in order for transfer to occur. Qualitative findings of this
149

study confirmed the Manlove et al. (2009) and Pedaste et al. (2012) suggestions by
evidencing that having the Stripling prompts helped the treatment group focus their
thinking, make decisions, and ease into the final expression of ideas (writing the paper).
In addition, scaffolds of peer interaction and use of graphic organizers were
acknowledged by the treatment group as useful to their inquiry process, further
confirming Manlove et al (2009) and Joseph (2010). The Stripling prompts provided an
explicit scaffold to self-regulation at critical intervals in the inquiry process as
recommended by Pedaste et al. (2012), helped learners plan, monitor and reflect
(Quintana et al., 2005, p. 235), and appeared to have promoted students’ belief in their
“control over learning processes” that promotes information fluency self-efficacy and
knowledge construction (Kilic-Cakmak, 2010, p. 201) and promotes knowledge transfer
(Bransford et al., 2000).
Limitations
Several limitations affected this study. First, internal validity was likely affected
by the fact that the Metacognitive Awareness Inventory (Schraw & Dennison, 1994) is a
self-report measure. Sample size (n = 138) is small reducing generalizability of
quantitative results, and the number of participant journals qualitatively analyzed (n = 12)
affects the degree of transferability of findings. Inquiry outcomes collected via the
scoring rubric were analyzed by total research paper scores only, making it difficult to
pinpoint the degree to which these outcomes were driven by scores gauging the actual
critical thinking elements of each student’s project. An additional limitation affecting
this study was the deployment of the treatment instruction by the teachers whose students

150

participated in the study. These limitations hold some implications for practice and
future research.
Implication of the Results and Findings for Practice
The findings of this mixed methods study underscore the complex nature of
inquiry and measuring the construct of metacognition. While the quantitative analysis
did not produce statistically significant differences stemming from learner reflections, the
qualitative findings suggested that learners using the Stripling prompts had very different
inquiry experiences from those who did not. While it is conceivable that uncontrollable
events of weather and school calendars affected the length of time spanned by the study,
several other factors may also have affected the findings. For example, an unanticipated
threat to internal validity came with the fact that the teachers whose students participated
in the study utilized one-to-one conferencing with learners as they moved through their
inquiry and writing processes. This additional scaffold may have also affected the final
inquiry scores. Since this study looked only at the final total inquiry score, it was not
possible to tease out whether those elements of the scoring rubric most related to critical
thinking affected the scores more than those elements related to the written paper.
Although controlled for via bracketing and multiple readings of participant reflections,
there is always a chance of misinterpretation of qualitative evidence. Finally, results of
the pre-and post-test MAI were dependent upon the accuracy and honesty of the high
school-age students.
While educational standards now widely call for inquiry learning, putting iterative
inquiry into practice is somewhat more challenging for students and teachers. The
teachers involved in this study grappled with the iterative nature of the model as they
151

faced time constraints in the classroom and the need to move all learners along at a
particular pace. One shared that she felt she had to keep pushing students along, falling
into the commonly found more linear approach as described by Loertscher, Koechlin, and
Zwann (2009) and Joseph (2010). Despite the challenge inquiry posed for the teachers,
comments included that they found the Stripling model to be flexible and easy to use.
Although only a small number of qualitative journals could be included in this study, it is
evident that this particular implementation of instruction based on the Stripling Model
helped address specific needs identified in the Project Information Literacy Reports
(Head, 2013; Head & Eisenberg, 2010). This small group of learners experienced the
recursive nature of inquiry and utilized a variety of tools to achieve their goals.
Instructional designers looking for an inquiry model that is flexible enough to work with
any content area and will encourage learners to engage in deep reflection may want to
consider the Stripling Model.
Recommendations for Further Research
In this study, use of the concurrent embedded strategy was advantageous for
detecting differences between groups. These differences would not have been evident
had the study followed a solely quantitative method. As suggested by Dinsmore et al.,
(2008), mixed methods can deeply explore “thoughts, explanations, and justifications of
those who are engaged in academic tasks” requiring self-regulation (p. 406). To that end,
further investigations to more extensively test validity of inquiry outcome scores through
a qualitative examination of final projects like a paper for direct evidence of knowledge
construction are needed. This line of investigation would uncover if and how the inquiry
results are consistent with the amount and quality of critical thinking and reflection
152

performed by learners. In addition, MAI scores and inquiry outcome scores should be
analyzed to learn whether correlations between the two measures exist.
Rather than focusing on the entire inquiry process as done in this study, another
mixed-methods approach should parse out specific skills impacted by the model as shown
in the qualitative findings of this study. These skills would include information
organization for understanding and knowledge construction, analysis, and synthesis, and
evaluation. Additional learner journals could be analyzed for evidence of these specific
skills, and the sections of a scoring rubric (such as the Inquiry Task Outcomes rubric used
in this study) should be isolated to determine what part of the overall inquiry score was
due to learner achievement in these categories. In this way, learner reflections could be
mapped directly to learning outcomes, an approach previously utilized by McKinney and
Sen (2012).
Another approach would be to take a broader scope of qualitative methodology,
by asking students to react to their MAI scores and specific MAI questions to see how
they relate this to inquiry task success. MAI results could also be explored to see if those
undergoing the treatment were more conservative or confident in rating their own
metacognitive awareness. MAI subscale (knowledge of cognition and regulation of
cognition) scores could be looked at separately for relationships or correlations to specific
qualitative findings. As a test to the accuracy of participant self-assessments on the MAI,
it would be interesting to replicate approaches such as that of Oakleaf and VanScoy
(2010) to learn if those participants with higher MAI scores in this study could more
accurately predict their learning outcomes than those with lower scores.

153

Continuing research based directly on this study might involve conducting followup interviews with participants to learn about their transfer of knowledge to their new
research experiences as college freshmen. Levels of personal confidence as learners
approach research, their application of metacognitive strategies and inquiry skills, or, if
they employ self-limiting strategies as identified by Head and Eisenberg (2010) could be
revealed. This line of research would also offer a follow-up to the work of Herring
(2011a; 2011b) that found instructors often assume that such transfer occurs.
Finally, this study should be replicated in a college setting with freshmen learners
who are required to work more independently. Such an approach could reduce or
eliminate the issue of teacher mediation that occurred in this study, as university students
would not likely have the level of personal attention and teacher assistance as occurred
here. This research would compare the research/inquiry techniques freshmen bring with
them to university, versus a Stripling-based approach. A survey and follow-up interviews
could be used to further isolate and identify specific strategies freshmen use. The amount
and types of metacognitive strategy use could then be compared and/or correlated to
inquiry scores.
Conclusion
This study offers a view into the inquiry learning experiences of one small group
(n = 138) college bound high school learners. Although the reflection generated from
instruction based on the Stripling Model of Inquiry (2003) did not yield statistically
significant differences in final metacognitive awareness levels and inquiry outcome
scores, comparisons of treatment and control participant journals suggest there is more to
the story and some instructional value to be gained from the model’s use with high
154

school-age learners. By uncovering the effects of learner reflection generated by
metacognitive prompts, this study adds to the scientific knowledge base of learning
processes, transfer context and instructional strategies (Richey & Klein, 2007) and offers
one test of external validation of the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003). It adds to the
descriptive literature on the Stripling Inquiry Model (2003) (Small et al., 2012; Stripling,
2003, 2009) in that the qualitative findings of this study support the suggestion that
learner metacognitive reflection be incorporated more commonly into instructional
designs targeting secondary student inquiry. This study also makes a small contribution
to the body of knowledge regarding the essential role of metacognition in constructivist
learning environments.
While the problem of finding an instructional design model that comprehensively
improves the inquiry / research skills of college-bound high school students remains, the
qualitative findings of this study suggest that the Stripling Model provides an appropriate
framework to support iterative inquiry, critical thinking, and deeper reflection on process,
potentially supporting transfer of skills. While further research is needed to investigate
this model more fully, this study offers positive qualitative evidence to support its use in
secondary schools. Additional research into the intersection of inquiry, information
fluency skills, and metacognition is needed to support the continuing and rapidly
changing needs of young scholars.

155

REFERENCES
Allen, M. (2008). Promoting critical thinking skills in online information literacy
instruction. College & Undergraduate Libraries, 15(1-2), 21-38.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/10691310802176780
Amelink, C. T., & Creamer, E. G. (2010). Gender differences in elements of the
undergraduate experience that influence satisfaction with the engineering major
and the intent to pursue engineering as a career. Journal of Engineering
Education, 99(1), 81-92. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/j.2168-9830.2010.tb01044.x
American Association of School Librarians (AASL). (2009). Standards for the 21stcentury learner in action. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
American Association of School Librarians (AASL), & Association for Educational
Communication and Technology (AECT). (1998). Information power: Building
partnerships for learning. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
American College Test (ACT). (2009). Measuring college and career readiness: The
class of 2009. Iowa City, IA: ACT.
Anderson, L. W., & Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A taxonomy for learning, teaching, and
assessing: A revision of Bloom's taxonomy of educational objectives [Complete
ed.]. New York, NY: Longman.
Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL). (2000). Information literacy
competency standards for higher education . Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/informationliteracycompetency
Vukman, K., & Licardo, M. (2010). How cognitive, metacognitive, motivational and
emotional self-regulation influence school performance in adolescence and early
adulthood. Educational Studies, 36(3), 259-268.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03055690903180376
Bannert, M., Hildebrand, M., & Mengelkamp, C. (2009). Effects of a metacognitive
support device in learning environments. Computers in Human Behavior, 25, 829835. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.07.002
156

Barnes, W., & Slate, J. R. (2010). College-readiness: The current state of affairs.
Academic Leadership Live: The Online Journal, 8(4). Retrieved from
http://icher.org/blog/?tag=academic-leadership-live-the-online-journal
Bereiter, C., & Scardamalia, M. (1989). Intentional learning as a goal of instruction. In L.
B. Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert
Glaser (pp. 361-391). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Berger, P. (2010). Student inquiry and web 2.0. School Library Monthly, 26(5),14-17.
Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Bloom, B. S., Krathwohl, D. R., & Masia, B. B. (1956). Taxonomy of educational
objectives: The classification of educational goals. New York, NY: D. McKay.
Blumenfeld, P. C., Kempler, T. M., & Krajcik, J. S. (2006). Motivation and cognitive
engagement in learning environments. In R. K. Sawyer (Ed.), The Cambridge
handbook of the learning sciences (pp. 475-488). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University.
Booth, C. (2011). Reflective teaching, effective learning: Instructional literacy for library
educators. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Bowler, L. (2010). A taxonomy of adolescent metacognitive knowledge during the
information search process. Library & Information Science Research, 32, 27-42.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2009.09.005
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (2000). How people learn: Brain, mind,
experience and school. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Brown, T. (2004). Bloom's taxonomy and critical thinking. In D. K. Weil & J. L.
Kincheloe (Eds.), Critical thinking and learning: An encyclopedia for parents and
teachers (pp. 77-82). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Bruner, J. (1986). Actual minds, possible worlds. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Bruner, J. S. (1961). The act of discovery. Harvard Educational Review, 31, 21-32.
http://dx.doi.apa.org/?uid=1962-00777-001
Buckheit, J. E. (2010). Reflection as a habit of mind: Empowering students throughout
metacognition. Independent School, 69(3), 90-97. Retrieved from Education
Research Complete database.

157

Burchard, M. S., & Swerdzewski, P. (2009). Learning effectiveness of a strategic
learning course. Journal of College Reading and Learning, 40(1), 14-34.
Retrieved from Education Research Complete database.
Burhanna, K. J. (Ed.). (2013). Informed transitions: Libraries supporting the high school
to college transition. Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Byron, S. M., & Young, J. I. (2000). Information seeking in a virtual learning
environment. Research Strategies, 17, 257-267.
Callison, D. (2006a). Information inquiry: Concepts and elements. In D. Callison & L.
Preddy (Eds.), The blue book on information age inquiry, instruction, and literacy
(pp. 3-16). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Callison, D. (2006b). Information search and use models. In D. Callison & L. Preddy
(Eds.), The blue book on information age inquiry, instruction, and literacy (pp.
36-49). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Callison, D. (2006c). Key foundational documents for information literacy and inquiry.
In D. Callison & L. Preddy (Eds.), The blue book on information age inquiry,
instruction, and literacy (pp. 17-35). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Callison, D. (2006d). Metacognition. In D. Callison & L. Preddy (Eds.), The blue book on
information age inquiry, instruction, and literacy (pp. 435-436). Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Callison, D. (2006e). Rubrics. In D. Callison & L. Preddy (Eds.), The blue book on
information age inquiry, instruction, and literacy (pp. 516-522). Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Campbell, D. T., & Stanley, J. C. (1963). Experimental and quasi-experimental designs
for research. Boston, MA: Houghton.
Cao, L., & Nietfeld, J. L. (2007). College students' metacognitive awareness of
difficulties in learning the class content does not automatically lead to adjustment
of study strategies. Australian Journal of Educational & Developmental
Psychology, 7, 31-46. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Chen, C., & Bradshaw, A. C. (2007). the effect of web-based question prompts on
scaffolding knowledge integration and ill-structured problem solving. Journal of
Research on Technology in Education, 39(4), 359-375. Retrieved from ProQuest
Education Journals database.

158

Choi, I., Land, S. M., & Turgeon, A. J. (2005). Scaffolding peer-questioning strategies to
facilitate metacognition during online small group discussion. Instructional
Science, 33, 483-511. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007.s11251-005-1277-4
Choy, S. C., & Cheah, P. K. (2009). Teacher perspectives of critical thinking among
students and its influence on higher education. International Journal of Teaching
and Learning in Higher Education, 20(2), 198-206. http://www.isetl.org/ijtlhe/
Conley, D. T. (2007). Redefining college readiness. Eugene, OR: Educational Policy
Improvement Center.
Conley, D. T. (2008). Rethinking college readiness. New England Journal of Higher
Education, 22(5), 24-26. Retrieved from Academic Search Complete database.
Coutinho, S. A., & Neuman, G. (2008). A model of metacognition, achievement goal
orientation, learning style and self-efficacy. Learning Environments Research, 11,
131-151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10984-008-9042-7
Creswell, J. W. (2009). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Deskins, L. (2012). Inquiry studies: Needed skills. School Library Monthly, 28(5), 20-23.
Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Dignath, C., & Buttner, G. (2008). Componenets of fostering self-regualted learning
among students. A meta-analysis nonintervention studies at primary and
secondary school level. Metacognition Learning, 3, 231-264.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-008-9029-x
Dinsmore, D. L., Alexander, P. A., & Loughlin, S. M. (2008). Focusing the conceptual
lens on metacognition, self-regulation, and self-regulated learning. Educational
Psychology Review, 20, 391-409. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10648-008-9083-6
Donham, J. (2010). Creating personal learning through self-assessment. Teacher
Librarian, 37(3), 14-21. Retrieved from
http://www.teacherlibrarian.com/topics/archived-articles/
Driscoll, M. P. (2005). Psychology of learning for instruction (3rd ed.). Boston, MA:
Pearson Allyn and Bacon.
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications for the design
and delivery of instruction. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of Research for
Educational Communications (pp. 170-198). New York, NY: Simon & Schuster.

159

Eisenberg, M. & Berkowitz, R. (1990). Information problem solving: The Big Six skills
approach to library & information skills instruction. Norwood, NJ: Ablex
Farmer, L. S. (2011). Instructional design for librarians and information professionals.
New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive
developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34, 906-911.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.34.10.906
Flavell, J. H. (1987). Speculations about the nature and development of metacognition. In
F. E. Weinert & R. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacognition, motivation, and understanding
(pp. 21-29). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Gordon, C. (1999). Students as authentic researchers: A new prescription for the high
school research assignment. School Library Research, 2. Retrieved from
http://http:www.ala.org/aasl/aaslpubsandjournals/slmrb/slmrcontents/volume2199
9/vol2gordon
Grassian, E. S., & Kaplowitz, J. R. (2009). Information literacy instruction: Theory and
practice (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Gross, M. (2005). The impact of low-level skills on information-seeking behavior.
Reference & User Services Quarterly, 45(2), 155-163. Retrieved from ProQuest
Education Journals database.
Gupta, S., Paterson, M. L., Lysaght, R. M., & von Zweck, C. M. (2012). Experiences of
burnout and coping strategies utilized by occupational therapists. Canadian
Journal of Occupational Therapy, 79(2), 86-95.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2182/cjot.2012.79.2.4
Hacker, D. J., Dunlosky, J., & Graesser, A. C. (2009). A growing sense of "agency". In
D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Handbook of metacognition
in education (pp. 1-4). New York, NY: Routledge.
Hall, C., Smith, K., & Chia, R. (2008). Cognitive and personality factors in relation to
timely completion of a college degree. College Student Journal, 42(4), 10871098. Retrieved from Education Research Complete database.
Halpern, D. F. (1998). Teaching critical thinking for transfer across domains:
Dispositions, skills, structure training, and metacognitive monitoring. American
Psychologist, 53(4), 449-455. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.53.4.449
Harada, V. H., & Yoshina, J. M. (2004). Inquiry learning through librarian-teacher
partnerships. Worthington, OH: Linworth.
160

Harada, V. H., & Yoshina, J. M. (2010). Assessing for learning: Librarians and teachers
as partners (2nd ed.). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Head, A. J. (2013). Learning the ropes: How freshmen conduct course research once
they enter college. Retrieved from Project Information Literacy website:
http://projectinfolit.org/images/pdfs/pil_2013_freshmenstudy_fullreport.pdf
Head, A. J., & Eisenberg, M. B. (2010). How college students evaluate and use
information in the digital age. In Project Information Literacy. Retrieved from
University of Washington Information School website:
http://projectinfolit.org/pdfs/PIL_Fall2010_Survey_FullReport1.pdf
Herring, J. (2011a). Assumptions, information literacy and transfer in high schools.
Teacher Librarian, 38(3), 32-36.
Herring, J. (2011b). Year 7 students, information literacy, and transfer: A grounded
theory. School Library Research, 14. Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/aasl/slr
Howell, D. C. (2010). Statistical methods for psychology (7th ed.). Belmont, CA:
Thomson Wadsworth.
Hyldegard, J. (2006). Collaborative information behaviour- exploring Kuhlthau's
Information Search Process in a group-based educational setting. Information
Processing and Management, 42, 276-298.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.ipm.2004.06.013
International Society for Technology in Education (ISTE). (2007). NETS for students.
Retrieved from ISTE NETS website: http://www.iste.org/standards/nets-forstudents/nets-student-standards-2007
Isaacson, R. M. (2005). Metacognitive knowledge monitoring in post-secondary
education: The consequences of poor knowledge monitoring and a program to
facilitate it. Mid-Western Educational Researcher, 18(1), 29-36. Retrieved from
http://www.mwera.org/MWER/archives.html
Jansen, B. A. (2011). Inquiry unpacked: An introduction to inquiry-based learning.
Library Media Connection, 29(5), 10-12. Retrieved from EBSCO database.
Johnston, B., & Webber, S. (2003). Information literacy in higher education: A review
and case study. Studies in Higher Education, 28(3), 335-352.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03075070310000113441

161

Jonassen, D. H. (1996). Handbook of research for educational communications and
technology: A project of the Association for Educational Communications and
Technology. New York: Macmillan Library Reference USA.
Jonassen, D. H. (1999). Designing constructivist learning environments. In C. M.
Reigeluth (Ed.), Instructional design theories and models (pp. 215-239). Mahwah,
NJ: Erlbaum.
Jonassen, D. H., & Land, S. M. (2000). Theoretical foundations of learning
environments. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Jonassen, D. H., Peck, K. L. & Wilson, B. G. (1999). Learning with technology: A
constructivist perspective. Columbus, OH: Merrill.
Jones, J. L., & Dotson, K. B. (2010). Building the disposition of reflection through the
inquiry-focused school library program. School Libraries Worldwide, 16(1), 3346. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Jones, W. P., & Kottler, J. A. (2006). Understanding research: Becoming a competent
and critical consumer. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Merrill Prentice Hall.
Joseph, N. (2010). Metacognition needed: Teaching middle and high school students to
develop strategic learning skills. Preventing School Failure, 54(2), 99-103.
Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Kardash, C. M., & Amlund, J. T. (1991). Self-reported learning strategies and learning
from expository text. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 16, 117-138.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0361-476X(91)90032-G
Kilic-Cakmak, E. (2010). Learning strategies and motivational factors predicting
information literacy self-efficacy of e-learners. Australasian Journal of
Educational Technology, 26(2), 192-208. Retrieved from ProQuest Education
Journals database.
Koechlin, C., & Zwaan, S. (2007). Assignments worth the effort: Questions are the key.
Teacher Librarian, 34(3), 14-19. Retrieved from
http://www.teacherlibrarian.com/topics/archived-articles/
Koechlin, C., & Zwaan, S. (2010). The big think: Reflecting, reacting and realizing
improved learning. Teacher Librarian, 37(3). Retrieved from Education Research
Complete database.
Kracker, J. (2002). Research anxiety and students' perceptions of research: An
experiment Part 1. Effect of teaching Kuhlthau's ISP model. Journal of the
162

American Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(4), 282-294.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.10040
Krathwohl, D. R., & Smith, N. L. (2005). How to prepare a dissertation proposal:
Suggestions for students in education and the social and behavioral sciences.
Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press
Ku, K. Y. L., & Ho, I. T. (2010). Metacognitive strategies that enhance critical thinking.
Metacognition Learning, 5(3), 251-267. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-0109060-6
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1993). Seeking meaning: A process approach to library and information
services. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (1994). Teaching the library research process (2nd ed.). Metuchen, NJ:
Scarecrow Press.
Kuhlthau, C. C., Caspari, A. K., & Maniotes, L. K. (2007). Guided inquiry: Learning in
the 21st century. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Kuhn, D., & Dean, D. (2004). Metacognition: A bridge between cognitive psychology
and educational practice. Theory into Practice, 43(4), 268-273. Retrieved from
ProQuest Education Journals database.
Kurt, M. (2007, May). Activating metacognition through online learning log (OLL).
Paper presented at International Educational Technology (IETC) Conference,
Nicosia, Turkish Repulic of Northern Cyprus. Retrieved from ERIC database.
Kuyper, H., van der Werf, M., & Lubbers, M. J. (2000). Motivation, meta-cognition and
self-regulation as predictors of long term educational attainment. Educational
Research and Evaluation, 6(3), 181-205. http://dx.doi.org/10.1076/13803611(200009)6:3;1-A;FT181
Kwon, K., & Jonassen, D. H. (2011). The influence of reflective self-explanations on
problem-solving performance. Journal of Educational Computing and Research,
44(3), 247-263. http://dx/doi.org/10.2190/EC.44.3.a
Leutwyler, B. (2009). Metacognitive learning strategies: Differential development
patterns in high school. Metacognition Learning, 4(2), 111-123.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-009-9037-5
Library of Congress. (2013). Teaching with primary sources: About the program.
Retrieved from http://www.loc.gov/teachers/tps/about/

163

Lodico, M. G., Spaulding, D. T., & Voegtle, K. H. (2010). Methods in educational
research: From theory to practice (2nd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Loertscher, D. V., Koechlin, C., & Zwann, S. (2009). The Big Think: Nine metacognitive
strategies that make the unit end just the beginning of learning. Salt Lake City,
UT: Hi Willow Research & Publishing.
Lowe, H., & Cook, A. (2003). Mind the gap: Are students prepared for higher education?
Journal of Further and Higher Education, 27(1), 53-76.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03098770305629
Magno, C. (2010). The role of metacognitive skills in developing critical thinking.
Metacognition Learning, 5, 137-156. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-010-90544
Manlove, S., Lazonder, A. W., & de Jong, T. (2009). Trends and issues of regulative
support use during inquiry learning: Patterns from three studies. Computers in
Human Behavior, 25, 795-803. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2008.07.010
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2011). Designing qualitative research (5th ed.). Los
Angeles: Sage.
Martinez, M. E. (2006). What is metacognition? Phi Delta Kappan, 87(9), 696-699.
Retrieved from Education Research Complete database.
McGuinness, C., & Brien, M. (2007). Using reflective journals to assess the research
process. Reference Services Review, 35(1), 21-40.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00907320710729346
McKinney, P., & Sen, B. (2012). Reflection for learning: Understanding the value of
reflective writing for information literacy development. Journal of Information
Literacy, 6(2). Retrieved from
http://ojs.lboro.ac.uk/ojs/index.php/JIL/article/view/ LLC-V6-12-2012-5
Michalsky, T., Zion, M., & Mevarech, Z. R. (2007). Developing students' metacognitive
awareness in asynchronous learning networks in comparison to face-to-face
discussion groups. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 36(4), 395-424.
http://dx.doi.org/10.2190/320V-8H4W-1123-44R6
Milam, P. (2009). The power of reflection in the research process. In K. Fontichiaro
(Ed.), 21st-century learning in school libraries (pp. 285-288). Santa Barbara, CA:
Libraries Unlimited.
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
164

Mok, M. M. C., Lung, C. L., Cheng, D. P. W., Cheung, R. H. P., & Ng, M. L. (2006).
Self-assessment in higher education: Experience in using a metacognitive
approach in five case studies. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education,
31(4), 415-433. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/02602930600679100
Mueller, J. (2008). Assessing skill development. Library Media Connection, 27(3), 1820. Retrieved from EBSCO Masterfile Premier database.
National Governors Association Center for Best Practices, Council of Chief State School
Officers. (2010). Common Core State Standards. Washington, DC: Author.
Nazari, M. (2011). A contextual model of information literacy. Journal of Information
Science, 37(4), 345-359. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0165511511403544
Neuman, D. (2011). Library media specialists: Premier information specialists for the
information age. Tech Trends, 55(4), 21-26.
Neuman, D. (2012). Here comes the future: Information is the building block for
learning. Knowledge Quest, 40(3), 24-28. Retrieved from Education Research
Complete database.
New York City School Library System. (2010). Information fluency continuum.
Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/27A1E84E-65EB-4A5480DF-51E28D34BF4F/0/InformationFluencyContinuum.pdf
New York City School Library System. (2012). Empire state information fluency
continuum. Retrieved from http://schools.nyc.gov/NR/rdonlyres/1A931D4E1620-4672-ABEF-460A273D0D5F/0/EmpireStateIFC.pdf
Nordell, S. E. (2009). Learning how to learn: A model for teaching students learning
strategies. Bioscene, 35(1), 35-42. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals
database.
Oakleaf, M., & Owen, P. L. (2010). Closing the 12-13 gap: School and college librarians
supporting 21st century learners. Teacher Librarian, 37(4), 52-58. Retrieved from
http://www.teacherlibrarian.com/
Oakleaf, M., & VanScoy, A. (2010). Instructional strategies for digital reference.
Reference & User Services Quarterly, 49(4), 380-390. Retrieved from Education
Research Complete database.
Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Collins, K. M.T. (2007). A typology of mixed methods sampling
designs in social science research. The Qualitative Report, 12(2), 281-316.
165

Partnership for 21st Century Skills (P21). (2011). Framework for 21st century learning.
Retrieved from http://www.p21.org/storage/documents/1.__p21_framework_2pager.pdf
Partnership for Assessment of Readiness for College and Careers. (2013). PARCC fact
sheet. Retrieved from
http://www.parcconline.org/sites/parcc/files/PARCCFactSheetandFAQsbackgrou
nder_FINAL.pdf
Pedaste, M., Maeots, M., Leijen, A., & Sarapuu, T. (2012). Improving students' inquiry
skills through reflection and self-regulation scaffolds. Technology, Instruction,
Cognition and Learning, 9(1/2), 81-95. Retrieved from ProQuest Education
Journals database.
Pew Research Center. (2012). Internet and American Life Project: How teens do research
in the digital world. Retrieved from http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/StudentResearch
Pinto, M., Cordon, J. A., & Diaz, R. G. (2010). Thirty years of information literacy
(1977-2007): A terminological, conceptual and statistical analysis. Journal of
Librarianship and Information Science, 42(1), 3-19.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177.096100060934509
Pintrich, P. R., Smith, D., Garcia, T., & McKeachie, W. (1991). A manual for the use of
the motivated strategies for learning questionnaire. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan.
Pintrich, P. R., Wolters, C. A., & Baxter, G. P. (2000). Assessing metacognition and selfregulated learning. In G. Schraw & J. C. Impara (Eds.), Issues in the measurement
of metacognition (pp. 43-97). University of Nebraska-Lincoln: Buros Institute of
Mental Measurements
Quintana, C., Zhang, M., & Krajcik, J. (2005). A Framework for supporting
metacognitive aspects of online inquiry through software-based scaffolding.
Educational Psychologist, 40(4), 235-244.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1207/s15326985ep4004_5
Richey, R. C., & Klein, J. D. (2007). Design and development research: Methods,
strategies and issues. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Riedling, A. M. (2006). Learning to learn: A guide to becoming information literate in
the 21st century (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.

166

Ritchhart, R., Turner, T., & Hadar, L. (2009). Uncovering students' thinking about
thinking using concept maps. Metacognition Learning, 4, 145-159.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-009-9040-x
Rosen, L. D., Carrier, M. L., & Cheever, N. A. (2010). Rewired: Understanding the
iGeneration and the way they learn. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sarac, S., & Karakelle, S. (2012). On-line and off-line assessment of metacognition.
International Electronic Journal of Elementary Education, 4(2), 301-315.
Retrieved from Education Research Complete database.
Savery, J. R. (2009). Problem-based approach to instruction. In C. M. Reigeluth & A. A.
Carr-Chellman (eds.), Instructional-design theories and models: Building a
common knowledge base (pp. 143-165). New York, NY: Taylor & Francis.
Schneider, W. (2008). The development of metacognitive knowledge in children and
adolescents: Major trends and implications for education. Mind, Brain and
Education, 2(3), 114-121. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Schraw, G. (2001). Promoting general metacognitive awareness. In H. J. Hartman (Ed.),
Metacognition in learning and instruction: Theory, research, and practice (pp. 316). Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer Academic.
Schraw, G., Crippen, K. J., & Hartley, K. (2006). Promoting self-regulation in science
education: Metacognition as part of a broader perspective on learning. Research
in Science Education, 36, 111-139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11165-005-3917-8
Schraw, G., & Dennison, R. S. (1994). Assessing metacognitive awareness.
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 19, 460-475.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ceps.1994.1033
Schraw, G., & Moshman, D. (1995). Metacognitive theories. Educational Psychology
Review, 7(4), 351-371. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF02212307
Shamir, A. (2013). Cognitive education in the digital age: Bridging the gap between
theory and practice. Journal of Cognitive Education and Psychology, 12(1), 96107. http://dx.doi.org/10.1891/1945-8959.12.1.96
Silen, C., & Uhlin, L. (2008). Self-directed learning - a learning issue for students and
faculty. Teaching in Higher Education, 13(4), 461-475.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/13562510802169756
Small, R. V., & Arnone, M. P. (2000). Turning kids on to research: The power of
motivation. Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited.
167

Small, R. V., Arnone, M. P., Stripling, B. K., & Berger, P. (2012). Teaching for inquiry:
Engaging the learner within. New York, NY: Neal-Schuman.
Sperling, R. A., Howard, B. C., Miller, L. A., & Murphy, C. (2002). Measures of
children's knowledge and regulation of cognition. Contemporary Educational
Psychology, 27, 51-79. http://dx.doi.org/10.1006/ceps.2001.1091
Sperling, R. A., Howard, B. C., Stahley, R., & DuBois, N. (2004). Metacognition and
self-regulated learning constructs. Educational Research and Evaluation, 10(2),
117-139. http://dx.doi.org/10.1076/edre.10.2.117.27905
Spink, A., Wilson, T. D., Ford, N., Foster, A., & Ellis, D. (2002). Information seeking
and mediated searching. Part 1 Theoretical framework and research design.
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology, 53(9),
695-703. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/asi.10081
Stafford, T. (2011). Analyzing the cognitive skills and inquiry. School Library Monthly,
28(2), 8-10. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Stripling, B. K. (1989). Rethinking the school library. School Library Media Quarterly,
18(4), 136-139.
Stripling, B. K. (2003). Inquiry-based learning. In B. K. Stripling & S. Hughes-Hassell
(Eds.), Curriculum connections through the library (pp. 3-39). Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Stripling, B. K. (2007). Assessing information fluency: Gathering evidence of student
learning. School Media Activities Monthly, 23(8), 25-29. Retrieved from ProQuest
Education Journals database.
Stripling, B. K. (2009). Teaching inquiry with primary sources. In Teaching with Primary
Sources Quarterly. Retrieved from
http://www.loc.gov/teachers/tps/quarterly/inquiry_learning/article.html
Stripling, B. K. (2010). Teaching students to think in the digital environment: Digital
literacy and digital inquiry. School Library Monthly, 26(8), 16-19. Retrieved from
ProQuest Education Journals database.
Thomas, N. P., Crow, S. R., & Franklin, L. L. (2011). Information literacy and
information skills instruction: Applying research to practice in the 21st century
school library (3rd ed.). Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Trochim, W. M. K. (2006). External validity. Retrieved from
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/external.php
168

Valenza, J. K. (2003). Power research tools. Chicago, IL: ALA.
VanScoy, A., & Oakleaf, M. J. (2008). Evidence vs. anecdote: Using syllabi to plan
curriculum-integrated information literacy instruction. College & Research
Libraries, 69(6), 566-575. http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl.69.6.566
Veenman, M. V. J., & Spaans, M. A. (2005). Relation between intellectual and
metacognitive skills: Age and task differences. Learning and Individual
Differences, 15, 159-176. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2004.12.001
Veenman, M. V. J., Van Hout-Wolters, B. H., & Afflerbach, P. (2006). Metacognition
and learning: Conceptual and methodological considerations. Metacognition
Learning, 1, 3-14. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-006-6893-0
Veenman, M. V. J., Wilhelm, P., & Beishuizen, J. J. (2004). the relation between
intellectual and metacognitive skills from a developmental perspective. Learning
and Instruction, 14, 89-109. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2003.10.004
Vrugt, A., & Oort, F. J. (2008). Metacognition, achievement goals, study strategies and
academic achievement: Pathways to achievement. Metacognition Learning, 30,
123-146. http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s11409-008-9022-4
Vukman, K., & Licardo, M. (2010). How cognitive, metacognitive, motivational and
emotional self-regulation influence school performance in adolescence and early
adulthood. Educational Studies, 36(3), 259-268.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/03055690903180376
Vygotsky, L. (1978). The mind and society: The development of higher psychological
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Walton, G., & Hepworth, M. (2011). A longitudinal study of changes in learners'
cognitive states during and following an information literacy teaching
intervention. Journal of Documentation, 67(3), 449-479.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/00220411111124541
Wang, M. C., Haertel, G. D., & Walberg, H. J. (1990). What influences learning? A
content analysis of review literature. Journal of Educational Research, 84(1), 3043. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Winne, P. H., & Nesbit, J. C. (2009). Supporting self-regulated learning with cognitive
tools. In D. J. Hacker, J. Dunlosky, & A. C. Graesser (Eds.), Handbook of
metacognition in education (pp. 259-277). New York, NY: Routledge.
169

Wolf, S., Brush, T., & Saye, J. (2003a). The Big Six information skills as a metacognitive
scaffold: A case study. School Library Media Research, 6. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/aasl/aaslpubsandjournals/slmrb/slmrcontents/volume62003/bi
gsixinformation
Wolf, S. E., Brush, T., & Saye, J. (2003b). Using an information problem-solving model
as a metacognitive scaffold for multimedia-supported information-based
problems. Journal of Research on Technology in Education, 35(3), 321-341.
Retrieved from http://www.iste.org/learn/publications/journals/jrte
Woyshner, C. (2010). Inquiry teaching with primary source documents: An iterative
approach. Social Studies Research and Practice, 5(3), 36-45. Retrieved from
http://www.socstrp.org
Young, A., & Fry, J. D. (2008). Metacognitive awareness and academic achievement in
college students. Journal of the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 8(2), 1-10.
Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Zmuda, A., & Harada, V. H. (2008). Librarians as learning specialists. Santa Barbara,
CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Zulkiply, N., Kabit, M. R., & Ghani, K. A. (2009). Metacognition: What role does it play
in students' academic performance? International Journal of Learning, 15(11),
97-105. Retrieved from ProQuest Education Journals database.
Zurkowski, P. G. (1974). The information service environment relationships and
priorities [Report No. 5]. Washington, DC: National Commission on Libraries
and Information Sciences.

170

APPENDIX A. STATEMENT OF ORIGINAL WORK
Academic Honesty Policy
Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy (3.01.01) holds learners accountable for
the integrity of work they submit, which includes but is not limited to discussion
postings, assignments, comprehensive exams, and the dissertation or capstone project.
Established in the Policy are the expectations for original work, rationale for the policy,
definition of terms that pertain to academic honesty and original work, and disciplinary
consequences of academic dishonesty. Also stated in the Policy is the expectation that
learners will follow APA rules for citing another person’s ideas or works.
The following standards for original work and definition of plagiarism are discussed in
the Policy:
Learners are expected to be the sole authors of their work and to acknowledge the
authorship of others’ work through proper citation and reference. Use of another
person’s ideas, including another learner’s, without proper reference or citation
constitutes plagiarism and academic dishonesty and is prohibited conduct. (p. 1)
Plagiarism is one example of academic dishonesty. Plagiarism is presenting
someone else’s ideas or work as your own. Plagiarism also includes copying
verbatim or rephrasing ideas without properly acknowledging the source by author,
date, and publication medium. (p. 2)
Capella University’s Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06) holds learners accountable for
research integrity. What constitutes research misconduct is discussed in the Policy:
Research misconduct includes but is not limited to falsification, fabrication,
plagiarism, misappropriation, or other practices that seriously deviate from those
that are commonly accepted within the academic community for proposing,
conducting, or reviewing research, or in reporting research results. (p. 1)
Learners failing to abide by these policies are subject to consequences, including but not
limited to dismissal or revocation of the degree.

171

Statement of Original Work and Signature
I have read, understood, and abided by Capella University’s Academic Honesty Policy
(3.01.01) and Research Misconduct Policy (3.03.06), including the Policy Statements,
Rationale, and Definitions.
I attest that this dissertation or capstone project is my own work. Where I have used the
ideas or words of others, I have paraphrased, summarized, or used direct quotes following
the guidelines set forth in the APA Publication Manual.
Mentor name
and school Dr. Suzanne Dunn, School of Education
Learner signature
and date Brenda L. Boyer, September 5, 2014

172

