i	  	  

	  

SCHOOL LIBRARIAN CANDIDATES’ DIVERSITY DISPOSITIONS:
EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF CULTURAL PROFICIENCY INSTRUCTION
by
Bridget I. Kratt
A DISSERTATION
Presented to the Faculty of
The Graduate College of the University of Nebraska
In partial fulfillment of requirements
For the Degree of Doctor of Education
Major: Educational Administration
Under the Supervision of Dr. Karen L. Hayes
Omaha, Nebraska
March 2015

Supervisory Committee:
Kay A. Keiser, Ed.D
Peter J. Smith, Ed.D
Rebecca J. Pasco, Ph.D

	  

UMI Number: 3689724

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

UMI 3689724
Published by ProQuest LLC (2015). Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code

ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

	  

ii	  	  
Abstract

SCHOOL LIBRARIAN CANDIDATES’ DIVERSITY DISPOSITIONS:
EXAMINING THE IMPACT OF CULTURAL PROFICIENCY INSTRUCTION
Bridget I. Kratt, Ed.D.
University of Nebraska, 2015
Advisor: Dr. Karen L. Hayes

The purpose of this study was to examine cultural proficiency instruction and its
impact on the dispositions of the school librarian candidates in the Library Education
Program at a Midwestern University. As research indicates that school librarians face
the unique challenge of differentiating instruction to meet the educational needs for all
students in the school, no matter their culture or ability (Mestre, 2009), it was also the
intent of this study to explore which diversity disposition factors were impacted the
greatest by that cultural proficiency instruction.
Prior to cultural proficiency instruction, candidates completed the Diversity
Dispositions Index (DDI) pre-survey, a 43-item instrument, which measures responses to
belief statements on a 5-point Likert Scale. Following learning opportunities developed
around the Developmentally and Culturally Appropriate Practices Teacher Preparation
Model (DCAP) and Nuri-Robins’, Lindsey’s, Lindsey’s, & Terrell’s (2012) Culturally
Proficient Instruction approach, the Diversity Dispositions Index post-survey was
administered.

	  

	  
iii	  

	  
Findings indicated that candidates scored themselves relatively high above the
midpoint on the 5-point Likert Scale during the pre-survey (M=4.23, SD=0.38). Even
with fairly high espoused diversity dispositions at the beginning of the study, findings

showed growth on the post-survey (M=4.59, SD=0.33). Employing a repeated measures
t-test with an alpha level of .05, two-tailed, further findings indicated that candidates
showed statistically significant growth within all 3 Factor Domains: Factor 1: Educators’
Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge, (M = 4.31, SD = 0.36, p < .01, d = 1.40),
Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning, (M =
4.82, SD = 0.23, p < .01, d = 1.05), and Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the
Community (M = 4.20, SD = 0.59, p < .01, d = 1.03). These results support the need for
cultural proficient pedagogy in which candidates reflect on their own understandings,
values, beliefs, and attitudes, to ensure they are effectively prepared to work with a
diverse student population.

	  

	  

iv	  
Acknowledgements and Dedication

Words cannot fully express the gratitude I have for my family. Thank you to my
husband, John Kratt, for always believing in me and for providing unconditional love,
patience, motivation, encouragement, and support. I could not have seen this through to
the end without you. Thank you to my children, Kylie and Brian, for so graciously
providing me the time to complete this journey and chapter in my life. I know you have
inherited my passion for lifelong learning. Thank you to my mother, Linda Corcoran, for
teaching me to respect and celebrate the differences in all people, and to be ethical, fair
and just. There is no one more caring than you, and I am proud to be your daughter.
Thank you to my sister, Kathleen (Kacy) Rizer for celebrating each small victory along
the way, for always lending an ear (even from Bahrain) and being there to listen.
Secondly, I would like to thank Dr. Becky Pasco for her unwavering support and
for always making a place for me in her life and in this program. There will never be a
bigger influence on me as an educator or as an advocate of education. You have always
been so much more to me than a supervisor, and the opportunities you have provided me
have changed my life, both personally and professionally. You are my colleague, my
friend, my mentor, and my inspiration. You always lead by example, and I’m forever
grateful. That five-minute conversation about school libraries back in 2005 was the
beginning of something amazing.
I would also like to thank and acknowledge Dr. Karen Hayes, my Doctoral Chair,
for your knowledge, patience, and guidance throughout my research. Knowing you
shared my passion for this study made the process so enjoyable. Dr. Kay Keiser,
Director of the Educational Leadership program, thank you for your tremendous support
	  

	  

v	  

and inspiration throughout my entire Ed.D. program. You have always believed in me,
and my topic, and ensured I stayed true to both. Dr. Peter Smith, thank you for your
direction and patience during my data collection and data analysis. You always helped
me see beyond the numbers to fully grasp the impact of those numbers. The three of you
have shared so much of your time and energy, and I appreciate your advisement and
support.
To my “doctoral crew” Abby Burke, Cindy Copich, and Wendy Loewenstein – I
couldn’t have made it this far and wouldn’t have wanted to without you, ladies. You
amaze me, challenge me, inspire me, and hold me up because you get it. I love you and
hope we always continue the “discussion” we started years ago. The field of education is
better because of your knowledge, your skills, your dispositions, and your passion.
Lastly, I would like to dedicate this to my father, Joseph Corcoran, who passed
away before he could see the final work and celebrate this accomplishment with me. My
father instilled in me a profound love of learning, and provided endless encouragement
along each step of this journey. His pride in me was always palpable and I know he is
smiling down on me now. This one is for you, Irish, with love from “Your Professor”.

	  

	  

vi	  
Table of Contents

Abstract

ii

Acknowledgements and Dedication

iv

Table of Contents

vi

List of Tables

ix

Chapter 1 Introduction

1

Background of the Study

1

Theoretical Framework

3

Problem Statement

6

Research Questions

8

Definition of Terms

10

Assumptions

13

Limitations

13

Delimitations

14

Significance of the Study

14

Outline of the Study

15

Chapter 2 Review of Literature

	  

16

The Changing Demographics

16

Development of Diversity Standards

20

Defining and Assessing Dispositions

30

Cultural Proficiency Instruction

36

A Discovery of Cultural Consciousness

38

Conclusion

40

	  

vii	  

Chapter 3 Methodology

42

Research Design

43

Participants

45

Instrument

45

Data Collection

47

Research Questions and Data Analysis

47

Chapter 4 Results

52

Restatement of the Problem

52

Description of Findings

53

Research Question 1

53

Research Question 2

53

Research Question 3

54

Research Question 4

54

Research Question 5

54

Research Question 6

55

Research Question 6a

55

Research Question 6b

55

Research Question 6c

56

Chapter 5 Discussion and Conclusions

66

Purpose of the Study

66

Discussion and Implications: Theme of Respect

66

Discussion and Implications: Growth Across the Program 68
Discussion and Implications: Developing Awareness

	  

69

	  

viii	  
Conclusions

71

References

73

Appendices

78

Appendix A: IRB Letter of Approval

78

Appendix B: Diversity Dispositions Index Survey

79

Appendix C: Diversity Dispositions Index Factor Domains 83

	  

	  

ix	  

List of Tables

Table 1: Candidates’ Espoused Diversity Dispositions

57

Table 2: Change in Total Score from Diversity Dispositions
Index pre-survey to post-survey

59

Table 3: Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions
Index pre-survey to post-survey for Factor 1: Educator’s Skills
in Helping Students Gain Knowledge

60

Table 4: Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions
Index pre-survey to post-survey for Factor 2: Educator’s Beliefs
and Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning

61

Table 5: Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions
Index pre-survey to post-Survey for Factor 3: Educator’s
Connections with the Community

62

Table 6: Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index
pre-survey to post-survey for items that showed the most
growth within Factor 1: Educator’s Skills in Helping Students
Gain Knowledge

63

Table 7: Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index
pre-survey to post-survey for items that showed the most
growth within Factor 2: Educator’s Beliefs and Attitudes about
Students and Teaching/Learning

	  

64

	  

x	  

Table 8: Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index
pre-survey to post-survey for items that showed the most
growth within Factor 3: Educator’s Connections with the
Community

	  

65

	  

1	  
Chapter 1
Introduction

Background of the Study
The United States is becoming an increasingly diverse country, with the
percentage of minority populations growing steadily. In 2007 it was estimated that one
in three residents identified themselves as other than Caucasian, making there more
minorities in terms of race in this country today than there were people in the United
States just 100 years ago (United States Census Bureau, 2007). In 2009 it was estimated
that 5.8 million of the nation’s schoolchildren, ages 6 to 21, were receiving special
education services through the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (United States
Department of Education, 2009). As of 2011, approximately 22% of school-age children
in the United States spoke a language other than English at home, and lived in a
linguistically isolated household in which no one over the age of 14 spoke English
(Forum on Child and Family Statistics, 2013). For schools to meet the needs of today’s
students with diverse cultures and backgrounds and to provide meaningful educational
experiences for these students, they must pay attention to the ways in which the elements
of “difference” influence our students’ educational journey.
As efforts mount to identify effective methods for teaching an ever-increasing
diverse population of students, a need for culturally responsive pedagogical approaches in
teacher preparation programs intensifies. Teacher preparation programs must identify
components of their programs that not only affect their candidates’ knowledge and skills,
but also affect their candidates’ dispositions, their values, beliefs, and attitudes, to ensure
they are effectively prepared to work with “Differences among groups of people and

	  

	  

2	  

individuals based on ethnicity, race, socioeconomic status, gender, exceptionalities,
language, religion, sexual orientation, and geographic area” (NCATE, 2011).
In recent years, there has been a call for teacher preparation programs across the
country to develop a “social justice” orientation that prepares candidates to create more
inclusive learning environments for students from diverse backgrounds. The teaching
strategies and curriculum components of teacher preparation programs are being
examined more closely to ensure they support the growth of teacher candidates through
cultural proficient pedagogy in which candidates reflect on their own understandings and
values (Ryan, Carrington, Selva, & Healy, 2009). In an attempt to find effective methods
of raising the cultural awareness and sensitivity of teacher candidates, teacher preparation
programs are now being explored in broader and more complex ways. Teaching that is
inspired by principles of social justice through culturally responsive pedagogy is a broad
approach to education that aims to have students reach high levels of learning
(Villegas, 2007).
There is considerable evidence that teacher candidates’ values, beliefs, and
attitudes, combined with ones’ own personal intercultural experiences, are critical factors
that influence the development of cultural awareness and sensitivity (Garmon, 2004;
Schussler, Stooksberry, & Bercaw, 2010). These already established values, beliefs, and
attitudes ultimately contribute to ones’ dispositions of teaching, which in turn can be seen
as a predictor of actions. Before ever stepping foot into a school in the role of “teacher”,
school librarian candidates in the Library Education Program have at minimum 21 years
of experiential factors that lead to the formation of their diversity dispositions. Upon
completion of the program, the candidates will begin to teach in school libraries where

	  

	  

3	  

students are diverse in terms of race, language, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation,
religion, abilities, and many other characteristics. Therefore, during their time spent in
the Library Education Program at this Midwestern University, it is imperative that
candidates are provided learning opportunities that will develop positive and productive
responses to the diversity in their own schools and communities.
Theoretical Framework
The framework for this study was embedded in The Developmentally and
Culturally Appropriate Practices (DCAP) Teacher Preparation Model (Fig. 1). This
model prepares teachers to work in multicultural school environments by urging teacher
education majors to participate in diversity training, field experiences, and instructional
methodologies designed to permanently change and/or enhance their opinions and
behaviors relative to the culturally and socially diverse student groups who will populate
future classrooms (Hyun, 1998).

	  

	  

4	  

Multicultural Education is defined
by Dr. James A. Banks (1989) as, “A
field of study and an emerging
discipline whose major aim is to
create equal educational opportunities
for students from diverse racial,
ethnic, social-class, and cultural
groups. 	

Anti-bias Education is an approach
based on the values exemplified in the
Teaching Tolerance Anti-bias
Framework, and organized into four
domains: Identity, Diversity, Justice,
and Action. Together, these domains
represent a continuum of engagement
in anti-bias, multicultural, and social
justice education.	


Culturally Congruent Critical
Pedagogy is a process that supports
future educators to reflect on using
P-12 students’ family culture and
background as an instructional tool	


Developmentally
And Culturally
Appropriate
Practices 	

(DCAP) 	

Teaching Model 	


Figure 1. Graphic Organizer of Developmentally and Culturally Appropriate Practices
(DCAP) Teacher Preparation Model.

This study also relied upon the definition of cultural proficiency (Nuri-Robins, et
al., 2012) as a way of being, a mind-set, a mental model, or a world view. “Cultural
Proficiency is an approach for responding to the environment shaped by its diversity.”
(2012, p. 3). Those who are culturally proficient “welcome and create opportunities to
better understand who they are as individuals, while learning how to interact positively
with people who differ from themselves” (2006, p. 4-5). Within this framework (Fig. 2),
	  

	  
cultural proficiency is seen as understanding the elements, values, behaviors, barriers,
and principles that enable one to interact effectively in a culturally diverse environment.
The Essential Elements
• Assess Culture: Identify the cultural groups present in the system
• Value Diversity: Develop an appreciation for the differences among and between
groups
• Manage the Dynamics of Difference: Learn to respond appropriately and effectively to
the issues that arise in a diverse environment
• Adapt to Diversity: Change and adopt new policies and practices that support diversity
and inclusion
• Institutionalize Cultural Competence: Drive the changes into the systems of the
organization
Cultural Proficiency Continuum
Change Mandated by Tolerance
Change Chosen for Transformation
Destruction
Incapacity
Blindness
Precompetence
Competence
Proficiency
Eliminate
Demean
Dismiss
Aware of but
Engage with
Esteem and
Differences
Differences
Differences
respond
differences
learn from
by rejecting
by believing by acting as inadequately to
using the
differences
other
in
if they don’t the dynamics of
essential
as a lifelong
people’s
superiority
matter
difference
elements
practice
cultures
of own
culture
Reactive Behaviors, Shaped by the:
Proactive Behaviors, Shaped by the:
Barriers
Principles
• Unawareness of the need to adapt
• Culture is a predominant force
• Resistance to change
• People are served in varying degrees by
the dominate force
• Systems of oppression and
privilege
• There is diversity within and between
cultures
• A sense of entitlement
• Every group has unique culturallydefined needs
• People have personal identities and group
identities
• Marginalized populations have to be a
least bicultural
• Families, as defined by culture, are the
primary systems of support
• The diverse thought patterns of cultural
groups influence how problems are
defined and solved
• The absence of cultural competence
anywhere is a threat to competent
services everywhere

Figure 2. Table showing components of Culturally Proficiency Framework.

	  

5	  

	  

6	  

Problem Statement
Research suggests that previous personal experiences impact beliefs, assumptions,
and prejudices and could result in either bias or tolerance (Ambrose, 2004; Garmon,
2004; Levine-Rasky, 2001). Even researchers who are conflicted on whether “beliefs
influence dispositions and dispositions predict actions” can agree that candidates can
benefit from instruction and experiences that encourage positive dispositions (Burant,
Chubbuck, & Whipp, 2007; Diez, 2007). The reality is that the diversity in school
systems in the United States continues to increase, and the ability to provide meaningful
educational experiences for diverse student populations will never transpire if teacher
preparation programs do not adequately prepare candidates who can support this need.
Teacher preparation program licensure and accrediting bodies such as the
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE), the Interstate New
Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC), and the American Library
Association/American Association of School Librarians (ALA/AASL) have all developed
standards for teacher licensure, certification, and endorsement that require assessment of
not only the knowledge and skills of teacher candidates but also their dispositions.
NCATE assesses how teacher preparation programs design, implement, and evaluate
curriculum and provide experiences for teacher candidates to acquire and demonstrate the
knowledge, skills, and professional dispositions necessary to help all students learn.
InTASC contends that teacher candidates must have a “deeper understanding of their own
frames of reference (e.g., culture, gender, language, abilities, ways of knowing), the
potential biases in these frames, and their impact on expectations for and relationships
with learners and their families” (2013). ALA/AASL has recently developed new

	  

	  

7	  

Standards for Initial Preparation of School Librarians which includes the element that,
“Candidates support the learning of all students and other members of the learning
community, including those with diverse learning styles, physical and intellectual
abilities and needs” (2010). The University of Nebraska Omaha College of Education
Conceptual Framework (2007), which outlines who the College of Education is and what
it prepares candidates to do, includes the following components:
•

We believe that candidates who understand their own personal and professional
strengths and needs will be better able to attend to the educational, social,
emotional, and physical needs of all stakeholders in classroom and community
settings

•

They consistently exhibit professional dispositions that are learner-centered;
ethical, socially, and culturally respectful; responsible; and optimistic

•

They are prepared to provide culturally competent leadership in their prospective
fields. They know that meeting the needs of diverse students requires knowledge
of culture and context and a wide array of pedagogical skills for teaching-learning
opportunities

•

Reflective scholarship is the lens through which professionals and educators see
all aspects of their professional lives. Whether reflection on beliefs leads to a
change in behavior or a change in behavior precedes a change of beliefs, both are
critical to candidate development
While national accrediting bodies are encouraging teacher preparation programs

to delve deeper than ever before to examine how dispositions can be developed to create
quality teachers who are prepared to teach in any setting, school districts across the

	  

	  

8	  

country are investing millions of dollars in workshops, trainings, and professional
developments that focus on cultural proficiency training of their faculty. They are
spending much needed time, money, and resources to ensure their teachers are effectively
prepared to meet the needs of the diverse students they serve. One has to look no further
than the mission statements developed through a school’s strategic plan to see statements
that address this issue.
As school librarians are in a position to see and serve all students in the school,
playing a pivotal role in working to effectively meet their educational needs, it led this
researcher to believe that a critical examination of cultural proficiency instruction and its
impact on the dispositions of the school librarian candidates in the Library Education
Program could contribute to the knowledge base of the factors that influence developing
dispositions about teaching diverse students.
Research Questions
Researchers in education have linked teacher dispositions to teacher quality
(Burant, et al., 2007; Coutinho & Oswald, 2000; Diez, 2007; Garmon, 2004; Taylor &
Wasicsko, 2000), yet a thorough investigation of literature found no empirical studies
linking how school librarian candidates’ dispositions were affected by cultural
proficiency instruction within their school library preparation program. Further, no
empirical studies have been found that explore which factors have had the greatest impact
on school librarian candidates’ diversity dispositions development.
To study whether school librarian candidates’ diversity dispositions develop as
the result of cultural proficiency instruction, in which the candidates are asked to think,
reflect, decide, and act on their own individual understandings and values through

	  

	  

9	  

readings, videos, discussions, and goal-setting, the following research questions were
asked:
1. Do the candidates in the Methods: School Library course espouse positive
diversity dispositions on the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey?
2. Is there a significant difference between mean scores from the Diversity
Dispositions Index pre-survey to the Diversity Dispositions Index post-survey?
3. Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in
Helping Students Gain Knowledge?
Factor 1 includes items such as “I (can) teach my students to gain knowledge on their
own”, “I (can) create opportunities for my students to express their knowledge in a
variety of ways”, and “I (can) differentiate expectations for individual students”.
4. Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and
Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning?
Factor 2 includes items such as, “I believe that all students can succeed”, “I believe
that all students can learn”, and “I believe that diversity enhances student
knowledge”.
5. Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections
with the Community?
Factor 3 includes items such as, “I (can) help my students make connections in their
community”, “I (will) see myself as part of the community in my role as teacher”, and
“It is important that I attend activities in my students’ neighborhoods”.
6. Which items from the Diversity Dispositions Index showed the most growth
within each of the Factor Domains?

	  

	  

10	  
a. Which item within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain
Knowledge showed the most growth?
b. Which item within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about
Students and Teaching/Learning showed the most growth
c. Which item within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community
showed the most growth?

Definition of Terms
American Association of School Librarians (AASL) is the national professional
membership organization focused on school librarians and the school library community.
American Library Association (ALA) is the oldest and largest library
association in the world, providing association information, news, events, and advocacy
resources for members, librarians, and library users.
Anti-bias Education is an approach based on the values exemplified in the
Teaching Tolerance Anti-bias Framework, and organized into four domains: Identity,
Diversity, Justice, and Action. Together, these domains represent a continuum of
engagement in anti-bias, multicultural, and social justice education.
Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation (CAEP) advances
excellence in educator preparation through evidence-based accreditation that assures
quality and supports continuous improvement to strengthen P-12 student learning. CAEP
was formed following the July 1, 2013 consolidation of the National Council for
Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) and the Teacher Education Accreditation
Council (TEAC).

	  

	  

11	  
Culturally Congruent Critical Pedagogy is a process that supports future

educators to reflect on using P-12 students’ family culture and background as an
instructional tool.
Culturally Proficient Instruction is defined by Nuri-Robins, et al. (2012) as “the
result of an inside-out journey of teaching and learning during which you explore your
values and behaviors while evaluating the policies and practices of your workplace. The
journey deepens your understanding of yourself and your community of practice.”
Developmentally and Culturally Appropriate Practices Teacher Preparation
Model (DCAP) was developed in 1996 and based on the notions of multicultural
education, culturally congruent critical pedagogy, and anti-bias education (Fig. 1).
Dispositions consist of “the values, commitments, and professional ethics that
influence behaviors toward students, families, colleagues, and communities and affect
student learning, motivation, and development as well as the educator’s own professional
growth. Dispositions are guided by beliefs and attitudes related to values such as caring,
honesty, responsibility, and social justice. For example, they might include a belief that
all students can learn, a vision of high and challenging standards or a commitment to a
safe and supportive learning environment” (NCATE, 2011).
Diversity Dispositions Index (DDI) is a perceptual assessment instrument
designed and validated by Schulte, Edick, & Edwards (2008) to measure the dispositions
practicing educators need to possess in order to work with students from diverse
backgrounds. The DDI includes 43 randomized questions that fall within 3 factors:
Factor 1 – Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge, Factor 2 – Educators’
Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning, and Factor 3 – Educators’

	  

	  

12	  

Connections with the Community.
Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC) Model
Core Teaching Standards consist of 10 standards for teaching that were set forth with
the purpose of assessing pre-service teachers and programs of teacher education (2013).
The 10 standards include: Standard 1 – Learner Development, Standard 2 – Learning
Differences, Standard 3 – Learning Environments, Standard 4 – Content Knowledge,
Standard 5 – Content Application, Standard 6 – Assessment, Standard 7 – Planning for
Instruction, Standard 8 – Instructional Strategies, Standard 9 – Professional Learning and
Ethical Practices, and Standard 10 – Leadership and Collaboration.
Likert Scale Scoring is a traditional 5-point attitudinal scale with 1=Strongly
Disagree, 2=Disagree, 3=Neutral, 4=Agree, and 5=Strongly Agree.
Multicultural Education is defined by Dr. James A. Banks (1989) as, “A field of
study and an emerging discipline whose major aim is to create equal educational
opportunities for students from diverse racial, ethnic, social-class, and cultural groups.
One of its important goals is to help all students to acquire the knowledge, attitudes, and
skills needed to function effectively in a pluralistic democratic society and to interact,
negotiate, and communicate with peoples from diverse groups in order to create a civic
and moral community that works for the common good."
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) is the
education profession’s mechanism to help establish high quality teacher preparation
through a performance-based system of accreditation to foster competent classroom
teachers and other educators.
School Librarian Candidates refer to the undergraduate and graduate candidates

	  

	  

13	  

who are receiving their School Librarian endorsement in the College of Education at this
Midwestern University.
Assumptions
To gain the whole picture of a candidates’ teaching effectiveness, one must
consider all aspects of the teaching act: knowledge, skills, and dispositions. As experts in
the dispositions field contend that there is no clear definition of a disposition, nor are
there consistent norms by which to assess dispositions, it was assumed that for this study
that the participants’ diversity dispositions, or attitudes, beliefs, and willingness, could be
assessed using the Diversity Dispositions Index. Because there was no coaching or
coercion, it was also assumed that the school librarian candidates participating in the
study would be honest in reporting their beliefs regarding diversity disposition
statements.
Limitations
Participation in this study was voluntary and data was gathered from a single
course within the Library Education Program at one Midwestern University, therefore,
the number of respondents was small and may not be representative of the overall
population of candidates seeking their school librarian endorsement in the Library
Education Program. All participants met admission standards for the Library Education
Program, but were at different points within coursework required of the program. No
knowledge of prior personal or educational experiences that may impact diversity
dispositions of participants could also be a limitation of the findings. Additionally,
during the course of this study graduate participants may have been receiving culturally

	  

	  

14	  

proficient training and instruction from their own school districts for which they were
employed. The possibility of the pre-test contaminating the post-test results is also noted.
Delimitations
This study was delimited to graduate and undergraduate candidates at a
Midwestern University enrolled in the Methods: School Library course as part of their
School Library Education Program. The nationally recognized School Library Education
Program prepares candidates to lead school libraries in P-12 schools, and delivers
coursework in a hybrid environment to include face-to-face and online class sessions.
The Methods: School Library course is offered each fall semester, and meets face-to-face
three times per semester with all other coursework delivered in an online format. Data
for this study was collected over two semester’s time: Fall 2013 and Fall 2014, during the
first and the last face-to-face class sessions.
Significance of the Study
It was the intent of this study to explore the effect of cultural proficiency
instruction on school librarian candidates’ overall diversity dispositions development. As
research indicates that school librarians face the unique challenge of differentiating
instruction to meet the educational needs for all students in the school, no matter their
culture or ability (Mestre, 2009), it was also the intent of this study to explore which
diversity disposition factors were impacted the greatest by that cultural proficiency
instruction. This critical examination could contribute to the knowledge base of
culturally proficient pedagogy.

	  

	  

15	  

Outline of the Study
Chapter 2 will examine the changing demographics and the increase in the
diversity of students in this country, explore the development of diversity standards that
are now widely recognized in teacher preparation programs, identify research on defining
and assessing dispositions of candidates within a teacher preparation program, provide a
working definition of cultural proficiency and cultural proficiency instruction, and
examine a discovery of cultural consciousness among candidates in a school librarian
preparation course. Chapter 3 will outline the methodology and research design
employed in this study, provide demographic information that was collected on
participants of the study, and discuss data collection and the instrument used to collect
the data to explore the relationship between school library candidates’ perceptions of
their diversity dispositions and the culturally proficient instruction delivered during the
Methods: School Library course. Chapter 4 will provide statistical analyses of the data
collected during this study by summarizing and comparing means and standard
deviations for the pre-survey and post-survey results, display and discuss pre/post results
for each of the 3 DDI Factors: Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain
Knowledge, Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning, and Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community, and
display and discuss the questions within each of the DDI factors that showed the most
growth from the pre/post. Chapter 5 will discuss findings from this study, and offer
implications for further research in the field of examining the diversity dispositions of
candidates pursuing a school library endorsement.

	  

	  

16	  
Chapter 2
Review of Literature

The Changing Demographics
Not since the last century have we seen such a rapid change in the demographics
of the United States. Between 1900 and 1915, more than 15 million immigrants arrived
in the United States, equal to the number of immigrants who had arrived in the previous
40 years combined. Forward 100 years, and the number of immigrants entering the
country between 2000 and 2010 passed the 15 million mark, making it the highest decade
of immigration in American History (Center for Immigration Studies, 2011). According
to the Forum on Child and Family Statistics (2013), there were 74.1 million children in
the United States in 2010, a 1.7 million increase since 2000. This number is projected to
increase to 80.3 million before the end of the next decade. Of these 74.1 million children,
53% were White, non-Hispanic; 24% were Hispanic; 14% were Black, non-Hispanic; 5%
were Asian, non-Hispanic; and 4% were non-Hispanic "all other races” (2013). Key
national “Indicators of well-being” for these children also indicated that 22% lived in
poverty, and 22% spoke a language other than English at home.
The National Center for Education Statistics (2014), which collects, analyzes, and
reports statistics on the condition of education in the United States, recently published
their Projections of Education Statistics to 2022. According to the latest report, by the
year 2022, “minorities – Hispanics, Asians, African Americans, Native Americans, and
multiracial individuals – will account for 50.3% of public school students. To break this
down by grade levels, minorities will make up 51% of pre-kindergarteners through 8th
graders and 48% of 9th through 12th graders” (NCES, 2014).

	  

	  

17	  
The Education for All Handicapped Children Act, which in 2004 was revised and

renamed the Individuals with Disabilities Act (IDEA), works to secure equal access and
equal opportunity inside schools through promoting inclusionary practices. New laws
ask that all children be afforded the opportunity to be educated in the least restrictive
environment, being general education classrooms. Although IDEA does not mandate
inclusion, the act does mandate how states and public agencies provide early intervention,
special education and related services to more than 6.5 million eligible infants, toddlers,
children, and youth with disabilities (United States Department of Education, 2004).
This surge in the changing demographics of America’s youth has ultimately
altered, and will continue to alter the population of students within our schools. As more
and more students from diverse backgrounds populate schools across the United States,
efforts mount to identify both theoretically and pedagogical sound culturally responsive
approaches to meet the varying needs of these students. Educators are being called upon
to create a culture where all students, regardless of differences in culture, language,
socioeconomic status, or ability, feel welcomed and supported, and are provided with the
best opportunities to learn. More than ever before, instructional practices across the
curriculum must take into account how a student’s culture, history, and learning style
affect how he/she may process information while valuing the student’s own unique
experiences and perspectives.
To understand the various models of multicultural education that have evolved,
one must look at the historical foundation of the concept and the social conditions,
educational traditions, and pedagogical philosophies that provided the framework for that
foundation.

	  

	  

18	  
In 1989, Banks identified the major aim of multi-cultural education as being, “to

create equal educational opportunities for students from diverse racial, ethnic, socialclass, and cultural groups” (1989, p. 4). Within the model proposed by Banks, there are
five dimensions of multi-cultural education that educators should move across to better
teach to all students:
1. Content integration – The extent to which teachers use examples, data, and
information from a variety of cultures and groups to illustrate key
concepts, principles, generalizations, and theories
2. Knowledge construction – The process by which teachers help students to
understand how knowledge is created and how it is influenced by race,
ethnicity, and social class
3. Equity pedagogy – The process by which teachers use techniques and
methods that facilitate the academic achievement of students from diverse
race, ethnic, and social classes
4. Prejudice reduction – The extent to which teachers consider students’ own
racial attitudes and use strategies to help students develop more
democratic attitudes and values
5. Empowering school culture and social structure – The process of
restructuring the culture and organization of the school so that students
from diverse racial, ethnic, and social classes will experience educational
equality and cultural empowerment
Banks stressed the importance of moving beyond teachers simply “filling up the
buckets” of students, and instead striving to create an environment where teachers and

	  

	  

19	  

students learn together through sharing of and valuing culture and construction of new
knowledge. Although the five dimensions are conceptually distinct, they are highly
interrelated, and provided the framework for others in the field (Ladson-Billings, 1995).
Nearly 25 years ago, Ladson-Billings introduced her research on the pedagogical
excellence of teachers working with marginalized students. Her findings were coined as
“culturally relevant” teaching practices, and identified how educators can insert culture
into education, rather than insert education into culture. Ladson-Billings (1995) defined
culturally relevant teaching as a, “pedagogy of opposition not unlike critical pedagogy
but specifically committed to collective, not merely individual, empowerment” (1995, p.
160). Ladson-Billings asserted that culturally relevant teachers utilize students’ culture
as a vehicle for learning, and culturally relevant teaching rested on three propositions:
1. Students must experience academic success
2. Students must develop and/or maintain cultural competence; and
3. Students must develop a critical consciousness through which they
challenge the status quo of the current social order
Her research has since been the foundation for others in the field who have
studied cultural proficiency instruction and culturally responsive teaching practices and
their impact on the dispositions development of candidates in a teacher preparation
program (Schulte, et al., 2008; Taylor & Wasicsko, 2000; Villegas, 2007). Instructional
practices that value all students’ own unique experiences, abilities, and perspectives will
ensure educators develop culturally relevant content throughout the disciplines,
incorporate a variety of viewpoints and perspectives into the curriculum, and transform
the canon, ultimately developing a new paradigm for that curriculum (Burnett, 1994).

	  

	  

20	  

Thus, the ultimate challenge for teacher preparation programs is to prepare dedicated and
reflective practitioners who possess the knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary to
connect, commit, and practice an ethos of care with changing demographics of an
increase in diverse students and their families.
Development of Diversity Standards: NCATE, InTASC, and AASL
The notion of teacher dispositions and their influence on student achievement can
be traced to Dewey in the early 1900’s. It was suggested that teacher dispositions were
not necessarily behaviors, but rather determinant of behaviors and representative of how
one views the world. As such, it has been argued that teacher preparation programs have
the moral and ethical responsibility of shaping the dispositions of teacher candidates in
their programs to better meet the needs of marginalized, at-risk-students to include
English Language learners, students with learning difficulties or disabilities, and those
from low-socioeconomic backgrounds (Mueller & Hinden, 2011). This call for teacher
preparation programs across the country to develop a “social justice” orientation that
prepares candidates to create more inclusive learning environments for students from
diverse backgrounds has led to a change in policy by the teacher preparation program
licensure and accrediting bodies, NCATE, InTASC, and AASL.
National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE)
The National Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education (NCATE) was
founded in 1954 through the joint efforts of the American Association of Colleges for
Teacher Education (AACTE), the National Association of State Directors of Teacher
Education and Certification (NASDTEC), the National Education Association (NEA), the
Council of Chief State School Officers (CCSSO), and the National School Boards

	  

	  

21	  

Association (NSBA), to provide accreditation to institutions with post-secondary
programs that prepare candidates for teaching in P-12 schools. In 1977, NCATE adopted
standards that required all NCATE institutions preparing teacher candidates be held
accountable for their teacher preparation programs. According to the organization,
“NCATE’s performance-based system of accreditation fosters competent classroom
teachers and other educators who work to improve the education of all P-12 students.
NCATE believes every student deserves a caring, competent, and highly qualified
teacher” (NCATE, 2011).
In 2002, NCATE, sensing there was a disconnect between what a teacher may
intend to do, and what he or she actually does, identified dispositions as one of the three
fundamental and critical skills necessary for candidates preparing to be teachers.
NCATE adopted the inclusion of dispositions into the standards and began to require that,
in addition to assessing the knowledge and skills of teacher candidates, teacher education
programs most also articulate and systematically assess the dispositions of teacher
candidates in the programs. According to NCATE’s Professional Standards for the
Accreditation of Teacher Preparation Institutions, “Accountability and improvement in
teacher preparation” and “Providing leadership for reform in teacher education” are
central to the mission (2008, p. 6.). To that end, NCATE established the following six
Unit Standards to ensure that graduates of accredited institutions have developed the
knowledge, skills, and dispositions necessary to help all students learn:
Standard 1: Knowledge, Skills and Professional Dispositions •

Candidates preparing to work in schools as teachers or other school professionals
know and demonstrate the content knowledge, pedagogical content knowledge

	  

	  

22	  
and skills, pedagogical professional knowledge and skills, and professional
dispositions necessary to help all students learn. Assessments indicate that
candidates meet professional, state, and individual standards.

Standard 2: Assessment System and Unit Evaluation •

The unit has an assessment that collects and analyzes data on applicant
qualifications, candidate and graduate performance, and unit operations to
evaluate and improve the performance of candidates, the unit, and its programs.

Standard 3: Field Experiences and Clinical Practice •

The unit and its school partners design, implement, and evaluate field experiences
and clinical practice so that teacher candidates and other school professionals
develop and demonstrate the knowledge, skills, and professional dispositions
necessary to help all students learn.

Standard 4: Diversity •

The unit designs, implements, and evaluates curriculum and provides experiences
for candidates to acquire and apply knowledge, skills and dispositions necessary
to help all students learn. Assessments indicate that candidates can demonstrate
and apply proficiencies related to diversity. Experiences provided for candidates
include working with diverse populations, including higher education and P-12
school faculty, candidates, and students in P-12 schools.

Standard 5: Faculty Qualifications, Performance, and Development •

Faculty are qualified and model best professional practices in scholarship, service,
and teaching, including the assessment of their own effectiveness as related to
candidate performance. They also collaborate with colleagues in the disciplines

	  

	  

23	  
and schools. The unit systematically evaluates faculty performance and facilitates
professional development.

Standard 6: Unit Governance and Resources •

The unit has the leadership, authority, budget, personnel, facilities, and resources,
including information technology resources, for the preparation of candidates to
meet professional, state, and institutional standards.
With the implementation of these Six Unit Standards, NCATE began holding

institutions accountable for including within their conceptual framework a commitment
to preparing teacher candidates to support learning for all students. NCATE asserts that
this decision has led to bridging the gap of disconnectedness between what a teacher may
intend to do, and what he or she actually does.
In 2013, NCATE consolidated with the Teacher Education Accreditation Council
(TEAC) to form the newly accrediting body, Council for the Accreditation of Educator
Programs (CAEP). With the de facto consolidation, came a new set of standards, the first
of which is:
Standard 1: Content and Pedagogical Knowledge •

The provider ensures that candidates develop a deep understanding of the critical
concepts and principles of their discipline, and, by completion are able to use
discipline-specific practices flexibly to advance the learning of all students toward
attainment of college-and-career-readiness standards.

CAEP goes on to include:

	  

	  

24	  

Element 1.1: Candidate Knowledge, Skills and Professional Dispositions •

Candidates demonstrate an understanding of the InTASC standards at the
appropriate progression level(s) in the following categories: the learner and
learning; content; instructional practice; and professional responsibility.
The consolidation of the accrediting bodies NCATE and TEAC into CAEP, and

inclusion of these statements, brought consistency to the expectations of teacher
preparation programs by aligning the same principles of rigor, evidence, and outcomes
outlined in InTASC that are designed to assure quality and support the continuous
improvement necessary to strengthen the learning of all P-12 students.
Interstate New Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium (InTASC)
Created in 1987 through the consortium of, “state education agencies and national
educational organizations dedicated to the reform of the preparation, licensing, and ongoing professional development of teachers” (InTASC, 2013), the Interstate New Teacher
Assessment and Support Consortium was also taking a hard look at teacher preparation,
licensing, and certification. Their work was guided on the basic premise that effective
teachers must be able to integrate content knowledge with the specific strengths and
needs of their students to assure that all students are learning and performing at the
highest level. In the early 1990’s InTASC began to look at teacher dispositions, or
predictive patterns of action, as a means of connecting intentions with action. InTASC
came to the realization that teachers might possess the knowledge and skills required to
be an effective teacher, but were not using them for good teaching (Schussler, et al.,
2010).

	  

	  

25	  
The consortium, concerned that the focus on “attitude” up to that time was not a

reliable predictor of “behavior” for teachers, introduced the Model Standards for
Beginning Teacher Licensing and Development (1991) which included 10 Principles to
address dispositions of effective teachers. In 2013, InTASC released the Model Core
Teaching Standards and Learning Progressions for Teachers 1.0 which updated the 10
Principles into the following 10 Standards intended to “describe a new vision of teaching
that is needed for today’s learners”:
Standard 1: Learner Development •

The teacher understands how learners grow and develop, recognizing that patterns
of learning and development vary individually within and across the cognitive,
linguistic, social, emotional, and physical areas, and designs and implements
appropriate and challenging learning experiences.

Standard 2: Learning Differences •

The teacher uses understanding of individual differences and diverse cultures and
communities to ensure inclusive learning environments that enable each learner to
meet high standards.

Standard 3: Learning Environments •

The teacher works with others to create environments that support individual and
collaborative learning, and that encourage positive social interaction, active
engagement in learning, and self-motivation.

Standard 4: Content Knowledge •

The teacher understands the central concepts, tools of inquiry, and structures of
the discipline(s) he or she teaches and creates learning experiences that make

	  

	  

26	  
these aspects of the discipline accessible and meaningful for learners to assure
masters of the content.

Standard 5: Application of Content •

The teacher understands how to connect concepts and use differing perspectives
to engage learners in critical thinking, creativity, and collaborative problem
solving related to authentic local and global issues.

Standard 6: Assessment •

The teacher understands and uses multiple methods of assessment to engage
learners in their own growth, to monitor learner progress, and to guide the
teacher’s and learner’s decision making.

Standard 7: Planning for Instruction •

The teacher plans instruction that supports every student in meeting rigorous
learning goals by drawing upon knowledge of content areas, curriculum, crossdisciplinary skills, and pedagogy, as well as knowledge of learners and the
community context.

Standard 8: Instructional Strategies •

The teacher understands and uses a variety of instructional strategies to encourage
learners to develop deep understanding of content areas and their connections, and
to build skills to apply knowledge in meaningful ways.

Standard 9: Professional Learning and Ethical Practice •

The teacher engages in ongoing professional learning and uses evidence to
continually evaluate his/her practice, particularly the effects of his/her choices and

	  

	  

27	  
actions on others (learners, families, other professionals, and the community) and
adapts practice to meet the needs of each learner.

Standard 10: Leadership and Collaboration •

The teacher seeks appropriate leadership roles and opportunities to take
responsibility for student learning, to collaborate with learners, families,
colleagues, other school professionals, and community members to ensure learner
growth, and to advance the profession.
Within the 10 Standards, InTASC included learning progressions for each of the

indicators of knowledge, dispositions, and performances in order to more meaningfully
target supports and interventions for teacher candidates, and to provide a stronger focus
on the application of their knowledge and skills. InTASC contends that these new
standards are no longer only intended for “beginning” teachers but instead should be used
as professional practice standards to probe the complexity of the teaching practice.
American Library Association/American Association of School Librarians
(ALA/AASL)
In 2003, the American Library Association/American Association of School
Librarians (ALA/AASL) developed and adopted the Standards for Initial Programs for
School Library Media Specialist Preparation. The four program standards, which
replaced earlier AASL/NCATE Guidelines and Competencies, were developed around
the conceptual framework of preparing candidates to be effective teachers as well as
effective information specialists through three critical areas of service provided in
effective library media programs: Teaching and Learning, Information Access and
Delivery, and Program Administration. AASL believed that, like Nationally Board

	  

	  

28	  

Certified teachers, library media specialists (school librarians), “know a wide range of
source material and how to access it; they develop interdisciplinary collections to meet
the demographic and cultural needs of the learning community; they partner with teachers
to create exciting experiences in an information-rich environment. They know the
curriculum of the school thoroughly and serve as leaders in implementing quality
teaching and learning” (ALA/AASL, 2003).
Research indicates that school librarians face the unique challenge of
differentiating instruction to meet the educational needs for all students in the school, no
matter their culture or ability (Mestre, 2009), and in 2010, program guidelines were
updated based on the mission of the school library program as described in AASL’s
Empowering Learners: Guidelines for School Library Media Programs (2009) placing
more emphasis on school librarians as teachers who meet the diverse needs of all
learners. As a result, the following 5 standards outlined in the recently adopted
ALA/AASL Standards for Initial Preparation of School Librarians (2010) now address
the philosophy, principles, and ethics of the field of school librarianship:
Standard 1: Teaching for Learning • Candidates are effective teachers who demonstrate knowledge of learners and
learning and who model and promote collaborative planning, instruction in
multiple literacies, and inquiry-based learning, enabling members of the learning
community to become effective users and creators of ideas and information.
Candidates design and implement instruction that engages students' interests and
develops their ability to inquire, think critically, gain and share knowledge.

	  

	  

29	  

Standard 2: Literacy and Reading • Candidates promote reading for learning, personal growth, and enjoyment.
Candidates are aware of major trends in children's and young adult literature and
select reading materials in multiple formats to support reading for information,
reading for pleasure, and reading for lifelong learning. Candidates use a variety of
strategies to reinforce classroom reading instruction to address the diverse needs
and interests of all readers.
Standard 3: Information and Knowledge • Candidates model and promote ethical, equitable access to and use of physical,
digital, and virtual collections of resources. Candidates demonstrate knowledge of
a variety of information sources and services that support the needs of the diverse
learning community. Candidates demonstrate the use of a variety of research
strategies to generate knowledge to improve practice.
Standard 4: Advocacy and Leadership • Candidates advocate for dynamic school library programs and positive learning
environments that focus on student learning and achievement by collaborating and
connecting with teachers, administrators, librarians, and the community.
Candidates are committed to continuous learning and professional growth and
lead professional development activities for other educators. Candidates provide
leadership by articulating ways in which school libraries contribute to student
achievement.
Standard 5: Program Management and Administration • Candidates plan, develop, implement, and evaluate school library programs,

	  

	  

30	  
resources, and services in support of the mission of the library program within the
school according to the ethics and principles of library science, education,
management, and administration.
AASL has noted that school librarians bring a unique perspective to the teaching

and learning process as their role demands a holistic approach of learning and instruction
that acknowledges the needs of all learners in the school, and requires school librarians to
“develop collections and instructional strategies that include both digital and print
resources in support of the diverse learning styles and multiple literacies of their students
and communities” (AASL, 2010). As such, each of these standards now also includes
elements that address the diverse learning styles, physical and intellectual abilities and
needs of students.
Defining and Assessing Dispositions
Dispositions have been described as the personality, values, attitudes, interests,
appreciations, or beliefs of effective educators. However, as there is no universal
checklist of teacher dispositions to follow, defining and assessing dispositions creates a
challenge for teacher preparation programs. As teacher preparation programs are now
required to address the dispositions accreditation requirement, they have begun to
consider their own institutional characteristics, mission, and focus in defining,
developing, and assessing dispositions. Going back just 15 years, an examination of
empirical research has revealed several definitions for dispositions, as well as suggested
several approaches for assessing dispositions.
In her research on preparing prospective and beginning teachers to develop an
awareness of cultural diversity issues to become more sensitive to the needs of their

	  

	  

31	  

culturally and linguistically diverse students, Morales (2000) studied the impact of using
the Developmentally and Culturally Appropriate Practices (DCAP) teacher preparation
model with her pre-service teachers at an urban university in California. Developed in
1996, the model is derived from the notions of multicultural education, culturally
congruent critical pedagogy, and anti-bias education. Within the DCAP Model, the
multicultural education goals include restructuring schools for equal opportunity to help
all students reach their fullest potential. With culturally congruent critical pedagogy, a
teacher develops their dispositions through the following actions: “A) listens to and
legitimizes students’ voices, B) accepts and uses students’ experience, culture, and
language as learning resources, C) respects and values different perspectives, and D)
incorporates decision-making and social action in teaching (Morales, 2000). The antibias education goals of the model are designed to change inequality and sources of
stereotypes of teacher candidates to enable all children to construct knowledge and
develop confident self-identities through a safe, just, and diverse interactive learning
environment. Morales studied 23 university students enrolled in an early childhood
education course, employing the DCAP Model to develop instructional activities and
strategies that encouraged her teacher candidates to first become aware of their own life
experiences related to cultural diversity to better develop their understanding of cultural
diversity issues and developmentally and culturally appropriate instructional practices.
Her findings indicated that candidates in the course gained confidence in themselves and
perceived that the instructional and activities heightened their level of knowledge and
ability to teach culturally and linguistically diverse students. By examining their own

	  

	  

32	  

personal biases, the candidates became more aware of examining cultural diversity
issues.
As there are forces that contribute to racism, sexism, classism, religious bigotry,
and biases against differently abled individuals, researchers at an urban university in
Chicago were also interested in examining how and to what degree specific instructional
strategies can impact pre-service teachers’ perceptions of diversity issues (Peterson,
Cross, Johnson, & Howell, 2000). Employing a post-test at the conclusion of their
Foundations of Education course, during which candidates engaged in instructional
activities designed to expand their attitudes regarding diversity issues, participants
responded on a 4-point Likert Scale (greatly, somewhat, very little, not at all) as to what
degree the class changed their views on intolerance and multicultural issues. The
researchers discovered that consciously addressing issues of intolerance in their teacher
preparation course had an impact, as the thinking of their candidates began to shift. The
pre-service teachers lauded the instructional experiences as powerful, and ones that
demanded reflection and critical thinking.
Teacher preparation programs can play a pivotal role in fostering awareness of
dispositions by helping candidates uncover knowledge of themselves, and nearly ten
years ago work began at a large Midwestern University to develop a means of measuring
this awareness. In their work developing and validating a Diversity Disposition Index
(DDI), researchers at the University of Nebraska Omaha College of Education referred to
the definition of dispositions as “a pattern of behavior exhibited frequently and in the
absence of coercion, and constituting a habit of mind under some conscious and
voluntary control, and that is intentional and oriented to broad goals” (Schulte, Edick,

	  

	  

33	  

Edwards, & Mackiel, 2004; Schulte, et al., 2008). Building on prior work that explored
how to best define and assess teacher dispositions, led to the development of the DDI as a
self-assessment instrument to help candidates become more aware of and acquire the
dispositions necessary to effectively teach students from diverse backgrounds. Schulte,
Edick, & Edwards worked with candidates in their own educational administration and
teacher education courses to develop the 43-item instrument, which measures responses
on a 5-point Likert Scale (1= strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree,
5=strongly agree). The researchers intended to assess the dispositions of educators across
three propositions outlined in Ladson-Billings’ (1995) research on culturally relevant
teaching practices: students must A) experience academic success, B) develop and/or
maintain cultural competence; and C) develop a critical consciousness through which
they challenge the status quo of the current social order. After providing evidence of
construct validity and reliability, the researchers asserted that a three-factor solution best
fit the data: Factor 1: Educators’ skills in helping students gain knowledge; Factor 2:
Educators’ beliefs and attitudes about students and teaching/learning; and Factor 3:
Educators’ connections with the community, and the 43 questions would be analyzed
within their identified factor.
Around the same timeframe, researchers at the Center for Research on Teaching
and Learning were presenting the findings of their study at the Annual Meeting of the
American Educational Research Association in New York City (Tobias, Fan, & Bang,
2008). Guided by previous research in the field of developing and assessing
dispositions, the team administered their validated Educational Beliefs Questionnaire to
candidates enrolled in the teacher preparation program in 2005 and 2006. Respondents

	  

	  

34	  

included both those who had just entered the program, as well as those who were
beginning their student teaching experiences. After analyzing responses, the researchers
posited that two latent belief dimensions underlie the patterns of their teacher candidates’
responses on the questionnaire. The first of these dimensions related to a belief in the
efficacy of teaching for promoting student learning, while the other related to caring,
equity, and social justice. Findings from their data analysis also confirmed their
hypothesis that the longer candidates participated in teacher preparation programs that
encourage them to reflect on their own individual understandings and values, the more
deeply they develop their beliefs in efficacy of teaching for promoting student learning,
as well as their teaching for caring, equity, and social justice.
Developing a framework of three disposition domains – intellectual, cultural, and
moral – Schussler, et al., defined dispositions as, “the individual’s prior experience,
culture, beliefs, values, and cognitive abilities, all which affect the assumptions the
individual may make” (2010, p. 351). The researchers, stating that the three domains
encompass A) content and pedagogy, B) the cultural identities of teachers and students,
and C) the values driving one’s moral reasoning, were interested in examining the
nuances of teachers’ dispositions within each of their identified domains, as well as
assessing whether the identified domains adequately captured teacher candidates’
dispositions during beginning stages of their teaching. By analyzing journal entries of 35
teacher candidates from two different universities equal in size, one private and
religiously affiliated university in a suburban northeast city and one public university in a
rural southeast city, the researchers noted that a pattern began to emerge within all three
disposition domains – intellectual, cultural, and moral. Regardless of geographic location

	  

	  

35	  

and diversity of those who lived there, candidates who were more aware of their
dispositions were more purposeful in their teaching. They were more in tune to the
tension between focus on self versus focus on students and how their dispositions
positively and negatively affect their teaching decisions.
In their research on factors that influence pre-service elementary teachers’
developing dispositions about teaching all children, Mueller & Hinden (2011, p. 17)
based their definition of dispositions on the notion that “socially conscious teachers act as
stewards and leaders; understand, respect, and value diversity; and apply what they have
learned about teaching to support diverse learners”. Believing that teacher candidates
needed opportunities to explore their current dispositions, as well as engage in
discussions that target the origin and nature of their dispositions, the researchers studied
65 teacher candidates’ to determine the relationship between their dispositions and their
experiences. Using an Inclusion Scenario and a Cultural Stereotypes Scenario, Mueller
and Hinden administered a survey to examine if the teacher candidates were drawing on
teacher preparation courses, field experiences, or personal experiences to identify both
problems and alternative options with the scenarios. In examining the data, the pair noted
that all candidates were able to identify problems and offer alternative options within
both scenarios, and were drawing more on information from past or current classes rather
than field experiences or personal experiences when responding.
The findings of these researchers in assessing dispositions, regardless of the
definition or instrument used, lead credence to the idea that teacher preparation programs
can have a positive affect in developing the dispositions of their candidates. By making
the invisible visible through structured and relevant learning experiences that explore

	  

	  

36	  

ways to learn about oneself, pre-service teachers are better understanding and
acknowledging their place on the culturally proficient continuum discussed in the
following section, and better preparing to meet the needs of the diverse learners they will
serve.
Cultural Proficiency Instruction
The definition of dispositions can vary from one teacher preparation program to
another, however, the definition of cultural proficiency provided by Nuri-Robins, et al.,
(2012) is widely accepted among those same programs. They explain cultural
proficiency as a way of being, a mind-set, a mental model, or a world view. “Cultural
Proficiency is an approach for responding to the environment shaped by its diversity.”
(2012, p. 3). They go on to explain that those who are culturally proficient “welcome and
create opportunities to better understand who they are as individuals, while learning how
to interact positively with people who differ from themselves.” (2012, p. 4-5).
In their latest edition of Culturally Proficient Instruction: A Guide for People
Who Teach (2012), the researchers have provided guiding principles for individual
behavior, a continuum in which individuals interpret and respond to differences, barriers
to be recognized and acknowledged, and essential elements or standards of individual
behavior to guide educators in the choice and application of culturally proficient
practices.
Guiding principles for individual behavior include acknowledging that culture is a
predominate force in shaping values, behaviors, and institutions, and validating the
personal identities, group identities, and diverse thought patterns of cultural groups.
Barriers include an unawareness of the need to adapt, a resistance to change, a system of

	  

	  

37	  

oppression and privilege, and a sense of entitlement. These barriers can prevent one from
moving through the continuum of cultural proficiency, stifling an individual in cultural
destructiveness or cultural incapacity where they seek to eliminate or demean differences,
rather than moving through cultural competency where they engage with differences, and
ultimately move into cultural proficiency, “Recognizing that both the differences and
similarities between cultures are important and learning from both” (2012, p. 5).
This developmental approach for addressing opportunities and challenges that
emerge in diverse environments has been used as a conceptual/theoretical framework in
numerous research studies (Abilock, 2006; Anderson, 2011; Surface, Smith, Keiser, &
Hayes, 2012). In her analysis of school librarians’ role in educating students for crosscultural proficiency, Abilock (2006) used the Cultural Proficiency Continuum to provide
suggestions for school librarians to engage in respectful inquiry, deliberative discussion,
and problem solving to prepare their students to become effective global citizens. In his
study of cultural proficiency in three Los Angeles public high schools, Anderson (2011),
looked at responses from 195 teachers and 532 students to identify both barriers and
opportunities for the teaching staff to examine their own behaviors, assumptions, and
beliefs. In a study of candidates in the Masters/Endorsement program in Educational
Administration and Supervision at the University of Nebraska Omaha, researchers used
this Culturally Proficient Instruction framework to provide candidates the opportunities to
“engage in dialog on social justice and to reflect about personal beliefs, as well as
practice in culturally diverse settings” (Surface, et al., 2012).
Nuri-Robins, et al., (2012) assert that cultural proficiency can occur if the
educator – teacher, professor, staff developer, or trainer – engages in an inside-out

	  

	  

38	  

approach to diversity by first assessing one’s own culture before attempting to understand
students’ unique individual and distinctive cultural backgrounds. This approach to
becoming aware of each learner’s uniqueness was the methodology of the research
discussed below.
A Discovery of Cultural Consciousness
Critically reflective educators are encouraged to develop a social justice
orientation to create more inclusive learning environments for students from diverse
backgrounds. They begin to understand how power shapes their teaching practices,
providing insights into the limitations and constraints that all educators encounter as well
as strategies for addressing these concerns.
In their research on preparing school librarian candidates to build an awareness of
culturally responsive teaching to better build confidence in their own practice of
providing learning opportunities and environments where all students feel safe to ask
questions and discover more about their own culture as well as the cultures of others,
Kratt & Pentland (2013) administered a pre/post survey to candidates in their Fall 2012
Methods: School Library course. Using five belief statements:
1. I can create a trusting and caring environment in which all students feel
they can take risks when learning new content
2. I can identify and capitalize on the learning profiles of each student,
including cultural preferences
3. I can personalize learning so that each student enjoys learning and feels
successful

	  

	  

39	  
4. I can engage and challenge students while also providing developmentally
appropriate learning activities
5. I can encourage students to work productively, both independently and
collaboratively
candidates were asked to assess themselves on a 4-point Likert Scale (1=no confidence,
2=somewhat confident, 3=confident, 4=very confident) both prior to and following
instructional activities and learning opportunities steeped in cultural proficient
instruction that were designed to raise awareness of themselves as individual learners in
order to better raise awareness of culturally responsive teaching practices.
Results from the study indicated that following learning opportunities intended to
challenge personal biases and propose changes for teaching practices, candidates
showed growth across all five belief statements. The school librarian candidates began
to reflect on how they could provide their students more inclusive learning opportunities
through relationships built on trust and respect, and more authentic learning
opportunities through choice and relevance. They began to ask questions about
connecting to their students and communities on a personal level, and ensuring high
achievement for all students by addressing multiple learning styles. The school librarian
candidates began to think of themselves as teachers who will see and serve all students
in the school, and began to explore unexamined assumptions they may have had.
Collecting responses and reflections from candidates following the post-survey,
one candidate noted, “During class someone said that everyone in a school has their own
stories. I think once I realized this to be true, I began to focus more on the individual
rather than the class as a whole...I believe being culturally responsive in my teaching

	  

	  

40	  
means looking at the individual. I will try to give each child what they need when they
need it. While doing this it is imperative I know “their story” and take into
consideration their own cultural differences” (Kratt & Pentland, 2013, p. 41). The
school librarian candidates had begun to change their thinking by recognizing barriers
and individual behaviors that may have been preventing them from becoming culturally
proficient educators.

Conclusion
There is substantial evidence to support defining, developing, and assessing the
dispositions of candidates in a teacher preparation program, and as these programs are
now required to address the dispositions accreditation requirement, they have begun to
consider their own institutional characteristics, mission, and focus to determine how to
best accomplish this.
Teacher preparation programs must employ learning strategies and opportunities
that will allow the candidates in their programs to explore personal biases and construct
learning from these new experiences. Teacher preparation programs must also go beyond
subject matter to help candidates gain knowledge of student experiences, learning styles,
and development. They must develop the candidates’ “values, commitments, and
professional ethics that influence behaviors toward students, families, colleagues, and
communities and affect student learning, motivation, and development as well as the
educator’s own professional growth” (NCATE, 2011). To accomplish this, candidates in
these programs must be exposed to culturally proficient teaching practices that provide
opportunities to acknowledge their own unique individual and distinctive cultural
background before attempting to understand students’ unique individual and distinctive

	  

	  
cultural backgrounds. The candidates must be afforded opportunities to discover,
examine, and reflect on their own attitudes and beliefs if a change in dispositions is the
intended outcome. This study will examine if the culturally proficient instruction
delivered in the Methods: School Library course at one Midwestern University had an
impact on the dispositions of school library candidates enrolled in the course.

	  

41	  

	  

42	  

Chapter 3
Methodology

Although there is a great deal of discussion and research in education that have
focused on teaching and assessing dispositions, there is very little literature on school
library candidates’ disposition development over the course of their school library
preparation program. ALA/AASL Standards for Initial Preparation of School Librarians
Standard 1: Teaching for Learning, Element 1: Knowledge of Learners and Learning,
indicates that: “Candidates in the school library preparation program should support the
learning of all students and other members of the learning community, including those
with diverse learning styles, physical and intellectual abilities and needs” (ALA/AASL,
2010). Therefore, the purpose of this study was to explore the effect of cultural
proficiency instruction, which encourages candidates to reflect on their own individual
understandings and values, on the overall diversity dispositions development of
candidates enrolled in the Methods: School Library course.
The purpose of the Methods: School Library course is for school library
candidates to develop the knowledge, skills, and dispositions requisite of school
librarians in 21st Century teaching and learning environments through structured and
purposeful learning opportunities and experiences that focus on the role of the school
librarian as teacher. The Methods: School Library course is required for completing the
school librarian preparation program and is offered every fall semester.

	  

	  

43	  

Research Design
The way in which a teacher education program defines dispositions will inform
the manner in which dispositions are developed, implemented, and assessed. For the
purpose of this study, NCATE’s definition of dispositions was adopted: “the values,
commitments, and professional ethics that influence behaviors toward students, families,
colleagues, and communities and affect student learning, motivation, and development as
well as the educator’s own professional growth. Dispositions are guided by beliefs and
attitudes related to values such as caring, honesty, responsibility, and social justice. For
example, they might include a belief that all students can learn, a vision of high and
challenging standards or a commitment to a safe and supportive learning environment”
(NCATE, 2011).
A pre/post survey was used to examine the diversity dispositions of school
librarian candidates. According to Creswell (2012), survey designs can be used to
identify and explain trends in attitudes, opinions, behaviors, or characteristics, and to
establish an overall tendency amongst a sample population. Other researchers who have
employed this type of methodology have also asserted that an effective means for
assessing dispositions can include the use of rubrics, rating scales, self-reflection
evaluations and/or checklists (Johnston, Almerico, Henriott, & Shapiro, 2011; Notar,
Riley, & Taylor, 2009). Therefore, participants in this study were given the Diversity
Dispositions Index survey to self-report belief statements prior to cultural proficiency
instruction, and again following cultural proficiency instruction in the Methods: School
Library course.
Learning opportunities in the Methods: School Library course were framed in the

	  

	  

44	  

Developmentally and Culturally Appropriate Practices (DCAP) teacher preparation
model, incorporating notions of multicultural education, culturally congruent critical
pedagogy, and anti-bias education (Fig. 1). These learning opportunities were also
steeped in the conceptual framework of Culturally Proficient Instruction (Fig. 2), “a way
of teaching in which instructors engage in practices that provide equitable outcomes for
all learners” (Nuri-Robins, et al., 2012) and included:
•

Completing a self-analysis of oneself as a teacher and a learner

•

Identifying the personal identities and group identities present in the candidates’
own Methods: School Library course system

•

Examining Nuri-Robins, et al. (2012) Four Tools for developing one’s cultural
proficiency: Guiding Principles, Continuum, Barriers, and Essential Elements

•

Reading and reflecting on professional journal articles, webinars, and videos

•

Sharing of thinking and learning through engagement in small and large group
discussions

•

Participating in field experiences at culturally diverse P-12 schools
(undergraduates)

•

Examining case studies of culturally diverse P-12 students

•

Identifying and developing culturally responsive teaching strategies, teaching
resources, and collections of materials for the school library

•

Creating culturally responsive teaching goals, and

•

Identifying a diverse group of learners and developing a culturally responsive
instructional unit to be delivered in the school library

	  

	  

45	  

The independent variable for this study included the Culturally Proficient Instruction
being delivered over the course of the Fall 2013 and Fall 2014 semester. The dependent
variable included a change in the mean score for the dispositions of candidates enrolled in
the course.
Participants
In education, many experimental situations occur in which the researcher needs to
use an intact group, as the setting prohibits randomly assigning participants, and the
target population is small and could easily be identified. As such, Creswell (2012)
recommends using a nonprobability sampling. Therefore, no restrictions were placed on
undergraduate (N=9) or graduate (N=45) candidates who voluntarily took both the
pre/post Diversity Dispositions Index in the Methods: School Library course during the
Fall 2013 and Fall 2014 semester (N=54). The single inclusionary criterion for
participation was enrollment in the Methods: School Library course. Participants
included 50 females and 4 males with an average age of 35 (M = 35.4). Participants
identified themselves as Caucasian (N=51), Hispanic (N=1), Native American (N=1), and
African American (N=1).
By selecting candidates enrolled in this course to complete the survey in class, it
was anticipated that it would promote a high participation by respondents in an efficient
manner. The candidates were given the option to not take part in this research, and all
information remained confidential through careful coding.
Instrument
The Diversity Dispositions Index (Appendix B) collects data on phenomena that
cannot easily be observed (attitudes and beliefs) and was used to collect data for this

	  

	  

46	  

study. This approach to collecting data to assess attitudes and characteristics of a wide
range of subjects is widely used in library and information science. Schulte, et al., (2008)
established the Diversity Dispositions Index (DDI), a 43-item instrument which measures
responses on a 5-point Likert Scale (1=strongly disagree, 2=disagree, 3=neutral, 4=agree,
5=strongly agree), adapting it from the framework and propositions of culturally relevant
teaching developed by Ladson-Billings (1995): conception of self and others; social
relations; and conceptions of knowledge.
After providing evidence of content validity for the DDI, conducting a pilot study
with 136 graduate candidates, and conducting factor and reliability analyses to provide
evidence of construct validity and reliability, the researchers asserted that a three-factor
solution best fit the data: Factor 1: Educators’ skills in helping students gain knowledge;
Factor 2: Educators’ beliefs and attitudes about students and teaching/learning; and
Factor 3: Educators’ connections with the community. Respondents are unaware of
which questions fall within which factor on the DDI as questions are randomized.
During analysis of the results, the 43 questions are analyzed within their identified factor
(Appendix C).
For the purposes of this study, two open-ended questions were added to the
survey to obtain additional information on candidates’ beliefs regarding the role
dispositions have in teaching students from diverse backgrounds (Question 44), and to
obtain additional information on candidates’ beliefs regarding which learning experiences
in the Library Education Program have had the greatest impact in preparing them to teach
and develop resources for diverse learners and why (Question 45). The responses to
these questions will be discussed in Chapter 5.

	  

	  

47	  

Data Collection
According to Creswell (2012) there are key characteristics of survey research that
researchers must engage in: sampling from a population, collecting data through
questionnaires or interviews, designing instruments for data collection, and obtaining a
high response rate. As the target population was small and easily identifiable, and the
instrument to be used for this study was previously tested for validity and reliability,
approval was granted by the University of Nebraska Institutional Review Board
(Appendix A) to survey the sample population of candidates in the Methods: School
Library course by administering the DDI, and to analyze results collected from the
survey.
The Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey was administered to all graduate and
undergraduate candidates during the first face-to-face class session of the Methods:
School Library course during both the Fall 2013 and Fall 2014 semesters, and the
Diversity Dispositions Index post-survey was administered during the last face-to-face
class session of the Methods: School Library course during both the Fall 2013 and Fall
2014 semesters, resulting in a longitudinal design.
The response rate for completed pre/post surveys during the Fall 2013 semester
and the Fall 2014 semester was N=54 (70%). Analysis of candidates’ responses on the
DDI through matching of and measuring the pre-survey to post-survey for completed
DDI surveys was then conducted.
Research Questions and Data Analysis
To study whether school librarian candidates’ diversity dispositions develop as
the result of cultural proficiency instruction, the following research questions were asked

	  

	  

48	  

and the following statistical analyses were conducted to explore the relationship between
school library candidates’ perceptions of their diversity dispositions and the Culturally
Proficient Instruction delivered in the Methods: School Library course during the Fall
2013 and Fall 2014 semesters:
Research Question 1:
Do the candidates in the Methods: School Library course espouse positive
diversity dispositions on the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey?
Analysis:
Descriptive statistics were analyzed and candidates’ perceptions of their diversity
dispositions were summarized by calculating means and standard deviations for the DDI
pre-survey given prior to cultural proficiency instruction, and again for the DDI postsurvey given following cultural proficiency instruction.
Research Question 2:
Is there a significant difference between mean scores from the Diversity
Dispositions Index pre-survey to the Diversity Dispositions Index post-survey?
Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
overall growth from the DDI pre-survey to post-survey.
Research Question 3:
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in
Helping Students Gain Knowledge?
Factor 1 includes items such as “I (can) teach my students to gain knowledge on their
own”, “I (can) create opportunities for my students to express their knowledge in a
variety of ways”, and “I (can) differentiate expectations for individual students”.
	  

	  

49	  

Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
growth within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge.
Research Question 4:
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and
Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning?
Factor 2 includes items such as, “I believe that all students can succeed”, “I believe that
all students can learn”, and “I believe that diversity enhances student knowledge”.
Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
growth within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning.
Research Question 5:
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections
with the Community?
Factor 3 includes items such as, “I (can) help my students make connections in their
community”, “I (will) see myself as part of the community in my role as teacher”, and “It
is important that I attend activities in my students’ neighborhoods”.
Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
growth within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community.

	  

	  

50	  

Research Question 6:
Which items from the Diversity Dispositions Index showed the most growth
within each of the Factor Domains?
Research Question 6a:
Which item within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain
Knowledge showed the most growth?
Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
which item within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge
showed the most growth from the DDI pre-survey to the DDI post-survey.
Research Question 6b:
Which item within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning showed the most growth?
Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
which item within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning showed the most growth from the DDI pre-survey to the DDI postsurvey.
Research Question 6c:
Which item within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community showed
the most growth?

	  

	  

51	  

Analysis:
A two-tailed, paired sample t-test with a .05 alpha level was used to analyze
which item within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community showed the
most growth from the DDI pre-survey to the DDI post-survey.
According to Creswell (2012) a paired sample t-test is best used when one wants
to determine whether there is a significant difference between the average values of the
same measurement made under two different conditions. For this research, Condition A
was the first face-to-face class session prior to the culturally proficient instruction, and
Condition B was the last face-to-face class session following the culturally proficient
instruction in the Methods: School Library course.

	  

	  

52	  
Chapter 4
Results

Restatement of the Problem
Research suggests that previous personal experiences impact beliefs, assumptions,
and prejudices and could result in either bias or tolerance (Ambrose, 2004; Garmon,
2004; Levine-Rasky, 2001). Even researchers who are conflicted on whether “beliefs
influence dispositions and dispositions predict actions” can agree that candidates can
benefit from instruction and experiences that encourage positive dispositions (Burant,
Chubbuck, & Whipp, 2007; Diez, 2007). The reality is that the diversity in school
systems in the United States continues to increase, and the ability to provide meaningful
educational experiences for diverse student populations will never transpire if teacher
preparation programs do not adequately prepare candidates who can support this need.
This chapter presents an analysis of the pre/post survey data collected to
determine if the diversity dispositions of candidates enrolled in the Methods: School
Library course were impacted as a result of the culturally proficient instruction delivered.
Data was collected during the Fall 2013 and Fall 2014 semesters. There were 29
graduate and 5 undergraduate candidates enrolled in the course during the Fall 2013
semester, and there were 35 graduate and 8 undergraduate candidates enrolled in the
course during the Fall 2014 semester. Participation in this study was optional, and
pre/post surveys were completed by 22 graduate candidates and 5 undergraduates
candidates in Fall 2013, and completed by 23 graduate candidates and 4 undergraduate
candidates in Fall 2014 for a total of 54 candidates and a response rate of 70%.

	  

	  

53	  

According to Creswell (2012), a response rate of 50% is considered adequate for most
survey studies.
Description of Findings
Research Question 1
Do candidates in the Methods: School Library course espouse positive diversity
dispositions on the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey?
Table 1 displays the results of the pre-survey and post-survey for the Diversity
Dispositions Index, and the mean and standard deviation is present for each of the items
on this table. Overall, candidates espoused positive diversity dispositions prior to the
culturally proficient instruction delivered in the course (M = 4.23, SD = 0.38), and postsurvey results indicated growth (M = 4.59, SD = 0.33).
Research Question 2
Is there a significant difference between mean scores from the Diversity
Dispositions Index pre-survey to the Diversity Dispositions Index post-survey?
Table 2 displays the overall difference when comparing the results of the presurvey data (M = 4.23, SD = 0.38) to the post-survey data (M = 4.59, SD = 0.33). As seen
in Table 2, the null hypothesis was rejected, as results indicated there was a statistically
significant difference between the pre/post survey (t(53) = 10.95, p < .01, two-tailed). In
addition, Cohen’s d indicated a large effect size (d = 1.46). According to Gravetter and
Wallnau (2012), a magnitude of d = 0.8 is considered a large effect, while a magnitude of
d = 0.5 is considered a medium effect, and a magnitude of d = 0.2 is considered a small
effect (2012, p. 264).

	  

	  

54	  

Research Question 3
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in
Helping Students Gain Knowledge?
Table 3 displays the overall difference when comparing the results of the presurvey data (M = 3.89, SD = 0.40) to the post-survey data (M = 4.31, SD = 0.36) for items
within Factor 1: Educator’s Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge. Findings
indicated a significant statistical difference between pre/post as the post-survey data was
significantly higher and had a large effect size (t(53) = 10.40, p < .01, d = 1.40, twotailed).
Research Question 4
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and
Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning?
Table 4 displays the overall difference when comparing the results of the presurvey data (M = 4.58, SD = 0.31) to the post-survey data (M = 4.82, SD = 0.23) for items
within Factor 2: Educator’s Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and Teaching/Learning.
Findings indicated a significant statistical difference between pre/post as the post-survey
data was significantly higher and had a large effect size (t(53) = 7.71, p < .01, d = 1.05,
two-tailed).
Research Question 5
Is there a change in total score for items within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections
with the Community?

	  

	  

55	  
Table 5 displays the overall difference when comparing the results of the pre-

survey data (M = 3.79, SD = 0.69) to the post-survey data (M = 4.20, SD = 0.59) for items
within Factor 3: Educator’s Connections with the Community. Findings indicated a
significant statistical difference between pre/post as the post-survey data was
significantly higher and had a large effect size (t(53) = 7.55, p < .01, d = 1.03, twotailed).
Research Question 6
Which items from the Diversity Dispositions Index showed the most growth
within each of the Factor Domains?
Findings are indicated in Tables 6, 7, and 8 with individual items listed from
highest to lowest t-test results.
Research Question 6a
Which item within Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain
Knowledge showed the most growth?
Table 6 displays all items related to Factor 1: Educators’ Skills in Helping
Students Gain Knowledge from largest to smallest t-test results. Significance and effect
size are also listed.
Research Question 6b
Which item within Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning showed the most growth?
Table 7 displays all items related to Factor 2: Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes
about Students and Teaching/Learning from largest to smallest t-test results.
Significance and effect size are also listed.

	  

	  

56	  

Research Question 6c
Which item within Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the Community showed
the most growth?
Table 8 displays all items related to Factor 3: Educators’ Connections with the
Community from largest to smallest t-test results. Significance and effect size are also
listed.

	  

	  

57	  

Table 1
Candidates’ Espoused Diversity Dispositions
Pre-Survey
Item

Post-Survey

M

SD

M

SD

Item 1

4.46

0.64

4.72

0.45

Item 2

4.31

0.75

4.56

0.45

Item 3

4.65

0.59

4.87

0.34

Item 4

4.37

0.83

4.67

0.55

Item 5

4.50

0.61

4.76

0.43

Item 6

3.93

0.99

4.17

0.99

Item 7

3.76

1.01

4.24

0.75

Item 8

4.33

0.70

4.76

0.43

Item 9

3.24

1.08

3.65

1.03

Item 10

3.96

0.89

4.44

0.69

Item 11

3.74

1.10

4.13

0.89

Item 12

4.43

0.72

4.70

0.57

Item 13

4.13

0.75

4.50

0.61

Item 14

3.65

1.10

4.02

0.98

Item 15

3.78

1.00

4.10

0.87

Item 16

4.06

0.76

4.57

0.66

Item 17

3.98

0.66

4.59

0.53

Item 18

4.50

0.54

4.74

0.48

Item 19

4.70

0.50

4.87

0.34

Item 20

4.83

0.38

4.94

0.23

Item 21

3.67

0.93

4.11

0.84

Item 22

4.72

0.49

4.87

0.34

Item 23

4.80

0.41

4.91

0.29

	  

	  

58	  

Table 1 (Continued)
Candidates’ Espoused Diversity Dispositions
Pre-Survey

Post-Survey

Item

M

SD

M

SD

Item 24

4.63

0.52

4.89

0.32

Item 25

4.46

0.66

4.78

0.42

Item 26

4.89

0.32

4.96

0.19

Item 27

4.56

0.57

4.85

0.36

Item 28

4.35

0.55

4.81

0.44

Item 29

4.31

0.72

4.63

0.56

Item 30

3.63

0.85

4.19

0.73

Item 31

4.24

0.73

4.69

0.54

Item 32

4.20

0.71

4.63

0.59

Item 33

3.81

0.75

4.17

0.77

Item 34

4.07

0.77

4.48

0.67

Item 35

4.35

0.70

4.48

0.69

Item 36

4.41

0.63

4.76

0.43

Item 37

4.57

0.57

4.81

0.39

Item 38

3.83

0.77

4.56

0.60

Item 39

4.56

0.57

4.83

0.42

Item 40

4.15

0.71

4.65

0.52

Item 41

4.02

0.69

4.69

0.51

Item 42

4.24

0.64

4.74

0.44

Item 43

4.24

0.67

4.72

0.53

	  

	  

	  

59	  

Table 2
Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to
post-survey

	  

Pre-Survey

Post-Survey

Source

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

d

Total Score

4.23

0.38

4.59

0.33

10.95

<.01

1.46

	  

60	  

Table 3
Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to
post-survey for Factor 1: Educator’s Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge

	  

Pre-Survey

Post-Survey

Source

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

d

Total Score

3.89

0.40

4.31

0.36

10.40

<.01

1.40

	  

61	  

Table 4
Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to
post-survey for Factor 2: Educator’s Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning

	  

Pre-Survey

Post-Survey

Source

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

d

Total Score

4.58

0.31

4.82

0.23

7.71

<.01

1.05

	  

62	  

Table 5
Change in Total Score from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to
post-survey for Factor 3: Educator’s Connections with the Community

	  

Pre-Survey

Post-Survey

Source

M

SD

M

SD

t

p

d

Total Score

3.79

0.69

4.20

0.59

7.54

<.01

1.03

	  

63	  

Table 6
Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to post-survey for items
that showed the most growth within Factor 1: Educator’s Skills in Helping Students
Gain Knowledge

	  

Item

M

SD

t

p

d

Item 38

0.72

0.86

6.20

0.00

0.84

Item 41

0.67

0.70

7.00

0.00

0.95

Item 17

0.61

0.63

7.16

0.00

0.97

Item 16

0.52

0.78

4.94

0.00

0.67

Item 40

0.50

0.67

5.52

0.00

0.75

Item 42

0.50

0.57

6.40

0.00

0.87

Item 43

0.48

0.72

0.68

0.00

0.67

Item 28

0.46

0.57

0.62

0.00

0.81

Item 31

0.44

0.77

0.65

0.00

0.58

Item 32

0.43

0.88

0.67

0.00

0.48

Item 34

0.41

0.86

0.64

0.00

0.47

Item 13

0.37

0.73

0.57

0.00

0.50

Item 14

0.37

0.88

0.61

0.00

0.42

Item 33

0.35

0.68

0.54

0.00

0.52

Item 29

0.31

0.72

0.52

0.00

0.44

Item 27

0.30

0.57

0.45

0.00

0.52

Item 12

0.28

0.79

0.49

0.01

0.35

Item 35

0.13

0.80

0.35

0.24

0.16

	  

64	  

Table 7
Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to post-survey for items
that showed the most growth within Factor 2: Educator’s Beliefs and Attitudes about
Students and Teaching/Learning from largest to smallest significant difference
Item

M

SD

t

p

d

Item 8

0.43

0.63

4.95

0.00

0.67

Item 36

0.35

0.55

4.66

0.00

0.63

Item 25

0.31

0.64

3.62

0.00

0.49

Item 39

0.28

0.60

3.42

0.00

0.47

Item 1

0.26

0.56

3.42

0.00

0.47

Item 5

0.26

0.52

3.66

0.00

0.50

Item 24

0.26

0.52

3.66

0.00

0.50

Item 2

0.24

0.72

2.44

0.02

0.33

Item 18

0.24

0.64

2.78

0.01

0.37

Item 37

0.24

0.47

3.73

0.00

0.51

Item 3

0.22

0.54

3.04

0.00

0.41

Item 19

0.17

0.47

2.63

0.01

0.36

Item 22

0.15

0.41

2.63

0.01

0.36

Item 20

0.11

0.42

1.95

0.06

0.26

Item 23

0.11

0.42

1.95

0.06

0.26

Item 26

0.07

0.26

2.06

0.04

0.28

	  

	  

65	  

Table 8
Change from the Diversity Dispositions Index pre-survey to post-survey for items
that showed the most growth within Factor 3: Educator’s Connections with the
Community from largest to smallest significant difference
Item

M

SD

t

p

d

Item 30

0.56

0.72

5.69

0.00

0.77

Item 10

0.48

0.82

4.32

0.00

0.59

Item 7

0.48

0.82

4.32

0.00

0.59

Item 21

0.44

0.95

3.46

0.00

0.47

Item 9

0.41

0.98

3.05

0.00

0.42

Item 15

0.41

1.09

2.74

0.01

0.37

Item 11

0.39

0.94

3.04

0.00

0.41

Item 4

0.30

0.79

2.75

0.01

0.37

Item 6

0.24

0.61

2.89

0.01

0.39

	  

	  

66	  
Chapter 5
Discussion and Conclusions

Purpose of the Study
As the diversity of students in this country continues to increase, school librarian
preparation programs must evaluate and improve their programs to ensure they are
endorsing quality teachers who have the knowledge, skills, and dispositions to help all
students feel welcomed, safe, valued, and important members of the learning community.
It is believed that quality teachers possess the “appropriate dispositions to address
diversity issues at all levels of the educational landscape” (Talbert-Johnson, 2006, p.
149). As such, the purpose of this study was to explore whether culturally proficient
instruction had an impact on school librarian candidates’ diversity dispositions. These
dispositions include the belief that diversity enhances student knowledge, and the belief
in creating an atmosphere where all students feel free to openly exchange ideas so that
they can understand their connection to global issues.
Discussion and Implications: Theme of Respect
Beyond the data analysis and results discussed in the previous chapter, several
discoveries were made throughout this research study. First, a theme evolved around
candidates’ responses to the open-ended question that was added for Item 44: “What role
do you think dispositions have in teaching students from diverse backgrounds?” Of the
completed DDI surveys from candidates (N=54), there were 37 candidates who
responded to this question. Of those 37 responses the term “respect” emerged 13 times
for this item. This term, or variation of it, was found more consistently than any other
term for responses to this item.
	  

	  

67	  
Candidate #3 noted, “I think dispositions are vital. Open, positive, welcoming,

respectful dispositions will allow, enhance, and encourage students from diverse
backgrounds. Showing we don’t know everything and are willing to learn and want to
learn only makes teaching and relationships stronger.” Candidate #20 stated that,
“Attitude and perceptions are significant. Students know if they are respected as
individuals. They know if someone believes in them. And, they will work hard to
succeed when they know this.” Candidate #37 noted, “I have to be open minded and
respect students from other cultures and backgrounds that are different from mine. I have
to make sure I am teaching in a way they can understand.” And, Candidate #44 shared,
“It's about relationship building. A successful classroom community is built on students
that feel respected and valued. They feel part of the class.”
The implication of this finding is that, when moving beyond teaching theory and
into teaching practice, dispositions become the behavioral evidence of one’s beliefs. It is
not enough to simply have a well-intended belief. One must instead practice and commit
to that belief. If sincerely held, dispositions should lead to actions and patterns of
professional conduct.
Ladson-Billings (1995) asserts that in order for teachers to use culturally relevant
or culturally responsive pedagogy successfully, they most show respect for students, and
understand the need for students to operate in the dual worlds of their home community
and their school community. In the instance of this research study, if these dispositions
are sincerely held then the candidates in the Methods: School Library course are
committed to creating a culture of mutual respect among themselves and their students,
and are committed to nurturing and maintaining educational communities marked by that

	  

	  

68	  

respect for others. It is noted that it would be interesting to follow up with these
candidates after they have completed the school library program and had experiences
teaching in diverse school libraries and communities to ascertain if the behavioral
evidence of this belief is evident. This leads to the second point of discovery discussed
below.
Discussion and Implications: Growth Across the Program
A second discovery made during this research process was that candidates are at
merely a single point in their own journeys toward cultural proficiency, and have varied
points of reference as they embark on that journey. As indicated in Chapter 3, an openended question was added for Item 45: “ Which learning experiences in the Library
Education Program have had the greatest impact in preparing you to teach and develop
resources for diverse learners and why?” Results of this item ranged from “Discussion
among peers in classes and the authentic activities and assignments”, to “Meeting a
school librarian in a school environment because it offered (a) unique perspective on
developing resources for diverse learners”, to “I learned about databases and websites to
use with my students that present multiple perspectives and viewpoints”.
Several candidates in the Methods: School Library course were new to the Library
Education Program, and this course was an introduction into that program. Other
candidates in the course had completed Children’s Literature or Young Adult Literature
where they were exposed to resources and practices that support cultural, visual, and
digital literacies. There were candidates in the course who had completed Managing
Collections where they were exposed to the theories, concepts, and activities that support
developing and managing a quality collection of library resources designed to meet the

	  

	  

69	  

diverse curricular, personal, and professional needs of students. Additionally, there were
candidates in this course who had completed Research and Inquiry where they were
exposed to resources and practices that support effective models of inquiry, questioning,
and tools that promote and reinforce the information literacy of diverse learners. Each
candidate was at a different point in their own academic journey, their own cultural
proficiency journey, and their own life experiences that impacted those journeys.
The implication of this discovery is that the Library Education Program is not
preparing candidates to simply complete a single course, or demonstrate dispositional
growth within a single course. The Library Education Program is preparing candidates to
develop their knowledge, skills, and dispositions across the entire program so that they
are better prepared to “support the learning of all students and other members of the
learning community, including those with diverse learning styles, physical and
intellectual abilities and needs” (AASL, 2010). As one candidate noted on Item #45,
“Each class I have had keeps building on learning from previous classes. No one class or
activity stands out. It has all been very valuable”.
Discussion and Implications: Developing Awareness
A third point of discovery during this research was that a change in dispositions
for some candidates did not always indicate “growth”, but perhaps did indicate
“awareness”. For example, it was interesting to note that on the pre-survey, Candidate
#30 indicated a score of 5 (Strongly Agree) on the 5-point Likert Scale, for Item 15: “I
encourage my students to give back to their community”. Post-survey results indicated a
score of 2 (Disagree) on the 5-point Likert Scale for this item. Likewise, Candidate #34
indicated a score of 4 (Agree) on the 5-point Likert Scale for Item 35: “I create

	  

	  

70	  

opportunities for and encourage my students to share their knowledge and talents with
their peers.” Post-survey results indicated a score of 2 (Disagree) on the 5-point Likert
Scale for this item. Candidate #51 provided a score of 5 (Strongly Agree) on the 5-point
Likert Scale during the pre-survey for Item 21: “I plan instructional opportunities for my
students to interact with peers, family members, and the whole community.” Post-survey
results indicated a score of 2 (Disagree) on the 5-point Likert Scale for this item.
At first glance it may appear that these changes were negative and indicated a lack
of growth. However, it is quite possible that these changes in dispositional statements are
due to a deeper awareness and understanding of what it truly means to encourage students
to give back to the community, or to create opportunities and encourage students to share
their knowledge and talents with their peers, or to plan instructional opportunities that
allow for students to interact with peers, family members, and the whole community.
On Exit Tickets submitted at the end of the final class session, candidates shared
comments such as, “The Teaching Tolerance videos, for me, were very powerful.
Hearing those multiple perspectives and reflecting on how they effect my teaching and
school librarianship really influenced me.” Another candidate noted, “My eyes were
opened to what true culturally responsive teaching and respect for diverse learners looks
like. I thought I was doing some of these things but I realized I have a long way to go. I
guess that in itself is growth though.” A third candidate shared, “I need to go straight to
the source with questions. I now understand that cultural blindness is worse and I admit
that I was stuck. I have good intentions but they need to be for all my students. I’m
definitely more aware of what CRT (culturally responsive teaching) is and what it isn’t.”

	  

	  

71	  
The implication of this finding is that, regardless of high-espoused diversity

dispositions at the beginning of a course or program, cultural proficiency instruction can
still help candidates identify and support effective practices by providing the tools that
can be implemented in any setting rather than the techniques that are applicable to only
one setting. The awareness, values, and attitudes of respect for diversity demonstrated in
culturally responsive teaching practices simply cannot be imposed on candidates. Rather,
these realities must be experienced, developed, and owned. Therefore, a change in a
dispositional statement from “Strongly Agree” to “Disagree”, or from “Agree” to
“Strongly Disagree” may not truly indicate a move down the cultural proficiency
continuum. To a certain extent, the change may actually indicate growth as candidates
become more aware of their current behaviors and move away from cultural incapacity or
change mandated by tolerance, into cultural proficiency and change chosen for
transformation.
Conclusions
Culturally proficient instructors have a good command of their subject matter, use
a variety of teaching techniques, see each learner as an individual, and express in multiple
ways their interest in each learner succeeding. “The culturally proficient instructor
believes that when new learners experience difficulties, it is not the learners’ cultural
behaviors and patterns that are suspect, but rather, it is the instructor’s behavior that must
change and adapt to meet their needs for learning” (Nuri-Robins, et al., 2012, p. 71).
As this study has shown, cultural proficiency instruction can have an impact on
the diversity dispositions of school librarian candidates in a Library Education Program.
When afforded the opportunity to closely examine themselves, their own points of

	  

	  

72	  

references, and their own potential biases through an inside-out journey of teaching and
learning during which they explored their values and behaviors while evaluating their
policies and practices, candidates shifted their diversity dispositions, showing significant
overall growth. This cultural proficiency instruction allowed candidates to build
awareness in and confidence for their own culturally proficient teaching practices, which
could ultimately drive change into the system as a whole. Throughout this research study
it became evident that, as a result of cultural proficiency instruction, candidates in the
Methods: School Library course became more critically reflective of past or current
practices, allowing them to move up the cultural proficiency continuum.
Critically reflective educators are on the path to becoming culturally proficient
educators themselves, as they begin to understand how power shapes their teaching
practices, providing insights into the limitations and constraints that all educators
encounter as well as strategies for addressing these concerns. Therefore, it is believed
that culturally proficient instruction can impact the diversity dispositions of candidates as
they become more honest about their own reactions and presumptions regarding students’
cultural dimensions. It is also believed that the results of this study support the need for
cultural proficient pedagogical approaches within Library Education Programs, in which
candidates reflect on their own understandings, values, beliefs, and attitudes, to ensure
they are effectively prepared to work with a diverse student population.

	  

	  

73	  
References

Abilock, D. (2006). Educating students for cross-cultural proficiency. Knowledge
Quest, 35(2), p. 10-13.
Ambrose, R. (2004). Initiating change in prospective elementary school teachers’
orientations to mathematics teaching by building beliefs. Journal of Mathematics
Teacher Education, 7, p. 91-119.
American Library Association. (2003). ALA/AASL Standards for initial programs for
school library media specialist preparation.
American Library Association. (2009). Empowering learners: Guidelines for school
library media programs.
American Library Association. (2010). ALA/AASL standards for the initial preparation of
school librarians.
Anderson, M. (2011). Teacher and student perspectives on cultural proficiency.
Leadership, 40(5), p. 32-35.
Banks, J.A., & Banks, C.A. (1989). Multicultural education: Issues and perspectives.
Boston: Allyn and Bacon.
Burant T. J., Chubbuck S. M., & Whipp J. L. (2007). Reclaiming the moral in the
dispositions debate. Journal of Teacher Education, 58(5), 397-411.
Burnett, G. (1994). Varieties of multicultural education: An introduction. ERIC
Clearinghouse on Urban Education, (98), p. 1-6.
Center for Immigration Studies. (2011). Key research and analysis. Retrieved
March 12, 2014.

	  

	  

74	  

Coutinho, M.J., & Oswald, D.P. (2000). Disproportionate representation in special
education: A synthesis and recommendations. Journal of Child and Family
Statistics, 9(2), p. 135-152.
Creswell, J.W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research. Upper Saddlebrook, NJ: Pearson Education
Diez, M.E. (2007). Looking back and moving forward: Three tensions in the teacher
dispositions discourse. Journal Of Teacher Education, 58(5), p. 388-396.
Forum on Child and Family Statistics. (2013). Welcome to America’s children: Key
national indicators of well-being. Retrieved February 20, 2014
Garmon, M.A. (2004). Changing preservice teachers’ attitudes beliefs about diversity:
What are the critical factors? Journal of Teacher Education, 55(3), p. 201-213.
Gravetter, F.J., & Wallnau, L.B. (2012). Statistics for the behavioral sciences. Boston,
MA: Cengage Learning.
Hyun, E. (1998). Exploring developmentally and culturally appropriate practice
(DCAP) through a nationwide collaborate teacher preparation project.
Proceedings from NAEYC Annual Conference: Toronto.
Interstate Teacher Assessment and Support Consortium. (2013). InTASC model core
teaching standards and learning progressions for teachers 1.0. Retrieved
March 1, 2014.
Johnston, P., Almerico, G.M., Henriott, D., & Shapiro, M. (2011). Descriptions of
dispositions for assessment in pre-service teacher education field experiences.
Education, 32(2), p. 391-401.

	  

	  

75	  

Kratt, B., & Pentland, C. (2013). Getting the conversation started: School library
candidates speak out about the importance of culturally responsive teaching.
Library Media Connection, 32(1), 40-41.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995). But that’s just good teaching: The case for culturally relevant
pedagogy. Theory Into Practice, 34(3), 159-165.
Levine-Rasky, C. (2001). Identifying the prospective multicultural educator: Three
signposts, three portraits. The Urban Review, 33(4), p. 291-319.
Mestre, L. (2009). Culturally responsive instruction for teacher-librarians. Teacher
Librarian, 36(3), 8-12.
Morales, R. (2000). Effects of teacher preparation experiences and students’
perceptions related to developmentally and culturally appropriate
practices. Action in Teacher Education, 22(2), 67-75.
Mueller, M., & Hinden, A. (2011). An analysis of the factors that influence preservice
elementary teachers’ developing dispositions about teaching all children. Issues in
Teacher Education, 20(1), 17-34.
National Center for Educational Statistics. (2014). Projections of education statistics to
2022. Retrieved August 24, 2014.
National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education. (2011). NCATE Unit
Standards. Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Notar, C., Riley, G., & Taylor, P. (2009). Dispositions: Ability and assessment.
International Journal of Education, 1, p. 2-13.
Nuri-Robins, K.J., Lindsey, D.B., Lindsey, R.B., & Terrell, R.D. (2012). Culturally
proficient instruction: A guide for people who teach. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin
Press.
	  

	  

76	  

Peterson, K.M., Cross, L.F., Johnson, E. J., & Howell, G.L. (2000). Diversity
education for preservice teachers: Strategies and attitude outcomes. Action in
Teacher Education, 22(2), 33-38.
Ryan, M., Carrington, S., Selva, G., & Healy, A. (2009). Taking a “reality” check:
Expanding pre-service teachers’ views on pedagogy and diversity. Asia-Pacific
Journal of Teacher Education, 37(2), 155-173.
Schulte, L., Edick, N., Edwards, S., & Mackiel, D. (2004). The development and
validation of the teacher dispositions index. Essays in Education, 12.
Schulte, L., Edick, N., & Edwards, S. (2008). The development and validation of
the diversity dispositions index. AASA Journal of Scholarship and Practice,
58(5), 11-19.
Schussler, D.L, Stooksberry, L.M., & Bercaw, L.A. (2010). Understanding teacher
candidate dispositions: Reflecting to build self-awareness. Journal of Teacher
Education, 61(4), p. 350-363.
Surface, J.L., Smith, P.J., Keiser, K.A., & Hayes, K.L. (2012). Leadership dispositions
and skills for ethically diverse schools. Educational Administration and
Supervision. Paper 16, p. 117-128.
Talbert-Johnson, C. (2006). Preparing highly qualified teacher candidates for urban
schools: The importance of dispositions. Education and Urban Society, 39(1),
147-160.
Taylor, R.L., & Wasicsko, M.M. (2000). The dispositions to teach. Retrieved
June 12, 2014.

	  

	  

77	  

Tobias, R., Fan, B.B., & Bang, H.G. (2008). Measuring the developing dispositions of
preservice and beginning teachers. Proceedings from Annual Report of the
American Educational Research Association: New York.
United States Census Bureau. (2007). Minority population tops 100 million. Retrieved
February 20, 2014
United States Department of Education. (2004). IDEA - Individuals with disabilities act.
Retrieved June 23, 2014.
United States Department of Education. (2009). New data from the U.S. Department of
Education 2009-2010 civil rights data collection show continuing disparities in
educational opportunities and resources. Retrieved February 20, 2014.
University of Nebraska Omaha. (2007). College of education conceptual framework.
Retrieved January 17, 2014.
Villegas, A.M. (2007). Dispositions in teacher education: A look at social justice.
Journal of Teacher Education, 58(5), p. 369-380.

	  

	  

78	  
Appendices

Appendix A: IRB Letter of Approval

	  

	  

79	  

Appendix B: Diversity Dispositions Index Survey

Diversity Dispositions Index Survey
Please mark your level of agreement with each of the statements listed below using
the following response scale:
1	  =	  Strongly	  Disagree	  
2	  =	  Disagree	  
3	  =	  Neutral	  
4	  =	  Agree	  
5	  =	  Strongly	  Agree	  
	  

1.

I continually search for new knowledge within my content area.

1

2

3

4

5

2.

I can express myself creatively as a teacher.

1

2

3

4

5

3.

I learn from my students.

1

2

3

4

5

4.

I see myself as a part of the community in my role as a teacher.

1

2

3

4

5

5.

I continue to look for new information to share with my students.

1

2

3

4

5

6.

I am involved in the community where I teach.

1

2

3

4

5

7.

It is important that I attend activities in my students’ neighborhoods.

1

2

3

4

5

8.

I collaborate with others in order to learn and grow.

1

2

3

4

5

9.

I collaborate on providing community service opportunities for my
students.

1

2

3

4

5

10. I work to establish positive school-community relationships.

1

2

3

4

5

11. I welcome community members into my classes to share their skills.

1

2

3

4

5

12. I make an effort to build positive relationships with my students’
parents/guardians.

1

2

3

4

5

	  

	  

80	  

13. Many of my lessons require my students to think critically.

1

2

3

4

5

14. I contact my students’ parents/guardians about positive growth.

1

2

3

4

5

15. I encourage my students to give back to their community.

1

2

3

4

5

16. Students enter my class with excitement about what the day
will bring.

1

2

3

4

5

17. I deliver instruction using an interactive process that enhance
further discovery.

1

2

3

4

5

18. I am responsible for creating an atmosphere where all students
feel free to openly exchange ideas, thoughts, and opinions.

1

2

3

4

5

19. I am passionate about my own learning.

1

2

3

4

5

20. I believe that all students can learn.

1

2

3

4

5

21. I plan instructional opportunities for my students to interact with
peers, family members, and the whole community.

1

2

3

4

5

22. I am enthusiastic about sharing knowledge with my students.

1

2

3

4

5

23. I believe that all students can succeed.

1

2

3

4

5

24. I demonstrate enthusiasm for the content I teach.

1

2

3

4

5

25. I am reflective about how my actions affect student achievement.

1

2

3

4

5

26. I believe that students learn in a variety of ways.

1

2

3

4

5

27. I use the teaching “moment” to enhance my students’
understanding of today’s world.

1

2

3

4

5

28. I determine where my students are and help them reach
their potential.

1

2

3

4

5

29. I encourage my students to take responsibility for their own
and their peers’ learning.

1

2

3

4

5

30. I help my students make connections in their community.

1

2

3

4

5

31. I teach my students the skills to gain knowledge on their own.

1

2

3

4

5

	  

	  

81	  

32. I provide opportunities and structure for my students to work
cooperatively.

1

2

3

4

5

33. I help students understand their connection to global issues.

1

2

3

4

5

34. I continue to reteach my students until they have an understanding
of the content.

1

2

3

4

5

35. I create opportunities for and encourage my students to share their
knowledge and talents with their peers.

1

2

3

4

5

36. I look for new ways to teach difficult material.

1

2

3

4

5

37. I believe that diversity enhances student knowledge.

1

2

3

4

5

38. I possess a large repertoire of teaching strategies to help students
access their prior knowledge.

1

2

3

4

5

39. I believe in setting high standards for all students.

1

2

3

4

5

40. I create opportunities for my students to express their knowledge
in a variety of ways.

1

2

3

4

5

41. I am successful at creating meaningful relationships between
knowledge and new information.

1

2

3

4

5

42. I work to develop my students’ critical thinking skills.

1

2

3

4

5

43. I differentiate expectations for individual students.

1

2

3

4

5

44. What role do you think dispositions have in teaching students from diverse backgrounds?

45. Which learning experiences in the Library Education Program have had the greatest impact in
preparing you to teach and develop resources for diverse learners and why?

	  

	  
	  

	   	  

82	  

DDI	  PRE-­‐SURVEY	  DEMOGRAPHIC	  INFORMATION:	  	  
	  
Please	  respond	  to	  the	  following	  items.	  
	  
1. Gender	  (please	  circle	  your	  response)	  
	  
Male	   	  
Female	  
2. Age	   __________	  
3. Ethnicity	  (please	  circle	  your	  response)	  
a. Caucasian	  
b. African	  American	  
c. Asian/Asian	  American	  
d. Hispanic	  
e. Native	  American	  
f. Other	  	  
4. Courses	  you	  have	  completed	  for	  your	  School	  Library	  endorsement	  (please	  
circle	  your	  response)	  
a. Children’s	  Literature	  
b. Young	  Adult	  Literature	  
c. Research	  and	  Inquiry	  (formerly	  “Reference	  Resources	  and	  Services”)	  
d. Managing	  Collections	  
e. Teaching	  and	  Learning	  in	  Digital	  Environments	  
f. Leadership	  and	  Management	  
g. Organization	  of	  Information	  (formerly	  “Cataloging	  and	  Classification”)	  

	  
	  
	  
	  
	  
	  

	  

	  

	  

83	  

Appendix	  C:	  Diversity	  Dispositions	  Index	  Factor	  Domains	  

	  
Item

Factor 1 Items – Educators’ Skills in Helping Students Gain Knowledge

31

1. I teach my students the skills to gain knowledge on their own.

42

2. I work to develop my students’ critical thinking skills.

41

3. I am successful at creating meaningful relationships between knowledge and new
information.

16

4. Students enter my class with excitement about what the day will bring.

27

5. I use the teaching “moment” to enhance my students’ understanding of today’s
world.

32

6. I provide opportunities and structure for my students to work cooperatively.

38

7. I possess a large repertoire of teaching strategies to help students access their prior
knowledge.

40

8. I create opportunities for my students to express their knowledge in a variety of
ways.

35

9. I create opportunities for and encourage my students to share their knowledge and
talents with their peers.

43

10. I differentiate expectations for individual students.

29

11. I encourage my students to take responsibility for their own and their peers’
learning.

12

12. I make an effort to build positive relationships with my students’
parents/guardians.

17

13. I deliver instruction using an interactive process that enhances further discovery.

13

14. Many of my lessons require my students to think critically.

28

15. I determine where my students are and help them reach their potential.

33

16. I help students understand their connection to global issues.

	  

	  

84	  

34

17. I continue to reteach my students until they have an understanding of the content.

14

18. I contact my students’ parents/guardians about positive growth.

Item

Factor 2 Items – Educators’ Beliefs and Attitudes about Students and
Teaching/Learning

23

1. I believe that all students can succeed.

20

2. I believe that all students can learn.

26

3. I believe that students learn in a variety of ways.

24

4. I demonstrate enthusiasm for the content I teach.

36

5. I look for new ways to teach difficult material.

22

6. I am enthusiastic about sharing knowledge with my students.

8

7. I collaborate with others in order to learn and grow.

25

8. I am reflective about how my actions affect student achievement.

2

9. I can express myself creatively as a teacher.

5

10. I continue to look for new information to share with my students.

3

11. I learn from my students.

1

12. I continually search for new knowledge within my content area.

18

13. I am responsible for creating an atmosphere where all students feel free to openly
exchange ideas, thoughts, and opinions.

39

14. I believe in setting high standards for all students.

19

15. I am passionate about my own learning.

37

16. I believe that diversity enhances student knowledge.

Item

Factor 3 Items – Educators’ Connections with the Community

9

1. I collaborate on providing community service opportunities for my students.

21

2. I plan instructional opportunities for my students to interact with peers, family
members, and the whole community.

30

3. I help my students make connections in their community.

15

4. I encourage my students to give back to their community.

	  

	  

85	  

6

5. I am involved in the community where I teach.

7

6. It is important that I attend activities in my students’ neighborhoods.

4

7. I see myself as a part of the community in my role as a teacher.

11

8. I welcome community members into my classes to share their skills.

10

9. I work to establish positive school-community relationships.

	  

