i

AN INVESTIGATION OF TOOL MEDIATION
IN THE RESEARCH ACTIVITY OF
EIGHTH-GRADE STUDENTS

A Dissertation
Submitted to
the Temple University Graduate Board

In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY

by
Nancy L. Henry
May 2016

Examining Committee Members:
Michael W. Smith, Advisory Chair, Teaching and Learning
Wanda Brooks, Teaching and Learning
Catherine C. Schifter, Psychological Studies in Education
Mary Kay Biagini, External Member, University of Pittsburgh

ProQuest Number: 10111334

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10111334
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ii

©
Copyright
2016
by

Nancy L. Henry
All Rights Reserved

iii

ABSTRACT
Technology and a variety of resources play an important role in students’ educational
lives. Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of tool mediation suggests that cultural tools, such as
computer software influence individuals’ thinking and action. However, it is not
completely understood how technology and other resources influence student action.
Middle school students are a particularly an understudied population. This qualitative
study examined how material and psychological tools, including the presentational
software tools PowerPoint and Prezi mediate middle school students’ actions when
conducting research for two Earth Science research projects. Six eighth-grade students
recorded computer screencasts and dialogue while conducting their research. I collected
data from transcripts of computer screencasts, student interviews, and artifacts. Prior to
coding, I established four major themes with 20 sub-categories. The four themes were
content knowledge, previous tool use, resource use, and tool use. I segmented and coded
the transcripts to reflect which different tools mediated student action. An analysis of the
data revealed that library resources and the special features of PowerPoint and Prezi
programs did not influence actions. Instead, I discovered that the assignment
requirements and research topic content were the primary mediators of actions and
behavior. However, despite the overall influence of the assignment requirements and
topic content, each student employed different tools to complete each assignment. The
results suggest that a variety of resources should be available to meet the individualistic
tool use of students. The results also suggest that educators design less structured
assignments that promote and encourage student centered learning and tool use.
Keywords: school libraries, technology, tool mediation, Vygotsky

iv

I dedicate this work
to my wonderful husband, Bill,
whose patience, devotion, and support was
above and beyond the call of duty.
In memory of my parents,
Jim and Linn Comer.

v

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Obtaining a doctorate is not a singular journey of one individual, but rather a
collaborative journey of many. To Debbie Kachel, Cindy Keller, and Debbie Emberger, I
am grateful for your comforting support, encouragement, and guidance, but most
importantly your friendship. To my Temple “cohort” of Sharon Fransen and Mary Lou
Herron, we have weathered and grown through our coursework and time together.
Having both of you by my side has made the journey more rewarding. I could not have
accomplished anything without each one of you.
My journey at Temple University has been challenging as well as rewarding. I
have had experiences and opportunities that I never dreamed were possible. I attribute
this to the remarkable and talented faculty. To Dr. Wanda Brooks and Dr. Catherine
Schifter, I thank you for your wonderful classes, constructive ideas for my research, and
support throughout my time at Temple. To Dr. Mary Kay Biagini from the University of
Pittsburgh, I thank you for your guidance and contributions to my work.
Finally, I would especially like to thank my advisor, Dr. Michael W. Smith for his
patience, guidance, and understanding. I read somewhere that Michael wanted to be that
little voice that whispers suggestions and ideas in his students’ ear to make them
reconsider and think about a particular perspective. He accomplished that goal very well.
Michael’s constructive suggestions and encouragement pushed me beyond what I thought
I was capable of doing. I also want to thank Michael for helping me to see “the forest for
the trees” when it came to my writing. A simple thank you does not convey my deep
gratitude and appreciation for all that he has done. I truly sit at the feet of the giants.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ABSTRACT……………………………………………………………………………...iii
DEDICATION……………………………………………….…...………………………iv
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS…………………………….…………………….…………...v
LIST OF TABLES…………………………………………………………………...…...ix
LIST OF FIGURES………………………………………………………………...……..x

CHAPTER
1. INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………….…………1
2. REVIEW OF LITERATURE………………………………………………………..13
General Tool Mediation………………………………………………………….13
Tool Mediation in School Libraries……………………………………………...31
Tool Mediation and Presentation Tools………………………………………….47
Tool Mediation with PowerPoint and Prezi Presentations………………………54
3. METHODOLOGY…………………………………………………………………..62
Rationale for a Qualitative Study……………………………….………………..63
Research Site…………………………………………………….……….64
Participants and Sampling…………………….………………………….65
Instructional Context…………………………………….……………….66
Earth Science Assignment Descriptions…………………………………68
Informants………………………………………………………………..69
Data Sources…………………………………………………………………......70
Semi-structured interviews………………………………………………70
Stimulated recall interviews……………………………………………...71
Field notes of observations……………………………………………....72
Artifacts…………………………………….…………………………….75
Teacher interviews……………………………………………………….75
Collection Techniques……………….…………………………………………...76
Data Analysis…………………………………………………………………….77

vii

Stimulated Recall Interviews and Computer Screencasts………………………..78
Content Knowledge………………….…………………………………...78
Previous Tool Use…………………………………….………………….79
Resource Use……………………….…………………………………….79
Tool Use…………………………….……………………………………80
Field Notes of Observations……………………………………………………..81
Computer Moves…………………………………………………………81
Interactions……………………………………………………………….81
Physical Moves…………………………………………………………..82
Resource Use…………………………………………………………….82
Artifacts…………………………………………………………………………..82
Content Knowledge……………………………………………………...82
Resource Use…………………………………………………………….83
Tool Use………………………………………………………………….83
Semi-structured Teacher Interviews……………………………………………..84
Trustworthiness…………………………………………………………………..85
Role of Researcher……………………………………………………………….86
Limitations……………………………………………………………….………87
4. RESULTS…………………………………………………………………………..88
Charlie……………………………………………………………………...…….88
Assignment 1……………………………………………………..……...89
Assignment 2…………………………………………………………….96
Mary……………………………………………………………..……………...105
Assignment 1…………………………...……………………………....105
Jerry……………………………………………………………………………..114
Assignment 1……………………………………………………….......114
Assignment 2…………………………………………...………………122
Lucy……………………………………………………...……………………..131
Assignment 1……………………………………………………….......132
Assignment 2…………………………………………...………………140
Hector…………………………………………………...……………………..145
Assignment 1……………………………………………………….......145
Assignment 2…………………………………………...………………153
April……………………………………………………...……………………..161
Assignment 1……………………………………………………….......162
Assignment 2…………………………………………...………………170
Differences Across Students……………….……………………………….......180
Patterns Across Both Assignments……………………..………………………184
Assignment Requirements...……………….……………………….......184
Topic/visual Details……………...……………………..………………188

viii

Notetaking/research………….…………….……………………….......190
Life Experiences/interests…………………..…………..………………192
5. DISCUSSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS………………………………...…………196
Findings Summary…………………………………………………………...…196
Implications for Research……………………………..……………………..…199
Study Positives…………...……………….……………………….........199
Study Changes…………..………...……………………..…………..…201
Future Studies…………...…….…………….…………………….........204
Implications for Practice………………………………..………………………205
Implications when working with Teachers….…………….………........205
Implications for working with Preservice Teachers…..……..….…...…208
REFERENCES CITED………………………………………………………………....211
APPENDICES
A. CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITTERS ASSIGNMENT AND GRADING RUBRIC…216
B. SCIENCE FINAL ASSIGNMENT AND GRADING RUBRIC……………...…...219
C. STUDENT TECHNOLOGY SURVEY…………………………………...……….222
D. SUGGESTED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS……………………..………………....223
E. SUGGESTED STUDENT PSEUDONYMS……………………………………….224
F. PRESEARCH TOPIC WORKSHEET…………………………………..…...…….225

ix

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Charlie’s Assignment 1 Content Moves…….……..………………………...…89
Table 2: Charlie’s Assignment 2 Content Moves……….....……………………….....…97
Table 3: Mary’s Assignment 1 Content Moves ..………..…………...……………...…106
Table 4: Jerry’s Assignment 1 Content Moves ………..……………….…….……...…115
Table 5: Jerry’s Assignment 2 Content Moves………..…………..………….……...…123
Table 6: Lucy’s Assignment 1 Content Moves ……………………………………...…132
Table 7: Lucy’s Assignment 2 Content Moves………..………………………...…...…140
Table 8: Hector’s Assignment 1 Content Moves ………………..…………...……...…146
Table 9: Hector’s Assignment 2 Content Moves ………………..……...…………...…154
Table 10: April’s Assignment 1 Content Moves …………….……………………...…162
Table 11: April’s Assignment 2 Content Moves ………………………….………...…170
Table 12: Proportion of Moves by Category………………………………………...…179

x

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1: Data Gathering and Work Timeline…………………………………………...68

1

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
As a middle school librarian, I have witnessed a significant change in the types of
resources located in a school library. When I first became a school librarian, everything
available in a school library was in print. Students checked out books by signing their
names and homerooms on a card in the book’s back cover. The state of the art in
technology was an electric typewriter I used to type the cards for the card catalog. As
time progressed, I began to see a slow evolution in types of resources and delivery
formats. The first breakthrough in technology for libraries was a statewide catalog of
library resources called ACCESS PA. The students accessed the statewide catalog on
eight CD-ROMS in a CD tower. The students were excited to use the product, and the
thought of borrowing books from across the state was overwhelming. It was during this
time I began thinking: how do new resources and delivery methods influence student
learning? I could see that students were interested in and willing to use new resources.
They learned the procedures for doing so and became self-sufficient in locating titles of
interest but did those resources influence students’ critical thinking and learning?
The mission of any school library is to engage and teach students to become
critical thinkers and effective users of information. This is the cornerstone of a
productive member of today’s global community (American Association of School
Librarians [AASL], 2007). Undergraduate and/or graduate library science coursework
and training addresses three areas of responsibility for a school librarian: learning and
teaching, information access, and program administration (AASL, 1998). Library
training focuses developing is on teaching, learning, and our role as teacher-librarians

2

who instruct students on information literacy skills or traditional library skills. Kuhlthau
(2004) encourages librarians to design in collaboration with a content teacher studentcentered, hands-on learning experiences where students apply information literacy skills
in a real-life application. During my undergraduate and graduate coursework, my college
instructors glossed over educational theorists and theories. As teachers and I planned
collaborative units, the teachers used terms such as scaffolding and social constructivism.
Though I had not encountered these terms in my coursework, I knew enough from my
own professional reading their definitions and use. The Russian sociocultural theorist,
Lev S. Vygotsky appeared in many library professional publications in connection with
social constructivism and student-centered learning. However, the journal article authors
did not explain how his theoretical foundation influenced teaching strategies used in the
classroom and library. There was a definite gap in my knowledge and experiences. I
needed to learn more about educational theories and concluded it had to be outside the
library science field.
Shortly after I made the decision to further my education, I began doctoral
coursework at Temple University. Vygotsky appeared very early in my class readings.
As I explored his theory in-depth, it was an eye opening experience. I witnessed in my
students the behaviors and actions that Vygotsky (1987) outlines in his research. For
example, Vygotsky (1987) explains that oral language is the ultimate tool that mediates
social activity and thinking, or as he says, “Speech is a means of social interaction,
means of expression and understanding” (p. 48). Mediation, as Vygotsky defines it, is
how culturally developed tools such as language in this example, acts as an influencing
agent on an individual’s actions. With that idea in mind, I observed students discussing

3

assignment requirements. I overheard students rereading parts of the requirements to
each other, asking each other questions, clarifying, and connecting parts of the
assignment to prior projects and learning experiences. I just did not quite know what I
was observing, but it was nonetheless exciting. I knew I was moving in the right
direction. Though I did explore other theorists, I kept returning to Vygotsky’s work. His
work connected well with library research and resource use. Vygotsky’s section on tool
mediation on human learning stood out repeatedly.
I had the opportunity to practice what I was learning in my doctoral coursework in
two mini-research apprenticeships. I discovered that how students used library resources
has the capability of promoting critical thinking and learning. I still did not know exactly
how the resources mediated the students’ learning and I believed this warranted more
study. My interests, coursework, and apprenticeships convinced me that Vygotsky’s
theory of tool mediation was my theoretical foundation for my future research studies. I
felt this would provide the better understandings I needed to help my students in the
future.
The purpose of my qualitative study is to explore how the presentational software
programs Prezi and PowerPoint mediate middle school students’ actions during Earth
Science class. Wertsch (1985), a pioneering neo-Vygotskian justifies this focus when he
explains that Vygotsky’s most significant contribution to psychology is his exploration of
tool mediation and its influence on human development. Wertsch (1985) explains,
“Vygotsky’s account of social interaction and mental processes is heavily dependent on
the forms of mediation (such as language) involved” (p. 15). I needed to understand
middle school students’ tool use in order to design learning experiences that encourage

4

critical thinking, learning, and effective use of information. By using a neo-Vygotskian
lens in this qualitative study, I explored tool mediation and middle school students’
thinking by using student interviews, observations, and analysis of student work.
Vygotsky and his colleagues initiated a new approach to studying how human
mental growth occurs. Their goal was to understand how new learning develops within
the parameters of their theoretical framework. Vygotsky’s (1987) theoretical framework
has three strands: genetic development, social impact on human development, and tool
mediation. Vygotsky was concerned about the societal forms, such as oral language that
had the most impact on human thought. Wertsch (1985) argues that tool mediation is the
most important contribution of the three strands. Wertsch believes that tool mediation
has the ability to stand alone when it comes to influencing cognitive development. On
the other hand, the Vygotsky’s other two strands need the impact of tool mediation for a
complete understanding of their influence on human development. Wertsch notes that
tool mediation was a continual theme throughout Vygotsky’s writings. However,
Wertsch also states that Vygotsky’s theoretical idea of tool mediation changed from
cultural sign use without meaning to a meaningful and communicative role in the
development of human thinking. Ultimately, as Wertsch outlines, the meaningful sign
became the center of Vygotsky’s tool mediation theory. In 1933, Vygotsky stated, “The
central fact about our psychology is the fact of mediation” (as cited in Wertsch, 1985, p.
15).
Vygotsky (1987) surmises that the only way the human thought process is
understood is when the tools, symbols, and signs used in thinking are clearly defined and
comprehended. He argues that tools, symbols, and signs are the agents that aim and

5

guide an individual towards higher cognitive development. As cited by Wertsch (1985),
Vygotsky explains, “A tool…serves as a conductor of human influence on the object of
their activity” (p. 78). Vygotsky continues by stating that human activity needs an
intermediary to achieve the goals that normally would not happen. Tools and signs serve
as that intermediary, and they are products of past and present culture not of nature.
Signs and symbols encourage individuals to think, evaluate the sign’s meaning, and then
take the appropriate action. For example, hallway directional signs mediate middle
school students’ thinking to select the correct hallway to get to their next class. The
mediational process is conditional and is dependent on how individuals invest meaning
into the signs and symbols. Signs and symbols are the representation that evokes a
unique framework for communication and interaction that guides human development.
One example of a symbolic tool used in a school library is the physical signage
throughout the facility that identifies areas of the collection and directs students to the
location that they are seeking.
Vygotsky (1987) advocates that human thought is associated with tool use. He
believes that signs, tools, and symbols in a specific situation or unique context mediate
human contact with society. The signs, tools, and symbols act as conductors between
society and human thinking. According to Wertsch (1985), Vygotsky envisioned tools as
the man-made symbols and signs that encourage individuals to think and act. They are
the links between societal processes and an individual’s mental process. Vygotsky cites
several examples of tools in his time: language and speech, writing methods, works of art
and literature, mathematical formulas, and mnemonic devices. Middle school students
rely on memory for the everyday operating procedures of a school library such as the

6

research pass process. For instance, students know when they have an assignment that
requires the use of library resources; they must get a research pass. The assignment
requirements act as a mediator on the students’ actions by encouraging them to obtain a
research pass. The school library webpage is another example of a tool, with its
electronic resource hyperlinks that are available for middle school students when seeking
information for personal reasons or curriculum related assignments. The hyperlinks that
are available on the library homepage serve as bridges to additional signs that mediate
students’ thinking. For example, a database such as SIRS Discoverer provides search
fields and icons that promote thinking and decision making by the students as they search
for information.
Signs, symbols, and tools also act as a connector between lower and higher
thinking. Vygotsky (1987) defines lower or natural thinking as those processes that are
part of an individual’s ontogenetic growth and maturation. Examples of natural thinking
processes according to Vygotsky, include memory, perception, or attention. However,
the environment controls and prompts the natural thinking processes. Society transforms
natural thinking processes to higher or cultural thinking processes by using culturally
accepted signs and symbols to mediate action and thought. Instead of the environment
stimulating action, higher mental processes are self-controlled by the individual.
Vygotsky emphasizes that tools promote a complete change in an individual’s thinking.
He argues that tool mediation is the move from natural memory use to active control by
the individuals of their thoughts and actions. Vygotsky (1987) explains this as, “The
basic difference between these two qualitatively different kinds of intellectual activity
consists in the transition from unmediated intellectual processes to operations that are

7

mediated by signs” (p. 133). He concludes that the bridging of an individual’s thoughts
and society by tools is the beginning of human behavior. Smagorinsky (2011) points out
that the mediation process is dependent on how individuals apply meaning to the context
in which the tools are used. For example, students are required to use specifically colorcoded and designed graphic organizers for recording their resources prior to creating a
works consulted page. The graphic organizers require a deliberate response from the
student to select the correct color and format depending on the library resource they used.
The color-coded graphic organizers act as a mediational means between the library
resource used and the proper format for the works consulted citations. The students use
the completed cards to select and create the correct citation formats using a software
program titled NoodleTools.
However, not all tools become mediating agents of human actions. An example
of a tool that has not mediated student thinking is the spine label prefix for paperback
books. Middle school students first experienced resource spine labels in an elementary
school library. Labels such as E FIC for easy fiction, QN for Quick Nonfiction are
common labels that students easily use when locating books in an elementary library. At
the middle school level, a classification of PB FIC for paperback fiction titles caused
confusion among the students. Middle school students, not familiar with this particular
label, struggled to locate book titles in the new school library environment. The PB
prefix had the capacity to mediate students’ actions and thinking, but it did not.
Tools assume a collective use and symbolic representation. Smagorinsky (2011)
clarifies that Vygotsky’s tools were not the typical devices used to construct or repair but
rather the means by which individuals act and respond. Material tools have very little

8

impact on mental thought. Their purpose is to direct human action. However, they do
put new conditions on human mental functions. Tools located in a school library that
have a symbolic representation to middle school students, direct their actions, and
ultimately shape their thinking include electronic databases, due date cards, and the
online public access catalog (OPAC). OPAC provides access to several tools that
mediate student thinking and learning. Besides access to the online catalog, the program
also provides access to electronic databases, websites, and specialized reading lists for
extra-curricular reading programs. An example of a specialized reading list of historical
fiction titles for seventh grade World History located on the OPAC is Joust Read.
Students use the specialized list of acceptable titles as a material tool to evaluate, select,
and then locate a title of interest.
The types of tools available have undoubtedly expanded since Vygotsky’s time.
The types range from something as simple as the spoken the word, an individual’s
cultural and personal understandings, to physical tools such as a calculator. A few
examples of the new tools available are electronic resources such as the World Wide
Web, social networking, databases, e-books, computer icons, gaming software, television
programs, and graphic novels. Today’s middle school students have access to a wide
variety of tools in a school library that can mediate their thinking and behavior. An
example of one of the more common tools located in a school library is the Dewey
Decimal Classification (DDC) system. The DDC system organizes and arranges the
variety of library resources available for middle school students. Students use the DDC
to locate and access resources in the library collection. The DDC reflects symbolic
organization but also physically direct students to the intended titles. The DCC opens the

9

door to mediating human thought and behavior by acting as a stimulant. Students no
longer rely on memory to locate resources in a library. Instead, they use the OPAC and
the DDC system to promote thinking in order to locate, evaluate, and access resources to
meet their individual information needs.
Vygotsky’s (1987) intent is to understand how tool mediation influences cognitive
development. Middle school students are at the age during which Vygotsky believes
concept development begins in earnest. Vygotsky (1998) argues, “The fact that the
period of sexual maturation is a period of a powerful rise of intellectual development and
that during this period, thinking moves to the forefront for the first time” (p. 31).
Research assignments or activities allow students to communicate, collaborate, and
practice using tools such as reference, nonfiction, electronic, and human resources to
mediate their thinking and learning. Educators can observe and document how middle
school students’ tool use mediates their thinking and learning in the instructional
environment that Vygotsky suggests. Writing assignments and research activities also
allow educators to capture evidence of what tools middle school students used. For
example, a writing assignment for an American History class requires that students
produce a personal diary or journal of a fictional character that reflects the people, events,
and emotions of the American Revolution era. Their own creativity as well as the
assignment requirements, library resources, class notes, and class discussions all mediate
the students’ writing and thinking. Simultaneously, educators can discover what tools
and signs that middle school students do not use. The knowledge gained when studying
middle school students’ presentational software tool use through the lens of Vygotsky’s
theory provides a look at cognitive growth in a socially collaborative, situated learning

10

environment. As Vygotsky advised, educators should determine what tools middle
school students use or do not use effectively to plan future instructional activities.
My teaching experiences over the years with middle school students have been
wide and varied. The increase in information, electronic delivery, and communication
devices has added to that variety. Students have to be critical thinkers and effective users
of information to be successful in today’s global community. Historically, the
instructional delivery of information literacy skills and resource use to students has
focused on a collaborative, hands-on learning environment has been as the mission of a
school librarian. As noted by Vygotsky, student educational experiences occur in
specific social arenas using acceptable resources. Teachers and I need to address all
aspects of middle school students’ cultural and social experiences in tandem with tool use
in order to make them successful in all their endeavors. A school library provides an
ideal setting for such diverse learning experiences to occur. In a school library, students
have access to print and electronic resources to meet their informational needs.
As the types of available resources have changed and increased, I have noticed
that some students use these resources better than other students do. Many students
select and use resources that meet their informational needs no matter the format.
However, some students struggle when faced with a variety of resources. How do
resources mediate students’ learning and critical thinking, if at all? Students come to
school with many learning experiences and tool use that provide a foundation for teachers
and me to build upon. Their outside tool acquisition mediates their tool use experiences
in the classroom and school library. However, it is unclear exactly what are those
experiences are and how can we as educators can use them effectively in our instructional

11

delivery. Keeping that in mind, I wanted to have a better grasp on what types of tools
middle school students use or do not use in the course of the educational experiences that
occur in the school library. In conjunction, an additional question came to mind of what
specific tools promote critical thinking and learning in students. If I have a better
understanding of the types of tools that mediate critical thinking and play a part in my
students’ learning, I could provide more effective instructional delivery and learning
experiences.
As I was preparing this study, a good friend asked me what the purpose of the
study was and how was it going to help the educational world, particularly school
libraries. My initial thought was my own professional interest on the topic of tool
mediation, but upon further review, there was more than just that. My qualitative study
has the opportunity to bring a new perspective to the field in regarding the extent to
which tools mediate critical thinking and promote learning in a school library. Most
educators would agree that growth occurs but exactly how it occurs is the question. If
there were a better understanding of this question, teachers and librarians could use this
information to their advantage. Technology has an important role in classrooms and
libraries and it will most likely continue to do so in the future. It stands to reason that the
exploration of how electronic tools such as Prezi or PowerPoint impact student learning
will only add to the discussion on effective teaching strategies and activities.
Research studies on tool mediation on learning have examined all types of tools,
but there are few research studies at the middle school level. For the most part, studies at
the high school level such as Thompson (2012) or Jacobs (2006) have shown that tool use
mediates critical thinking but such studies have not fully documented the process by

12

which that mediation occurs. For example, at the college level Ball (2012) and Kinchin
and Cabot (2007) examine presentational software tool use and focus on the presentation
and not how, whether, and for whom the software promotes critical thinking. The studies
do acknowledge the tool’s influence but fail to delve into the subject more deeply.
The implications uncovered in current study will aid in filling this gap by
providing more insight into tool mediation on student learning. Vygotsky advocated for
such studies in this area that is, not on the final mature product but on the student’s
journey using the tools that played a meaningful role in their critical thinking. Finally,
this qualitative study provides additional discussion on student achievement by drawing
connections between tool use and previous learning experiences to information literacy
skills, technology, and human development.
Using Vygotsky’s theoretical framework on tool mediation and my interests in
how tools mediate student learning as the driving force, the following research question
guided my study:
1. How do cultural tools mediate research activities in eighth-grade students?
2. How does the use of presentational software tools mediate eighth-grade students’
approaches to conducting research?

13

CHAPTER 2: REVIEW OF LITERATURE
Long before the emergence of the information age and the myriad of new devices
that came with it, educators struggled with understanding tool mediation and its impact
on student learning. The Pennsylvania Academic Standards, English Language Arts
Grades 6-12 (2013) outlines using technology, a variety of resources, and other tools that
are available in classrooms and libraries to encourage learning. A position paper on the
Common Core State Standards by the American Association of School Librarians
(AASL, 2007) supports the use of a variety of print and electronic resources in
classrooms and school libraries. The authors of the AASL position paper argue that
students who are well versed in the use of multiple resources are on their way to
becoming lifelong learners and effective users of information. With the concern of how
to integrate the many resources that are available into the classroom facing the
educational landscape, I examined research studies that explore how tools mediate
student learning through the theoretical framework of Lev Vygotsky as well as studies by
Vygotskian literacy researchers. This literature review has three parts: 1) what studies
say about how tool use mediates individuals’ actions, 2) how tool use mediates
individuals’ actions in school libraries, and 3) how presentational tools mediate
individuals’ actions and learning.
General Tool Mediation
Vygotsky’s (1987) theory has three strands that relate when working with
adolescents. According to Wertsch (1985), Vygotsky’s most important strand is that the
cultural signs, tools, and symbols of society mediate human growth and development.
Wertsch (1985) argues, “Mental processes can be understood only if we understand the

14

tools and signs that mediate them” (p. 15). Vygotsky (1998) defined adolescents as
individuals who are ages 12 to 16 and who are in a transitional stage of physical,
emotional, and mental growth. Adolescents are becoming more socially aware of
themselves and the tools that are available within the world around them. This is the time
when, according to Vygotsky, conceptual thinking begins to develop and mature in
adolescents. Their thinking begins to move from the intrapersonal to the interpersonal
level. Vygotsky (1987) explains, “That the development of his [adolescent’s] intellect,
that he reaches the point where he is thinking in concepts” (p.160). Vygotsky (1987)
advocates studying this time in adolescents’ lives to gain an understanding of the
transition and growth. He continues by noting the best method for studying is, “If we
look at it [adolescent thinking] in action, that is, if we submit it to a functional analysis
rather than taking the adolescent’s concept in its developed form” (p. 161). In my study,
I examined how tools mediate adolescent or middle school students’ actions when
researching in a school library for Earth Science assignments.
A number of studies have examined how tools mediate student behavior both
inside the classroom and out. Students arrive at the school’s door with a vast and varied
array of life and tool use experiences. I argue that educators need to have a grasp on
student’s experiences in order to gain a better of picture of how that varied tool use
mediate student behavior. This is part of Vygotsky’s (1987) tool mediation theory that
needs to be acknowledged and explored. The following studies provide a small snapshot
of adolescents as their conceptual thinking begins to mature.
As an example of the changes in adolescence, that Vygotsky (1987) outlines,
Meyers, Fisher, and Marcoux (2009) conducted a qualitative study on 34 students ages 9

15

to 13 on how “tweens” (p. 301) gather and use everyday information. Today’s tools have
expanded to include a vast array of electronic and telecommunication devices. In focus
group discussions, students reported using tools such as print and electronic resources,
collaboration, discussion with others, reading strategies, text patterns, smartphones,
electronic signs and symbols, journaling, and mnemonics. Meyers et al. (2009) note that
despite that students are considered “digital natives” (p. 302), their physical, emotional,
and mental development is the same as the tweens of past generations. The students used
technology such as smart phones to gather information, but overall, they favored face-toface interaction with others. Meyers et al. continue by noting that adolescents are very
social and rely on their experiences and understandings, which in turn mediate their
thoughts and actions. Luria stated that the ultimate tool for mediation is language and
speech by describing speech as the, “tool of tools” (as cited by Smagorinsky, 2011, p.
13). Vygotsky likewise states, “The primary function of speech, both for the adult and
for the child, is the function of communication, social contact, influencing surrounding
individuals” (as cited by Wertsch, 1985, p. 81). Meyers et al. noted that the students put
their trust in others with whom they had long-standing relationships, as well as in the
social identity attached to those relationships, when gathering information. The students’
face-to-face interactions and conversations mediated their actions in three ways: 1) who
to seek for information, 2) the type of information they were gathering, and 3) aided in
developing their social identities.
Meyers et al.’s (2009) aim was to understand the situations and context that
adolescents prefer when seeking information. The authors only reported the tools used to
gather everyday information and did not use the opportunity to examine how the tools

16

used mediated the students’ actions. Meyers et al. did highlight important insights into
how students’ everyday tool use mediated their behavior. However, school activities and
research mediation were not part of the study. Using Meyers et al.’s understanding of the
importance of adolescent face-to-face interaction, I went beyond focus groups and
instead, I interviewed students in-depth about their tool use and the tools that mediated
their actions.
In contrast with Meyers et al. (2009), who studied the tools that mediate everyday
information, use Grisham and Wolsey (2006) demonstrated how prior knowledge
encourages students’ reading in an English class setting in a qualitative study of 99,
eighth-grade students. The self-selected reading texts were of high interest and
connected to the student lives. The students pulled from life experiences to compare and
contrast the story text they were reading in class. Smagorinsky (2011) argues that
student-centered, hands-on activities where the students have a common interest and
connection contribute to the appropriation of tools and problem solving. Grisham and
Wolsey continue after individual reading and face-to-face discussions, the students
responded to their classmates in an online asynchronous threaded discussion. The online
discussions mediated students’ actions by providing special symbols and signs to express
meaning beyond the printed word and their social identities that are not available in faceto-face conversations. The other feature that asynchronous threaded discussions offered
students was the opportunity to think and reflect before responding. Students were able
to make further authentic connections to their lives, deeper reflection on the reading, and
then share their thoughts later in the online discussion. Face-to-face conversations do not
necessarily have this wait time feature.

17

Grisham and Wolsey’s (2006) study neglected to explore how the special signs
and symbols of the threaded discussion program specifically mediated students’
behaviors. McDonald, Le, Higgins, and Podmore (2005) argue that similar studies only
refer to tools by name. Such studies fail to examine how the particular tools, their
features, and their history mediate student behavior. Grisham and Wolsey did examine
how print, discussion, and electronic tools blend to mediate student action but not how
the individual tools or their blended features mediate student action. In my study, I
examine how tools and their special features mediate students’ actions and thoughts while
conducting research on Earth Science projects.
Continuing in the classroom arena, Smagorinsky (2011) presented examples of
nonverbal sign and writing mediation in a qualitative study conducted with two students
in a Southwest high school horse management class. The students were required to
demonstrate their knowledge of horses by designing a set of readable, real-life horse
ranch blueprints, as well as a companion essay describing the horse ranch operations.
Smagorinsky discovered more than just class content mediated students’ thinking and
actions. He examined in detail how individual tools mediated the students’ decisions and
thinking. For example, the assignment requirements, writing strategies, and the diagram
symbols mediated the students’ actions. Smagorinsky argued that the real life
requirements of operating a horse ranch, in and out-of-school knowledge, mentorship
discussions, blueprint diagram features, and life experiences also mediated the students’
thinking, emotions, and behaviors as they designed their horse ranch diagrams. Vygotsky
views writing as, “The most complex device of cultural behavior” (as cited in
Smagorinsky, 2011, p. 167). The students’ previously learned writing strategies and their

18

specialized equine knowledge, business decisions, and life experiences mediated how
they communicated their expertise on the subject in the companion essay. Unlike Meyers
et al. (2009), Smagorinsky focused on high school students who may be at the end of the
transitional stage that Vygotsky (1987) describes. For the current study, I focused on
middle school students who are at the beginning of the transitional stage. Any insights
gained will provide not only a better understanding of the how tool mediates action but
also how adolescents’ conceptual thinking develops and matures.
Prior to Meyers’ et al. (2009) work, McDonald et al. (2005) pointed out that an
individual’s tools include the cultural beliefs, practices, and life experiences that mediate
understanding and perceptions. They argue that personal experiences and tools play an
important part in how individuals appropriate or as Smagorinsky (2011) defines it, “take
up and make use of” (p. 32) tools. McDonald et al. defined tools as those cultural tools
that have stood the test of time and connect the past to the future. McDonald et al.’s
study examined three types of traditional tools: flipcharts and easels, jigsaw puzzles, and
textbooks in three small studies that focused on how the traditional tools mediated
students’ actions. The authors proposed that tools such as textbook vocabulary mediate
students’ perceptions and emotions when acquiring new knowledge. Vygotsky (1987)
argues that learning only occurs when tool mediates changed action and clarifies by
stating, “All higher mental functions are mediated processes. A central and basic aspect
of their structure is the use of the sign as means of directing and mastering mental
processes” (p. 126). McDonald et al. included the idea that mediation is not limited to
human development but could be part of the connection between people and places. For
example, McDonald et al. discovered in their first study that the location of the flipchart,

19

easel, and classroom reading procedures mediated the behaviors of 5-year old girls. The
chart and its location mediated two points in the girls’ understanding: the context of the
activity, in this case reading and that reading is a shared activity. Meyers et al. also noted
that tweens connect location and people when seeking everyday information.
Smagorinsky likewise discovered a connection between people and place in his
qualitative study of students designing horse ranches for an equine management class.
McDonald et al. (2005) noted similar implications with the two other studies, the
jigsaw puzzle, and the textbook studies. In the textbook study, English vocabulary
mediated Vietnamese high school students’ emotions. The vocabulary provoked anxiety
and stress in the students as they negotiated the text. Vygotsky (1987) briefly discusses
how emotions are a part of human development and mediate thinking. In McDonald et
al.’s three cases, the tools controlled the students’ actions, perceptions, emotions, and
behaviors. McDonald et al. explored how particular tools mediated understanding and
the emotional responses of the students whereas other studies did not. The authors
examined three types of traditional tools that mediated elementary and university
students’ thoughts, but not middle school students. Additionally, their study only focused
on non-electronic tools, omitting any discussion on how electronic tools mediate
thinking. However, in the current study, I expand McDonald et al.’s examination of tool
mediation by exploring how student tool use, including electronic tools such as, Prezi and
PowerPoint mediate middle school students’ understanding, emotional behavior, and
actions.
Continuing the focus on how emotions mediate action, Kuhlthau (2004) explored
how high school and college students transverse through an Information Search Process

20

(ISP) when conducting research. Kuhlthau addressed the emotional impact on thinking
through her ISP. Through surveys and interviews, the author discovered that despite the
diverse populations, there were similar emotional, cognitive, and physical patterns
present. The students’ emotional reactions mediated their behaviors as well as their
discussion, reading, writing, and information throughout the ISP. For example, students
experienced a high level of anxiety and apprehension when initially faced with a research
assignment. The apprehension mediated how the students approached the assignment
and their decision-making strategies. The students brainstormed and had small group
discussions to select a research topic. Kuhlthau focused her study on how the emotional
reactions mediated the students’ actions and how the students navigated the research
process. She did not address what particular tools the students used in their research.
Similar to McDonald et al. (2005), Kuhlthau limited her study to college and adult
students. In the limitations section, Kuhlthau suggested additional studies be conducted
with middle school students. To meet this suggestion, I look closely at how middle
school students’ emotions mediate their tool use in a school library setting.
In a recent study, Spires, Harvey, Morris, and Stelpflug (2012) reflect on how
students’ reading and writing strategies mediated how they used a variety of tools such as
a flip camera, video making software, electronic and print resources, reading and writing
strategies, and nonverbal diagrams for an assignment. Students created research
questions for a compelling, high interest, real world issue. Vygotsky (1987) promotes the
use of interesting real world problems to motivate and encourage individuals to promote
mental growth. He also advocates collaboration as an important mediation tool in human
development. Spires et al. note how students’ interest mediated how they discussed,

21

brainstormed, outlined, and planned their final project, a short video. The assignment
required students to gather and evaluate information. The students used previously
learned strategies in evaluating and selecting information found on the World Wide Web.
For example, one web evaluation strategy on how to differentiate between domain names
mediated how the students selected a website for accuracy and reliability. Previously,
students would select the first website returned in the search. The web evaluation
strategy encouraged them to be more critical in their website selection. A wiki provided
a wider collaborative workspace for students to collect, share, and make decisions as they
progressed through the project. Special features of the wiki guided how the students
recorded, shared, and stored their information. The asynchronous feature of the wiki
mediated the students’ actions by providing time to reflect before adding the wiki
contents.
The Spires et al. (2012) study was different from the previous studies. The
students were middle school students, my target population. Spires et al. also included
electronic tools that other earlier studies omitted. However, Spires et al. did not go into
detail about the types or the special features of the tools. Similar to Grisham and
Wolsey’s (2006) and Smagorinsky’s (2011) examination of nonverbal symbols, Spires et
al. highlighted how wikis and website domains mediated student actions. However,
Spires et al. did not examine how the special features and symbols mediated the students’
actions. In the current study, I include how the special features of collaborative tools
such as PowerPoint mediates how students write, share, and use information in Earth
Science research assignments.

22

Reading strategies mediate student behaviors in different ways. Darvin (2008)
noted in his qualitative study on informational reading in vocational high school cooking
classes that discussion, reading, and writing create a unique discourse community among
students and teachers. Vygotsky (1987) advocates collaboration and oral discussion
when learning. He explains that language is the first tool used to mediate an individual’s
life and thought. Darvin discovered that vocabulary, technical language, and purpose for
reading encourage what reading strategies the students used. The text format and context
of a recipe motivated how the students read the text and used the information. In
Darvin’s study, the students did not necessarily read in a sequential manner but rather in
bits and pieces getting the needed information as they worked through solving the
problem. Similar to Spires et al. (2012) the students used a variety of print and electronic
tools in collaborative, authentic hands-on learning experiences that mediated their
actions. However, Darvin did not focus on the exact tools the students used or how the
various features mediated the students’ work in the cooking classes. In the current study,
I include how tools such as reading strategies mediate middle school students’ actions
and thoughts.
The qualitative studies reviewed here demonstrated how tools mediate action in a
variety of ways. The studies also show how learning is as Alexander, Schallert, and
Reynolds (2009) described, “inevitable, essential, and ubiquitous” (p. 178). Meyers et al.
(2009) examined the tools that mediate adolescents’ everyday information gathering and
use. Other studies focused on school activities and assignments in high school and
college aged students. For example, McDonald et al. (2005) and Kuhlthau (2004)
explored how context, location, and emotions mediated students’ thinking and behaviors.

23

Kuhlthau did not describe how the tools mediated student action. On the other hand,
McDonald et al. and Smagorinsky (2011) did describe specifically how tools mediate
thinking. The types of tools described encompassed all forms: human, print, and
electronic in various combinations, with an emphasis on the traditional over the
electronic. These studies provided a solid foundation for future studies. However,
additional research needs to look more closely at how tools mediate action in middle
school students. In the current study, I conduct a qualitative study to explore how student
tool use including electronic tools, such as PowerPoint and Prezi mediate middle school
students’ actions when working in a school library on two Earth Science class
assignments.
The number of tools available today that mediate an individual’s actions have
grown since Vygotsky’s time. Computers, telecommunication, and collaborative
computer programs are just a few new tools that have appeared in society that mediate
thinking and mental growth as described by Vygotsky (1987). Vygotsky’s work focused
on tool mediation using oral language and writing as his primary tools. I expand this
discussion with the next group of studies. The following five studies examine how
language, reading, and writing mediate student actions. However, the studies also feature
the new electronic tools that Vygotsky did not have the opportunity to experience as part
of the equation that mediates student behaviors.
An example in Thompson’s (2012) study demonstrates an electronic tool’s impact
on one student’s actions. Thompson examined in a case study how out-of-school
activities and technology can provide motivation for a ninth-grade student to write in an
English class in the United Kingdom. Vygotsky (1987) views writing as the most

24

complex tool of higher order thinking in order to communicate one’s thoughts on paper.
Thompson’s assignment for his student was to write an article for the school newspaper
on his favorite subject, rugby. The author discovered that personal experiences and
interests motivated the student’s selection of his article topic. The student used the word
processing program features to convey his knowledge of rugby to the printed page.
Thompson noted the student decided specifically to use font size and capitalization
features to convey emotionally what he felt needed emphasis with his audience. The
computer technology mediated the student’s actions by allowing him to concentrate on
what he wanted to say in the article rather than struggle with his poor handwriting.
Thompson (2012) did not explore any other computer features except for font size
and capital letter use and they how mediated the student’s actions. I expand beyond the
special features of word processing and explore the special features of other programs
such as Prezi or PowerPoint. In addition, the oral discussion between Thompson and his
student about the article’s content mediated the student’s thinking, his advanced
vocabulary use, and the use of literary devices such as metaphors in his writing. Such a
discussion supports Vygotsky’s theory of the importance of oral language in mediating
thought and mental growth. Myers et al. (2009) similarly demonstrated that discussions
and interactions are highly important to middle school students’ learning. Therefore, I
included informal discussions similar to Thompson’s with students during the course of
my study.
In contrast to researching high school students, Purcell-Gates, Duke, and
Martineau (2007) conducted a quantitative study to explore how authentic, genre-specific
reading and writing strategies mediated 120, third-grade students’ actions when writing

25

informational and procedural science texts. Third-grade students collaborated to create
procedural steps to a science experiment for second-grade students. Students recorded
their actions as they progressed through the experiment. Similar to Thompson’s findings
(2012), Purcell-Gates et al.’s students expressed their thoughts and actions on paper for
others to read. The authors noted that the experiment materials, science vocabulary,
results, audience, and problem-solving strategies mediated the students’ writing. For
example, students carefully recorded the experiment’s sequential steps in such a manner
so that the intended audience would be able to duplicate the experiment successfully.
Purcell-Gates et al.’s (2007) second class of students created and wrote an
informational brochure of frequently asked questions for a local nature preserve that they
had just visited. The students’ personal experiences from the field trip guided their
thinking as they created questions for the brochure. The brochure design, intended
audience, specialized vocabulary, brainstorming, and purpose of the writing activity also
mediated the strategies that the students used in the project. For example, the limited
space in the brochure design encouraged students’ to identify only the most important
points they wished to make with their writing. Purcell-Gates et al. discovered that the
experimental group reflected a collaborative, hands-on application in which students had
a vested interest in the topic. The students’ interest motivated them to do additional
research on the nature preserves to supplement what they had learned from the field trip.
The experimental group’s writing was of higher quality than the control group. PurcellGates et al. conducted a quantitative study whereas in my study there was not a control
group.

26

Jacobs (2006) further exemplifies Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of tool mediation in
the electronic age in a two-year study with high school students. Jacobs investigated how
an instant messaging (IM) program mediated the actions of four tenth-grade students.
She discovered through observations, interviews, and field notes that IM mediated the
students’ actions as text producers, consumers, and disseminators of information. The
synchronous collaboration tool’s text and symbols prompted the students’ decisionmaking such as whether to accept a message or not and whether to communicate their
physical location as, “away” (Jacobs, 2006, p. 175) in the virtual world. Jacobs also
discovered the IM program promoted students’ text production by having special
symbols and abbreviations that convey meaning and emotional nuances normally found
in face-to-face conversations. The students kept the messages very short and used the
special IM symbols to produce text and disseminate meaning. For example, one student
used special graphic symbols to express her confusion about the topic of an AP American
History test. The special symbol prompted the person that the student was
communicating with to call her on the telephone for a more lengthy discussion about the
test.
Similar to Grisham and Wolsey’s (2006) findings, Jacobs’ (2006) IM allowed
students to think and reflect before responding. The practice of short responses and
abbreviations mediated the student’s thinking further by forcing the students to respond
in an effective and meaningful text structure. The special emotional IM symbols
provided an additional dimension found in face-to-face interaction but in a slightly
delayed timeframe. Jacobs (2006) briefly described how some special symbols such as
the confusion symbol mediated student thinking and action. However, she did not go into

27

detail on any other symbols that mediated student action. I expand on Jacobs’ study by
examining how Prezi and PowerPoint special features mediate student action and
behavior. My target population was more in line with Grisham and Wolsey’s (2006) but
fewer than 99 students. For the current study, I recruited six eighth-grade students: three
boys and three girls.
In a case study, Karlström, Cerratto-Pargman, Lindström, and Knutsson (2007)
investigated how the special features of a computer assisted second language learning
program mediated the actions and writing of four medical students learning Swedish.
The study’s objective was to gain insight into how special features such as grammar
check mediate students’ writing and language development. Pairs of students listened to
a fictional patient’s report, took notes, and then recounted the report in their own words
in Swedish. The students received instructions on how to use the program and how the
features could help or hinder them in their writing. What Karlström et al. discovered was
that the program mediated students’ actions but not in ways they expected. The grammar
check aided student actions by correcting errors but only to satisfy the error-marking
feature and not as language development tool. The grammar errors found by the
grammar check made the students evaluate their sentence structure and meaning that they
were trying to document in the patient’s record. The special feature did mediate second
language development by causing the students to reread their notes, reflect on their
writing, and then discuss in length how to correct and revise. The students had to speak
Swedish because it was the common language among the pairs. Karlström et al. believed
this oral language development was an unexpected, but a valuable item that was
uncovered during the study. Karlström et al. also noted the other features such as syntax

28

and word class highlighting, which the students said were useful but not used when
revising. Vygotsky (1987) reminds us that unless individuals appropriate tools, change in
human action will not occur.
Karlström et al. (2007) provided examples of tools such as the syntax and word
class highlighting features that the medical students did not appropriate. Thompson
(2012) and Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) noted similar oral language mediation on student
actions. During the current study, I examined how oral language discussions mediate
students’ actions and behavior. Thompson and Karlström et al. noted individual
computer features such as capitalization that encouraged student actions. I expand
beyond capitalization and font size to include more special computer program features.
Karlström et al. provided examples of how students did not appropriate certain tools. The
other studies reviewed did not encounter findings such as this. Karlström et al. did not
pursue the reasons why the medical students did not use some of the features available.
Based on this, I chose to include an examination of what special features the students did
not appropriate and the reasoning behind it.
Just recently in Finland, Kumpulainen, Mikkola, and Jaatinen (2014) examined
how an online collaborative writing program mediated 21 fifth and sixth-grade Finnish
students’ creative composition of a school musical over a three-month period. By
analyzing chat room discussions and interactions, revision history of the musical script,
and student responses to open ended questions, Kumpulainen et al. outlined how
computer program features such as the chat room mediate the students’ collaborative
discussions, writing, and revisions of the musical script. Kumpulainen et al. explored the
additional components of where and when the students worked as another mediating

29

factor on student behavior. Small groups of three created a school musical to honor the
anniversary of the elementary school’s founding. Students were given each a laptop,
wireless internet connection for school and home use, a collaborative online writing
program called VisciPad, and access to additional online resources.
Kumpulainen et al. (2014) discovered that chat room features such as special
symbols for emotion, promoted trust among the students normally found in face-to-face
interactions. This trust carried over into the deep, honest, reflective discussions about the
students’ writing and their progress on the project. The time delay between receiving a
message and responding allowed students time to think, reflect, and compose a message
that conveyed their intended meaning. The simultaneous writing feature also encouraged
discussions and revisions on the script by noting each of the students’ contributions in
different colors. The color-coding promoted further discussions in the chat room in effort
to clarify each student’s writing contribution and the thought process behind it. One
student’s questionnaire comment on the continual online access for brainstorming and
ideas was helpful in moving the script writing along. The 24/7 access of VisciPad also
supported the students’ continuous thinking, reflection and sharing with their partners.
No longer did the students have to wait until they were in school to record their ideas.
Kumpulainen et al. (2014) provide insight to the digital lives of upper elementary
students and how 24/7 access to computer programs mediates students’ actions on school
assignments and projects. Studies reviewed earlier did not describe this type of tool
mediation. Thompson (2012), Purcell-Gates et al. (2007), Jacobs (2006), and Karlström
et al. (2007) focused their research solely on tool mediation in the classroom. Similar to
Jacobs, Kumpulainen et al. had a delay time built in for responses via a chat room, which

30

mediated the students to think and respond more effectively. Kumpulainen et al.’s
contribution of 24/7 tool use and mediation added another dimension to Vygotsky’s
(1987) theory of tool mediation in today’s global society. In the current study, I examine
how student tool use and presentational tool features of PowerPoint and Prezi mediate
middle school students’ actions in their Earth Science class assignments and projects.
The studies reviewed in this section reflect additional different ways tools mediate
student actions and behaviors. All with the exception of Kumpulainen et al. (2014)
examine tool use in a classroom setting. Each study emphasized Vygotsky’s (1987)
advocacy for authentic, hands-on application of tools in a specific learning environment.
However, Kumpulainen et al. also took into account how tool mediation on class
assignments extended beyond the schoolhouse door into a 24/7 virtual environment.
Karlström et al. (2007) explored how a second language develops when mediated by a
grammar correcting program and oral language. They discovered that Vygotsky’s (1987)
most important tool, oral language, mediated second language development far beyond
any computer program. In their study, Karlström et al. stumbled upon examples of tools
not appropriated by students, leaving the door open for future studies that examine why
students do not use certain tools. Thompson (2012) and Jacobs (2006) described how
specific features such as font size and special symbols mediate how students express
emotion in their writing. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007), Kumpulainen et al., and Jacobs all
demonstrated the power student collaboration has on writing and creation of meaningful
text for others to read. The examples described demonstrate why Vygotsky denotes
writing as the most complex tool of all. Purcell-Gates et al. briefly discusses students’
previous experiences and understandings from the field trip. Beyond this, the authors

31

mention very little in regards to how previous experiences and tool use mediate student
actions. The studies provided a foundation for future studies. As I laid out, I conducted a
qualitative study to explore how student tool use and presentational programs such as
PowerPoint and Prezi mediate student actions when researching for Earth Science class
assignments.
Tool Mediation in School Libraries
Vygotsky (1987) argued that tools mediate conceptual development. However,
according to Vygotsky not all concepts are the same. He made a distinction between
everyday concepts, those developed or through lived experiences, and scientific concepts,
or those developed through direct instruction. Myers et al.’s (2009) study is an example
of Vygotsky’s notion of everyday concept development in tweens. Smagorinsky (2011)
pointed out that Vygotsky believed that the formal classroom was an ideal location for
studying scientific concept development. Smagorinsky argued that an individual’s higher
order thinking develops in specific situations using tools. He defined this as an arena, a
physical location that has certain cultural and historical features that make it what it is.
Smagorinsky continued by explaining that a setting is an individual’s preconceived
understandings of an arena based on their personal, emotional, societal, cultural, and
historical knowledge and background. Two individuals may work in the same arena but
construct a different setting based on their own prior experiences and knowledge. A
classroom is an example of an arena where students can construct their individual
settings. Thus far, I have reviewed several studies with classroom arenas with what most
neo-Vygotskian scholars would agree demonstrate tool mediation. Next, I will step out
of the classroom arena and examine other physical locations overlooked in the literature.

32

One physical location not discussed in the existing literature but would also meet
Smagorinsky’s (2011) definition of an arena is a school library. The library arena affords
a variety of learning experiences particularly the types that Kuhlthau (2004) advocates for
students. Kuhlthau argues that a library arena offers a comprehensive view on how tools
such as an ISP, information literacy skills, and library resources mediate student
behaviors. Up until this point, I have reviewed studies that examined tool mediation in
everyday life and in the classroom but very little in the way of tool mediation in school
libraries. The following studies reviewed next vary in the nature of tool mediation but
focus on libraries as an arena. The tools that Vygotsky (1987) outlined are not
implements used to repair but rather the means by which individuals act and respond to
their environment. McDonald et al.’s (2005) easel and chair that mediated students’
action is one type of tool. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) and several other studies focused on
speech as a tool that mediates student behavior. Next, I will examine research studies
that explore how tools mediate student actions in a school library arena.
Limberg and Alexandersson’s (2003) study reflects Smagorinsky’s (2011)
definition of an arena. Limberg and Alexandersson examined how 260 students, ages 8
to 19 perceive a library as a tool for locating information for class assignments. In a twoyear qualitative study, the authors interviewed and observed students as they used a
school library and the types of tools that directed the students’ actions. What the findings
revealed was that the library functioned in such a way that the physical space, services,
and artifacts such as print, electronic, and human resources mediated student action. For
example, the physical furniture arrangement such as large or small tables mediated the
students’ decision-making on whether to work in small groups or independently. One

33

student remarked while working in the library that the nearby proximity of the print
collection to her workspace made her realize that she should explore what the print
resources had to offer in addition to what she had from electronic resources. The
nearness of the print collection mediated the student’s decision to locate and browse
books that she had not previously considered. The nature of the assignments mediated
the ways students employed the resources available in the library arena.
Limberg and Alexandersson (2003) highlight that human resources or librarians
available in the library were another tool that encouraged students to use the library.
Students noted on questionnaires that they went to the library for two reasons: first, the
librarian’s expertise in the use of print and electronic resources and second, the technical
services that the librarians can offer. The librarians’ knowledge of the assignments and
resources supported student actions by assisting them in using library resources or
making recommendations on where to look or search on the student’s topic. Limberg and
Alexandersson continue by reporting that technical services such as photocopying or help
with computer problems offered in the library caused students to go there for help. For
example, one student reflected that he had difficulty accessing the library databases from
home. He talked to the librarian to double-check if the passwords and procedures were
correct. The home access issue prompted him to seek a librarian’s help to solve the
problem.
Limberg and Alexandersson (2003) uncovered that a library arena mediates a
range of emotions particularly in the Information Problem Solving (ISP) process.
Students remarked that library services from previous experiences and understandings
provoked them to have certain emotional responses to their assignments. For example, a

34

student commented that he was relaxed when he went to the library because he knew that
he could get help to complete his assignments. Another student said she was always
thrilled with what she found in the library. A third student noted that she and her
classmates would meet to work, discuss, and seek help from a librarian if necessary. The
availability of a librarian to talk, interact, and collaborate with on finding sources, ideas,
and assignment details positively supported the students’ emotional perceptions of the
library arena.
In their study, Limberg and Alexandersson (2003) investigated the library as an
arena instead of specific portions or items that are located in it. Other studies, such as
Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) primarily focused on specific resources available in a library.
Limberg and Alexandersson did include middle school students in their study, but they
did not separate the various age levels in their findings. In my study, I address how
specific resources and features of presentation tools such as Prezi and PowerPoint
mediate student actions. However, also I take into consideration how the library arena
guides students’ actions when using these computer programs. Vygotsky (1987) reminds
us that human development does not happen in a vacuum but rather in specific context
and the context of the library arena can play an important part in tool mediation.
On a smaller scale, van Aalst, Hing, May, and Yan (2007) investigated in a case
study how 18 twelfth-grade students working in small groups gather information on
relevant topics. The study’s objectives addressed the types of resources used, student
cognitive and emotional experiences, and factors that directed students’ collaborative
work. Through questionnaires, interviews, search logs, and diaries, van Aalst et al.
discovered that despite the direct information literacy instruction on print and electronic

35

resources, students predominately used web-based resources. During the interviews,
students remarked that web-based resources were easier to use and less time consuming.
The web-based resources’ 24/7 availability also encouraged students’ actions by being
accessible anytime and anywhere. Additionally, the databases’ special features of
Boolean searching prompted the students to consider and select specific search terms.
Students believed that database content was more current and this perception influenced
the students to use them over print materials. The amount of information provoked
emotional responses in students. They were frustrated and overwhelmed. The
information overload and their frustration pushed students to seek help from their peers,
instructors, or librarians. Van Aalst et al. highlighted that all the students experienced the
six levels of Kuhlthau’s (2004) ISP during the project. To address the emotional needs,
students used several methods of communication with their group mates. Van Aalst et al.
noted that face-to-face discussions and telephone calls were the predominate types of
communication that the students used. For example, the amount of information the
students uncovered encouraged them to call a group mate to discuss what they had
discovered. One student complained that when using email or instant messaging they had
to keep the messages short. The assignment requirements, as well as email and instant
messaging constraints motivated students to meet face-to-face or call on the telephone for
lengthy discussions.
Van Aalst et al. (2007) had similar findings as Kuhlthau (2004) where both sets of
participants transversed through the six stages of the ISP. For example, both groups of
students experienced anxiety due to information overload, forcing them to seek help.
Other studies also noted similar anxiety. The student participants in van Aalst et al. and

36

in Kuhlthau’s studies as well as Darvin (2008), Jacobs (2006), McDonald et al. (2005),
Smagorinsky (2011), and Thompson (2012) were high school aged. I followed the path
of Meyers et al. (2009) and Grisham and Wolsey (2006) by using middle school students
for my study. Van Aalst et al. mentioned briefly that some database special features such
as Boolean searching directed student behavior. However, they did not go into detail as
did McDonald et al. and Thompson did in their studies. I expand on McDonald et al. and
Thompson’s ideas and examine more than just one or two special features of the Prezi
and PowerPoint computer programs that guide students’ actions.
Focusing on the same target age group as my study, Newell (2009) explores in a
qualitative study how two types of ISP processes prompted 27, seventh and eighth-grade
middle school students’ actions over a four-week time period. Two classes used a library
computer simulation and its resources while the other two classes used a face-to-face,
authentic, real-life research project within a library arena and its resources. Observations,
interviews, field notes, and students’ guided portfolios captured the students’ ISP
behaviors during the study. Newell discovered both groups had similar conflicts with the
research assignment: they did not know what to do. Kuhlthau (2004) and van Aalst et al.
(2007) report similar student anxiety and conflict. In Newell’s study, students had not
experienced an ill-structured problem before. He defines an ill-structured problem as a
real world, complex information problem with multiple solutions. The term illstructured, therefore, does not imply the problem or assignment is poorly designed but
rather that it is designed as a student-centered, inquire based task. However, for the sake
of clarity, I will use the descriptor “less structured” to refer to problems that Newell
would have termed ill-structure. Their previous research project experiences were linear

37

and left very little room for creative thinking. The less structured problem prompted
negative student reactions, which in turn, caused them to seek help from the cybrarian, an
online librarian, and the school librarian. This unexpected student action forced both
librarians to provide more direct ISP instruction than anticipated.
Newell (2009) continues by noting the direct ISP instruction guided student
actions. For example, without any encouragement, the students formed small groups
within their classes to work together. The computer simulation classes did not follow the
suggested ISP but instead created short cuts by sharing what they had found and
brainstorming to find better approaches. This was unexpected, whereas the problem
based classes worked separately and then came together to share what they had
discovered. The information and search problem encouraged student discussions in both
groups. From these discussions, the students made joint decisions on what was the best
information and the next step in the process. Newell concluded by stating that the
students did follow an ISP but the group discussions, information needed, and problem
scenario directed the students’ actions. For example, one student reflected on the needed
information, stating the group discovered that information was not available in the middle
school library. After some discussion and additional research, the students had to go to
the high school library to get the resources they needed.
Newell’s (2009) study addressed the ISP process in a way that most other studies
have not. Similarly, to Kuhlthau’s (2004) study, Newell explored how emotional
thinking mediated student action. Meyers et al. (2009) did describe how emotions
motivated tweens and their everyday information gathering but not in the classroom
setting. Newell did not focus in detail how the each specific level of the ISP guided

38

student actions. He only highlighted the first level of the ISP, anxiety and frustration, as
an example. However, Newell did describe how these emotions and the unexpected
actions and previous experiences prompted unexpected student actions that the librarians
addressed, whereas other studies did not report any unexpected student actions. In
addition, Newell’s study focused on middle school students, an under-researched age
group in the literature. Kuhlthau readily admitted that this age group needed some
definite studies. Using her suggestion, I recruited middle school students for my study. I
compared instructional methodologies as Newell did, but with the intent of exploring the
special features of computer programs that mediate student actions in two Earth Science
research assignments.
Continuing with middle school students as participants, Foo and Majid (2007)
investigated how information literacy (IL) skills instruction mediated 179 13-year old
students’ actions in a five-week, project-based assignment. In a quasi-experimental
study, 109 students received personalized IL guidance or coaching and 70 students did
not. The assignment required groups of five students to compose an essay with
supporting artifacts for an oral presentation. The scoring rubric design assessed the
essay, artifacts, and oral presentation. Foo and Majid reported that the experimental
group performed better that the control group. The students in the experimental group
stated that the IL guidance from the instructor was very helpful. The IL guidance and
assisted them in understanding the assignment better. The IL coaching mediated the
students’ understanding of the assignment details better, helping them to move forward
on the project. The authors both noted within both groups that teamwork was highly
valued. The opportunity to discuss the topic and relevant information encouraged

39

students to evaluate and compare information to determine the best results for their
project. The students remarked that discussion helped them to weed out or eliminate
information that did not meet the project’s criteria. In addition, the experimental group
had the opportunity to ask the coach questions. The coach’s answers and guidance
positively mediated the students’ actions. Because of their experiences with the coach
the experimental group advocated for additional projects similar to the one used in the
study. Kuhlthau (2004) supported the idea of varied learning experiences that allow
students time to master the ISP process and other tools needed for success. Vygotsky
(1998) argues that tool appropriation is not accomplished overnight: “The transition to
higher forms of synthesis of practical and verbal thinking is not instantly achieved. It
begins in early childhood…achieved specifically in the transitional age” (p. 116). He
advocates that practice and tool application in real life learning experiences over time
leads to tool appropriation and mastery.
Foo and Majid (2007) demonstrated in their study the value of Vygotsky’s (1987)
theory of collaboration and oral discussion and their positive mediating effects on student
behavior. Foo and Majid’s study has several similarities to my study. I worked with
eighth-grade students in two project-based assignments. Students used previously
learned IL skills while working on the assignments. What differs from Foo and Majid’s
study is that the current study does not have a control group. All student participants will
receive IL skill instruction and guidance during the Earth Science class projects. Foo and
Majid recommended in their implications to integrate IL skills into content areas and
provide further guidance in IL skills over a time period for students to practice and gain
mastery.

40

Similar to studies reviewed earlier, Foo and Majid (2007) did not examine what or
how special features of IL skills or library resources mediated the students’ actions. Foo
and Majid were unclear on the project requirements and IL skills because their primary
intent was to examine the mediating effects of coaching on student behavior. Data
gathering in my study was similar to other studies such as van Aalst et al. (2007) and
Newell (2009). I included interviews, artifacts, observations, and field notes that
provided rich details of my students’ actions. Instead of exploring the IL skills, I
explored student tool use and the special features of Prezi and PowerPoint. I
documented that previously taught IL skills mediated students’ actions during my study.
The following studies continue the discussion of tool mediation by focusing how
a library arena, IL skills, and ISP mediate student behaviors. Foo and Majid (2007) and
Newell (2009) did focus on the same target group of middle school students as I did in
my study. Limberg and Alexandersson (2003) included middle school students as a part
of their study but did not separate their responses from the overall findings. Limberg and
Alexandersson examined tool mediation on a larger scale than other studies. They
investigated how a library as an arena directed student actions, whereas other studies only
focused specific areas or library resources. Newell noted how previous experiences and
understandings prompted unexpected student reactions. However, he missed an
opportunity to explore more in-depth how those previous experiences prompted the
students to react the way they did. Only a few studies, such as Grisham and Wolsey
(2006), Smagorinsky (2011), and Spires et al. (2012), addressed prior experiences as part
of their studies. However, they too did not take advantage of the opportunity to examine
their mediating impact on student actions.

41

Vygotsky (1998) points out that adolescents or middle school students are in a
transitional stage. Significant emotional, social, physical, and cognitive changes are
happening during this time. Keeping this in mind, I anticipated possible unexpected
student reactions during my study. Van Aalst et al. (2007) did note emotional
experiences similar to Newell and Foo and Majid but on the high school level. Van Aalst
et al.’s objectives did include how library resources mediated action. However, only
Boolean searching was mentioned – not any specific command. The other studies
reviewed here did not mention any tools’ specific features. In all cases, opportunities
were lost to examine in detail tool mediation in a library arena. For the current study, I
went further and investigated specific features of the computer programs Prezi and
PowerPoint in more detail.
Tools located in a library, such as books, databases, e-books, and computer
software, have the potential of mediating students’ actions in many ways. Previously, I
reviewed four neo-Vygotskian studies that took place in the context of a library arena and
how library resources overall mediated student perceptions. For example, van Aalst et al.
(2007) discussed the mediating impact of Boolean searching on students but fail to
address how the located information mediated student action. I argue that specific tools
need more examination on how they mediate mental growth and development. The
following three studies explore in further detail how specific library resources such as
encyclopedia articles or websites, mediate student action. The examination of how
library resources and their special features mediate student behavior is the intent of my
study. The studies are still within the library arena, but focus more upon how specific
library resources and tools mediate student learning.

42

In a recent study, Rojas-Drummond, Mazón, Littleton, and Vélez (2014)
demonstrated how library resources mediate student behaviors. In a quasi-experimental
study, the authors explored how tools such as reading and writing strategies, oral
discussion, and library resources mediate a higher quality of writing in 120 sixth-grade
students in a public school in Mexico City. Rojas-Drummond et al. discovered that the
“Learning Together” (LT) programs mediated a higher quality of writing in the finished
product. The LT program was an instructional unit that introduced specific oral
discussion, reading, and writing strategies that guided students’ verbal and written
communication. Groups of three students were required to read three types of library
resources: a newspaper article, an encyclopedia entry, and a magazine interview, and then
write a summary of all three resources and create an original title for the essay. The
triads discussed topic ideas and settled on an interesting topic. The students read each
article separately and then wrote the summary together. Rojas-Drummond et al.
highlighted that the LT discussion strategies mediated the students’ reading and writing
strategies. For example, the LT writing strategies prompted student use of a higher-level
writing strategy such as linguistic markers to link ideas in their essays. The LT reading
strategies directed students to integrate the main ideas with supporting details in an
organized manner from each library text into their summaries, whereas the control group
did not show these types of actions in their essays.
Rojas-Drummond et al. (2014) along with van Aalst et al. (2007), Jacobs (2006),
Meyers et al. (2009), and Newell (2009) support Vygotsky’s theory of oral language as
one of the most important tool in human development. Similar to earlier studies, RojasDrummond et al. did not mention resource delivery or its mediating impact on student

43

action. My intent is to examine how resource use directs students’ actions. Students who
participated in my study had access to a larger variety of resources and the delivery
format was electronic. However, Rojas-Drummond et al. did mention two writing
strategies that the experimental group used in their written summaries: linguistic
connectors and level of expression. The age group that Rojas-Drummond et al. focused
on in their study used is at the lower end of Vygotsky’s (1998) transitional age range. I
used a slightly older population for my study: the eighth-grade students who participated
in my study brought the age group closer to the center of Vygotsky’s age range of 12-16.
In a similar age group as Rojas-Drummond et al.’s (2014) participants, Ho,
Nelson, and Müeller-Wittig (2011) focused on 12-13 year old students, exploring in a
research study intervention in Singapore on how a virtual museum gallery assignment
mediates students’ behaviors. Student questionnaires allowed for insight into students’
prior experiences with museums, technology, and various resources. Bases on the
questionnaire responses, Ho et al. found that students received direct instruction where
needed concerning museums, technology, and library resources. Student teams of 4-5
grouped by general topic interest and used only web-based resources: databases,
resources on the World Wide Web, electronic books, and virtual museum technology for
the assignment. Using interviews, observations, and questionnaires, Ho et al. found that
the assignment and topic mediated student actions. The research topic mediated how the
students selected images that best reflected the message they wanted to convey. The
museum program’s special features mediated the student’s awareness of the constraints
that text had on conveying a message. For example during the Ho et al.’s (2011)
interviews, a student stated that an essay could not convey the same “sense” (p. 1090)

44

that images can. The selected images encouraged students to discuss and compose
captions that further enhanced the images’ meaning.
Ho et al. (2011) also noted that the small group arrangement mediated the
students’ actions. Students reported that they learned more about their topic through
brainstorming and discussions that broadened their perspectives and helped create a
better museum gallery. Interpersonal group dynamics also mediated student behavior:
students described the group social behavior such as who the natural leader was or who
the technology expert that helped them to produce a quality product was. One student
reported how they emotionally bonded to when helping each other when working so
everyone stayed together in during the project.
Ho et al. (2011) was different from many of the earlier reviewed studies. Firstly,
the authors focused on 12-13 year old students, my target age group, whereas most of the
literature has other studies targeted elementary or high school students. Ho et al. also
built on students’ prior understandings of museums, technology, and various resources. I
understood and noted prior IL instruction and resources that mediated student actions.
The museum gallery assignment required the use of electronic resources with no mention
of print resources nor was any specific resource type mentioned. Ho et al. focused on the
museum gallery program and the image types used as well as the collaborative actions
that mediated students’ behavior. Students who participated in my study were not limited
as to the types of resources they could use. Similar to Foo and Majid (2007), I note
previous IL instruction and resource use that mediate student behavior. Ho et al. mention
text boxes as a special feature that mediated students’ writing strategies for the still
images. The text box features including size and font, mediated how the students

45

succinctly composed their message to fit in the text box space. I investigated how text
boxes mediate student actions as well when using Prezi or PowerPoint, but I also
considered other features of the programs.
In a prior study, Grant and Branch (2005) investigated how resources mediated
five eighth-grade students’ actions in a private school in Southeast United States.
Students in a 10-week unit study researched a country noted for human rights violations
and created an essay with a visual display. The students used a variety of resources such
as a teacher-created WebQuest, the government website CIA World Factbook, and
country newspapers. Student also used note-taking templates, graphic organizers,
bibliographic templates, essential questions, and peer and adult evaluation throughout the
four-unit study. Grant and Branch conducted interviews with students before, during,
and after the project, as well as used observations, field notes, and artifacts to gain an
understanding of how the resources mediated learning. The methodology that Grant and
Branch used was very similar to that of my study.
Grant and Branch (2005) continued by noting after initial instruction on human
rights and violations, students selected a county of interest. They studied and researched
their country’s political, physical, cultural, and economic geography. As the students
learned about their selected countries’ human rights violations, they focused on one
example to delve into further. The assignment details, student interests, and the resources
mediated the students’ actions. For example, the government website CIA World
Factbook provides current information about the political, economic, and cultural status
of each country. It does not provide human rights examples but it does identify countries
having issues in that area. The CIA World Factbook’s lack of specific human rights

46

violations and the assignments requirements encouraged students to explore newspapers
and websites to pursue specific details and examples for their essays.
Grant and Branch (2005) reported that the note-taking and bibliographic
templates, as well as graphic organizers mediated the students’ actions and behaviors
throughout each stage of the project. For example, the note-taking templates had the
capability of arranging the students’ work into a linear organization. Students designated
the organization and arrangement by the subheadings and the information. The
organization motivated how the students arranged the slides in their presentations. The
organized subtopic arrangement mediated the students’ use of the computer program’s
navigating links of “next” and “previous” arrows to direct his audience to their
summaries and photos. The research paper contents guided the students to edit the
captions on the images they selected.
A common theme appeared in Grant and Branch’s (2005) study for all five
students. The authors discovered that the computer programs mediated the students’
decision-making when they were designing their exhibits. For example, one student
realized that the trifold board was not going to work for what he had in mind. The
computer program he used had special features that hyperlinked his photo gallery to his
essay summaries. He had specific ideas on how he wanted to present his information to
his audience and used this to his advantage with the computer program. All the students
created their exhibits with the intended audience in mind. The potential audience
therefore mediated how they summarized their research papers, selected images and
graphics, and linked everything together into print/electronic presentations.

47

Smagorinsky (2011) advocated for an expanded look beyond the spoken or
written word when examining how tools mediate student learning. The studies in this
section demonstrated how one specific group of tools, in this case, various library
resources, mediated student learning. Each study documented at least one specific
feature of a resource or computer program that mediated student actions. A good
example of this is Ho et al.’s (2011) description of how the museum gallery still image
feature mediated students’ awareness of the constraint using text only to convey their
intended meaning to an audience. Ho et al. used the students’ previous experiences as a
starting point for instruction in their study, whereas other studies only allude to student’s
previous experiences. In the current study, I explore students’ previous experiences.
Rojas-Drummond et al. (2014) and Grant and Branch’s (2005) examples of tool
mediation is similar to what I examined during my study. However, the students who
participated in my study had access to a larger variety of resources than the students did
in these studies. In Rojas-Drummond et al. (2014), Ho et al. (2011), and Grant and
Branch, the participants were close to or in the age group that I recruited for my study.
Many of the earlier studies focused on high school or adult learners. Vygotsky (1987)
reminds us that observing the journey that the student takes during their mental growth
and how tools mediate that growth is far more important than examining the mature
product. My intent during my study was to examine a small portion of that journey.
Tool Mediation and Presentation Tools
Within a school library arena, many tools can mediate student actions. In
addition, presentational tools, like PowerPoint for example, are readily available in a
school library and the PowerPoint’s special features mediate student actions. Several

48

studies such as Ho et al. (2011), and Grant and Branch (2005) have alluded to
presentational tools but failed to examine how those tools mediate student action and
thought in detail. My argument is that all types of tools need investigation so that
librarians and teachers can have a better understanding of their mediating influence on
student actions. Vygotsky primarily investigated oral and written language.
Smagorinsky (2011) advocates for a broader view, explaining, “More expanded notion of
cultural tools that looks beyond Vygotsky’s focus on linguistic expression and takes into
account other means of mediating human thought” (p. 189). Thus, I chose to include in
my study electronic resources such as PowerPoint and Prezi. Similar to studies on
libraries and library resources, there is very little in the literature examining
presentational tools through a Vygotskian lens. The following studies will take a critical
look at how presentational tools and programs mediate student action.
Goos, Galbraith, Renshaw, and Geiger (2003) explored how tools such as
graphing calculators and widescreen projection devices mediate student actions. Using
an ethnographic study with taped interviews and observations, field notes, and surveys
Goos et al. investigated how these technological tools mediated the student behavior in
high school calculus classes over a three-year period in Australia. For example, the
widescreen projection display prompted small and large group discussions where the
students took control of their actions by attempting different calculator commands as
suggested by their classmates. One student said, “By displaying things in different ways
[technology] can help you understand things more easily” (Goos et al., 2003, p. 79). The
authors also found that the mobility and screens of the students’ hand-held graphing
calculator encouraged discussion by allowing students to share and compare their work to

49

emphasize a point or alternative calculation. Calculator error messages prompted student
action by encouraging further exploration and discussion. One student noted that the
calculator display provoked them to verbalize their thinking and to visualize the math
problem more easily. Another student described the features of the graphing calculator as
an exploration tool. The calculator functions motivated the students to expand their
ideas, test alternative methods of solving problems, and the freedom to explore outside
the conventional thinking.
Goos et al. (2003) approached tool mediation in a slightly different manner than
previously reviewed studies. The researchers focused on how graphing calculators and
widescreen projectors mediated student action in a calculus class. On the other hand,
other studies, such as McDonald et al. (2005), focused on non-electronic tools. Similarly,
to Goos et al., the current study examines how electronic tools’ special features mediate
student actions. Goos et al. noted both types of devices promoted oral discussion in large
and small groups. Special features such as error messages and small display screens
encouraged students to act beyond the usual ways to find the correct answer. In line with
Smagorinsky (2011), Jacobs (2006), van Aalst et al. (2007), and Thompson’s (2012)
studies, Goos et al. selected student participants who were high school age, whereas in
my study, I sought out eighth graders.
In a later study, Neo and Neo (2009) investigated how a multimedia constructivelearning project on a “Malaysian Culture” (p. 256) topic guided college students’ actions
over a 14-week semester. The assignment requirements prompted the students to form
small groups, identify a problem or topic in Malaysian culture to create a multimedia
project with a presentation of the final product to the class. Students reflected on the

50

project via surveys and interviews. Neo and Neo discovered that similar to other studies,
high topic interest, and the assignment influenced students to work and complete the
project. For example, one student commented that the subject his group selected was fun
and he had the opportunity to use his creative ideas in the project. Another student stated
that she was motivated because she learned new skills that she could not get from her
instructors.
Neo and Neo (2009) uncovered that assignment requirements such as hands-on,
multimedia programs mediated students’ increased understanding of interactive
multimedia in a real-world application. One student reflected that working with the
multimedia program improved their understanding of how to use the program in the
future. Neo and Neo’s findings, in regards to how collaboration and teamwork mediate
student behaviors, reflect Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of collaborative interaction and
discussion. Students reported the teamwork discussion and problem-solving was far
more in-depth, and that they learned from one another. Similar to McDonald et al.
(2005), Neo and Neo highlighted that teamwork and interaction encouraged increased
student thinking with discussion, brainstorming, and feedback. One student noted that
they shared all of their ideas, discussed each one, and then voted on the best idea.
Similar to the studies by Jacobs (2006), and Grisham and Wolsey (2006), the
studies, students who participated in the current study had access to special
communication programs that allowed them to respond to each other. Various electronic
formats enhanced communication between students: chats, emails, and listservs guided
student communication when scheduling conflicts prevented meeting face-to-face. One
aspect of teamwork and collaboration that Neo and Neo (2009) highlighted, which other

51

studies did not report, was how student interaction directed their behavior when dealing
with negative collaborative activities and group management. Neo and Neo reported that
one of the biggest challenges to the student groups was the conflict in ideas and
workload. Student discussion positively guided the resolution of the issues by writing
down each problem and working together to solve each one.
Wang and Turner (2006) examined the mediating effects of a slightly different
type of presentational tool. In their qualitative study, Wang and Turner used interviews,
observations, and document analysis to investigate how electronic portfolios, or eportfolios, mediated seven graduate students’ actions at a university located in the United
States Midwest. The students compiled an e-portfolio required for graduation with
artifacts that demonstrated their learning during the graduate program. Similar to Grant
and Branch (2005) and Neo and Neo (2009), the assignment was a real-life application of
skills and learning. The eighth-grade Earth Science instructional units that the current
study investigated were student-centered, learning experiences – similar to what
Vygotsky and other neo-Vygotskian scholars suggest.
In Wang and Turner’s (2006) study, the University’s e-portfolio graduation
requirement directed the students’ motivation and interest in assembling a product that
met the University’s standards. Previously learned skills and newly learned skills
prompted students to reflect on their learning by selecting artifacts that demonstrated
their growth over time. Collaboration with instructors and peer reviews also led students
to reconsider ways that they could improve their portfolio contents. Wang and Turner’s
student commented that the discussions they had about computer problems not only
helped fix technical glitches but also created new learning opportunities to solve

52

problems. The e-portfolio software program mediated students’ problem-solving skills
by forcing them to discover what worked and what did not when converting files.
Selecting artifacts also forced students to analyze and determine whether the artifacts
truly reflected their academic growth. Several students commented that this analysis
encouraged them to identify how to improve the artifact.
Wang and Turner (2006), like earlier research did not provide specific details on
how the portfolio programs mediated student action. They did provide an overview, but
not much more. PowerPoint and Prezi are presentation tools very similar to e-portfolios.
All have the capability to encourage students to reflect, decide, and select information or
artifacts that demonstrate student learning. I investigated how PowerPoint and Prezi’s
special features mediate student actions. Like McDonald et al. (2005), I delved further
into what these programs and their special features can offer in the way of tool mediation
as outlined by Vygotsky (1987).
Goos at al. (2003), Neo and Neo (2009), and Wang and Turner (2006) examined
tools that previous studies only allude to or highlight. Goos at al. explored how graphing
calculators mediate student action and behaviors in a classroom arena. Earlier studies
only overview presentational programs on a large scale. For example, earlier studies did
not mention handheld calculators’ mobility feature. While Goos et al. focused on these
handheld devices as presenting the students’ thoughts and actions, the authors did not
expand beyond the mobility feature – for instance, how specific features mediated student
behavior.
The current study investigated devices with similar mobility features as handheld
calculators. Students had access to laptops and IPads as part of the study. Neo and Neo

53

(2009) examined several electronic interactive media programs that guided student
actions. Like many of the earlier reviewed studies, Neo and Neo only alluded to
presentational software programs. They did however highlight communication
advantages of emails and chats, as did Jacob (2006) and Grisham and Wolsey (2006).
These authors argued that electronic communication formats mediate students in a
positive way but did not go into detail on how the formats’ special features encouraged
specific student action. Wang and Turner (2006) explored a different presentational tool,
an e-portfolio. Again, like others, Wang and Turner did not examine the specific features
of the tool but rather only areas that directed student actions such as the new learning that
students experienced when converting files for the portfolio. They touched briefly on
how students’ previous experiences guided student actions when creating their eportfolios. Ho et al. (2011) also mentioned students’ previous experiences but only as a
starting point for student direct instruction.
Several studies, such as Grant and Branch (2005), have briefly noted the
challenges students face when using tools and how tools, such as the trifold board,
mediate students’ actions. Wang and Turner (2006) also highlighted challenges and how
new learning resulted. Each of the studies reviewed had a variety of opportunities to
explore in-depth how tools mediated student behaviors, but the researchers did not take
the opportunity to act further. Hoping to take advantage of these lost opportunities, I
explored how electronic tools such as PowerPoint and Prezi and their special features,
plus mobile devices such as IPads, mediate student actions in an eighth grade Earth
Science research assignments in the school library arena.

54

Tool Mediation with PowerPoint and Prezi Presentations
In the following section, I explore several studies that examine some of the
special features of PowerPoint and Prezi and how these features mediate student action.
As I noted earlier, studies investigating how presentational tools mediate student actions
are not abundant in the literature. Goos et al. (2003) and Neo and Neo (2009) discussed
presentational devices and software, but not how the special features mediated student
action. The explosion of electronic communication and delivery devices provides many
opportunities to investigate how Vygotsky’s (1987) tool mediation theory influences
student behavior. The following two studies examine how PowerPoint and Prezi features
mediate student action in a classroom arena. Both studies move closer to my study. Each
study examines one or two special features of PowerPoint or Prezi and documents how
they mediated student behavior. However, I expanded the number of special features
examined and added a different perspective to the conversation on Vygotsky’s tool
mediation theory.
In the first study, Kinchin and Cabot (2007) explored how a PowerPoint
presentation and a concept map mediated 37 third-year undergraduate dental students’
actions in the United Kingdom. During clinical instruction classes, students received an
introduction to a removable partial denture design in a PowerPoint presentation, as well
as a concept map. At the conclusion of the instruction, students completed a
questionnaire. The following class period, focus groups of six to nine students reflected
on their questionnaire responses more in-depth. Kinchin and Cabot uncovered that
PowerPoint presentations prompted the students’ behavior by presenting quick, bulleted
facts in order to study for a professional exam. One student commented it was an easy

55

way to memorize for upcoming exams. However, the students agreed that the concept
map provided more explicit and better-understood connections in the partial denture
construction process. They mentioned that the concept map format aided their in-depth
understanding of the denture design process. Students also noted that the concept map
encouraged discussions among themselves as well as with the instructor. All agreed that
the concept map provoked their long-term application of the construction process and
encouraged them to think beyond the linear bullet points of the PowerPoint. The concept
map design is a visual of creating a partial denture with connecting link, giving the
students a complete conceptual model – whereas the PowerPoint presentation does not
demonstrate variable connectors that are a part of the design process. The concept map
acts as a mediating guide for students when practicing and creating partial denture, while
PowerPoint bullet points do not have that affordance. The concept map also aided the
instructors’ understanding of the students’ procedure in denture making by allowing them
to compare whether the students’ denture making procedure was correct or not.
Kinchin and Cabot (2007) uncovered two types of mediating factors in
PowerPoint presentations and concept maps. Both are useful tools in promoting
understanding but on different levels. The authors report that PowerPoint presentations
aided with simple, quick recall for an exam. The program however does not necessarily
encourage long-term appropriation. On the other hand, Kinchin and Cabot highlight how
concept maps provided a detailed, visual example of the content knowledge. Each level
of the concept map provided significant detail for long-term understanding particularly in
a hands-on application. Kinchin and Cabot compared two PowerPoint presentation
features – the linear design, bullet point feature, and how they mediated student behavior.

56

However, student created PowerPoint presentations were not part of Kinchin and Cabot’s
study. In the current study, students created a PowerPoint or Prezi presentations instead
of viewing one for information. I investigate how special features such as the bullet point
application in PowerPoint and Prezi mediate middle school students’ actions, a
significantly younger population than Kinchin and Cabot’s. Similarly, to Grant and
Branch (2005), my exploration will be during real life, hands-on research units with the
application of information literacy and resource use in an Earth Science class.
In a more recent study, Ball (2012) explored how digital design tools such as a
Prezi mediated one graduate student’s writing and presentation of an academic
manuscript in a multimedia format worthy of publication in an online scholarly journal.
The semester long project allowed the student to apply her writing skills in what Ball
described as “webtext” (2012, p. 62). The student selected a topic of her choice and
using various scaffolded assignments, ultimately produced a completed webtext. Ball
pointed out that webtexts have the same strong writing and research components as a
conventional written product, but the goal is to have part of the student’s argument that in
an interactive format and not the written word. Ball explains that a visual multimedia
component must enact the student’s argument as part of the webtext. Assignment tools
such as rubrics, digital design tools, storyboards, instructor conversations, rough drafts,
and peer reviews at each stage of project mediated the student’s actions throughout the
semester.
Ball (2012) discovered that the student’s topic and argument guided what type of
design tool the student used to make the webtext. The present study had similar options
for students to select a presentation tool. However, it was on a more limited scale.

57

Students had the choice of PowerPoint or Prezi. In Ball’s study, a graduate student
wanted to use a Prezi to present her creative piece on her struggle and diagnosis of
fibromyalgia. Her goal was to demonstrate how her progress with the disease diagnosis
and her trigger points were different from the most commonly identified triggers in the
medical field. Prezi’s unique features mediated her selection of the program as her
presentational tool for the assignment. For example, Prezi allows users to create onscreen paths or frames that are not linear but rather present information as straight,
curved, or jutting as needed. Ball’s student could therefore custom design visuals
appropriately. In this case, the student used an outline of the front of a woman’s body to
display her creative writing sections. The visual representation of the student’s unique
trigger point links demonstrated her pain and also explained her argument in further
detail using nonfiction information about the disease. Ball’s study reflects Vygotsky’s
position that writing is the most complex tool. In this case, the webtext takes the writing
complexity to a higher level with an interactive visual that conveys the author’s intent.
Ball (2012) highlights how suggestions from a peer review encouraged the
student to add a second outline of a woman’s back to her storyboard to display her trigger
points as compared to the medical fields’ norms. Prezi features allowed the student to
have the freedom to create what she needed to reinforce her argument that there is very
little that is normal about fibromyalgia and how it affects individuals. The student also
used the assessment’s rubrics to guide her writing, as well as her visual display to refine
her webtext. Ball noted that the student was able to submit successfully her webtext for
publication in a scholarly online journal.

58

The prior two studies demonstrate the nuanced differences that tools have to offer
in motivating student actions. Ball’s (2012) student used the special features of the
Prezi’s nonlinear frames that directed her to create a webtext that reflected her struggle
with fibromyalgia. Her storyboard promoted her argument in a print format, but the Prezi
features supported her argument further in a nonlinear, interactive way. The peer
feedback received by the student also encouraged her actions further. Earlier studies
have also reflected on the importance of oral discussion that Vygotsky (1987) advocates
for. Kinchin and Cabot (2007) compared two types of electronic tools that directed
student actions in different ways. The PowerPoint’s special bullet features aided with
short-term recall, whereas concept map’s special features encouraged long-term
appropriation. Both are useful in mediating different student behaviors. The current
study moves beyond this, exploring how PowerPoint’s special features mediate more
than simple recall. Studies such as Jacobs (2006), Ho et al. (2011), and Grant and Branch
(2005) did not delve into the specific features of the technological tools that could
mediate student behavior. However, these two studies provide me with a solid
foundation to continue Smagorinsky’s (2011) position on an expanded examination of
Vygotsky’s theory of tool mediation.
Prezi has several special features that afford individuals the opportunity to create
interactive and effective presentations. Chou, Chang, and Pe (2015) and Yee and Hargis
(2010) suggest that the ability to organize relational concepts, such as what the student in
Ball’s (2012) study is one of the strongest special features that the program has to offer.
Strasser (2014) describes the opening frame as a “canvas” (p. 9) that allows the audience
to view and analyze the presentation’s big picture. He explains that the interactive

59

transition and zoom feature provides the opportunity to delve deeper into the subject
matter in a nonlinear and graphic fashion by directing the audiences’ attention to a
specific content and connections that the presenter deems vitally important. The option
to create a frame within a frame is a special feature not found in other presentational
software such as PowerPoint. Strasser also notes that the free, cloud-based access
promotes 24/7 use by individuals with the option for several individuals to collaborate on
the same presentation. Prezi offers a variety of backgrounds, color options, fonts, and
bullet text features that permits creativity and flexibility when designing a presentation.
Yee and Hargis also note that Prezi frames have the function to embed hyperlinks for
video presentation.
However, Berkun (2012) and Strasser (2014) outline several features that limit an
individual’s ability to design an interesting presentation when using Prezi. Berkun
believes that the transition and zoom features distract and confuse the audience. The
program attempts to force a spatial relationship where none may exist. Strasser suggests
that if the presentation content is not relational using Prezi’s zoom feature is unnecessary
and adds to the audiences’ confusion. Chou et al. (2015) and Jensen and Tunon (2012)
have noted similar negative reactions to the motion from their audience. Berkun states
that the motion sickness caused by the Prezi’s transition and zoom feature is a limitation
of the program. Other limitations that Berkun report include poor selection of
backgrounds and colors that hinders an individual’s creativity and flexibility. Berkun and
Strasser both note that the default settings limit and encourage poor presentation design.
Similar to Prezi, the PowerPoint program has special features that aid individuals
in creating an informative presentation. Hill, Arford, Lubitow, and Smollin (2012)

60

suggest the slide arrangement allows individuals to create an organized presentation. The
slide order in part creates an outline with visuals for the audience to follow during the
presentation. PowerPoint has print options for creating handouts for the audience to
record additional notes from the speakers’ presentation. PowerPoint users have access to
a large selection of background templates, colors, and fonts. Program features also
include a variety of slide motions and timing transitions for moving from one slide to the
next. Jensen and Tunon (2012) also note the program’s ability to embed photos and
hyperlinks into each slide. They further suggest that the bullet point features encourages
individuals to distill their message to the main ideas for the audience to view while the
presenter expands with additional detail. PowerPoint provides a 24/7 collaborative
feature for several individuals to work on single presentation. Chou et al. (2015)
mentions that the collaborative format eliminates the need to email files and maintains
the latest version for everyone involved.
PowerPoint has many benefits but the program also has some limitations. Hill et
al. (2012) depict the linear organization as an affordance, whereas Jensen and Tunon
(2012) view it as a limitation. Jensen and Tunon explain that the linear slide design
hinders an individual’s creativity and critical thinking when producing a slide show.
Additionally, the linear design hampers connecting relational concepts. Chou et al.
(2015) also believes the bullet point feature and slide size encourages poor practices by
forcing individuals to diminish the content and depth of the presentation’s message.
Similarly, the outline format reduces the opportunity for audience participation. Jensen
and Tunon point out that a free version of PowerPoint is not available as with some other
cloud-based presentational programs.

61

The overall objective of my study is to examine and describe how cultural tools
mediate student actions. Specifically, my goal was to examine how PowerPoint and
Prezi mediate eighth-grade students’ behaviors. Though prior research has investigated
the tool mediation on various level researchers have often overlook adolescent students,
despite that this is an important population in the eyes of Vygotsky (1998). According to
Vygotsky, this is the age of transition where mature critical thinking begins to develop in
earnest. Taking the ideas, suggestions, and missed opportunities from the reviewed
studies, I explore how student tool use and presentational tools mediate action in eighthgrade students. My study’s design exposed how these tools mediate action in a small
group of students. I examine the nuances of the special features of PowerPoint and Prezi
and how they mediate eighth-grade students’ behaviors when creating presentations for
two Earth Science class assignments. Building on Vygotsky’s work by using a
qualitative study design, I uncover some rich detailed experiences that will add to the
conversation on tool mediation in the transitional stage and its impact student
development.

62

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
Students today face a large array of electronic devices and ever-increasingly
complex software programs. For students to be effective users of information and
contributing members of the global community, they must master these electronic tools.
Though I have noticed over the years that students are eager to use these tools, I still
wonder how these tools mediate the students’ actions. Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of tool
mediation provides a foundation for exploring the impact that today’s devices and
programs have on students. Surprisingly, the education and library fields have few
studies that have examined this idea. I uncovered that some studies touch on how nonelectronic tools, such as easels or textbooks, mediate student action and some studies
address how computer program features such as fonts or use of capital letters mediate
student action. However, no studies have looked in depth at how electronic tools mediate
student action. My study examines how student tool use and the special features of the
presentational tools Prezi and PowerPoint mediate eighth-grade students’ actions when
researching in a school library during two Earth Science class assignments. The
following chapter outlines and explains how I captured and analyzed the participating
eighth-grade students’ actions. I prefaced this with my reasoning for selecting a
qualitative research study design, which set the stage for a detailed description of the
research site and participants, my techniques for gathering data, and a description of the
procedures for data collecting, coding, and analysis. The section concludes with a
discussion of my role as a researcher, as well as the trustworthiness and limitations of the
study.

63

Rationale for a Qualitative Study
Vygotsky’s (1987) work was a foundational element that informed my decision
on to select a qualitative study design. Vygotsky argued that an individual constructs an
understanding of the social and cultural world with their personal experiences, tool use,
and interactions with others while thinking about those experiences. An individual’s
personal experiences are constructed in a social and historical environment when
appropriating tools that mediate their actions. As noted by Smagorinsky (2011), “The
appropriate unit of analysis for the study of development of human consciousness is
volitional, goal-directed, tool-mediated action in a social context” (p. 250). Creswell
(2007) states that qualitative research study designs afford researchers the opportunity to
tease out any patterns in participants’ beliefs and actions. The intent of my study was to
discover if any patterns emerged when eighth-grade students use a variety of tools
including Prezi and PowerPoint for a class assignment.
My research inquiry was to gain an understanding of what Creswell (2007)
defines as a, “cultural-sharing group” (p. 14), which in this case, was a group of eighthgrade Earth Science students in a particular school setting. Kuhlthau (2004) encourages
additional research with more diverse library groups, such as middle school students. My
study offers another dimension to the literature by focusing on middle school students,
who have been sorely overlooked. I focused on how the special features of the
presentational tools Prezi and PowerPoint mediate student actions. Creswell argues that
a qualitative study design is appropriate for gathering rich, thick data for a study such as
this. He continues by suggesting that this type of data collecting requires the use of
detailed field notes and memoing, interview transcripts, observations, and the collection

64

of artifacts throughout the study. Understandably, the study’s findings cannot be
generalized because of the situated environment and the participants. However, the
findings will be of interest to the library field by adding to the ongoing discussion of how
tools mediate student actions in a school library arena.
Research site. The Knoxville Area School District (KASD) is a suburban
community located in south central Pennsylvania (all names and locations are
pseudonyms). KASD covers 43 square miles that includes Bussey and Chariton
Townships and the boroughs of Knoxville and Newton. The student population of 4,243
is 85% White, 8% Hispanic, 4% African American, 3% Asian, and .2% mixed heritage,
reflecting the diversity of the area. Of the overall district population, 8% is below the
poverty level, and 38% percent of the student population receives free or reduced
lunches. KASD has four K-4 elementary buildings, one middle school (KMS), and one
high school. KMS is the facility for grades 5 to 8 and has a student population of 1,268
as well as 87 faculty and numerous support staff. Students with an IEP make up 8% of
KMS building population.
KMS met their Adequate Yearly Progress (AYP) goals for 2012. The building
has consistently met their AYP goals for the last ten years. The attendance rate for the
building was 96%. The Pennsylvania System of School Assessment (PSSA) scores for
2012 show that 82% of the KMS student body was proficient or advanced in math.
Additionally, 75% of the student body was proficient or advanced in reading. The eighth
grade’s 2012 PSSA math scores placed 90% at proficient or advanced, 89% at proficient
or advanced in reading and 72% at proficient or advanced in science. KASD community
and faculty have a long history of stability. Many of the community members are

65

graduates of KASD. The district has a long record of employing graduates as teachers
and support staff. Currently, six KMS teachers are former students of mine. Nine district
faculty members have children attending KMS. KMS is an ideal site for the current study
because of its consistent academic achievement that reflects best instructional practices,
as well as the District’s motto, “Providing Opportunities to Achieving Success One
Student at a Time.”
Participants and sampling. To conduct this study, I obtained permission from
KASD Superintendent Dr. William Wyler and KMS building principal, Mrs. Mary
Norton. The cooperating Earth Science teacher is Mrs. Ruth Cavender. The participants
were eighth-grade Earth Science students from Mrs. Cavender’s classes. The rationale
for my decision to select eighth-grade Earth Science students was threefold. First, the
classes were in my building and located near the library. Therefore, these students had
been exposed to me as their librarian for four years and were used to me. Many of the
students saw me weekly, if not more. If I asked them to be part of a study, they would
not be concerned or surprised. In fact, the students were very excited to be involved. I
also believed our existing relationship meant these students would gave me genuine
answers and responses and not what they think I wanted to hear. Second, Mrs. Cavender
and I have a good personal and working relationship. In the past, we have created several
integrated instructional research units for Earth Science and Language Arts Enrichment
classes. Mrs. Cavender and I have also collaborated when working with students on
Science Fair projects in the past. Lastly, the Earth Science curriculum has at least four
research assignments in place that would work well for my study. Mrs. Cavender and I
felt that the Hydrology and the Science final research assignments would be the best fit of

66

the four assignments. Both assignments have a technology component where the use of
Prezi or PowerPoint was required. The assignment requirements or assessment rubrics
need very little modification for the current study. Both assignments included a student
oral presentation as the final assignment requirement. The study procedures did not
interfere with the delivery of the Earth Science curriculum to all eighth-grade students, as
was required by the KASD district.
Instructional context. My aim was to gain an understanding of how student tool
use, including presentational programs Prezi and PowerPoint, mediate student actions
when completing an Earth Science assignment. The participants were six 12-14 year old
eighth-grade middle school students. Research studies examining tool mediation have
largely overlooked this age group. Vygotsky (1987) argues for more studies with
students in the transitional age range of 12-16 years old. He reminds us that the journey
of human development needs to be explored and not just the mature product. Kuhlthau
(2004) recommended investigating this age group, as well. Eighth graders are
approximately in the middle of Vygotsky’s age range that he describes. I selected Prezi
and PowerPoint presentational programs as the tools to examine in the context of
Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of tool mediation. KASD is moving towards a paperless
environment with the purchase of more computer hardware and software for enhanced
community communication, electronic delivery of educational resources, class materials,
assignments, and assessments. Electronic and technological tools such as Prezi and
PowerPoint use will only be increasingly prevalent in the students’ lives. Thus, by
having students use the electronic devices and programs in the classroom, educators are
preparing students for life beyond graduation.

67

As a part of this transition towards a paperless environment, KASD teachers and
librarians have instructed students on how to use graphic organizers, Word, Publisher,
NoodleTools, Prezi and PowerPoint programs for their class assignments. Instruction in
the elementary classrooms and libraries, and computer classes on how to use graphic
organizers, Word, Publisher, NoodleTools, and PowerPoint occurred in fourth through
seventh grades. Teachers introduced Prezi to students during their eighth grade
Language Arts and Earth Science classes. A brief review of both Prezi and PowerPoint
is part of each research unit’s introduction. Handouts and instruction guides on how to
use the two programs are also available for the students at all times. As I noted earlier,
there are very few studies examine how Prezi or PowerPoint mediate student actions. By
doing so in this study, teachers and librarians will gain further insight into how electronic
tools could possibly mediate student actions in the classroom and library. These newly
gained insights add to the teachers and librarians’ instructional toolkit for future planning
and curriculum delivery.
I approached twelve eighth-grade students to ask if they would be interested in
being part of the study. I based the student selection on the previous experiences Mrs.
Cavender and I had with these students when they were in seventh grade. The students
were eager participant in a project in seventh grade. I hoped that they would be just as
willing to be part of this study. The individual student selection criterion was who
returned their completed consent forms first. The quick form return was an indicator to
me that the students wanted to be part of the study. My goal was to recruit three boys and
three girls because Smith and Wilhelm (2009) highlight studies that identified
achievement differences between males and females brains.

68

I scheduled the study for the second semester of the 2014-15 academic school
year. The Hydrology unit is normally the first unit in February and the Science Final is
the last unit in the school year, usually in the end of April, or the beginning of May. Each
research assignment allowed for five days in the library to work and complete the project.
Students presented their projects to the class over the three days directly following the
library workdays. Both research assignments allowed the students to choose either Prezi,
or PowerPoint as the presentational tool for their project. However, students who were
participating in the study were required to use Prezi for one assignment and PowerPoint
for the other. The students self-selected one of the six computers where the IT
department had installed Screencast-O-Matic (SOM) an online screen-recording program
that the students used to record their screencasts and dialogue. To teach students how to
use SOM, I demonstrated SOM with the example of how to locate a book on the OPAC.
The student participants used the same computers for both assignments. Figure 1 outlines
the timeline for gathering, transcribing, and analyzing data during the study.
Figure 1
Study Data Gathering and Work Timeline
February
March/April
Chesapeake Bay
Transcribing and
Critters Assignment
Analyzing
Data Gathering

May
Science Final
Assignment
Data Gathering

June
Transcribing and
Analyzing

Earth science assignment descriptions. The first research project assignment
was on Chesapeake Bay Critters. Students selected an organism that lives in the
Chesapeake Bay estuary. Students received very detailed instructions and subtopics for
their research focus. At the conclusion of the project, students were expected to be
knowledgeable about their topic. The final product was an oral presentation to their

69

class. The directions gave students a choice of a Prezi, PowerPoint, or website for their
oral presentation. The assignment details, grading rubric, and graphic organizer for this
assignment are located in Appendix A. As noted earlier, the participating students
limited their selection to either a Prezi or PowerPoint.
The second research project assignment was the last Earth Science project of the
school year, titled, Science Final. The students had the option of the taking a multiplechoice test or creating presentation on an earth science topic of their choice. Unlike the
Chesapeake Bay Critters project where the assignment instructions provided the research
topics, for the Science Final assignment the students created their own research questions
or topics to guide their work. The Science Final assignment had four requirements: a
student self-selected Earth Science topic, a five minute, or longer oral presentation, a
multimedia element such as video clip, and minimum of five sources in the works
consulted. Other than the four requirements, there were no limitations on what the
students could present. The student-directed topic and research was the foundation for
the assignment. During the interview with Mrs. Cavender, the science teacher stated that
the assignment design’s intent was to allow for student choice and decision-making.
Similar to the Chesapeake Bay Critters project, students may use a Prezi or PowerPoint
as the presentation component for their class presentation. However, the participating
students were required to select the presentation tool that they did not use in the
Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment. Assignment details and grading rubric for the
Science Final assignment are located in Appendix B.
Informants. The intent of the study was to document the students’ actions during
two Earth Science instructional research units. My research question was how the use of

70

presentational software tools mediates adolescents’ approaches to conducting research to
answer an informational need for an Earth Science class. In terms of the participants, my
goal was to have a sampling of three boys and three girls as key informants in the class. I
recruited from a group of students that Mr. Cavender and I had worked with when the
students were in seventh grade. The students who expressed a willingness to be part of
the study I used their first semester Earth Science grades and their seventh grade PSSA
Science Scores to make a final selection. Using the students’ scores made sure I have a
range of student academic abilities with no special requirements that I was seeking for the
study. All six students participated in the study for Assignment 1. However, one student
opted to take the multiple-choice test and therefore did not participate in Assignment 2.
Data Sources
I collected interview and observational data from each student as well as relevant
artifacts throughout the study. The following are the data sources that I used for data
collecting.
Semi-structured interviews. Prior to the first Earth Science instructional unit, I
interviewed participant about their technology use and prior experiences. At this point,
participants completed a short survey on their technology use. The student technology
survey is located in Appendix C. I wanted to establish a benchmark of each student’s
technological abilities and understandings. The survey was not intended to gather
quantitative data but rather act as an interview and conversation starter or icebreaker for
the students and myself. Hesse-Biber and Leavy (2011) described interviews as a
conversation between the researcher and the participant that focuses on a particular topic
but allows for latitude in the discussion for change. Keeping in mind Vygotsky’s (1987)

71

transitional stage that the students were in, I expected that some of the students needed to
be challenged to think beyond what they have experienced in the past. I gently nudged
student participants for their answers and thoughts, by using age appropriate, open-ended
questions such as, “what made you think that?” or “tell me more about that comment.”
The vocabulary used in the interviews did not have any jargon or unfamiliar language and
were appropriate for middle school students. My experience with this age group has been
that they are willing to share thoughts and ideas, as well as answer questions thoughtfully
and honestly. I followed the path the students wished to take during the discussions
while keeping the interview on track. At the conclusion of the second Earth Science
instructional unit, the participants took the survey same once again. The goal was to have
additional data on the student’s technology use and actions that may have appeared
during the course of the instructional units. Suggested questions for the interview
protocols are located in Appendix D.
Stimulated recall interviews. In order to obtain the data that describes possible
tool mediation I used stimulated recall interviews to collect varied responses from the
students. DiPardo (1994) describes stimulated recall interviews as a flexible process that
allows participants to read, review, and reflect in more detail on a lived experience.
Student reflection on their thinking and actions allows them to evaluate, with the hope of
revealing more details on what they did and thought. To obtain the transcripts for the
stimulated recall interviews, the students recorded their computer screen moves and their
dialogue using SOM as they worked on the two class assignments. At the conclusion of
each SOM recording, I transcribed the students’ SOM dialogues. Later, the students read
the transcripts and we watched and discussed the SOM recordings together during the

72

stimulated recall interviews. I interviewed each student twice. The first interview was at
the conclusion of the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment and the second interview at the
conclusion of the Science Final. During the stimulated recall interviews, I used the
suggested questions documented in Appendix D. I had the students respond and reflect
on what they said and did while working on the class assignments. I audiotaped both
student interviews. Each interview took about 20-25 minutes. The audiotaping gave me
an accurate and complete recording of the student’s dialogue, meaning I did not have to
rely on my memory for details. Audiotaping and speaking into a recorder was a new
experience for the participating students and they were a bit nervous. To compensate for
any nervousness, I started each interview with a practice question: “what is your favorite
part of being in eighth grade as compared to seventh grade?” The exercise gave each
student an example of how the interviews would work and how they sounded on a tape
recorder before starting the actual interview.
Field notes of observations. During the student’s five-day research period in the
library, I observed and recorded field notes on three specific areas: student interactions
and movements, technology and resource use, and students’ interactions with the teacher
or librarian. Purcell-Gates (2011) and Creswell and Miller (2000) note that field notes
are thick, rich, and detailed accounts that are part of the foundation of a qualitative study
because they document participants’ behaviors as they are happening. No one reading a
successful field note account should have any difficulty in creating a mental picture of the
events. Observing and taking field notes add another dimension to the student dialogues.
The student dialogue allowed me to hear what the students were saying whereas the
observation and field notes documented their physical actions, such body language,

73

conversations, and resources used, that might not appear in the audiotapes. Capturing
these elements complemented and created a complete picture of the students’ actions. In
addition, this type of data provided additional documentation and support for what the
students may say in their dialogues. I reviewed and reflected on my descriptions with
analytic memos and I conferred with Mrs. Cavender to gain another perspective for
accuracy on what I have documented.
The library facility has an area that is a natural location for the participating
students to work. There is small side wing of the computer lab area where students can
work undisturbed. Along with Mrs. Cavender, I reviewed the library-computer lab area
and felt this was the best location for the students as they would not be isolated from the
rest of the class or the library, but they would have minimal noise disruptions from the
rest of the library. I chose this particular area because the students could work, and
record their dialogue while I could observe and not disturb the rest of the class. I was
able to place myself in a location where I could observe, take notes, and still assist all
students during the project. Because the students are used to me being in close
proximity, my presence did not distract them.
In the three areas where I observed and took notes, I had specific criteria for each
area. When I was watching student interactions, I looked for whom the student spoke to,
what the topic was, and details of the conversation related to any possible assistance with
technology. For example, a participating student may ask for clarification about the
assignment or how their classmates tackled the assignment. I also included the number
of times the students interacted with their classmates and where they sat to work.
Vygotsky (1987) argues that oral language and collaboration is an important mediator of

74

human actions. It is as he says, “The word serves as means of interaction and mutual
understanding between the child and the adult” (p. 145).
The student’s technology and resources used was a critical piece of data that
needed to be collected for analysis. How technology, in particular, Prezi and
PowerPoint, mediates student action is the study’s foundation. I paid close attention to
how the student’s used Prezi and PowerPoint’s special features as they worked to
complete the class assignment. However, I noted in detail all types of technology and
resource use. Vygotsky (1987) argues that all types of tools: psychological, material, and
human mediate individual’s behavior in a specific social context. Vygotsky (1987)
explains, “The subject uses the sign as a means of directing his intellectual operations.
Depending on how the word is used, depending on its functional application, we are able
to study how the process of concept formation proceeds and develops” (p. 128). By
documenting all types of technology, I added further detail to the picture of my students’
actions. The resources and the information the students selected influence how they used
the technology.
The final area where I concentrated my observations and field notes was the
student’s access of and interaction with the teacher and librarian. Vygotsky (1987)
reminds us that language and discussion is society’s ultimate tool. What teachers and
librarians say and discuss with students in the course of their research may possibly
mediate student actions. Therefore, I wanted to capture the discussions that transpired
between the students and the teacher or librarian. I followed the students when they went
to speak to a teacher as to record what their actions were as result of those conversations.
This data was another source to analyze for possible examples of tool mediation.

75

Artifacts. Purcell-Gates (2011) defines artifacts as physical evidence of students’
learning and literacy practices. In this study, the student artifacts were electronic, but
they still had the capability of demonstrating students’ actions. I included students’ final
products as supporting documentation of the observations and student interviews. I
examined, in collaboration with Mrs. Cavender, the students’ final products and class
presentations. I looked for evidence of how the students effectively used the Prezi and
PowerPoint features to present what they learned about their topic and how the students
used the program’s features to their advantage. I also examined whether the students met
the assignment requirements. Thus, the grading rubrics and class presentations were
another component of data relevant to the student’s actions.
Class presentations gave additional data on student use of the technology. How
does the student maneuvered through the programs as they presented to their classmates
was one element that demonstrated technology use and how the technology mediated
their actions. Class presentations also gave insights into whether the students were
comfortable with the program and if they expanded on the displayed information in the
oral presentation. These types of data held possible indicators of how the information
from the resources mediated the students’ actions. I sifted through this data for
information on how does Prezi and PowerPoint mediate student actions when conducting
research for an Earth Science class assignment.
Teacher interviews. At the conclusion of each instructional unit, I interviewed
Mrs. Cavender. My objective was to gain another perspective and interpretation from the
teacher regarding the students’ actions during the research units. Her interviews included
her analysis of the students’ final products and class presentations. Mrs. Cavender’s

76

comments and reflections served as additional documented support for my observations
and the students’ interviews. I transcribed the interviews for easy use later as when
analyzing the students’ interviews and work.
Collection Techniques
I obtained permission from Temple University’s Institutional Review Board
(IRB) prior to start of the study. The potential participants were under the age of 18, and
a vulnerable population according to the IRB regulations. Once the IRB Committee
granted permission, I verbally presented the study to the potential participants along with
a letter to their parents explaining the study. Students who were interested in
participating received a permission and informed consent packet. I additional offered to
parents a follow-up contact, by email or by phone, to answer any questions they may
have had, review the paperwork, or discuss the study further. I recruited three girls and
three boys for the study.
I received a verbal assent from Mrs. Cavender to be a part of the study. Upon
IRB approval, I conducted a face-to-face discussion, and explanation of the study with
Mrs. Cavender who then signed the consent forms. The teacher’s assent was necessary to
plan and design the methodology for the study for the dissertation proposal defense and
ultimately submittal to the IRB Committee. The Earth Science instructional unit
requirements and assessments were also an important part of the study’s methodology.
Mrs. Cavender and the participating students selected pseudonyms to protect their
confidentially. I created a bank of pseudonyms for the students to select from to prevent
any small connection to the students’ identities that could occur with student-created

77

pseudonyms. I compiled the list of suggested pseudonyms, located in Appendix E with
character names from Tomi dePaola’s Mother Goose (1985).
I transported the audio-files from the school and stored the audio-files on a
password-protected computer located outside the KMS building. I transcribed the
interviews at my home. The transcribed interviews are stored on the same passwordprotected computer. The transcribed data and all the paperwork connected to this study
are stored in a secure location and destroyed three years after the study.
Data Analysis
Vygotsky (1978) defines the research process as an analysis that reveals dynamic
relations and identifies the points that foster and advance human action. It is not neat and
tidy, but a glorious muddle that fosters exploration and interpretation. It was my job to
find those dynamic relations and give meaning to them. As outlined earlier, I used
student stimulated recall interviews, field notes of observations, teacher semi-structured
interviews, and student artifacts as my data sources. I examined each data source for
instances of tool mediation on student actions. I kept analytic memos throughout the
study that will help guide and challenge to me as I attempted to make sense of the data
and bring some type of order to this muddle.
I analyzed student work to isolate tool use and actions over two Earth Science
instructional units. I divided the analysis by each student, each assignment, and finally
across both assignments. The student stimulated recall interviews and screencasts were
audiotaped, transcribed, and divided into what Smagorinsky (2011) calls segments or
content units. Smith and Strickland (2001) define a content unit or move as “a segment

78

of discourse designed to make a single point” (p. 150). After reading and segmenting the
students’ transcripts, I coded the data according to the tools that mediated students’
thinking and decision-making as they worked on the class assignments. Saldaña (2013)
defines codes as terms, phrases, or descriptive sections that capture a salient attribute or
action. He notes that codes can summarize data as well as condense it. At the beginning
of the study, I compiled a list of possible tools that could mediate student actions. Based
on my research questions, I established the four themes that I used to begin my reading
and segmenting: content knowledge, previous tool use, resource use, and tool use. As the
study progressed, I added or removed themes depending on the students’ actions while
working on the class assignments. Within the four initial coding moves, I formulated
twenty additional coding moves that segmented the students’ actions even further. The
content moves that appear for each subcategory in Table 12 demonstrate the number of
times that the move was identified during the analysis. I recognize that my coding only
suggests the magnitude of the impact of the use particular on the students’ subsequent
actions; however, frequency counts were only readily observable measure I had available.
I used the following themes to code the student transcripts.
Stimulated Recall Interviews and Computer Screencasts
Content knowledge. Content knowledge mediates student action as they work to
meet an instructional problem. For example, Kinchin and Cabot (2007) explored how
dental students’ content knowledge mediated their construction of partial dentures. The
content knowledge mediated how the students used that information when making
dentures. In the current study, I am seeking to locate similar data. Specifically, how and
why students’ content knowledge mediated their actions during their research. Life

79

experiences and interests included students’ outside-of-school experiences or personal
interests that prompted their actions when working. For example, “I have been to the
Smithsonian. I know they have a remarkable group of fossils.” Previous instructional
units directed student actions when working on the class assignments, such as “The
largest source of runoff is agricultural runoff. Isn’t what we talked about before in
class?” Topic information both image and text, that encouraged students to explore
further their topic. For example, “Because of their dense bone they [common loon] need
a long runway. What I am going to do is find a video of a loon taking off.”
Previous tool use. Previous tool use mediates students as they work to
appropriate new tools. Ho et al. (2011) examined how middle school students’ previous
tool use mediated their actions as they designed a museum gallery. Their previous use of
the museum gallery program mediated their design, captions, and images selected for the
project. My aim was to identify the tools that mediated student action and discover how
and why this occurred. Students’ poor handwriting or spelling motivated them to use
spellcheck or electronic note taking. For example, “How do you spell circumstance?”
Students use of computer login procedures to access Destiny, or Chrome that guided their
actions when researching. For example, “I’m logging in on the network and going to
Destiny.” Student actions that provoked decisions while conducting research and taking
notes on their topic such as, “I decided not to do the three different types of coral reefs. I
read in a book there is not much difference.” Web evaluation strategies students use to
decide on appropriate websites. For example, “I knew it was okay.”
Resource use. Students participating in the current study were required to use a
variety of resources for their Earth Science class assignments. Rojás-Drummond et al.

80

(2014) examined how three different types of library resources mediated sixth-grade
student actions. The resource format and content, in this case an encyclopedia and
magazine mediated how the students’ selected the relevant information needed. In the
current study, however students were required to use more resources in their projects. I
identified how those resources directed student actions and why the students made the
decisions that they did. Databases were the subscription electronic resources that
supported student actions during their research. For example, “I went to SIRSDiscoverer
and picked up some information.” Google search provided the possible websites or
images that influenced student actions in exploring what was available such as, “Let’s go
back to my Olber’s Paradox list. There it is the University of Oregon.” Responses or
questions from teachers, classmates, or the librarian directed student action while
working. For example, “Mrs. K says I have too much text in my slide. I have to make it
shorter.” Print library collection that students used that aided their decisions in their
research such as, “In one of the books, the chapters were like questions. I used them to
guide my research.” Website content that motivated student action in understanding and
selecting details for their projects. For example, “That website was a big help in helping
me understand the area.”
Tool use. Newell (2009) explored how students used tools to address a less
structured problem. The problem forced the students to use a variety of tools and seek
help. I identified segments similar to what Newell uncovered that demonstrate student
tool use and why the students did what they did when working on the class assignment.
The assignment instructions and supporting handouts that guided student actions
throughout each project, “I would read and write down stuff that answers the sections on

81

the graphic organizer.” NoodleTools special features provoked negative student actions.
For example, “Websites in NoodleTools aren’t easy to do.” NoodleTools special features
that provoked positive student actions such as, “The [annotation] notes [section] were
reminders for me. I didn’t have to try to remember what was best for me and which
wasn’t.” PowerPoint’s special features prompted negative student actions For example,
“Oops…I created 80 or more slides.” PowerPoint special features prompted positive
student actions such as, “I could get everything to work [in PowerPoint]. I used pictures
that I cropped to fit.” Prezi’s special features that motivated negative student actions.
For example, “I couldn’t get everything to work [in Prezi] like I wanted it to.” Prezi
special features motivated positive student actions such as, “The transition from slide [in
Prezi] is smoother and classier looking.” The websites that students consulted
encouraged student actions during their research. For example, “Oh Biokids from the
University of Michigan.edu that’s really good maybe we should look at that.”
Field Notes of Observations
Computer moves. Thompson (2012) and Grant and Branch (2005) highlighted
computer moves and features that mediated student actions but focused on only one or
two features, such as capital letter usage and font size. I examined for additional special
features and captured various computer moves students made during their research. The
additional computer moves provided evidence of what types of computer features the
students used and how those features mediated the students’ actions.
Interactions. Vygotsky (1987) advocated that human discussion and interactions
play an important role in tool mediation. He explained that oral language is one of the
most important tools that mediate human action. The type of research assignments that

82

the students conducted during the current study lends themselves well to interactions and
discussions with others. Middle school students are social beings and Myers et al. (2009)
reflected this behavior in their studies. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) also described the
importance of oral language in students’ actions. I documented my students and their
classmates’ discussion topics. These interactions added another dimension of how oral
language mediated their actions.
Physical moves. The physical location of resources and individuals mediate
student actions. McDonald et al. (2005) noted how the physical location of an easel and
chair mediates the actions of five-year olds. Limberg and Alexandersson (2003) also
noted how a library arena and resource location mediates students’ actions when
conducting research. A library layout is much different from a classroom and
documenting where the students sat and moved to use the various resources shed light on
how their physical movement mediated their action.
Resource use. The very center of the two instructional units of this study is
research. Students were required to use a variety of print and electronic resources to meet
the assignment requirements. Grant and Branch (2005) provided examples of the type of
tool mediation that resources had on student actions. When documenting resource use, I
aimed to record two important facets: first, the resource type and second, how the student
used the resource’s information to meet the assignments’ requirements.
Artifacts
Content knowledge. Content knowledge mediates what types of tools students
use to accomplish a task as noted by Darvin (2008). He stated that text format and
content mediates what type of tools students use to negotiate a text. Foos and Majid

83

(2007) also documented how students’ information literacy skills mediated their actions
when conducting research. The students’ who participated in the current study had newly
acquired Earth Science content knowledge that mediated their actions. In my analysis, I
captured any segments that revealed how the content knowledge mediated the students’
delivery of the final project.
Resource use. Resource use mediating student actions was reoccurring theme.
Kumpulainen et al. (2014) demonstrated in their study how resource use mediated their
students’ writing of a school musical. The electronic resource features, delivery, and
communication elements mediated the students use and writing. Neo and Neo (2009)
investigated how multimedia programs mediated students’ action when creating a
presentation. The assignment requirements afforded students several options for types of
resources: human, electronic, and print. The students in the present study had similar
opportunities and access to electronic resources. In parsing the data, I identified the
segments that reflected how the electronic resource features mediated the students’
actions when working.
Tool use. Students presented their final projects in an electronic format to their
classmates. Both Earth Science projects required students to use a presentational
program to deliver their assignment. Participating students used a Prezi or PowerPoint
for their class presentation. Ball (2012) investigated how the presentational tool Prezi
mediated the delivery of a student’s research on fibromyalgia. Jacobs (2006) highlighted
how the special features of Instant Messaging (IM) mediated high school students’
decisions and actions. Each program has features that mediate student action. The
participating students’ presentational programs mediated their actions in a similar

84

fashion. By examining the students’ presentations, I identified how the students used
technology to deliver their assignment.
As I read the interviews, I expected additional themes to appear. I made
modifications to the descriptions of themes I initially created. My intent was to have
these segments begin to assemble a picture that tells a story of how tools mediated my
students’ actions. For example, if a student used the outlining features in NoodleTools to
organize their notes, they then can create their slides and use the visual slide sorter to
arrange them into the order they want for their presentation.
Semi-structured Teacher Interviews
I audiotaped Mrs. Cavender’s interviews. Her interviews have a twofold purpose.
First, I used her comments and reflections for the analysis of my initial themes. I kept in
mind my initial themes when reviewing her interviews to determine if she noticed the
same student actions as I did. The review helped to clarify and solidify the themes and
their definitions. I also used Mrs. Cavender’s interviews to corroborate that I had coded
the segments correctly. Mrs. Cavender’s interviews provided another perspective and
additional themes or interpretations that I may not have discovered on my own. In turn, I
used the new revelations to reanalyze the students’ interviews and artifacts. The second
purpose of Mrs. Cavender’ interview was to evaluate the students’ artifacts. The
interviews helped me to determine that I had correctly analyzed the students’ artifacts for
the themes that I identified.
All the segmenting was completed using Atlas.ti 6.2, a qualitative data analysis
and research computer program. The program allows for easy parsing, moving,
comparing, and adding themes as a study moves forward. I am a visual learner and the

85

colorful visual computer feature aided in my dividing and interpretation of the data. All
together, analyzing the various data sources’ content gave me a plethora of possibilities
that I read, reviewed, and compared on my journey to identifying Vygotsky’s points of
advancement. Those pieces that I uncovered helped to form a picture that tells a story of
how tools mediate my students’ actions when conducting research.
Trustworthiness
Creswell and Miller (2000) argue that one of the challenges of a qualitative study
is demonstrating that the study is worthwhile. To address this argument, I used a variety
of procedures that will help in establishing validity of my work. As suggested by
Creswell and Miller, I triangulated my study by using artifacts, peer reviews, and
descriptive field notes. In addition, I took into account how I viewed the data and any
resulting themes that appeared. In other words, I considered whether my perceptions, the
research topic, and participants’ perceptions made sense and clearly showed different
avenues to the same conclusion.
I shared transcripts and reviewed students’ final projects with Mrs. Cavender in
order to obtain an additional perspective from another adult and receive critical feedback
throughout the study. Mrs. Cavender confirmed what she saw, read, and heard. These
ongoing conversations during the study gave me other viewpoints to consider as I
reviewed and evaluated the study’s progress. An additional outside group of colleagues
who gave critical feedback was my dissertation committee members. Their viewpoints of
the ongoing study and wisdom helped guide and challenge me as I progressed through the
study.

86

Role of Researcher
Smagorinsky (2011) argues that Vygotsky’s theoretical framework has
considerable merit for researchers in today’s educational arena. However, he advocates
for a more expanded view of Vygotsky’s work. Smagorinsky describes the changing
landscape of how researchers perceive Vygotsky’s work and concludes that researchers
need to adapt their thinking on how they conduct research. Specifically, researchers need
to accept themselves as part of the study and that they are an additional tool that mediates
the learning of the students. The idea of a researcher being a part of a study is critical in
a study of middle school students conducting research. Researchers influence students’
actions and must not be ignored, but rather embraced as part of the study. The
instructional units designed for this study address this important element as the teacher
and I were actively involved with the students as they completed the assignments. We
play a significant role in these students’ academic lives. Thus, it made sense that the
teacher and I influenced the students’ actions. My role in the research project was, as
Guba and Lincoln (1994) call it the “passionate participant” (p. 112). I understood that
my values, beliefs, actions, and life experiences would influence the students as well as
Mrs. Cavender. I recognized that my perceptions and experiences would play a part in
my interpretation of the data. The library arena would also influenced the students’
actions. All of these influences mediated the student, the teacher’s, and my actions
throughout the course of the study. The data gathered in this study provided an additional
insight into how human, print, and electronic tools mediate middle school students’
actions when conducting research. The study provided new data for my colleagues and
myself to collaborate and plan. I understood that I may not have made a huge impact on

87

the research field but if my research in some small way added to the discussion, it has
been worth it.
Limitations
The current study investigated how tools mediate middle school students’ actions
when conducting research. Recent studies on tool mediation neglect the middle school
age group as a study population. Vygotsky (1987) argues that this age is when
researchers should be taking a close look at how tools mediate the actions of individuals
who are beginning to mature in conceptual thinking. He reminds by saying, “Only after
the age of 12 that the child begins to develop the processes that lead to the formation of
concepts and abstract thinking” (Vygotsky, 1987, p. 123). Kuhlthau (2004) and other
researchers have recognized that the new electronic resources mediate student actions but
are only starting to explore this area. I focused on only two electronic tools, Prezi and
PowerPoint, and their mediating influence on student actions. The study’s implications
are not generalizable across all middle school students because of the unique group of
individuals that participated in the study. The hope is that my study added to the ongoing
discussion about tool mediation, information literacy, and middle school age students.

88

CHAPTER 4: RESULTS
My research question for this study was how library resources and the
presentational software tools Prezi and PowerPoint mediate adolescents’ approaches to
conducting research in effort to answer an informational need for an Earth Science class.
As seen in Table 1 as well as the results of the stimulated recall interviews, in
Assignment 1 the tool that most influenced student actions was the assignment
requirements. On the other hand, the content knowledge – topic/visual details mediated
student actions the most in Assignment 2. I also discovered that although the students
displayed commonalities in their actions different mediating tools uniquely influenced
each student’s actions. Although not necessarily the presentational tools as I had
anticipated. However, what is interesting to note is how the various tools did
successfully mediate students’ actions to meet their informational needs. Through a
discussion of the study’s findings, I will attempt to illustrate how and what tools
mediated the students’ actions as they worked to answer two class assignments for an
Earth Science class.
Charlie
Charlie is a 14-year old eighth-grade student at KMS. He is a tall, quiet young
man with a wicked sense of humor. His twin sisters remarked that Charlie is a great older
brother but he does tease them a bit. Charlie’s history teacher, Mrs. Carson, shared that
Charlie connects his schoolwork to his personal interests to make insightful contributions
in class. For example, Charlie shared his interest in the American Civil War by
explaining his participation in a Civil War reenactment group to his class. His classmates
hold him in high regard and continually seek him out. Mr. Conine, Charlie’s math

89

teacher, noted that Charlie leads by example and gets along with everyone. Charlie
mentioned that he enjoys language arts and has an A- in science. However, math is his
least favorite subject.
Table 1
Charlie’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

0

25

-

.18

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

5

32

.04

.23

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
3

.02

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
1

.01

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
6

.04

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

1

0

2

2

1

.01

-

.01

.01

.01

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

0

9

32

18

3

-

.06

.23

.13

.02

Assignment 1. As Table 1 revealed, the assignment requirements was the
overriding tool that mediated Charlie’s actions. Of Charlie’s total moves while
researching, 23% were from this category. He also had the lowest number of moves
made as compared to the other students in the same category. Charlie did use a unique
set of tools. For example, 23% of his content moves were in Prezi negatives category
and 18% were in the topic/visual detail category. In addition, with April, Hector, Jerry,
Lucy, and Mary, the assignment requirements also contained their highest number of
content moves. However, beyond the assignment requirements category each student had
his or her own distinct actions and tool use.
The actions Charlie took to begin the project were very similar to that of the other
students. The verbal assignment instructions prompted Charlie to reread the assignment
handouts. I noticed he pondered for several minutes before starting to work. He
admitted to me that he was brainstorming how he wanted his presentation to go and
where he would start looking for information. Charlie explained, “I was thinking about

90

where I could start and where I could go for information.” The assignment requirements
motivated Charlie to read and keep circling back to the handouts. Purcell-Gates et al.
(2007) explain that explicit assignment requirements focus and guide student actions –
precisely what occurred with Charlie. I observed him on several occasions doublechecking the assignment requirements as he worked. The requirements prompted Charlie
to reflect on and carefully examine his work as he completed each part of the assignment.
His final action before finishing his presentation was to double-check his Prezi content
against the assignment requirements and scoring rubric.
The assignment requirements encouraged Charlie to take up tools that he had used
in the past. After rereading the assignment requirements, Charlie decided how he was
going to attack the assignment. He logged onto the network, opened up Destiny, and
signed on to NoodleTools. The assignment directions prompted Charlie to access the
Destiny homepage for the suggested websites and the NoodleTools login screen. His
actions eliminated the need for typing or remembering the URLs. Charlie shared with me
he believes his organization is better when using NoodleTools: “I personally think I am
better organized in NoodleTools than on paper.” As an example, the assignment required
eight subtopics of information related to Charlie’s topic, the common loon. I noticed
Charlie using the subtopics from the assignment handouts to label his notes in
NoodleTools. Each time Charlie created a notecard he typed a subtopic that he decided
fit the information he discovered. He used the required eight subtopics as headings in
NoodleTools to organize his notes. NoodleTools has special features that connect
assignment subtopic headings to notes and resources. Information about the resources
can be used later to create a bibliography or works consulted. A works consulted was

91

another requirement of the assignment and this requirement provoked Charlie to use
NoodleTools citation feature. The grading rubric from the assignment requirements on
the other hand, encouraged Charlie to evaluate his project by comparing his work to the
scoring guidelines. These are examples of what Grant and Branch (2005) describe as
computer-driven tools, such as the notetaking fields, that aid students in their work. The
program’s special features prompted students’ decision-making and reflection on how
they would approach the assignment.
Charlie disliked his handwriting so much that typing his notes in NoodleTools
was, in his opinion a better option. His actions support what Thompson (2012) notes in
his study that computer programs such as Word remove barriers to writing by allowing
the individual to focus on the written content instead of their handwriting technique.
Typing also eliminated the possibility of Charlie misinterpreting or misplacing his notes.
The notetaking fields in NoodleTools provide a space for typing the needed information
for each of the required eight subtopics. Again, the assignment requirements guided
Charlie to reflect and decide to use the special features in NoodleTools.
Another special feature of NoodleTools is that it is web-based and available 24/7.
Charlie remarked, “I can access it from home. So, if I wanted to work from home I
could.” The 24/7 feature expanded Charlie’s options and allowed him to work outside
the school day, encouraging him to meet the assignment’s due date. Kumpulainen et al.
(2014) highlight similar positive student reactions to not being limited to working during
the school day.
The assignment requirements provided Charlie with resources as a starting point
for his research. Initially, I suggested three websites as a starting place to locate

92

information. Foo and Majid (2007) describe teacher guidance such as website
recommendations as one of the many tools that encourage student actions. During our
interview, Charlie stated he started with the first website suggested in the opening
directions. He explained, “I went on the Chesapeake Bay Project.” As with past
assignments, websites hyperlinks for assignments are located on Destiny. The teacher
and librarian’s verbal directions that Foo and Majid describe as coaching, directed
Charlie’s actions to begin with those websites with the understanding the students were
not limited to those three. Later on, a verbal recommendation from a classmate of a
fourth website, “All About Birds” motivated Charlie to explore and evaluate what this
website had to offer. There, he discovered new information that was not available on the
other three websites. The verbal recommendation prompted Charlie to examine a new
website. In addition, the new topic details encouraged Charlie to reevaluate his
presentation and include what he had found.
The assignment requirements had one subtopic titled “Interesting Facts.” The
“Interesting Facts” subtopic allowed the students to include unique or unusual
information that did not fall into the other seven subtopics. The “Interesting Facts”
subtopic was included to encourage student to expand their research and add information
beyond the basic requirements. Charlie admitted the fourth website provided hyperlinks
to the birdcalls, which gave him the idea to add this to his presentation. He explained, “I
made sure I could get the “All About Birds” website in for my presentation for the loon
calls.” The special birdcall hyperlinks located on the “All About Birds” prompted
Charlie to decide to include a recording of the loon’s call as part of his presentation to the
class. The requirements did not specifically require examples of birdcalls, but Charlie

93

believed the birdcall was interesting enough to include it in the “Interesting Facts”
subtopic frame. Charlie wanted to broaden his presentation beyond just images and text.
In his opinion, the idea of including the birdcalls was an added touch. Charlie’ actions
support Neo and Neo’s (2009) description of how ideas and interests motivate individuals
to use tools to demonstrate their original thoughts and creativity.
The presentation tool Charlie selected for his assignment was Prezi. The
assignment requirements offered students a choice of Prezi or PowerPoint. After much
deliberation, the assignment requirements prompted Charlie to evaluate the presentational
tools and choose Prezi for his presentation. As he said in his screencast, he did not like
Prezi: “I will be doing a Prezi well because I really want to get this over [with].” Of
Charlie’s total moves, 23% were in the Prezi negatives category. Charlie wanted to get
the Prezi requirement over with so he could use PowerPoint for his later project. The
special features of Prezi, such as zoom in and out contributed to his negative perception
of the tool. Charlie successfully used the zoom feature in his comparison of the
cormorant and common loon in his presentation. However, he was not comfortable with
it and said so during his interview. Charlie remarked, “Even when I was presenting, I felt
like I was all over the place.” Smagorinsky (2011) reminds us that not every individual
“takes up and makes use of” (p. 32) tools in the learning process. Charlie used Prezi
because he was required to.
Charlie felt he was fiddling with Prezi’s special features instead of concentrating
on the content. Though he tolerated using the Prezi, he felt he could not get the program
to do what he wanted for his presentation. His struggles are examples of Smagorinsky’s
(2011) five levels of tool appropriation that individuals move through as they learn to

94

master cultural tools. For example, Charlie wanted to include a link to the loon call but
his limited experience with Prezi rendered him unable to do so. Therefore, his basic
Prezi tool use prompted him instead to employ tools that he was far more capable of
using in order to adapt his presentation. Wang and Turner (2006) remind us that
technology is not always foolproof and to expect problems such as what Charlie
experienced. The technological barriers encouraged Charlie to reflect and problem-solve
to overcome the challenges that he faced. To resolve the problem of having access to the
loon call during his presentation Charlie opened a second Chrome tab with the loon call
hyperlink. He then switched back and forth between the windows during the
presentation. Charlie remarked, “I had to go outside the Prezi for the loon call.” The
problem of accessing the loon call hyperlink encouraged Charlie to problem-solve
whereas NoodleTools citation fields prompted him to evaluate his website credentials to
create his works consulted.
Charlie discovered on “All About Birds” that a common loon needs considerable
water space and length to take off. The interesting information encouraged Charlie to
reflect and search for a video clip of a loon taking off. Charlie felt the takeoff
information was important enough to include as part of his presentation under
“Interesting Facts.” However, he was unable to locate such a clip. The inability to locate
a video clip provoked Charlie to reevaluate and amend his Prezi frame. He commented,
“I could not find a way to put in a video of a loon taking off.” Charlie returned to his
notes and reread what he had written about loons taking off. The lack of a tool such as a
video clip directed Charlie back to his notes, which he then used to describe in detail to
the class how a loon takes off. The lack of a video clip prompted Charlie to evaluate and

95

problem-solve regarding how he would share the takeoff information with his class. His
topic details also prompted Charlie to explain to his classmates the length a loon needs to
take off whereas the inability to embed the loon call link in his Prezi prompted Charlie to
problem-solve to overcome the barrier. Wang and Turner (2006) note that problemsolving directs individuals into continually to reflect, review, and amend to demonstrate
their new learning.
The assignment requirements, topic/visual details, Prezi negative features, and
positive special features categories mediated Charlie’s actions and behaviors. Of course,
Charlie would not have done what he did in his presentation if it were not for the
assignment’s requirements. However, the assignment requirements also influenced
Charlie to use the topic/visual details and explore for new information beyond the
assignment’s requirements. Topic/visual details category reflected 18% of Charlie’s
moves. For example, Charlie discovered information about how the cormorant is
commonly mistaken for a common loon. He explained, “It [website] said you could
possibly mistake a double-crested cormorant for a common loon.” Charlie found the
identification error interesting and believed it would add another dimension to his Prezi.
Charlie’s interest encouraged him to evaluate and expand his presentation beyond the
basic eight requirements by adding a comparison frame. He created a side-by-side frame
that displayed both birds. During his presentation, Charlie enlarged the photos to point
out the differences to the class. Another interesting idea that prompted Charlie to go
beyond the assignment requirements was the birdcall hyperlinks that he discovered. The
birdcall link idea encouraged him to include the loon call as part of his presentation. Neo

96

and Neo (2009) suggest that high interest in a topic, such as what Charlie experienced,
encourages students to seek out new information beyond the required elements.
Charlie’s negative experiences of Prezi tool use motivated him to seek other tools
in order to meet the assignment requirements. For example, despite disliking the zoom in
and out feature Charlie was able to get it to work for his comparison of the loon and
cormorant. On the other hand, Charlie was not able to embed the birdcall hyperlinks in
the Prezi frames. He said, “I did get pictures in but I never did get the sound to work.”
The inability to get the birdcall link into the slide provoked Charlie to reevaluate his
Prezi. He overcame the obstacle by opening up a second Chrome tab for the birdcall
hyperlinks. Another obstacle Charlie faced was the inability to locate a video clip of a
loon taking off. The lack of a video clip motivated him to reread and delve further into
his notes. He carefully reviewed how the loon takes off and explained it in detail during
his presentation. Charlie remarked, “So I had to explain it [loon taking off] to the class.”
Wang and Turner (2006) suggest that individuals’ evaluation of information promotes
decision-making and problem-solving. Charlie’s reflection encouraged his thinking and
decision-making so that he could clearly articulate to his class how a loon takes off.
Charlie’s disappointing experiences using Prezi confirmed and strengthened his dislike of
Prezi. However, both the positive and negative Prezi tool use encouraged a deeper
engagement with other tools such as the topic/visual details that Charlie did use and
ultimately fostered his critical thinking. In the next section, a different set of tools
mediated Charlie’s actions for the second assignment.
Assignment 2. As Table 2 revealed, a different set of tools mediated Charlie’s
actions in Assignment 2 as compared to Assignment 1. For example, in Assignment 1,

97

23% of Charlie’s actions were attributed to the assignment requirements, whereas in
Assignment 2, only 5% were noted in the same category. Instead, in Assignment 2,
Charlie’s highest number of content moves appeared in the notetaking/research category
at 32%. As in Assignment 1, in Assignment 2, Charlie also made use of other tools that
mediated his actions. His second highest percentage of moves was in website resource
category at 14%, followed by the topic/visual details category and life
experiences/interests category.
Table 2
Charlie’s Assignment 2 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

18

1

22

.10

Resource Use
Print
Collection
7

.04

.01

Resource
Use
Websites
24

.14

.13

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements
9

.05

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
6

.04

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
2

.01

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
5

.03

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

56

0

2

3

1

.32

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives
0

-

-

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives
0

-

.01

.02

.01

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

1

0

13

.01

-

.08

I noticed that Charlie followed a similar pattern as the other students when
starting the assignment. He listened to the directions, reread the handout, and paused to
reflect and decide how he wanted to create his presentation. Charlie did not hesitate on
his decision to design a presentation instead of taking a multiple-choice test. Of Charlie’s
moves, 10%were in the life/experiences category. He had the highest percentage in this
category among all five students. Charlie selected fossils as his topic, sharing with me,
“I’ve always been interested in fossils.” Charlie’s personal interest motivated him in his
selection of his topic. Thompson (2012) notes how personal interests and prior life
experiences encourage individuals to select research topics. The assignment
requirements encouraged Charlie to decide to create a presentation, whereas the Earth

98

Science topic requirement directed him to evaluate and adapt his topic. I noticed similar
actions in Lucy, April, Hector, and Jerry. Charlie’s topic did pose a challenge on what he
wanted to present to his audience. The topic of fossils relates more closely to biology
than to earth science. Charlie said, “I would like to have done prehistoric life but that
was considered biology. So I had to go with paleontology.” Charlie’s personal interest
in fossils motivated him to reflect, evaluate, and decide how to investigate his topic and
still meet the science final topic requirement.
The parameters of the paleontology field prompted Charlie carefully to evaluate
how he would approach his topic. Of Charlie’s content moves, 32% were in the
notetaking/research category, the highest for Assignment 2. Charlie initially planned to
discuss the different types of fossils and their locations in the world. During the
interview, he reflected on what he was thinking of presenting to his class, “I would like to
tell about the different kinds of fossils.” Vygotsky (1987) argues that an individual’s
interest in a topic is a motivating factor that contributes to their mental growth. He
continues by saying an individual’s interest encourages increased decision-making and
problem-solving. Charlie’s interest in fossils prompted him to reflect and decide what he
planned to share in his presentation. However, the requirements motivated his decisionmaking to focus his presentation in paleontology instead of biology.
I noticed that Charlie located several print resources from the library collection.
He took notes in NoodleTools on some information from the titles that he found. Charlie
used NoodleTools for notetaking as he did in Assignment 1. He remarked, “The books
were helpful. I found the different types and definitions.” Charlie’s previously held
ideas about his topic promoted him to explore the print collection for information.

99

McDonald et al. (2005) stress that cultural beliefs and practices mediate an individual’s
actions. Charlie relied on cultural tools such as the print library collection that have
served him well in the past to start his research. During the interview Charlie said, “They
[books] were very worthwhile. That is where I got my first ten facts.” I noticed during
class that Charlie did not need any reminders about exploring what was available in the
library nonfiction section. He reviewed a cart of books and then went straight to the
library collection. The nonfiction section encouraged Charlie to browse, evaluate, and
select resources that he believed were useful for his topic. He found what he needed on
his own, whereas the other students needed a verbal nudge towards the print library
collection.
After Charlie reviewed all of the available print resources on his topic, he moved
onto searching the World Wide Web. Of Charlie’s moves, 14% were in website use
category. The other students’ content moves in this category were not as high as
Charlie’s. I noticed that he started by searching the Smithsonian Institute website. When
questioned about his choice he replied, “I have been to the Smithsonian and they have a
remarkable collection of fossils.” Charlie’s life experiences therefore, encouraged him to
start with a museum website. Charlie added, “I thought it would be a good place to
start.” Van Aalst et al. (2007) note that their students prefer web-based resources because
they are easy to use. Once Charlie had exhausted all his options with library books, he
moved onto web-based resources. Easy access to the Smithsonian website and his
positive experiences at the museum influenced Charlie to decide to begin there.
What Charlie discovered on the Smithsonian website challenged his thinking. He
did not have the results that he had hoped he would find. Charlie paused and read over

100

the screen’s content. When I asked about this, he said, “The website looks like it has a
lot but not what I wanted.” Charlie continued by noting, “I kept finding stuff about
biology and not the paleontology fossil topic. That is not what I wanted.” Finally, in
frustration, he paused and reflected for a few minutes, and then amended his search
terms. Charlie said during the interview, “There [pointing at the screen] is where I
changed to the types of fossils and location.” Based on his lack of success, Charlie had
decided that his search term “fossils” was too broad. He changed his term to “fossil and
location” in hopes of better results. He remarked on the success of this change, “I
switched to type and location, and did better.” McDonald et al. (2005) and Kuhlthau
(2004) document how emotions mediated student actions. Emotions influence how
students address the situation they were facing. Charlie’s lack of success frustrated him
and prompted him to stop and reflect on what terms he was using. In the end, Charlie
changed his search terminology.
I observed in the screencast that as Charlie explored different sources, depending
on what he discovered, his presentation content evolved. The topic/visual details
category influenced 13% of Charlie’s moves. Spires et al. (2012) note that student
created research questions encourage student reflection by evaluating the newly found
content against their research questions and expectations. Newell (2009) adds to the
conversation by including that a less structured problem encourages self-reflection and
decision-making on the part of the individuals. As an example, Charlie discovered the La
Brea Tar Pits when searching. He shared with me that this was unexpected and very
interesting. Based on his discovery, Charlie added several slides and a video about the
tar pits. The La Brea Tar Pits Museum website provided information that helped Charlie.

101

He said, “The website was a big help in helping me understand the fossils that were
found there.” The website content information prompted Charlie to reflect and amend his
ideas for his presentation to include what he discovered about the tar pits. The
topic/visual details also encouraged Charlie to reflect and amend his presentation, while
his interest in the topic provoked him to evaluate how to use the video to his advantage.
Grant and Branch (2005) note similar actions in their study where participants reflected
on what they read and amended their presentation content. April, Hector, Jerry, and Lucy
displayed similar actions while they were researching their topics. The research results
encouraged student to reevaluate their research questions and presentation content. I
noticed that the content of each students was ever-changing content throughout this
assignment.
Charlie’s presentation content continued to evolve as he encountered new
information as he worked. The website-tool use category reflected 8% of Charlie’s
moves, the highest of all the students in the study for Assignment 2. The websites that
Charlie used motivated how he created and adapted his presentation. Purcell-Gates et al.
(2007) reported that limitations can be a motivating factor in an individual’s tool use. In
their study, a brochure’s small text space encouraged students to reflect on how they
wanted to convey their information to their audience. Instead of the size of text box,
Charlie’s limitation was his topic given that he had to keep his presentation content
within the paleontology field. The limitation prompted him to explore and analyze a
wider variety of websites. Early in the assignment, Charlie started with the Smithsonian
Museum website but eventually encountered the British Museum and the British
Broadcasting Company (BBC). To his delight, both websites had much to offer. For

102

example, the BBC website had a hyperlink to a website about the La Brea Tar Pits. The
information Charlie discovered encouraged him to reevaluate his content and include a
new section that he had not previously considered. When I asked how he discovered the
two websites, he replied, “The Smithsonian had a link to the British Museum and the
BBC.” The hyperlinks on the Smithsonian website motivated Charlie to explore what
those hyperlinks had to offer. Here is an example of how Charlie used the special
features of a particular website. I noticed later how other special features of the same
website did not encourage Charlies’ tool use.
The websites Charlie used also prompted him to think outside the field of
paleontology. I noticed Charlie viewing a movie trailer for the new movie Jurassic
World. I overheard him explain to a classmate that he was considering a how he could
use movie and television clips to compare real fossils to the mass media’s depiction of
prehistoric life. During his interview, Charlie confirmed this idea by saying: “I want to
include a segment on how movies and television distort sizes of prehistoric creatures.”
As in Assignment 1, the outside world influenced Charlie’s actions. Meyers et al. (2009)
and Newell (2009) point out how a cultural tool such as the movie trailers can influence
actions by promoting creativity and problem-solving. The movie trailers that Charlie
stumbled upon motivated him to reflect on how he could use the movie’s size
misrepresentation of prehistoric animals via their fossils. The topic/visual details
encouraged Charlie to evaluate the movie trailer, whereas the PowerPoint special features
directed Charlie to embed successfully the hyperlinks in a slide. During his presentation,
Charlie used this idea to compare and describe the true size of prehistoric life to what the

103

mass media portrays. Charlie felt this additional section gave a well-rounded view of
fossils and paleontology.
Similar to Assignment 1, Charlie did not use some of the web-based special
features to his advantage when working on Assignment 2. In the Chesapeake Bay
Critters assignment, Charlie did not use the Prezi frame within a frame feature. In the
Science Final assignment, Charlie also failed to use some web-based features available to
him. For instance, located on the left side of the Smithsonian website is a list of related
search terms that may have guided Charlie’s search for better results. I observed Charlie
scrolling through the Smithsonian website and ignoring the hyperlinks that may have
aided his research efforts. He also did not use the special related search terms features
that were available on the Smithsonian website. Though these related search terms did
not motivate Charlie’s tool appropriation, the hyperlinks to the British Museum did
encourage Charlie to examine what those websites had to offer. Smagorinsky (2011)
points out that individuals like Charlie take up and use tools at different levels and times.
However, in some cases, there are individuals who do not take up and use cultural tools.
Karlström et al. (2007) highlight examples of their medical students not appropriating a
computer program’s special features. During his interview, I asked why Charlie did not
use these available options. Disgustedly, Charlie replied, “Yeah, I didn’t see it. I wish I
had.” Charlie also noted that if he had seen the hyperlinks and used them, he would not
have had so much information to wade through. He said, “I still did not see the filter. I
could have really brought my list down. It was too much [information].” Newell (2009)
highlights how emotions and a less structured problem can hinder an individual’s tool
use. The amount of information that Charlie discovered overwhelmed him and interfered

104

with his progress. I observed Charlie ultimately stepping back to reevaluate his situation
and eliminate several websites by using a tool for evaluating websites used previously in
Assignment 1. Charlie only selected websites that ended in the domain name of .edu or
.org.
Charlie faced two vastly different types of assignments: a structured and explicitly
detailed assignment and a less structured assignment. Each assignment had its own
unique set of tools that mediated Charlie’s actions. In Assignment 1, the assignment
requirements were the primary mediating force on Charlie, whereas in Assignment 2 it
was the notetaking/research tool use. In both assignments, the tools fostered reflection
and problem-solving in Charlie. I noticed as Charlie worked his tool appropriation
varied. In Assignment 1, the Prezi negative special features motivated Charlie to
problem-solve and decide how to overcome the barriers that the special features put
before him. Charlie employed previously learned tools to solve the challenges he faced
as he worked to complete his assignments such as opening a second tab for the needed
hyperlinks. In Assignment 2, Charlie’s notetaking/research information encouraged him
to pause and reflect on how he would use this information. The reflection enabled
Charlie to reevaluate and amend what he wanted to share with his audience. I noticed
that one tool, the topic/visual details appeared in both assignments. For Charlie the
topic/visual detail category was one of the top three most used categories for both
assignments. New details that Charlie encountered prompted him to pause and reflect if
and how would he use the new information he found. In both assignments, Charlie
expanded and amended his content presentation to include what he found. In the end, the

105

various tools that Charlie used in both assignments motivated his reflection, decisionmaking, and problem-solving, which in turn fostered his mental growth.
Mary
Mary is a 14-year old eighth-grade student at KMS. She is a pleasant young
woman who is an avid reader of mysteries and historical fiction. Mary shared with me
once that she loves to try to figure out who committed the crime in her mystery novels
before the end of the book. She is a warm and caring individual and her peers constantly
seek her out. Mary’s language arts teacher, Mrs. Lindell, described Mary as a serious,
hardworking student who is not afraid of a challenge. An example is the topic of animal
testing that Mary selected for her language arts debate. The topic posed some difficult
concepts that she grappled with as Mary persuaded her classmates not to support animal
testing. Mary has a B in science and according to her, she is glad for it.
Assignment 1. Similar to Charlie, the assignment requirements primarily
prompted Mary’s actions in Assignment 1. As Table 3 revealed, all of Mary’s content
moves 36% were in the assignment requirements category. However, this was below
April, Hector, and Lucy’s percentages in the same category. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007)
notes that explicit directions such as what were in Assignment 1, prompts students by
guiding their actions successfully to complete the project. Purcell-Gates et al. also
suggest instructions encourage students to focus their writing to meet a specific purpose.
Despite the assignment requirements as the primary mediating tool for all students, Mary
employed different tools as compared to the others to complete Assignment 1.
NoodleTools positives, website-tool use, and topic/visual details categories also mediated
Mary’s actions.

106
Table 3
Mary’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

2

14

.01

Resource
Use
Websites
10

.07

.10

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements
52

.36

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
3

.02

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

0

11

0

2

0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

21

0

.15

-

.08

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives
0

-

-

.01

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

4

4

.03

.03

-

Tool Use
Websites
21

.14

Mary started the assignment by listening to the verbal instructions. As she said, “I
listened to the teacher and you tell us what the project was about and where to start.” The
verbal assignment directions motivated Mary to decide to go straight to the recommended
websites and begin to work. Mary admitted she knew what she was doing. She opened
up NoodleTools and created a new project. As Mary said in the screencast, “Create a new
project, we use MLA because that it what we do.” Vygotsky (1987) argue that previous
learning experiences aid and enhance an individual’s learning. He suggests that previous
educational experiences create an environment where instruction has a mediating
influence on an individual’s higher mental processes. Mary created a new project in
NoodleTools because she knew from the assignment requirements that she would need a
works consulted. Mary explained, “I can make my citations for my bibliography. It is
easier as I go.” The assignment requirements as well as her previous experiences in
creating works consulted provoked her to open NoodleTools, the program used to create
citations for a works consulted. I observed other students doing a similar process during
the project. Smagorinsky (2011) notes that socially accepted practices such as a works
consulted play a role in how an individual learns. Individuals learn through interaction
with culturally accepted tools that encourage a specific action.

107

The assignment handouts guided Mary to locate and evaluate the required
information that she needed about the black-crested night heron. The graphic organizer,
a handout used to take notes, prompted her research by providing the eight required
subtopic areas. Mary also used the graphic organizer to record her facts she wanted to
use in her presentation. She commented, “The paper was easier because I can read then
write. Sometimes going back and forth on the screen I miss stuff.” I noticed that she
followed the sequence suggested by the handout. That is, she first located the scientific
name of the animal and then moved on the next box labeled “Habitat.” She continued
with this procedure throughout her research. The graphic organizer arrangement guided
her actions to locate and analyze the required information. In Purcell-Gates et al.’s
(2007) study, a procedural guide reflected a similar mediating action, as did the graphic
organizer. The graphic organizer sequence also directed Mary to complete each section
and use it as a guide. Mary repeated this process with each of the websites. However,
she only added new information to her graphic organizer. Mary explained, “I used my
class handouts and papers to help me find what I need.” The graphic organizer
encouraged Mary systematically to complete each subtopic whereas NoodleTools
prompted her to create a works consulted.
The assignment requirements motivated Mary when creating her presentation.
Throughout her time in the library, Mary repeatedly consulted the assignment
requirements. For example, Mary used the subtopics as her headings for each
PowerPoint slide. She also followed the graphic organizer sequence to put her slides in
order. I noticed during the class presentations that many of her classmates did the same
thing. Following the graphic organizer sequence encouraged the students not to forget

108

anything in their presentations. I observed Mary comparing her presentation slides to the
rubric. The rubric checklist motivated her to reflect, examine, and compare to make sure
that she covered all that was required. After careful evaluation and editing, Mary crossed
off each rubric element until she had completely reviewed her presentation and was
confident she had addressed all parts of the rubric. Mary mentioned during the interview
that she wanted the best grade possible and one way to achieve this was to double-check
the rubric. She explained, “I had problems in the past and I wanted to do better. Looking
at the rubric helped. I did okay on my presentation.” Mary’s past presentation
experiences encouraged her to use the rubric as a checklist in order to get the best grade
possible. Ball (2014) explains that rubrics provide a set of criteria by which the student
can gauge their progress and quality of their work. Rubrics act as a guide that encourages
student reflection and decision-making. The rubric criteria encouraged Mary to examine
each slide’s content for the required elements, whereas NoodleTools directed Mary to
evaluate if she had successfully completed her works consulted.
The assignment requirements directed Mary to use several websites during her
research. Of her total moves, 14% were located in the website-tool use category. Mary
used the three recommended websites as well as additional websites that she discovered
on her own during a Google search. Here is an example of what Smagorinsky (2011)
describes as the influence of culturally accepted tools such as Google on a student’s
behavior. Smagorinsky argues that culturally accepted tools place conditions on an
individual’s actions that produce an effect on their mental development. Mary browsed,
evaluated, and explored many of the websites that the Google search returned. She
selected websites, carefully read their content, and double-checked her information

109

against what she was reading as she searched for new facts. Based on what Mary had
recorded in her notes, she eliminated several websites. Mary’s notes guided her to
evaluate and decide when selecting websites. For example, I observed Mary spending
considerable amount of time reading one website. She compared her notes to what she
was reading. In the end, she did not use that source, noting in her interview, “I saw the
same stuff.” Mary skipped facts that she had already previously recorded on her graphic
organizer. The topic/visual details motivated Mary to analyze and decide what facts she
wanted to include in her notes. The content that Mary recorded in each of the subtopic
boxes guided her selection of new facts to add. As noted by Darvin (2008) reading
strategies differ depending on the reading need. Mary needed and wanted more
information but only new facts. Mary commented, “I needed to find information about
the environment. I looked at other websites.”
Mary made 10% of her moves in the topic/visual details category, especially to
use unexpected and interesting information in her presentation. For example, when
searching for the environmental impact on herons, Mary came across information that
was not what she was looking for. She discovered how heron fledglings protect
themselves by regurgitating on intruders. What she encountered prompted her to read,
review, and analyze this new bit of information. Her first thought was how pleased she
was with this new fact but upon further reflection, Mary was dismayed. Her initial
comment on the screencast was, “Oh wait here is another fact…As I’m writing this, wait
that is just gross.” Later in her interview, Mary said, “I thought it was gross but then it
was good. That it drives the intruders away.” The new information that she stumbled
upon provoked her to reflect and consider whether to include it as part of her

110

presentation. The new facts also encouraged Mary to pause and reflect more deeply
about what she read previously about the heron’s defense. Darvin (2008) explains that
reading for information encourages individuals to use reading strategies to locate bits and
pieces to meet an informational need. The deeper engagement influenced Mary to
include this information in her presentation. She reflected, “Later on, I liked the
description and thought it would be useful.”
The assignment requirements prompted Mary to use some special features of
NoodleTools to her advantage as she worked and 15% of her moves were in the
NoodleTools positive category. Mary had the highest percentage in this category of all
the students. As noted earlier, Mary planned to create her citations for her work
consulted using NoodleTools. I observed that she had little trouble completing the
required fields for each citation. She admitted during the interview that she did not have
much trouble: “Not really, it depended on what I was looking through and had to cite it.
It is getting easier.” The citation requirements in NoodleTools motivated Mary to use a
split screen format and the copy-paste functions to obtain the correct pieces for the
citations. Mary carefully examined each citation field and located the appropriate piece
of text in the website. She then copied and pasted the text into the correct field. The
copy and paste feature removed the chances of misspelling names and URLs, improving
Mary’s accuracy and ultimately improving her grade on her works consulted. Karlström
et al. (2007) has also noted how students used computer program special features to their
advantage by identifying and eliminating errors. The special features encouraged
students to reflect and revise their writing. Using NoodleTools eliminated the need for
Mary to remember citation punctuation, a troublesome issue for most students. Mary

111

remarked, “I like that it puts in the punctuation. I can never remember that.” The
topic/visual details motivated Mary to analyze and compare her noted with any new facts
she discovered, whereas, the copy and paste feature promoted Mary to examine and
reflect on the correct text for the citations.
Mary used a NoodleTools special feature that no one else did for Assignment 1.
When Mary created her works consulted citations, she made additional notes about each
source in an annotation box that is available in NoodleTools. The annotation box feature
is a field for students to create an annotated works consulted. Mary however adapted that
space to hold personal reminders for her about each source that she used in her research.
She explained during the interview, “Just if I needed more information, I can remember
what the website [source] had and I can go back for more.” She continued by clarifying,
“I did not have to remember which [source] was the best and which was not for me.”
The special feature availability provoked Mary to adapt and use the space for her own
unique need for the project. Similarly, to Karlström et al.’s (2007) findings in which
students creatively used the special computer features for their own personalized use.
During my observations, I noticed Mary consulting her reminders on at least one
occasion while she was working. Her notes prompted her to return to a website for
additional research.
The assignment requirements encouraged Mary to use web evaluation tools that
she had learned about in previous classes and 8% of her moves were in the web
evaluation category. Mary had the highest number of moves in this category of all her
classmates for Assignment 1. In previous classes, students had learned how to evaluate
website content using a six-item checklist. Mary and her classmates had learned to

112

examine authority and accuracy, website domains, purpose and content, contact
information, revision dates, and ease of use. The most commonly used item from the
checklist is the website domain. It is easy for the students to look at the website domain
and select websites that have a good chance of having accurate and current information.
During the study, I observed many students looking at and commenting to each other on
the website domains as they looked over a list of possibilities. Vygotsky (1987) explains
that oral discussion is one of the more effective tools available to individuals.
Collaborative discussions allow new ideas to emerge and in turn encourage deeper
engagement and ultimately mental growth. This was also the case for Mary. I noticed
that she listened to the discussions, looked carefully at the domains, and decided to limit
her selection to .edu and .org websites. Mary commented, “I knew I was okay with, .edu
and .org on this project. I was double-checking as I researched.” Spires et al. (2012)
noted similar web evaluation techniques in their study. The web evaluation strategies
prompt students to reflect and decide as they located information.
Previous instruction also prompted Mary to skip websites that did not have an
.edu or .org domain and exploring those that did. The previous instruction on evaluating
websites influenced her to skip Wikipedia as a source as well. Vygotsky (1987) argues
that individuals need opportunities to practice using cultural tools. Practical application
encourages individuals to apply tools in specific learning experiences such as what Mary
did with her web evaluations strategies. In her interview, Mary noted how it was not a
good idea to rely on the information found on Wikipedia, “Wikipedia stuff can be
changed by anyone. I do not want to use stuff that maybe wrong. It is better to skip it.”
I observed students ignoring Wikipedia and selecting websites that they believed offered

113

better information. Prior web evaluation instruction guided Mary to evaluate and ignore
less reliable websites and select ones that were more promising.
Above all else, the assignment requirements mediated Mary’s actions above all.
The Chesapeake Bay Critter assignment directions left very little room for student
creativity. Only one subtopic, “Interesting Facts” allowed students to be creative about
their critter. Mary’s classmates demonstrated similar outcomes. The assignment
requirements mediated their actions. However, I discovered that Mary used her unique
set of tools to develop a presentation with her own personal stamp on it. For example,
the NoodleTools special features motivated Mary to reflect and decide on how to adapt
annotation text boxes for her own personal use. Her creative use allowed Mary to
document her website use so that she could return to and reflect on what she had written
about each website. The other students did not do this. While working on her project,
Mary returned to her notes in NoodleTools and discovered facts that were interesting and
different enough to include in her presentation. Unusual topic/visual details such as the
baby heron’s defense mechanisms prompted Mary to reflect and review on how to use
them in her presentation, whereas Mary’s previous web evaluation instruction
encouraged her to be selective in her website use. I noticed the other students did not
explore much beyond the recommended websites. Only Lucy and Hector evaluated
websites that they found on the World Wide Web. Similarly, to Charlie, Mary’s unique
tool use fostered her critical thinking, creativity, and mental growth. The Chesapeake
Bay Critters assignment was a structured project and therefore it stands to reason why the
assignment requirements mediated student actions. However, later in the second
assignment Mary’s classmates employed a slightly different set of mediating tools. One

114

of the options in the second assignment for students was the choice of taking a multiplechoice science test or creating a presentation. Mary opted to take the multiple-choice test
and withdraw from the study. Therefore, there are no findings to report on Assignment 2
for Mary.
Jerry
Jerry is a 14-old year eighth-grade student at KMS. He is a creative and emerging
artist. He shared with his art teacher, Mr. Sederal, that he has an interest in combining
his love of art with computer technology. For example, Jerry designed motif of sketches
of his classmates using a computer art program. Jerry is not necessarily an outgoing
individual but he has a group of friends with similar interests. His other teachers
remarked that Jerry contributes in class during discussions but is very content to let
someone else speak first. Schoolwork is not a problem for Jerry. He has an A in science
and all his other classes as well.
Assignment 1. As Table 4 revealed, Jerry’s moves in Assignment 1 mirrored the
actions of the other participating students. The assignment requirements category was
the most used by Jerry at 27%. Nonetheless, Jerry’s moves in this category were the
second lowest of the group. Only Charlie’s moves in the assignment requirements
category was lower. Jerry did use different tools than his classmates while working. Of
Jerry’s total moves, 21% were in the Prezi positives category, the highest of all his
classmates. Other categories showing in which Jerry made his moves were Prezi
negatives, topic/visual details, NoodleTools positives, and human/verbal responses.
Jerry’s tool use motivated him in ways that were uniquely different from his classmates.

115
Table 4
Jerry’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

3

9

.03

.08

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

5

32

.04

.27

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
7

.06

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
8

.07

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

2

0

0

1

7

.01

-

-

.01

.06

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

5

1

12

26

2

.04

.01

.10

21

.01

The assignment requirements motivated Jerry’s actions in such that he did not
hear the opening directions. I observed that he was so intent on reading the handouts that
the teacher had to prod him to begin working. He followed a similar pattern as the other
students did in beginning the work. Jerry logged in, and created a split screen – one for
Destiny and one for NoodleTools. I noticed Jerry pausing and glancing at his neighbor’s
screen before selecting a website from the recommended three. He selected the same
website as his neighbor. Jerry’s action made sense, given that he was not listening at the
beginning of class. Meyers et al. (2009) argue that “tweens” (p. 301) are social in nature
and rely on their peers for help. The social interaction with ones’ peers aid in developing
their social identities. The assignment requirements prompted Jerry to examine closely
what his neighbor had on his screen since he did not listen to the opening directions. The
classmate’s selection provoked Jerry to decide to select the same source.
After opening up the website, I noticed that Jerry referred back to the graphic
organizer and studied it for some time. When I questioned him about this, he replied, “I
was thinking about the subtopic descriptions. I wanted some ideas before I started to
read.” Similar to what Ball (2102) suggests subtopic requirements guided Jerry’s reading
and research. The handouts also acted as an outline that directs to the student’s reflection

116

and decision-making. I observed that Jerry stayed with the suggested websites and did
not do any outside searching. He confirmed this during the interview: “I pretty much
went to the three websites.” I also noticed that his works slide consulted supported his
statement. Jerry did use Google image search for his visuals but he did not use Google to
look for any additional information. The assignment requirements did not motivate Jerry
to expand his research. However, the requirements did prompted Jerry systematically to
follow the instructions. Assignment 1’s requirements were a detailed, point-by-point
project that prompted Jerry to reflect and follow the checklist. The type of direction
given did not encourage Jerry to expand his research, but rather to do exactly what was
required. Another student in the study, Hector followed the same path. Both students
followed the basic requirements and went no further. Grant and Branch (2005) noted
similar findings in their study. The research paper requirements and contents directed
their student actions in creating their human rights displays without adding or expanding
the content beyond what was required. On the other hand, Assignment 1 requirements
motivated Charlie, April, Lucy, and Mary to explore beyond the basic requirements and
include additional facts in their presentations.
Jerry’s reliance on classmates and teachers was apparent throughout Assignment
1. His questions and classmate’s responses directed Jerry’s actions while he worked. His
content moves for human/verbal response category of 6% were one of the highest among
the six students for Assignment 1. Vygotsky (1987) argues that oral language and
discussion is one of the most important tools that society has to offer. Discussion
encourages the exchange of thoughts and ideas that promote deeper reflection and
engagement on the part of both individuals. Only one other student, Lucy, had a higher

117

percentage of human/verbal response content moves for the Chesapeake Bay Critters
assignment. Lucy and Jerry were in the same class and I noticed that Jerry and Lucy sat
near each other while working. While Jerry worked, he turned to Lucy if he had a
question. I noticed a related comment from Jerry on the screencast: “I am going to
dictionary.com because I do not know how to spell ‘circumstance’ and neither does
Lucy.” Lucy’s proximity encouraged Jerry to ask questions and Jerry’s reliance on others
kept him on task during the assignment. However, unlike Jerry and Lucy, Hector,
Charlie, and Mary did not converse with others during the Chesapeake Bay Critters
assignment. Oral discussion motivated Jerry to reflect and ask for help when he needed
it, whereas the graphic organizer directed him to reflect and locate just what he needed
for the assignment.
Like Charlie, Jerry took notes in NoodleTools instead of using the graphic
organizer. However, the other four students in the study utilized the graphic organizer for
their notetaking. During the interview, Jerry said, “I used NoodleTools to create my
notes and my bibliography. It is easier.” NoodleTools encouraged Jerry to decide to use
the program while he worked on the assignment. Kumpulainen et al. (2014) suggests that
easy program usage motivates individuals to employ the special features when problemsolving. Jerry appreciated that he could use NoodleTools anywhere and not lose his
work. He explained, “I do not lose my work. I have had that happen in the past. It was a
mess.” Jerry’s negative past experiences positively guided him to utilize the NoodleTools
notetaking features instead the paper graphic organizers. He did not want to lose his
notes and have to start over. Conversely, April was not of the same opinion. She was
concerned about losing her notes as well, but wanted them on paper. In a prior

118

assignment, April recorded her notes in NoodleTools, but due to a technology glitch, she
lost all of her work. I overheard April say that she was not going to lose her work again.
April’s and Jerry’s negative experiences directed them to reflect and problem-solve on
how to record and safeguard their notes. NoodleTools notetaking features provoked
different actions, emotions, and opinions among different students.
In addition, NoodleTools’ citation features positively influenced Jerry, as well as
the other students. Of Jerry’s total moves, 7% occurred in NoodleTools positives
category, the second highest category for, Assignment 1. Jerry utilized the citation
feature to create his works consulted. I noticed Jerry employed the split screen format to
locate and evaluate the required items needed for each citation field. He created a
citation when he finished taking notes from each website. Jerry remarked, “I can find the
parts I need to complete the citation.” I observed Jerry using the copy and paste feature,
as well, when he made his works consulted. The copy and paste feature prompted Jerry
to analyze and select the correct pieces of information from the websites he needed to
complete the citation. For example, Jerry reviewed and located the author or responsible
organization that produced the website. He copied the name and pasted it into
NoodleTools filed titled “contributor.” The dropdown window prompted Jerry to decide
if the name he located was a single author or an editor. Jerry continued this process until
he had completed each of the required fields to create the citation. The NoodleTools
features encouraged Jerry to be accurate with his works consulted because of the
expectation for exact information, whereas the assignment requirements only motivated
him to complete the project by providing a specific outline. He shared with me, “I do not
have to worry about punctuation, what is underlined, and what is not.” The other

119

students had the same opinion. Jerry had very little difficulties with the NoodleTools
features as compared to the others. Thompson (2012) and Karlström et al. (2007) report
similar reactions about special computer features in their studies. Lucy and April
admitted that NoodleTools was helpful but the websites citations were difficult to
complete. Overall, the positive NoodleTools content moves reflect that Jerry and his
classmates were glad they had access to NoodleTools and the special features the
program had to offer.
Jerry decided to do a Prezi for Assignment 1. The Prezi presentation program
influenced Jerry positively as compared to the other students and Jerry had the most Prezi
positive content moves than any other student in the study. Jerry selected the Prezi tool it
because he believed, the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment would work better in a
Prezi than PowerPoint. The assignment requirements therefore prompted Jerry to
evaluate the subtopics and select Prezi for the project. In his opinion, the subtopics lent
themselves well to Prezi’s special features such as the zoom in and out feature or the
frame within frame feature. The student from Ball’s (2012) study made a similar
decision. Prezi had the special features that would meet her expectations for the webtext
than other programs. The zoom feature motivated Jerry to reflect and decide clearly on
the precise details that he wanted to share with his classmates. He believed that the slide
within a slide feature gives more options for adding detail. He commented in the
screencast, “I think we need to move to Prezi because it gives me more options.” When I
asked Jerry to expand on this statement, he remarked, “Prezi looks better. The transition
from one frame to another is smoother and classier looking.” Jerry also felt Prezi’s
availability was greater. The program is free and available on the World Wide Web,

120

whereas PowerPoint is not. Jerry explained, “PowerPoint you have to purchase the
program.” The 24/7 feature and that it was free motivated Jerry to decide when and
where to work on his Prezi.
The assignment subtopics prompted Jerry to use the Prezi special features when
creating his slides. Jerry felt the available options allowed him present his information in
far more detail. For example, Jerry created a slide on the American eel’s habitat, a
required subtopic. The opening habitat frame had the basic facts about the eel’s
ecosystem, but Jerry also included a frame within the main frame that showed more
detail, such as the negative impact dams have on the eels’ migration. He said, “I like the
way it [frames] looks and how it presents the information.” I observed during Jerry’s
presentation that he utilized the frame within the frame feature to narrow the exact
amount of detail he provided about the dams. Ball (2102) noted similar results in a
student’s webtext. The freedom to place frames within frames encourages students’
deeper engagement with the information, as students have to think about how to display
the information. Special features such as frame within a frame, as Grant and Branch
(2005) suggest, encourages individuals to reflect on how the audience will perceive the
information. Individual reflection prompts problem-solving to decide how to
communicate the message. I noticed that other students only employed simple frames
with the transitions feature when presenting. Charlie mentioned earlier that because of
the movement and transition features, he felt he was all over the place when he was
presenting. The Prezi transition special feature provoked Charlie and Jerry in different
ways. Jerry embraced and used it in his presentation to clarify special information on his
topic, whereas Charlie successfully, but begrudgingly used the transition feature.

121

Jerry shared with me that the Prezi frame size guided him into keeping his
information concise. The bullet feature prompted Jerry to limit his facts to what he
determined to be the most important. He referred to his notes as he created his frames. I
asked why he did not use the copy and paste feature. Jerry said, “I took some pretty long
notes to use in my Prezi. It [typing] keeps me from copying word for word.” Similar to
the images, the slide size limitation and bullet features directed Jerry to consider carefully
and decide what particular information he wanted to present to his class. On the other
hand, the human/verbal response encouraged Jerry to stay on task and complete the
project on time. I observed in the class presentations that most students displayed their
information using the bullet feature. Kinchin and Cabot (2007) report that special
features such as the bullet feature provoke student learning. The limited space
encourages students to pause, evaluate, and decide exactly what information they wanted
to include.
The Assignment 1 requirements directed Jerry to use the subtopic sequence from
the graphic organizer for his frame order. All of the students in the study, as well as the
rest of the class, followed the sequence order. Jerry used the zoom in and out feature to
make points about certain pieces of information within an image. For example, on his
frame about the dams, he zoomed into show the eel ladders explaining, “I have some
interesting information about eels that I want to share with my class.” The zoom in and
out feature motivated Jerry to reflect on his images and information and decide what was
the most important to share with his class. The zoom feature also directed Jerry to
analyze and decide what part of the image he wanted to highlight in each particular
frame.

122

Jerry’s content topic guided him to review and consider the styles and colors
available in the Prezi program. Jerry said, “The color I picked thought looked about the
color of the eel.” Thus, the American eel topic influenced Jerry to evaluate and select the
best color and style for his presentation. The assignment requirements provoked Jerry
successfully to use the Prezi special features to complete his presentation, whereas the
websites Jerry used directed him to analyze images that best enhanced his facts on the
eel. His reflection on the available colors and styles guided his decision-making. The
transition and frame within a frame features encouraged Jerry to problem-solve and plan
how he wanted the subtopic information displayed. Finally, the bullet feature prompted
him to review and reflect on what was the most important information to include in his
presentation. The bullet feature also encouraged Jerry to reflect on his facts in order to
compose the text in short but understandable phrases. The tools that Jerry employed for
the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment encouraged him to reflect on what he discovered
on the American eel and this deeper engagement fostered mental growth. In the next
section, I examined how Jerry used different types of tools in the second assignment.
Assignment 2. As Table 5 revealed Jerry’s moves for Assignment 2, I noticed
that he had similar tool use to other students in several categories. For example, in
Assignment 2, topic/visual details or notetaking/research categories contained either the
highest or the second highest number of moves for all five students. Similarly, to April
and Hector, Jerry had a high percentage moves – 22% in the topic/visual details category.
In the notetaking/research category, Jerry made 16% of his moves. However, after these
top two categories, Jerry’s remaining tool use categories were distinctly unique from the
other students. His other categories were assignment requirements, PowerPoint

123

positives, and resource use-websites. The PowerPoint positives and previous instruction
categories were individual only to Jerry for this assignment as compared to his
classmates.
Table 5
Jerry’s Assignment 2 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
4

.02

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

9

36

.06

Resource
Use
Websites
12

.07

.22

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements
17

.11

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
2

.01

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

26

3

0

4

2

.16

.02

-

.03

.01

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

0

13

0

0

34

-

.08

-

-

.04

Surprisingly, as compared to Assignment 1 Jerry did listen to the opening
directions for Assignment 2. For this assignment, Jerry listened and then reviewed the
assignment handouts. Jerry had to decide what he was going to do for the science final,
whether to take the test or create a presentation. I noticed Jerry reviewing the suggested
topic ideas. He approached Mrs. Cavender and he had a short conversation with her.
Later on during our interview, Jerry shared with me that he had an idea but needed the
okay from Mrs. Cavender. He explained, “I was going to do paradoxes but she [Mrs.
Cavender] said it [the topic] only can be something that we learned this year.” Mrs.
Cavender’s comments encouraged Jerry to reflect on their discussion, explore further
options, and problem-solve before choosing his topic. Jerry continued, “I searched space
and this [Olber’s Paradox] came up.” I asked what made him settle on his topic. He
replied, “I thought it [Olber’s Paradox] was pretty interesting so I selected it.” Personal
interests, as Thompson (2012) suggests encourages individuals to evaluate and explore
topics that otherwise have not been considered. Jerry’s personal interest in outer space

124

guided him to reflect and evaluate topics that he believed in his opinion were interesting,
whereas Jerry’s experiences and interests did not influence his actions in Assignment 1.
Further investigation and reflection convinced Jerry that he had found his topic for his
science final.
During our interview, I asked Jerry what he was going to share with his audience.
I noticed that with Assignment 2 the lack of structure challenged the students’ decisionmaking. All, including Jerry had to evaluate and decide exactly what they were going to
tell their audience. The openness of the assignment requirements encouraged the
students to reflect and decide on their presentation content. Newell (2009) proposed that
a less structured problem promotes problem-solving and decision-making in individuals.
For example, some students, like April struggled in selecting a topic and the subsequent
subtopics for her presentation. April and Lucy took me up on my offer of a presearch
handout that aided their brainstorming efforts, whereas Jerry, Hector, and Charlie did not.
However, when explaining the presearch handout to the class, I noticed that though he
chose not to use the handout, Jerry had paid attention to what I stated were the
foundational questions on the handout: who, what, where, when, why, and how. During
our interview, Jerry explained, “I started off with what it is, who created it, when it was
first developed, and why.” My opening directions about the optional presearch handout
guided Jerry’s decision-making on what he wanted to present to his audience. The
suggested subtopic ideas of who, what, when, where, and why encouraged Jerry to reflect
and decide on his individual subtopics. Jerry’s screencast remarks also reflected this
action. Jerry had commented “Hmm, someone said to make who, what, why questions. I
like that.” Vygotsky (1987) describes the importance of speech and its mediating

125

influence on mental growth. Oral discussion promotes individuals to explore and
consider new ideas and thoughts.
Jerry spent a considerable amount of time searching the World Wide Web. I
noticed he did not use any of the print collection. When I asked why, Jerry replied, “I did
not think there would be any books on the topic.” Smagorinsky (2011) suggest that
depending on the context individuals do not always appropriate available cultural tools.
Individuals may consider using certain tools but in the end decide not to. Jerry did not
appropriate the print collection based on his assumption that there would not be any print
information on his topic. However, when searching on the web, one website’s images
provided a detailed description of Olber’s Paradox theory. The image motivated Jerry to
analyze and decide what information from the image’s explanation was appropriate for
his project. Another website’s definition directed Jerry to evaluate and decide to use a
direct quote rather than risk writing a poor definition.
I observed Jerry evaluating his website options in the screencasts. I heard him
mention, “I am looking for definitions…do not want Wikipedia.” During his interview
Jerry explained, “I mostly used sites that ended in .edu or .org. I did find one or two .com
websites that were useful.” Jerry’s works consulted supported his statement. Jerry
reviewed each website in two ways. First, he examined the website domain for .edu,
.org, and .com, skipping websites he determined were suspect. Second, he read the
website summaries for further information. Only after this evaluation, did Jerry explore
and analyze the website’s content in more detail. Previous web evaluation instruction on
website domains guided Jerry to analyze and select appropriate websites for his topic,

126

whereas images prompted Jerry to evaluate and decide on the best image that
demonstrated Olber’s Paradox.
I also noticed in the screencast, Jerry analyzed the website domain before
examining the website’s images. For example, Jerry shared during his interview, “I had
pictures to support the theory.” The topic/visual details directed Jerry to evaluate and
select the images that best explained his topic. I observed Jerry using one particular
image a guide for his presentation. The image that Jerry discovered highlighted each
principle of the paradox. He explained, “It [hyperphysics.com website] had pictures that
helped show the theory.” Ho et al. (2011) suggest that images impart meaning beyond
the written or spoken text. Jerry wanted additional support for his presentation and the
images aided in that support. His notes that appeared on the screencast reflected his use
of the image’s content but also included additional facts that Jerry had located from other
websites. Jerry explained during his interview that he located additional detail to expand
his facts for each slide. He commented, “I added details to the slides after I had the
basics.” The images directed Jerry to locate and evaluate additional content for his notes
that he later used in his slides, and his oral commentary about the web evaluation
strategies guided Jerry to reflect and review the websites’ domains. I also observed
during his presentation that Jerry’s slide sequence mirrored the image content from the
University of Oregon that Jerry decided was the best image he had during his research.
The topic/visual details, such as the four possible explanations for Olber’s Paradox that
Jerry discovered in his research prompted him to analyze and decide what facts and
images best served him for his presentation.

127

The assignment requirements also mediated Jerry’s actions in Assignment 2.
However, the impact of the requirements in Assignment 2 was not as high as compared to
in Assignment 1. Jerry made 27% of his moves in the assignment requirements category
for Assignment 1 but only 11% of his moves in this category for Assignment 2. I noticed
that Jerry and his classmates made sure they covered the requirements needed for an A in
Assignment 2: five minute or longer multimedia presentation, five sources, class
participation handout, and a literary device such as video clip or poem. The assignment
requirements motivated Jerry to review and reflect on his presentation to make sure he
covered all of the required elements. However, Jerry used images in a manner that went
beyond the usual action of inserting an image into the slide. For example, Jerry selected
one image and made it the background for two of his slides. When I asked about his
action Jerry explained, “I really liked that one [pointing at the screencast] and it helped
explain the paradox.” He was the only student to use an image as background. Ball
(2102) proposes that special features of presentational programs allow the individual
freedom to display creatively their information. Jerry created a unique background that
added detail to his slide content. The image and the meaning that it represented
influenced Jerry to examine his facts and decide how to use it as a background in his
presentation.
I noticed that Jerry as well as the other students added content beyond the basic
requirements for Assignment 2. Jerry included a direct quote in his presentation. When
explaining this decision, Jerry said, “I wanted the exact definition of Olber’s Paradox, not
my explanation.” I also observed Jerry evaluating and comparing his presentation slides
to the grading rubric. The other students did the same. The science final was very

128

important to Jerry as it was his last science grade for the school year and he wanted to
cover all the requirements. The assignment requirements as well as his dislike for taking
the science final test motivated Jerry to carefully evaluate and review his work using the
grading rubric. Wang and Turner (2006) suggest that grading rubrics encourage
individuals to work beyond meeting the assignments required elements. The rubric
criteria prompt individuals to reflect and evaluate their work process and product quality.
Jerry explained, “I wanted to make sure I had all that Mrs. Cavender was looking for. I
do not want to take the science final.”
Jerry selected PowerPoint as his presentational tool for his science final. Out of
all of his content moves, 8% appeared in PowerPoint Positives. I observed Jerry using
several special PowerPoint special features that his classmates also used. However, Jerry
did use some tools that his classmates did not. For example, Jerry cropped his images to
focus on the important point that he wanted to highlight. Cropping an image encouraged
Jerry to examine and pinpoint exactly in his image in this case the grain of sand, what he
wanted to emphasis about the size of the galaxy. Ho et al. (2011) state that individuals
employ a program’s special features to make a point or focus the audience’s attention
during a presentation. Jerry used the cropping feature to limit the image’s size but also as
directional tool to focus his classmates’ attention during his presentation. During his
presentation, Jerry pointed to the exact area on the image that he wanted to highlight as
he spoke. In his interview, Jerry said, “I want only to use the part that helps my
presentation.” The visuals that Jerry selected directed him to examine and crop the image
to meet his presentation focus for each slide.

129

Jerry used two popular PowerPoint special features, as did his classmates: font
size and bullet point feature. Similarly, to Lucy, Jerry maintained a consistent font type
and size throughout his presentation. During his screencast, Jerry remarked, “New slide
– what was the font? 44? 54? Make the title and content larger. I want everyone in the
class to see it.” Jerry wanted the size large enough for his audience to see. Purcell-Gates
et al. (2007) suggest that an individual’s informational writing serves a purpose to
communicate about a particular topic. Individuals need to keep their audience in mind as
they compose. Jerry kept his audience in the forefront of his mind as he created his
slideshow. Jerry’s purpose for writing and his audience motivated him to reflect and
revise the slides’ content as well as the font size. On the other hand, in Assignment 2
previous instruction provoked Jerry to carefully reflect and employ the strategies on how
to cite a direct quote for the definition of Olber’s Paradox.
Jerry also used the bullet point feature in PowerPoint to limit the amount of
information on each slide. The bullet point feature was the most commonly used
PowerPoint feature among all the students and one of the easier features to use. I
observed Jerry using the bullet feature to organize his content in each slide and to keep
his information short. He said in the screencast, “All right keep this [content] bulleted.
Not copying this word for word … that is plagiarism.” The bullet point feature motivated
Jerry to reflect and evaluate on the type and amount of text he typed in his slides. Jerry
also used the bullet point feature to focus on new information and limit previously
learned information. For example, Jerry remarked in the screencast, “Distant light of the
stars has not reached us yet. I will not have to say too much on this. We spent a whole
day on this.” Kinchin and Cabot (2007) note that PowerPoint special features, such as

130

the bullet point feature support certain types of learning. The bullet point feature aids in
focusing on the content that the presenter wants to address with the audience. In Jerry’s
case, this was new information about Olber’s Paradox not previously learned in class that
he wanted to share with his audience.
Jerry’s tool use in both assignments was in many ways was similar to his
classmates. For example, assignment requirements mediated his actions in Assignment 1,
but in Assignment 2, it was the topic/visual details. Both categories mediated Jerry’s
action as well as his classmates. The topic/visual details directed Jerry to problem-solve
on how to use the information. The newly discovered information prompted him to
pause and review his notes. Based on his review, Jerry added a subtopic and ultimately a
slide in his presentation. Yet, in Assignment 1, the assignment requirements prompted
Jerry to reflect on what steps he needed to accomplish for the project. However, I
discovered that Prezi positives and Prezi negatives, PowerPoint positives and
NoodleTools positives had a far more mediating influence on Jerry’s actions than on his
classmates.
I noticed that Jerry’s special feature tool use in these four categories varied.
Several special features, such as the bullet point feature motivated all students – including
Jerry to reflect and make decisions about content throughout both assignments. The
bullet points also encouraged Jerry to review and decide on the exact phrasing and text
for each slide. However, Jerry employed more special features than his classmates did.
An example of this is Jerry’s use of the cropping tool in PowerPoint. The cropping tool
prompted Jerry to evaluate what images to use and decide where and how to crop the
images that would best enhance his presentation content. I noticed Jerry examining each

131

image carefully, even to the point of touching the computer screen as he employed the
cropping tool to get the precise area he wanted. The cropping tool encouraged Jerry to
analyze his images and locate the exact image area he desired for his slide. His
classmates did not employ the cropping tool.
Jerry’s tool use was unique in other categories, as well. For both assignments,
previous instructional unit content encouraged Jerry to pause and reflect on what he
discovered. His reflection aided Jerry in adapting his presentation content. Due to the
limitations of Assignment 1, Jerry did not expand his presentation content beyond the
required elements. On the other hand, the design of Assignment 2 encouraged Jerry to
problem-solve and create a presentation of his own interest and design, not a laundry list
of items such as what Assignment 1 mandated. The information encouraged Jerry to
reflect and consider the information and the potential possibilities that it afforded. The
topic/visual details prompted Jerry to problem-solve and decide exactly what information
he wanted as part of his PowerPoint. Overall, Jerry’s tool use in both assignments
motivated his problem solving and decision-making promoting critical thinking and
growth. The next student, Lucy demonstrated how a slightly different set of tools
mediated her actions.
Lucy
Lucy is a 14-old year eighth-grade student at KMS. Lucy is interested in and
active in social issues facing today’s society. For example, Lucy chairs the KMS
Recycling club and is active in the no-kill animal shelters. The recycling club’s faculty
sponsor, Mr. DeYoung, described Lucy as a mature young woman. According, to Mr.
DeYoung, Lucy has the capability of interpreting situations with a mature perspective.

132

Lucy’s peers appreciate her friendship and look up to her in school and out. She enjoys
her science and language arts classes. History, Lucy admits, is okay. She likes current
events but not necessarily the past American history. Lucy has an A in science.
Assignment 1. Thus far, the assignment requirements have been the driving force
behind student actions in Assignment 1. Lucy was no exception. The assignment
requirements category comprised of 42% of her moves. I also noticed Lucy had the
highest or the second highest percentage of moves in the assignment requirements,
PowerPoint positives, previous instruction, and human/verbal categories as compared to
her classmates. For example, Lucy had 13% of her moves in the PowerPoint positives –
the highest among the other students. She had the highest percentage of moves in
previous instruction with 10%. However, she did have her own routine that differed from
the others.
Table 6
Lucy’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

14

10

.10

.07

1

.01

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives

5

56

2

.03

.42

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling

.01

1

.01

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
1

.01

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

0

4

0

4

-

.03

-

.03

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal
11

.09

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

2

17

0

0

6

.01

.13

-

-

In the beginning of Assignment 1, Lucy followed the same procedure as her
classmates. She listened to the instructions, logged on, and opened up Destiny. I
observed Lucy following the directions and regularly referring to the handout as she
worked. When I questioned her actions, she replied, “I was making sure I had all I
wanted to put in my slides.” The handout content mediated Lucy’s actions by

.04

133

encouraging her to reflect and double-check the assignment requirements to make sure
she had all that she needed. Lucy continued by saying, “The directions in the handouts
pretty much told me what to do.” Grant and Branch (2005) highlight similar findings,
stating that assignment directions act as a guide and a baseline for student actions. The
assignment requirements prompted Lucy to evaluate and follow the handout contents for
completing the project.
Lucy recorded her notes on the graphic organizer. When I asked her about
NoodleTools, she replied, “I forgot we could use NoodleTools to take notes.”
Smagorinsky (2011) reminds us that individuals appropriate tools at different times and
in different learning experiences. The situated learning experience encourages individuals
to take up and use tools appropriate to the context. However, in this case, Lucy did not
appropriate the notetaking feature of the NoodleTools program. Instead, she used the
graphic organizer a tool that she had successfully used in the past. Lucy continued by
remarking, “It [graphic organizer] was easy and I could see what I had to get done.” Ball
(2012) notes that rubrics and assignment requirements act as a prompt for students to
evaluate their progress as well as the product. The graphic organizer sections encouraged
and reminded Lucy to complete each section.
I also noticed that Lucy followed the graphic organizer sequence order to locate
information about her content topic, the northern puffer. Lucy’s presentation slides also
followed the graphic organizer sequence order. Other students had a similar
arrangement. In the interview, Lucy did clarify that she used NoodleTools to create her
works consulted. The citation fields directed her to examine and locate the required
information for each field. The assignment requirements provoked Lucy to create her

134

works consulted with NoodleTools. Using NoodleTools was not new to Lucy, as she had
used it in previous research moves. She said to me, “It [NoodleTools] is easier now than
it was in the fall … then it was really hard.” Vygotsky (1987) suggests that previous tool
instruction facilitates an individual’s action as they practice using a tool. Practical handson tool application over several learning experiences, such as what Lucy experienced,
promotes tool appropriation by the individual. Previous NoodleTools instruction and
application guided Lucy to complete her works consulted, whereas the graphic organizer
directed Lucy to reflect on the slide order for her presentation.
Similarly, to the other students, Lucy collected her information from the three
suggested websites. However, Lucy did look elsewhere for images. She explained, “I
researched my topic using websites you recommended. I used Google …I needed to find
pictures.” I noticed the other students also used Google images – in line with
Smagorinsky’s (2011) contention on as a socially accepted use. Smagorinsky suggests
that culturally accepted tools such as Google image search encourage individuals take up
and use certain tools to meet an informational need. Google images aided Lucy and her
classmates to locate and select the images that they believed were the best for their
presentations. Lucy noted that recommended website images were okay, but she wanted
more. She stated, “I wanted different pictures.” I noticed in the screencast that Lucy said
she wanted two particular fish images. She discovered in her research that the northern
puffer expands its body as a defense mechanism and floats upside down feigning death to
escape its predators. Lucy believed that this was interesting and important enough to
share with her classmates. The topic/visual details motivated Lucy to analyze and select
images that demonstrate the northern puffer’s defense system.

135

Lucy decided she wanted two specific images to include in her presentation.
While Vygotsky (1987) focused on language as the ultimate tool that mediates human
development. Smagorinsky (2011) argues that nonverbal signs and symbols such as
images also mediate an individual’s action. During our interview Lucy said, “I wanted a
picture of a puffed-up puffer.” She was successful in locating an image of a puffed-up
puffer but not one of the fish floating upside down. Ho et al. (2011) also reported how
students used images to convey a message beyond the written word. Symbols or images
have the capability of adding meaning or sense to the written or spoken text. When it
came to the information on puffers floating upside down, Lucy did not have such a tool.
She was not able to locate the image she wanted. To compensate for not having an
image, Lucy reread her notes and decided to expand her explanation to the class by
carefully describing how the fish plays dead to get away from its enemies. During her
presentation, Lucy was explicit in her description to make sure her classmates understood
this fish’s special defense technique. The lack of images directed Lucy back to reread her
notes on how the puffer defends itself. Her explicit explanation deepened her
engagement with the content knowledge so she could clearly convey the message she
intended. Similarly, to Charlie, Mary, Jerry, and April, new and interesting content
knowledge nudged Lucy to go beyond the assignment’s basic requirements by engaging
and adding new information. On the other hand, the images influenced Lucy to examine
carefully and select the best one for her presentation.
Up to this point, Lucy’s behavior mirrored her classmates’, and the assignment
requirements directed her actions. However, Lucy’s unique tool use began to play an
important role in encouraging her actions. Of Lucy’s total content moves, 10% were in

136

the previous instruction category – more than all of her classmates. Previously learned
strategies, content knowledge, and class discussions motivated Lucy’s thinking and
decision-making as she worked. For example, in the screencast, Lucy mentioned she did
not understand what a pectoral fin was. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) suggests that
specialized vocabulary is a motivating factor in an individual’s learning. Specialized
vocabulary encourages individuals to investigate and acquire information that meets a
specific need. Lucy went to dictionary.com to get a description. She typed in “pectoral
fin,” read the definition, and examined the illustration that appeared with the definition.
When I questioned her about where she learned about this website, Lucy said, “We used
dictionary.com in LA class.” Therefore, she knew from previous instructional units that
this particular website was useful and accurate. Lucy’s prior instructional units prompted
her to use tools that were successful for her in the past, whereas the websites that Lucy
used encouraged her to examine images that aided in explaining the pectoral fin.
Lucy also connected another previous instructional unit content knowledge with
her northern puffer presentation. She shared with me during our interview that she
recalled an interesting class discussion about environmental issues that are negatively
affecting the Chesapeake Bay. Smagorinsky (2011) suggests that personal interests
engage student actions by encouraging them to make connections with both previously
learned information and new information. Lucy did just that, recalling, “I remembered
someone talking about that runoff from farms is causing harm to the bay.” Lucy’s
previous class discussion prompted her to reflect and decide to include the past class
discussion as part of her presentation. During her presentation, Lucy connected the
Chesapeake Bay environmental issues to the runoff as a threat to the northern puffer’s

137

survival. Vygotsky (1987) suggests that oral language and discussion motivate thinking
and learning. Oral language, in the eyes of Vygotsky, mediates an individual’s action by
introducing new ideas and concepts that prompts to the individual to reflect on the
discussion. Lucy, Mary, and April’s previous class discussions influenced what they
included and how they connected it in their Chesapeake Bay Critters presentations.
Lucy’s previous instructional experiences motivated her to select PowerPoint as
her presentational tool for Assignment 1. In addition, Lucy deliberated and discussed the
merits of both programs with Hector, another student in the study. She said, “Hector said
he was using PowerPoint this time.” Both decided to save the Prezi for the next
assignment so they could help each other. Kumpulainen et al. (2014) notes how
collaboration, be it online or face-to-face, facilitates student behavior and learning.
Collaboration prompts individuals to exchange thoughts that, in turn, put new conditions
upon their thinking. Lucy and Hector weighed the merits of each program, how much
experience they had with each, and the assignment requirements before making a
selection. The oral discussion prompted thoughtful reflection and decision-making in
both Lucy and Hector. Lucy told me during our interview that she had used PowerPoint
before and she knew she would be comfortable with it. On the other hand, Prezi was still
new to her and she wanted more practice before using it for a class grade. As she said, “I
have used PowerPoint before and Prezi only once.” Lucy’s conversation with her
classmate motivated her to reflect, analyze, and decide which program was her best
option for Assignment 1.
I noticed that Lucy employed several special features of PowerPoint. Lucy
strongly preferred PowerPoint when creating her presentation, evidenced by her having

138

the highest number of content moves in PowerPoint positives as compared to her
classmates. Of her total moves for Assignment 1, 13% were in the PowerPoint positives
category. Lucy did not hesitate while working with the PowerPoint. I noticed in the
screencast that she kept careful watch on the slide format. For example, Lucy maintained
a consistent size, font, and color in each slide. Thompson (2012) and Kinchin and Cabot
(2007) support this design type. They suggest that a clean design will not detract from
the slide content and helps highlight points the individual is attempting to make. Lucy
explained that she likes her slides to be the same, stating, “It looks better. I think it tells
the class I put effort into my presentation.” Lucy also remarked that she recalled which
classmates’ past presentations she thought looked good and which ones that did not. She
did not want hers to look sloppy and poorly prepared. Her classmates past poorly made
presentations encouraged Lucy to reflect, evaluate, and create a more polished slide
presentation by using the PowerPoint special features to her advantage. Her work was
evident in her class presentation. Lucy created a clean, well designed, and interesting
PowerPoint presentation.
Another PowerPoint special feature motivated Lucy’s action when working on
her slides was the bullet point feature. In fact, all the students used the bullet point
feature in their presentations, whether it was in a Prezi or a PowerPoint. The bullet point
feature prompted students to reflect on how to keep their facts short and concise but still
convey the message they intended for their audience. I noticed Lucy kept her facts in
short phrases. She also referred repeatedly to the grading rubric. During the interview,
she said, “It [short phrase reference] is on the rubric and using the bullet points made me
think on how I wanted to show my facts.” Lucy also reminded me of a YouTube video

139

shown in a past LA class on what not to do in a PowerPoint. She continued, “I did not
want my slides to look like that.” The assignment requirements provoked Lucy to
evaluate carefully past instructional experiences and how to write her facts so that they
made sense to her and the audience. The bullet point feature influenced Lucy and her
classmates to pause and reflect in a manner similar to the findings of Branch and Grant
(2005). On the other hand, the rubric criteria guided Lucy to evaluate her work in order
to complete successfully the assignment.
The human/verbal response category was another mediator of Lucy’s actions in
Assignment 1 with 9% of her moves in this category. Specifically, Jerry and Lucy relied
on each other and their classmates throughout Assignment 1. Vygotsky (1987)
repeatedly highlights the importance of social and collaborative interactions in promoting
learning in individuals. Collaborative interactions prompt individuals to discuss and
influence which in return shapes individuals’ mental development. As I mentioned
earlier, Lucy and Hector discussed the pros and cons of Prezi or PowerPoint for this
assignment. Their collaborative discussion aided in their decision-making. Lucy
commented during our interview that she also discussed this with April. She said, “I
talked to April and saw her Prezi.” Lucy also shared that she double-checked with Jerry
about using a website for images explaining, “Jerry said it was okay to use it.” Lucy’s
personal interactions with her classmates demonstrate what Meyers et al. (2009)
describes. Adolescents may embrace technology but face-to-face connections are very
important to their human development. Lucy’s verbal interactions did not end there.
Throughout the screencasts, I heard Lucy ask or answer questions with her classmates.
For example, I noticed Lucy checking with a classmate on the spelling of stomach. Later

140

on, I observed that Lucy’s discussions continued with her classmates after the science
classes had ended. Lucy and April reviewed what happened in class and their individual
progress on the assignment. They analyzed, compared, and edited their presentations
according to the rubric as they talked. In Assignment 1, the structured assignment
requirements and PowerPoint positives mediated Lucy’s action, whereas in Assignment
2, a different set of tools mediated Lucy’s actions.
Assignment 2. Lucy’s decision-making progress in Assignment 2 was vastly
different from Assignment 1. As Table 7 revealed, the category with the highest number
of moves for Lucy in Assignment 2 was notetaking/research at 30%. In Assignment 1,
notetaking/research did not mediate Lucy’s actions at all. Other tools also mediate
Lucy’s actions in Assignment 2. For example, 17% of her moves appeared in
topic/visual details, the second highest of all her classmates. Assignment requirements
and life experiences/interests were also mediators at 8% and 7%, respectively. Lucy’s
moves reflected a slightly different tool use than her classmates.
Table 7
Lucy’s Assignment 2 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
8

.07

Resource Use
Print
Collection
5

.05

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

2

18

.02

Resource
Use
Websites
1

.01

.17

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements
9

.08

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

2

.02

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
8

.07

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

32

2

0

8

2

.30

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives
0

-

.02

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives
0

-

-

.07

.02

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

2

1

7

.02

.01

.07

Lucy went from a highly structured assignment in Assignment 1 to a less
structured assignment in Assignment 2. In Assignment 1, 42% of Lucy’s moves were in
the assignment requirements category. However, in Assignment 2, only 8% moves were

141

in this category. Thus, the assignment requirements did not influence Lucy nearly as
much in Assignment 1. Instead, Lucy’s personal interest influenced her thinking about
her topic in Assignment 2. Lucy selected coral reefs for her presentation. When I
prompted her about her selection Lucy replied, “I like oceans and stuff. I think coral
reefs are pretty and that is why I picked it.” Lucy’s life experiences and personal
interests motivated her to reflect, evaluate, and select coral reefs as her topic.
The openness of the science final topic posed a challenge to Lucy as well as her
classmates. Lucy had a topic. What was she going to tell her audience about coral reefs?
I noticed a similar challenge with many of her classmates. Students were accustomed to
directions telling them what they needed to find. The lack of structure and directions
stymied them. Newell (2009) and Kuhlthau (2004) report similar negative emotional
reactions in their studies. I noticed Lucy and her classmates discussing what they should
do next. The assignment’s lack of definition prompted Lucy and her classmates to pause,
reflect, and discuss what specific information they needed. Students’ topic directed their
unique actions to problem-solve and decide how they would create their presentations.
As a suggestion during the opening instructions for the science final, I offered an
optional presearch topic handout as a brainstorming tool to help the students to record
some ideas or subtopics down on paper as a starting point. Lucy accepted the handout, as
did April. During the interview, Lucy said, “I started with the chapter titles they were
like questions I found in one of the books. I wrote them the way I wanted them on the
paper [presearch handout] you gave us.” The chapter titles prompted Lucy to reflect and
revise her initial ideas before starting to research. Ball’s (2009) findings note how ideas
and directions guide an individual to reflect and evaluate their project. Lucy’s

142

brainstorming gave her a starting point with the understanding that she could change her
presentation any time. Spires et al. (2012) note that self-selected topic prompts
individuals to reflect and create a plan of action. Lucy created a tentative plan with her
subtopics on the presearch handout. The handout prompted her to evaluate and record
her initial topic ideas. Later on, I observed Lucy rewriting her subtopics on her presearch
worksheet as she worked. Lucy explained that she wrote her down her changes so she
would not forget what she wanted in her presentation. She said, “I used those questions
[on the presearch handout] to organize my Prezi frames.” The presearch handout
contents guided Lucy to problem-solve and organize her presentation frames, whereas
topic/visual details directed her to reread, analyze, and adapt her presentation content.
Lucy developed her initial research topics on the presearch handout. She shared
with me that she got a few ideas from one of the nonfiction books in the library
collection. Lucy said, “The book titles made me pick them to start.” However, I noticed
that as Lucy read she rewrote some of her questions and subtopics. For example, one of
her subtopics was the description of the three types of coral reefs. Lucy explained that
she discovered in one of the coral reef books that the author stated that there is not much
difference between the three types. That piece of information prompted Lucy to pause
and reflect on her subtopic ideas. Ultimately, she rewrote one of her questions and its
related subtopics. During our interview, Lucy remarked about changing her subtopics, “I
decided not to do the three different kinds of reefs. I read in one book that they [coral
reefs] were mostly the same.” The new information Lucy discovered prompted her to
evaluate and change her presentation content. She said, “It was easier to do what was
common about all three instead of the different types.” Newell (2009) suggests that

143

information discovered while addressing a less structured problem enhances an
individual’s problem solving by examining alternate solutions such as what Lucy did.
Lucy’s life experiences/interests mediated her actions as she gathered information
for her coral reef presentation with 7% of her moves appearing in this category. Lucy’s
personal interests prompted her topic selection. However, her life experiences also
influenced Lucy’s thinking beyond topic selection. For example, Lucy discovered that
some coral reefs are older than redwood forests. On the screencast, I heard Lucy say,
“Some coral reefs are older than our old-growth redwoods.” Later, Lucy shared that she
remembered that redwood trees are very old. She explained, “I heard a couple times
[redwoods’ age] of times in my life. I cannot remember where I heard it.” Lucy
compared her previous knowledge to the newly acquired information. The information
about the redwoods and coral reefs age prompted Lucy to reflect and evaluate the
information. In her presentation, Lucy shared a detailed age comparison of coral reefs
and redwoods with her classmates. Lucy’s life experiences prompted her to reflect and
adapt her presentation, whereas the chapter titles encourages her to problem solve and
create a presentation that was uniquely her own.
Topic/visuals details mediated Lucy’s actions by provoking her to compare
information she learned in the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment to her coral reefs
information. I heard Lucy mutter on the screencast, “More things I can present about the
environmental impact … like we did for the Chesapeake Bay. Cool, I can connect them.”
I noticed in Lucy’s class presentation, she connected and compared the negative impacts
on both ecosystems. Grisham and Wolsey (2006) note that previous knowledge provokes
an individual to critically evaluate and compare the old and new information. The

144

previous Chesapeake Bay knowledge encouraged Lucy to reflect and evaluate on whether
to include the comparison in her presentation. Ultimately, Lucy did include this
information as part of her presentation.
Though Assignment 1 was very detailed in its requirements, Assignment 2 had a
less structured design wherein the students controlled the content. Lucy’s tool use
reflected the design structure in both assignments. For example, the assignment
requirements mediated Lucy’s actions in Assignment 1 but in Assignment 2, the
requirements were not as important. Instead, in Assignment 2 the most influential
mediator was the research/notetaking category. However, in both cases, the tools
promoted Lucy to problem-solve and decide. The opportunity to self-select her topic and
brainstorm some initial ideas encouraged Lucy to reflect, decide, and take control of her
learning, which was a goal of the assignment. The topic self-selection guided Lucy to
problem-solve, whereas the topic/visual details encouraged her to reflect and adapt her
presentation content.
I learned that as Lucy uncovered new information on coral reefs, it encouraged
her to reflect, evaluate, and revise her presentation content. Lucy’s previous knowledge
and past instructional units prompted her problem solving and reflection more in
Assignment 2 than in Assignment 1. For example, Lucy drew from her past life
experiences and prior instructional units as she gathered information about coral reefs.
Her reflection of the newly discovered information in comparison to her previously
learned facts deepened her engagement and decision-making. Assignment 1 had only a
small opportunity for the same type of reflection. I also discovered that the special
features of Prezi and PowerPoint had little or no mediating impact on Lucy’s actions in

145

Assignment 2. Unlike Charlie, Lucy did not have one tool that stood out in both
assignments. Instead, Lucy used several tools for each assignment. Thus, the tools that
Lucy did use ultimately encouraged her thinking and decision-making. In the next
section, I will examine the tools that mediated Hector’s actions.
Hector
Hector is a 14-old year eighth-grade student at KMS. He is an athlete and plays
lacrosse. He is an extremely outgoing, socially-minded student. Hector’s math teacher,
Mr. Conine, observed that Hector has the potential to be an excellent student if he puts
his mind to it. Grades are important to Hector but not as important as his friends are.
Hector only keeps his grades up so he can be academically eligible to play sports.
However, all of his teachers agreed that they look forward to having him in class. Hector
is talkative but respectful with a good sense of humor. He has a B+ in science.
Assignment 1. As Table 8 revealed, in Assignment 1 content moves many of
Hector’s moves were similar to other students in the study. The assignment requirements
were the primary mediator of his actions in Assignment 1, at 63%. However, other
categories mediated Hector’s actions as well. For example, 9% of his moves occurred in
the PowerPoint positives category, the second highest of all the students. Two other
categories, web evaluation and previous instruction reflected Hector’s distinct use of
tools as compared to the other students.

146
Table 8
Hector’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
0

-

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

5

2

.06

.02

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives

1

59

3

.01

.63

.03

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
2

.02

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
1

.01

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

0

4

0

0

0

-

.04

-

-

-

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

2

8

1

2

4

.02

.09

.01

.02

.04

Similarly to his classmates, Hector listened to the opening directions, scanned
over the handouts, logged on, and opened up Destiny to begin to work on Assignment 1.
The directions, as Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) propose, prompted Hector’s decision to go
to the suggested websites. I observed that he paused, studied the three recommended
website options, and selected one. Later, Hector shared that he had some issues deciding
where to start. He said, “I remember thinking it [website] should be first on the list, not
second. It was confusing.” Instead, Hector settled on the website that several classmates
recommended. Their recommendations guided Hector to decide and select the same
website to begin with. He clarified his selection: “I noticed that’s where others started so
I figured they had checked this out earlier.” Like Jerry, Hector also relied on his
classmates for help. Their classmates’ actions prompted them to select the same website.
As Meyers et al. (2009) and Vygotsky (1987) both suggest, adolescents such as Hector
and Jerry, who are in the transitional stage attach importance to relationships and social
interactions when making decisions. Hector and Jerry are in a time of their lives where
they seek out their peers for collaboration and association instead of adults. It is another
step in their social self-development.

147

Hector’s actions continued to reflect behaviors similar to that of the other five
students in the study. He used the three recommended websites to locate the information
he needed for the assignment. I observed that he used the graphic organizer to take notes.
During his interview, Hector mentioned in passing that it was easier: “I answered the
questions in the packet. It [graphic organizer] had places for me to write my answers.”
The graphic organizer functioned as guide for Hector as he worked. Ball (2012) and
Grant and Branch (2005) both note similar findings with graphic organizers. They
promote a sense of order to the assignment. Hector carefully read the website
information, paused, and reviewed his graphic organizer and wrote his notes in the
corresponding subtopic. The graphic organizer prompted Hector to read, analyze, and
determine the correct facts for each subtopic.
Hector opened up NoodleTools and used it to create his works consulted. He said
it was easy to make his citations: “I opened up NoodleTools and a bunch of windows. I
went back and forth copying and pasting the things I needed.” The copying and pasting
eliminated the possibilities for misspellings. The citation fields in NoodleTools prompted
Hector to locate and analyze the correct items needed for each field. He examined each
website for the proper piece of information, then copied and pasted it into the correct
field in NoodleTools. Hector admitted that, like Lucy and April said, making website
citations was hard but they were getting easier. He noted, “It [NoodleTools] is getting
easier each time I use it.” I noticed on his works consulted slide that his website citations
had the fewest errors as compared to other students. Vygotsky (1987) suggests that tool
practice over time and in several learning experiences aids an individual’s tool
appropriation. Hector’s previous NoodleTools experiences provided the foundation that

148

he needed to continue to practice and move towards mastery with this program. While
the graphic organizer promoted Hector to locate his facts in a systematic order the
NoodleTools citation fields encouraged Hector to examine and select the correct items he
needed for the works consulted.
Another category, web evaluation, had a mediating influence on Hector’s actions
in Assignment 1. Hector’s moves appeared 4% of the time in web evaluation – only
Mary had a higher percentage at 8%. Mary focused more on eliminating websites,
whereas Hector quickly skimmed and found a website that matched his evaluation
criteria. After which he went no further. Mary on the other hand, returned several times
to her website list. Hector searched for websites that might provide additional
information about his content topic, the red-winged blackbird. With exception of Mary,
most of Hector’s classmates only searched on Google images. During his searching
Hector came across a website titled “All About Birds” from Cornell University. I
watched him slowly scroll, read, and click through several links within the website before
he recorded anything on his graphic organizer. Hector paused and looked back and forth
between his graphic organizer and the screen. During the interview, I questioned him
about this action, and he said, “I found more interesting facts than the other sites.” The
new website content encouraged Hector to read, explore, and evaluate what was
available. Darvin (2008) argues that reading motivates the use of different reading
strategies for different purposes. Hector quickly reviewed the website’s contents for new
information that he had not encountered before. Ultimately, Hector added new facts to
his graphic organizer. Grisham and Wolsey (2006) highlight that a time lapse or in

149

Hector’s case, pausing allows a student to reflect, evaluate, and decide before committing
any facts.
Hector shared with me that he knew the “All About Birds” was an acceptable
because it was an .edu domain. I asked him to expand on that statement. He said, “.edu
is an extension for a university. I remember that from last year.” The domain extension
prompted Hector to reflect and select that particular website because he knew from prior
experiences that it was an acceptable website to use. Hector also made sure that I was
aware that he did not use Wikipedia. Mary did the same thing. In fact, overheard Mary
and Hector discussing the merits of the websites they discovered and both agreed that
Wikipedia was not a site to be trusted because anyone can change the content. Spires et
al. (2012) advocate for web evaluation strategies such as the ones that Hector and Mary
used. Such strategies encourage individuals to think critically, evaluate, and be selective
in their website use. Hector shared the “All About Birds” website with his teacher and
classmates. As I noted earlier, Charlie and Mary both had considerable success with the
website. Spires et al. also suggests, as did Vygotsky (1987), that collaboration is an
important tool in promoting human development. Discussion between individuals allows
for the sharing of thoughts and ideas that prompts a deeper reflection by all individuals.
The web evaluation strategies motivated Hector to analyze and select promising websites,
whereas the topic/visual details of the “All About Birds” influenced Hector to decide to
share it with his classmates.
Hector selected PowerPoint as a presentational tool for his Chesapeake Bay
Critters assignment. One of his higher percentages for Assignment 1 was for the
PowerPoint positives category at 9%. Hector decided he needed additional time to work

150

with the Prezi and its special features. Hector said, “By the time I do use Prezi I will
know more about it.” Lucy had the same opinion. As with the others students, Hector
used the bullet point feature to organize his facts in each slide. He shared with me that
using the bullet point feature prevents him from copying word for word. I noticed in his
screencast, he said almost in a chant, “Bullets keep it short.” The bullet point special
feature promoted Hector’s thinking by pushing him to reflect and decide how he would
effectively convey his facts in short, meaningful phrases on each slide. Jacobs (2006)
suggests that special symbols such as bullet points facilitate a deeper engagement with
the content in order for the text to make sense to the reader. Another action that Hector
did similarly to his classmates was use the graphic organizer as a sequence guide for the
slide arrangement. The sequence order guided Hector and his classmates to reflect and
decide on content when creating their presentations. The handout sequence order
encouraged and provided an outline for the students to follow to make sure they covered
all the necessary requirements for the assignment.
Up until this point, I have noted examples of what Hector did that was similar to
the other students. Here, I will examine Hector’s unique tool use. When Hector created
his presentation, he used several PowerPoint special features differently than his
classmates. For example, Lucy, Mary, Charlie, April, and Jerry carefully evaluated
backgrounds and colors when putting their slides together. Hector, however went in the
opposite direction. He used very little color and decided to use a plain white background
and red subtopic headings only. He wanted his selected images to be a focal point for the
audience. Hector said in the interview, “I want the red titles to stand out and the pictures
I used.” Hector also explained that he selected the color red for the font because it

151

created a direct visual connection to his content topic, the red-winged blackbird.
Thompson (2012) suggests that individuals use special features such as computer font to
highlight important points the individual wants to convey to their readers. Hector did this
by using a red font color to emphasize certain facts about his bird. Hector thought the
key points that he wanted to make would be lost if there were a background color. He
used the simplicity of a white background as a guide for his audience, directing them to
the images that supported his facts. Thus, the topic/visual details directed Hector to
reflect, problem-solve and decide to how to use the PowerPoint features to his advantage.
Images, as Ho el al. (2011) point out aid in conveying sense or meaning that the printed
text cannot communicate to the intended audience. The background color or design did
not distract his audience’s attention from the message Hector wanted to send. The
topic/visual detail of the bird’s color patch prompted Hector to reflect and decide to use
red for the text headings. On the other hand, the bullet point features encouraged Hector
to reflect and analyze his notes to compose meaningful text to complement his images.
During our interview, Hector explained that he used the automatic transition
feature in PowerPoint to move automatically from one slide to another. I noticed that
Hector was the only student in his class to utilize that special feature. During the
interview, Hector explained his reasoning. He said, “All the PowerPoints I see are
boring. I wanted a little action just to break up the presentation.” He continued by noting
the time lapse between slides was not long, but it was enough for him to gather his
thoughts before the next slide. Hector had noticed a time element was part of the grading
rubric. The grading rubric motivated Hector to reflect and decide how to use the
transition feature between slides. The time-lapse feature also prompted Hector to reflect

152

and decide what he was going to say for the next slide. He believed the transition
movement would keep him within the allotted time. Hector remarked, “I did not want to
go over and lose points.” Ball (2012) reported similar actions, in that students utilized
grading rubric requirements in order to complete the assignment successfully. The rubric
details provide a criteria list for the students to compare and evaluate their work to the
expected requirements. I observed that during his presentation, Hector stayed within the
designated timeframe – his reasoning paid off.
Hector relied on previous instructional units and content – 6% percent of his
moves to create his presentation. One other student, Lucy, had a higher percentage at
10% but for Hector used previously learned strategies to analyze websites, he found when
searching for additional information on the red-winged blackbird. Hector selected one of
the easier strategies, domain evaluation, but he used the strategy effectively. I noticed
Hector skimmed his search results and ignored .net and .com websites. The domain
extensions prompted Hector to reflect and decide or not to use the .net or .com websites.
Another example was skipping Wikipedia. Mary shared she did the same thing based on
what she has learned in the past. During his interview, Hector reflected, “I think I
learned about it [web evaluation strategies] in science last year.”
Hector also integrated previously learned information from earlier units into his
presentation about the red-winged black bird. He remembered an earlier unit about
environmental issues concerning the Chesapeake Bay. Hector said, “That [pollution
impact] is what we learned earlier about environmental issues. It was cool to see the
connection.” Grisham and Wolsey (2006) noted similar findings in that individuals
connecting previously learned information with newly acquired information encourages a

153

deeper engagement with both new and previously learned information. The previously
learned skills and strategies encouraged Hector, Lucy, and April to reflect and make
connections about the Chesapeake Bay environmental issues unit and their critter. On the
other hand, the grading rubric motivated all three students to evaluate carefully to meet
the expected assignment criteria.
The assignment requirements strongly mediated Hector’s actions in the
Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment. The assignment design encouraged Hector to
evaluate and use the directions and handouts to complete the assignment successfully.
However, Hector employed the PowerPoint special features differently as compared to
his classmates. Instead of using a complicated color and layout design, Hector used
minimal color with a plain design in his PowerPoint. He used the transition feature in
PowerPoint to time his presentation and allow him to prepare quickly for the next slide.
His classmates did not use the transition feature at all. The special transition feature
motivated Hector to analyze the time factor of his presentation. Hector’s positive tool
use motivated a deeper engagement and reflection on the content in order to be ready to
present to his class. In the next assignment, I will examine how Hector used a different
set of tools to create his science final presentation.
Assignment 2. Hector’s tool use for Assignment 2 differed slightly from
Assignment 1. As Table 9 revealed, his highest number of moves for Assignment 2 was
in the topic/visual details category at 22%. Hector’s number of moves in the topic/visual
detail category was the second highest of all the students for Assignment 2. In
comparison, in Assignment 1, the same two categories had very little influence on
Hector’s actions. The other students had similar high number of moves in topic/visual

154

details and notetaking/research categories in Assignment 2. Despite having these
categories in common with the other five students, Hector also did displayed unique tool
use. For example, Hector had high number of content moves in verbal/human
interactions, assignment requirements, and Prezi negatives.
Table 9
Hector’s Assignment 2 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
6

.05

Resource Use
Print
Collection
2

.02

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

0

26

-

.22

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

3

14

.03

.12

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
3

.03

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

14

4

0

6

.12

.03

-

.05

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal
14

.12

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

3

3

15

0

4

.03

.03

.12

-

.03

How Hector began Assignment 2 was very similar to his classmates. He listened
to the assignment directions and the two options for the assignment. I noticed Hector
carefully studied the handouts and paused to consider what he wanted to do. He briefly
discussed his topic choice with Mrs. Cavender and then recorded his topic on the sign-up
sheet for presentation dates. During our interview, Hector shared with me how he
selected his topic. He said, “I was looking through some topics. So I decided on the
evolution of a star.” I asked what made him select that topic and he replied, “I was
familiar with space from before in another class.” His actions were similar to his
classmates. Hector selected a known topic that he wanted to know more about. Neo and
Neo (2009) suggest that personal interests motivate individuals to select topics that
appeal to their interest. Kuhlthau (2004) also suggests that selecting a meaningful topic
encourages the individual to moves towards specialized knowledge in a particular subject
area. The individual’s interest encourages problem-solving and evaluation as the

155

individual investigates their chosen subject. Hector’s personal interest in space motivated
him to analyze and select the evolution of stars as his presentation topic.
Hector’s personal interest in the life of a star encouraged him to explore
information beyond the basic knowledge needed for the assignment. In Assignment 2,
many of his classmates selected their topic in a similar manner. I observed Hector
browsing some library books on a cart. He selected two books, sat down, and started to
read. Similarly to Lucy, April, and Charlie, the availability of print resources motivated
Hector to browse, analyze, and select books on his topic. Limberg and Alexandersson
(2003) suggest that the location of print resources such as a cart full of books prompts
individuals to think about all of their available options. Hector shared with me in the
interview, “I used Space a book told me the main stages of it [star evolution stages].”
McDonald et al. (2005) propose that a historically significant cultural tool such as a
library collection mediates individual’s actions during the research process. During the
interview, I questioned his actions. Hector replied, “I found some good basic information
about stars. It was a good start.” The basic star information encouraged Hector to
reflect, evaluate, and decide on what he wanted to do next.
In the screencast recordings, I noticed Hector reviewed several websites that he
discovered during a Google search. I observed him in class looking back and forth
comparing his notes with each website summary. In his interview, Hector shared with
me what he was doing: “I read the captions for information that related to my topic.”
Hector continued by saying he selected websites that gave him new information to
support what he already had on stars. Hector made a point to say he checked the domain
extensions. He stated, “I checked the .org extension to make sure I was not using

156

someone’s personal page.” Hector also shared with me that he used other web evaluation
strategies when he analyzed commercial websites. He said, “The .com website sold stuff
about space like telescopes, but [the website] also had current space articles. The articles
were current, had authors, and were helpful.” Hector’s website evaluation strategies
prompted him to evaluate each website beyond looking merely at the domain extension.
However, Hector made minimal moves in the website evaluation strategies categories at
3%. Nonetheless, these strategies mediated Hector’s action as he worked. Spires et al.
(2012) propose that web evaluation strategies such as what Hector and his classmates
used prompts them to evaluate and decide the best website for their specific informational
need. The domain extensions prompted Hector to evaluate carefully the information
before he added anything to his presentation, whereas the library books information
encouraged Hector to problem-solve and search further for more details.
In his interview, Hector explained that he used information that he discovered in
one of the library books as a foundation or starting point for his research on the evolution
of a star. The requirements for Assignment 2 were not as structured as the directions for
Assignment 1. Assignment 2 directions were vague in order for individuals to take
leadership in their learning. Newell (2009) proposes that a vague or less structured
information problem prompts individuals to problem-solve and evaluate more in order to
address an informational need. As I did with the other students, I asked Hector what he
intended to share with the audience about the life of a star. He replied, “I want to make
the audience understand that the evolution of a star is a long process.” Assignment 2
requirement’s lack of structure motivated Hector to reflect and problem-solve on what he
planned to present to his class.

157

I noticed in the screencast that Hector kept changing his notes by adding and
subtracting facts. He also kept rearranging the order of the facts. When I asked about
this, Hector explained, “I just went online for details that added to the basic information.”
He continued by saying he compared what he found in the book to the online information
to make sure it was the same. Hector concluded, “I kept reading my facts and selecting
what I wanted.” The new information encouraged Hector to reflect, examine, and revise
his notes. Newell (2009) suggests that vague, less structured problem offers more
opportunities for individuals to reflect and evaluate to solve the informational need. In
this way, Hector did the same actions as Charlie, Lucy, and April. As he discovered new
and more interesting information facts, he analyzed his notes and then changed his
content and the focus of his presentation. Hector had an initial idea of what he wanted to
share, but as he discovered new information, it prompted him to reflect, reconsider, and
revise his topic.
The information that Hector located mediated his actions as he was creating his
presentation. For example, while Hector searched and explored websites he stumbled on
to some images that demonstrated the different stages of a star’s life. I noticed in the
screencast that Hector kept returning to the same image. In the interview, Hector shared
that the specific image was helpful as he created his slide presentation. I asked why. He
added, “I used the image as an outline for the sequence.” The content in the image of the
star life sequence prompted Hector to reflect, evaluate, and compare his information to
his slide content. The content knowledge Hector acquired for his presentation guided his
decision-making. Compared to Charlie who struggled with the content of his
presentation, Hector did not have this issue. Hector knew what he wanted to present.

158

Though he had a clear idea of what he wanted to express, he wanted more detail to
expand his presentation. Hector said, “It helped to give them [audience] a visual as I was
explaining each step of the star’s life.” The images that Hector selected enhanced the
audience’s understanding of his presentation. Grant and Branch (2005) discovered that
students often use images to enhance a point in their human rights presentation. The
images added an element or as Ho et al. (2011) call it, a “sense” to an oral presentation.
The images also motivated Hector to reflect and be explicitly clear in his explanation of
each stage in a star’s life as he proceeded through his slideshow, whereas new
topic/visual details prompted Hector to evaluate and compare his notes for a clear
understanding of the life of a star.
One category in which Hector had a higher number of moves was in the
human/verbal category. Twelve percent of his moves appeared in this category. His
classmates did not have as many moves in this category. Hector’s screencast dialogue
revealed that he had a discussion with Mrs. Cavender about his slide content. In his
screencast, he mentions that he had too much in each slide and needs to revise. I
observed Hector copying his text out of each slide. He paused, read, and reviewed what
he had on the screen. Hector slowly deleted and retyped the wording in the document.
Hector explained, “My teacher just said I have too much in my frames. I need to make
notecards of my talk and only use some details on the frames.” The oral discussion
between Mrs. Cavender and Hector mediated his actions. The discussion prompted
Hector to reflect and revise his presentation text. Vygotsky (1987) propose that oral
language encourages critical thinking and mental growth. Individuals reflect on and
evaluate the discussion content, which in turn prompts critical thinking and decision-

159

making. Mrs. Cavender’s recommendations influenced Hector to review and revise the
slide content.
Hector also had a high number of moves in the assignment requirements category
at 12%. Only April had a higher percentage in this category. I noticed that Hector
carefully reviewed the rubric. He followed the few directions that were required for the
assignment. However, during his interview, Hector admitted that he forgot to limit his
text on his frames. He was so intent on making sure he adequately covered his topic he
overlooked that item on the rubric. Hector said, “I know I looked at it [rubric] from time
to time. But most of the time I did not.” Mrs. Cavender’s suggestions reminded him of
that specific assignment requirement. After the conversation with Mrs. Cavender, I
noticed that Hector referred to the rubric more often. In the interview, Hector said, “I
shortened my text by using bullet points. It kept me from copying. I really worked on
that. I knew Mrs. Cavender would be looking for that.” Ho et al. (2011) and Ball (2012)
propose that rubrics and assignment requirements act as a guide that the students can use
to navigate successfully to the conclusion of the assignment. The assignment
requirements prompted Hector to use the bullet point features to limit his text content,
whereas the websites encouraged Hector to analyze the images for the best representation
of a star’s evolution.
Hector selected Prezi for his presentation tool for Assignment 2. He had
opportunities to learn more about the program since the Chesapeake Bay Critters project.
Hector believed that a Prezi would be a visually appealing method of delivery for each
stage of the star’s life. I noticed that Hector used the transition with the zoom in and out
feature as he was creating his slideshow. In his screencast dialogue, Hector said, “I can

160

use the zoom in and out to get an outer space effect.” However, as Hector was designing
his frames, he had some challenges. The high number of moves in the Prezi negatives
category demonstrates the challenges that Hector faced, and 12% of Hector’s moves were
in this category. As Hector worked, he attempted to copy a frame, which resulted in
creating at least 80 or more frames. Hector was very dismayed. His screencast moves
and dialogue demonstrated his emotion. Hector said, “Oh! I have 80 slides!” He had
difficulty with deleting the unwanted frames while retaining the frames he wanted to
keep. Hector’s screencast comments also reflected his anxiety about not wanting to lose
all of his work. He said, “Oh, did I delete the slides I wanted to keep?” Hector paused
and then said, “Okay, let me think. I know I will NOT save and I will still have my
stuff.” Hector’s emotional fear of losing his work prompted him to reflect and problemsolve. Wang and Turner (2006) suggest that technology glitches motivate individuals to
evaluate and decide what will work to solve their problem. Hector’s problem-solving
worked. He was able to keep the frames that he wanted and deleted the unwanted ones. I
overheard Hector comment to a classmate that if he had to do this project over again, he
would not use Prezi. He would use PowerPoint instead. The negative Prezi experiences
prompted Hector to reevaluate his Prezi use for the future. On the other hand, Hector’s
conversation with Mrs. Cavender prompted him to reflect and revise the frame text.
Just as his classmates, Hector addressed Assignment 1 and 2 in different ways.
The assignment requirements mediated Hector’s actions in Assignment 1. However, in
Assignment 2, the topic/visual details mediated his actions. Both categories encouraged
Hector to problem-solve. I observed Hector employing a variety of tools. Only the
assignment requirements category appeared in Hector’s top five categories for both

161

projects. However, 63% of Hector’s moves were in this category for Assignment 1,
whereas just 12% were in this category for Assignment 2. The assignment requirements
encouraged Hector to reflect and evaluate on how he would meet the requirements
successfully. In both projects, I noticed that the bullet point feature in PowerPoint and
Prezi played an important role. The bullet point feature encouraged Hector to evaluate
his notes and decide how he would condense the content and still keep the intended
meaning for his audience. Another feature in both programs influenced Hector’s actions
in his presentations. He used the PowerPoint transition and the Prezi zoom feature to
move from one slide to the next in each presentation. The motion allowed Hector to
reflect quickly and decide what he wanted to say for each slide, as well as add a smooth,
visually appealing movement to his presentation. In Assignment 2, the human/verbal and
Prezi negatives categories mediated Hector’s actions, whereas the same two categories
had a very little mediating impact on his classmates. Hector’s discussions directed him to
reflect and consider how to adapt his content. The negative Prezi experiences prompted
Hector to reflect and problem-solve on how he could keep his existing notes and delete
the unwanted frames. The variety of tools that Hector made use of during both
assignments mediated his actions, which in turn promoted his mental growth. I will now
examine the last student in the study.
April
April is a petite, 14-old year eighth-grade student at KMS. She is a leader and
organizer. April kept the “family” as she described her classmates in the study on task
when it came to paperwork and meetings. April likes to be involved in school activities
and is on the KMS student council. Her classmates enjoy her company and leadership.

162

Mrs. Lindell, the student council faculty adviser, remarked that April is a gifted speaker.
For example, April delivered a well-rounded nominating speech that helped get April
elected to student council. Mrs. Lindell expects April to be the high school senior class
president in the future. April has an A- in science.
Assignment 1. As Table 10, revealed that April’s moves in Assignment 1 were
not much different from that of her classmates. As with the others, the assignment
requirements heavily influenced her actions and 38% of her moves were in this category.
April, however, showed some unique tool use as compared to her classmates. For
example, 10% of Aprils’ moves occurred in topic/visuals details category, the second
highest for Assignment 1. Three other categories, Prezi negatives, NoodleTools
positives, and website tool use demonstrated April’s specialized tool use as compared to
her classmates.
Table 10
April’s Assignment 1 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
0

-

Resource Use
Print
Collection
3

.03

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

1

12

.01

.10

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives

4

44

2

.03

.38

.02

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
6

.05

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
8

.07

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

4

0

0

3

5

.03

-

-

.03

.04

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

0

1

11

5

8

-

.01

.09

.04

.07

April began working on the assignment in a similar manner to the other students
in the study. Like her classmates, she listened to the directions, logged on, went to the
recommended websites located on Destiny while opening up a new window for
NoodleTools. April created a new project in order to make her works consulted. The
verbal instructions encouraged April to evaluate and select a website to begin her

163

research. April, as well as four of her classmates, used the graphic organizer to record
her notes for each of the eight subtopics. During her interview, April admitted, “I would
read and write down stuff in each section on the graphic organizer.” She did not refer to
the requirements page often but faithfully followed the graphic organizer sequence. The
graphic organizer prompted April to complete each subtopic. April carefully read and
analyzed the content to select the subtopic and record her facts. She said, “I’m glad I
used the graphic organizer because I lost my Prezi.” April was visibly upset when her
Prezi disappeared. April demonstrated what Meyers et al. (2009) and Kuhlthau (2004)
describe as emotions and personal experiences directing an individual’s actions.
Emotions motivate an individual to pause and reflect prior to attempting to problemsolve. Her negative experience with technology motivated April to record her notes on
the graphic organizer instead of in NoodleTools. It was only at the end of the assignment
that I noticed her carefully checking and comparing the grading rubric against her final
project. I observed her making a few changes to her presentation. Ball (2012) suggests
that students use rubrics to evaluate their progress and the quality of their work. The
grading rubric also guided the girls’ actions to make sure that they reflected and reviewed
all the assignment requirements. The assignment requirements provoked April to select a
website to begin researching, whereas the negative technology experiences encouraged
April to reflect and decide to record her notes on the graphic organizer.
April’s content topic, the lined sea horse, motivated her actions beyond the eight
required subtopics. The topic/visual details category reflected 10% of her moves. For
example, one piece of information April came across prompted her to delve further on the
subject. She discovered that lined sea horses cling to crab pots. April said during our

164

interview, “I did not know what a crab pot was. I went on Google to find a picture and a
description.” Her interest and curiosity, similarly to what Meyers et al. (2009) found,
motivated April to look beyond the basic requirements. During April’s presentation, I
observed how she used the crab pot image and carefully explained how crab pots play a
part in the lined sea horses’ environment. The crab pot information, in Aprils’ opinion
was an important addition to her habitat subtopic.
As suggested by Smagorinsky (2011) and Goos et al. (2003) adding new
information such as a crab pot image aid a student’s explanation by prompting their
thinking to a higher degree. Images add meaning beyond the written or spoken text.
April provided a visual reference for her audience while she explicitly explained the role
of crab pots in the sea horse’s environment. April expressed during her presentation that
she believed manmade products such as crab pots, were an important added component to
the lined sea horses’ natural habitat. April also questioned her audience to ensure they
knew what a crab pot was prior to her explanation. Vygotsky (1987) advocates the
importance of oral discussion such as what April had with her classmates. Oral
discussion offers opportunities to shape individual’s mental functions through social,
communicative interactions. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) and Meyers et al. (2009) also
uphold that oral language plays a critical role in thinking and learning. The new facts
about the crab pot encouraged April to include it as part of her presentation. The crab pot
information and her own lack of understanding provoked April to quiz her audience to
make sure they clearly understood the definition of a crab pot and its role in the lined sea
horses’ habitat.

165

One aspect of the assignment requirements that evoked negative reactions in April
was using Prezi for her final project. Out of April’s total moves 9% appeared in the Prezi
negatives category. The assignment requirements allowed the students to choose from a
Prezi, PowerPoint, or a Weebly. April chose a Prezi and similarly to Charlie, April made
this choice with reluctance. She struggled while making her frames. During her
interview, April said, “It [Prezi] was confusing when I started. I could not get my
bibliography into my Prezi.” Again, the negative emotions that Kuhlthau (2004)
highlights and the challenges of Prezi’s special features provoked both April and Charlie
to state that they do not want to take this tool up in the future. The challenges prompted
April and Charlie to reflect and reevaluate their preferences by comparing Prezi and
PowerPoint. Karlström et al. (2007) found similar reactions in their study. April stated
in her interview, “If I had to do it over again. I would not use a Prezi.” When I asked her
to expand on that statement, she said, “I did save or publish my Prezi but it disappeared.
I had to do it over at home the night before it was due.” April said earlier that she was
glad she had her graphic organizer and notes. The graphic organizer and notes guided
and aided her in replicating her lost Prezi presentation. She remarked, “I remembered
just about everything I did the first time so it was not hard to make the Prezi again.” I
also noticed that April followed the graphic organizer sequence in her frames. All six
students in the study did the same process. The subtopic order on the graphic organizer
guided her construction of her presentation. On the other hand, following the subtopic
sequence also encouraged April to reflect and not omit any required assignment elements.
The assignment requirements also motivated April to employ other sources
besides the original recommended websites. She mentioned that she was able to get most

166

of, if not all of the required information from the recommended websites. However,
April also used the print library resources that were available for the project. On the
other hand, none of the other students used the print collection for the Chesapeake Bay
Critters project. I asked April why she has used additional resources and she replied, “I
wanted to check everything I can.” McDonald et al. (2005) and Smagorinsky (2011)
describe how using historically accepted tools such as books in the library collection
promote meaningful action. Tools such as library books act as a mediator of society’s
shared understandings of individuals’ actions. April continued, “I did find a fact or two
that the websites did not have.” Similarly to the other students, April only added new
facts to her graphic organizer. April also pointed out that the assignment required three
sources for the works consulted. A book was her third source. The assignment
requirements prompted April to reflect and explore other resources such as the print
library collection. She wanted to cover all the options for information but also meet the
project requirements.
I noticed as April read, she referred frequently to her graphic organizer notes and
compared her notes to the printed text. April’s notes on the lined sea horse directed her
to read and select only new facts to add to her graphic organizer. Similarly to Darvin’s
(2008) findings April’s reading strategies encouraged her to focus on facts that she had
not read before. To her delight, April found some new facts that she added to her graphic
organizer. She said, “I was surprised I found something…usually it is the same.” I
observed her contemplating her notes for a few minutes. She then asked her teacher to
clarify two subtopics, “special circumstances” and “interesting trivia” before she wrote
anything down. During her interview, April said, “I wanted to know the difference

167

between the two [subtopics].” Smagorinsky (2011) states how Vygotsky advocated for
collaboration such as this between a novice and expert. The collaborative interactions
between a novice and expert encourage the novice to accomplish activities that they may
have otherwise not been successful completing. The interaction creates a joint activity
that motivates the novice to work towards mastery. April’s conversation with her
classroom teacher guided her to reflect and decide which subtopic to record her new
information.
Information that April discovered in her research also provoked her to reflect and
recall content from previous Earth Science instructional units. April was not alone in
recalling previously learned content knowledge. Several other students in the study
remembered the environmental issues unit from earlier in the school year. As part of the
habitat subtopic, students were required to include information about the environmental
impact on their particular critter. April mentioned in her screencast that the fact that the
seagrasses are disappearing was important. During the interview, I asked her to expand
on that statement. She said, “That pollution in the water was the cause for the grasses
dying.” She went on to explain that she remembered from an earlier Earth Science
instructional unit that runoff from farms impact the Chesapeake Bay. April commented
in the interview, “Lancaster County was one place that impacted the Chesapeake Bay
because of the farmlands.” The content knowledge information about the seagrasses
encouraged April to reflect and review previously learned knowledge and connect it to
the new knowledge. Ho et al. (2011) propose that previously learned knowledge such as
what April remembered motivates an individual to construct links between the previously
learned information and the new information, encouraging a higher level of thinking.

168

April believed the information about the runoff being a threat to the lined sea horses’
habitat to be such an important connection that she included it in her presentation. The
previous instructional unit content prompted April to analyze the subtopics and decide
where to record her notes, whereas a previous instructional unit content motivated April
to connect the prior unit information to her seahorse presentation.
The assignment requirements motivated April to take up tools such as
NoodleTools and special electronic features to complete the project. For example, as
April read information available on the websites she would highlight sections by clicking
and moving the cursor over the text. At the conclusion of reading a section, she reviewed
her graphic organizer and decided where the highlighted information belonged. During
her interview, I asked about this technique. She replied, “I like to read stuff on the
screen, then go back and highlight the important pieces I want to use.” April was the
only student I noticed that used this highlighting technique. She also commented that she
does it because she can see the important information better. April was not sure when
she learned the highlighting technique, she stating, “I do not remember anyone saying to
do that.” April admitted she highlights on paper, and highlighting on the screen would be
the same idea. Karlström et al.’s (2007) findings suggest that students appropriate and
adapt tools for the individual needs. The previous learned highlighting techniques
encouraged April to adapt her highlighting technique from the paper/pen world to the
electronic world, just as did Mary with the NoodleTools annotation fields. April
appropriated the highlighting feature for her own personal use, whereas the other students
did not use the highlighting feature.

169

April had mixed results using NoodleTools. However, 7% of her moves were in
the NoodleTools positive category. Unlike Mary or Charlie, she did not use any
NoodleTools special features beyond the citation feature. Though she used the program
to create her works consulted but she was not happy with some of its features. For
example, April did not like citing websites. Websites, in her opinion, were difficult to
cite. She admitted, “I can never find all the parts I need for NoodleTools.” April’s
difficulty citing websites as compared to other sources demonstrates the impact the
varying degrees of Smagorinsky’s (2011) tool appropriation continuum has on how an
individual uses a cultural tool. Tool appropriation appears on various levels and in
specific learning contexts. For example, April did not use NoodleTools notetaking
feature. Instead, she used the graphic organizer because as she said, “I could lose my
notes in NoodleTools.” Her tool appropriation of this special feature was not high.
However, April did admit that NoodleTools helped her keep track of the number of
sources she used and reminded her what she needed to meet the assignment requirements.
The NoodleTools citation features prompted April to reflect and review the assignment
requirements criteria. April’s appropriation here was higher. The NoodleTools citation
features also supported April’s actions by acting as a safety net. After losing her Prezi
presentation, April was relieved that all she had to do was export her citations from
NoodleTools and copy them into a Prezi frame for her works consulted. The tools that
April used for Assignment 1, such as the assignment requirements, motivated her critical
thinking and served her well for the Chesapeake Bay Critters project. In the next section,
other types of tools will appear that April used and how those tools mediated her actions.

170

Assignment 2. April followed a similar pattern of tool use as her classmates for
Assignment 2. As Table 11 revealed, her top two categories were topic/visual details at
29% and notetaking/research at 17%. These two categories were the highest or second
highest for the other students as well. Topic/visual details category was the highest
category for April, Hector, and Jerry. However, this category was the second highest for
Charlie and Lucy. Similarly, notetaking/research category was the second highest for
April, Hector, and Jerry but first for Charlie and Lucy. April’s other three highest content
moves categories were assignment requirements, print collection, and tool use-websites.
These three categories comprise April’s unique tool use for Assignment 2.
Table 11
April’s Assignment 2 Content Moves
Content
Knowledge
Life
Experiences/
Interests
5

.04

Resource Use
Print
Collection
9

.08

Content
Knowledge
Previous
Instruction

Content
Knowledge
Topic/Visual
Details

7

33

.06

.29

Resource
Use
Websites

Tool Use
Assignment
Requirements

1

18

.01

.16

Previous Tool
Use
Handwriting
Spelling
0

-

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Negatives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Login
Destiny/
Chrome
3

.03

Tool Use
NoodleTools
Positives
0

-

Previous
Tool Use
Notetaking
Research

Previous
Tool Use
Web
Evaluation

Resource
Use
Databases

Resource
Use
Google

Resource
Use
Human/
Verbal

20

3

0

2

5

.17

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Negatives
0

-

.03

Tool Use
PowerPoint
Positives
0

-

-

.02

.04

Tool Use
Prezi
Negatives

Tool Use
Prezi
Positives

Tool Use
Websites

0

0

8

-

-

.07

April listened to the directions for this assignment at the beginning of class, same
as her classmates. However, April took longer to decide on her topic as compared to the
other students in the study. April reread the handouts, then sat quietly and pondered her
options. I overheard her say earlier that she was not going to take the science final. In
her opinion, she was not a good test taker but on the other hand, she did not have any
ideas for a topic. After thinking for a few minutes, April approached the book cart and
browsed the titles. She selected one book and slowly scanned the contents. April
returned to her seat and began a discussion with her classmates. I observed the students

171

brainstorming possible ideas and topics for a few minutes. One of April’s classmates
went to the presentation sign-up list and reviewed topics that other students had selected.
She returned to the group and reported her findings. April paused and reviewed this
information. Vygotsky (1987) suggest that oral discussion aids in mental growth.
Discussion among individuals encourages critical thinking and decision-making. April
reflected and evaluated the information and ideas that her classmates shared as she
attempted to select a topic. It seemed, from my observations that April struggled with
selecting a topic and making a decision. She later confirmed this impression during the
interview. April said, “Yes, I did not know what to do.”
In her struggle to find a topic, April went back to the book cart and selected
another book. I noticed that both books were on supernovas and space. She flipped
through the book and then approached Mrs. Cavender. They had a brief discussion.
After the conversation, April went to the sign-up sheet and recorded her topic. The
conversations with April’s classmates and teacher encouraged her to reflect and evaluate
the conversations in order to make a decision. During the interview, I asked April about
how she determined her topic. She replied, “The pictures, I did not know what they
[supernovas] were. I liked what I saw.” April also mentioned that the visuals were a
help to her in understanding the topic. Another point that April mentioned in regards to
her topic selection was, “We have not talked about supernovas in class so my classmates
will not know much about supernovas.” Grant and Branch (2005) suggest that intended
audiences mediate an individual’s actions by encouraging reflection and evaluations as
the individual creates a presentation. April considered her potential audience as she
decided on her topic. The supernova images that April liked, as well the notion that her

172

classmates would know very little about supernovas, motivated her to select this as her
topic. The conversation prompted April to reflect on possible topics, whereas the
supernova images motivated April to decide and select that topic for her science final.
Like Hector and Jerry, April’s highest number of content moves appeared in the
topic/visual details category. As previously mentioned, the images that April found
encouraged her to choose her topic. The topic/visual details influence did not stop there,
however. For example, April used the books she found on the cart as a starting point for
her research. I questioned her on what she was going to tell her audience. April replied,
“I figured if I have the covered the who, what, and where type of questions I will have
covered the topic pretty well.” She also shared that she created a list of questions. April
explained, “My questions…I have them on that sheet [presearch worksheet] you offered
us. It was a big help.” The presearch handout directed April to reflect and problem-solve
on the subtopics for her presentation. Purcell-Gates et al. (2007) highlight those
individuals who have a high interest in their topic have a tendency to enhance their
subject matter with further research. In the screencast, I noticed April commented on the
amount of information she discovered on supernovas: “Holy cow! Look at all this
information.” The amount of information that April discovered motivated her to reflect,
expand, and add to her presentation. In addition, the images also encouraged April to
examine and decide that supernova was her topic choice.
The information April discovered in the library books prompted her to review,
reflect, and adapt her subtopics. In fact, 8% of her moves were in regards to using the
print collection. I noticed on the screencast that April referred to the print resources. She
commented, “I am now looking at another book about super giants.” April paused in her

173

recording and then said, “What is a red giant? I am looking up the definition of a red
giant.” During the interview, April explained she found most her of information in
library books. However, the facts she discovered encouraged her to pause, reflect, and
expand on her subtopic and look for additional information. For example, April when
looking up the red giant definition, April discovered another name for a red giant, which
she added to her notes. The new red giant name prompted April to go back to the books
because she then remembered another red giant name. She recorded both names in her
notes. Grisham and Wolsey (2006) highlight how resource content crossover mediates
actions. Their findings suggest that the integration of information motivates individuals
to reflect and evaluate when researching. In this case, the new information motivated
April to reflect and investigate the red giant’s status further. In the screencast, she said,
“The book says Eta Carinae is the next best candidate to become a supernova. I want to
see if it has become one yet.” April’s interest in Eta Carinae’s status prompted her to
search some websites for further information. The topic/visual details directed April to
analyze and decide to research further. On the other hand, the NoodleTools citation fields
prompted April to analyze carefully for required information.
The screencast demonstrated that April went to a several websites. Her website
use category was one of her most used at 7%. To answer her question about the red giant
April went to a website that she had used in the past, NASA. In her interview comments,
she told me, “I used the website in the past. I knew I would be okay with that website.”
April’s past successful experiences and evaluation of the NASA website prompted her to
return to the website. Spires et al. (2012) highlights how web evaluation strategies

174

prompt individuals to evaluate and select appropriate websites. April’s web evaluation
strategies supported her decision that the website was safe to use.
April’s notetaking/research details in Assignment 2 mediated her actions similarly
to the other students. April had only a vague idea of what she wanted to present to her
audience. With exception of Hector whose topic had a definite sequence, April, Charlie,
Lucy, and Jerry were not committed to any particular sequence. Newell’s (2009)
suggests less structured problem promotes the student’s own unique problem solving and
evaluation. The information they found while researching guided them to reflect and
decide about their slide order. April kept her options open regarding how she would
organize her slide content. In her interview she said, “I think will arrange my slides by
my questions. I am still working on it.” Later during April’s presentation, I noticed that
April used a few questions as part of the slides but not all. For example, April’s opening
slide was the origin of the name supernova, which led to the definition slide. April
displayed in extra slides the information she wanted to emphasize to her audience. The
sequence was logical and the content connected seamlessly from slide to slide. The
notetaking/research details directed April to reflect, problem-solve, and decide on the
content and sequence of her presentation.
April used the assignment requirements more than her classmates did for
Assignment 2. Sixteen percent of her moves occurred in this category. April was
concerned about her grade, as the science final was the last grade of the school year. I
overheard her tell a classmate that she wanted an A on the assignment. The others in the
study did not voice a similar thought but their actions reflected the same sentiment. In
April’s case, she referred the assignment rubrics often. April clarified her screencast

175

actions by saying, “I was shuffling my papers. I was back on my rubrics checking things
to make sure I had everything.” I noticed that her classmates in the study engaged in
similar behavior but not to the degree that April did. Ball (2012) study exemplifies how
assignment requirements and grading rubrics mediate action in individuals. The
assignment and rubric criteria provoke individuals to gauge their progress and quality of
their work. A similar impact occurred on April. The assignment rubric motivated her to
reflect and evaluate her progress and the quality of her presentation, whereas topic/visual
details guided April to problem solve and decide on her exact presentation content.
In regards to the assignment requirements, April used PowerPoint as her
presentational tool. I overheard her tell a classmate that she was glad that she did not
have to use a Prezi. She did not want to jeopardize her science final grade of the year.
Kuhlthau (2004) highlights how emotions influence individuals’ actions. April exhibited
a range of emotions when using Prezi, mostly negative. The negative Prezi experiences
from the Chesapeake Bay Critters project influenced April to reflect with some relief that
she can use PowerPoint for the science final.
April employed the same PowerPoint special features, as did her classmates for
this assignment. Thompson (2012) suggests that special features, such as bullet point or
font size encourage individuals to reflect and evaluate. As an example of this, I noticed
in April’s presentation that she used the bullet point feature to organize and keep her text
to a minimum. The bullet point feature encouraged her to read, reflect, and analyze her
information in order to be concise in her slide text. April discovered quite a bit of
information on supernovas. She said in the screencast, “There is a lot of information on
supernovas.” The size limitation on the slides, however, prompted April to reflect,

176

evaluate, and decide on what she wanted to place in her slides while still conveying her
complete meaning to her audience.
Other features that April used in her PowerPoint were visuals both still photos
and video clips, as well as background special effects. April shared in her interview that
the visuals helped her to understand supernovas. She wanted to use images and videos to
explain the life and death of a star. April clarified this by saying, “They [pictures] helped
me to understand my topic. I want the same for my presentation.” I noticed in April’s
presentation that she shared an image of the life cycle of a star with her class. She used
each stage in the image as her visual cue to explain in further detail. The slide images
prompted April to reflect as she carefully explained supernovas with additional facts. Ho
et al. (2011) suggest that images engage individuals’ senses beyond the written word.
Images such as what April used in her presentation, can add to the message that a student
is attempting to share with her audience. April kept her PowerPoint backgrounds simple.
Similarly, to what Hector did in Assignment 1, April wanted her pictures to stand out. I
observed April reviewing the different background types that are available in
PowerPoint. She finally settled on a simple black background with grey undertones. I
questioned her decision and she replied, “I have to select my pictures. I am thinking
about how I am going to use them to help explain my facts. I am still working on it.” In
her screencast, April said, “That black and grey background reminds me of space.” The
images encouraged April to reflect, review, and decide on a background that supported
her presentation topic.
Similarly, to the other students, April had her own unique set of tools that
mediated her actions in each assignment. In Assignment 1, the assignment requirements

177

motivated April’s decision-making. However, in Assignment 2, the primary category
that reflected April’s moves was the topic/visual details. These two categories were also
high-ranking categories for the other students as well. The different design structures of
Assignment 1 and 2 encouraged different tool use for April. I noticed in April’s moves,
assignment requirements garnered a high number of content moves in both assignments.
The assignment requirements were the highest in Assignment 1 but in Assignment 2, it
was third highest. In both cases, the assignment requirements directed April to reflect,
evaluate, and decide if she had covered all the required elements and to what level, that
she wanted to obtain.
Interestingly enough I learned that the topic/visual details category was a highranking categories for April in both projects. April’s topic/details category was the
second highest in Assignment 1 and the highest for Assignment 2. No other student
showed a similar pattern. Despite the assignment requirements mediating April’s actions,
the topic/visual details that April discovered encouraged her to reflect and explore
beyond the basics. For example, in Assignment 1 April expanded her presentation to
include information about crab pots and their role in the seahorse’s habitat. In
Assignment 2, the lack of a topic challenged April. She had the most difficulty with this
out of all the students. The less structured nature of Assignment 2 provoked April to
brainstorm and problem-solve and ultimately select supernovas as her topic. She chose
this topic because she liked the pictures. Her decision was not unusual. Her classmates
also selected their topic based on personal interests. However, April also selected
supernovas because the topic was not part of the class curriculum setting her apart from
the other students. April reasoned that she would be introducing a new, attention-

178

grabbing topic. April considered her audience as she made decisions, whereas her
classmates did not.
Once April had her topic, whether it was Assignment 1 or 2, she took control of
her learning. As she researched her topics, she did not limit herself to what was required
to obtain a passing grade. I noticed similar actions in her classmates. Everyone
expanded his or her research to add interesting information. The newly discovered
information encouraged April and her classmates, to reflect, evaluate, and revise to create
a well-rounded presentation. One example is April’s quest for the latest update on the red
giant Eta Carinae to see if it had exploded.
I noticed that the Prezi had a negative impact on April’s actions. She did not care
for the program and used the program only because it was required. April was pleased
that she could use PowerPoint for the Assignment 2. Charlie similarly disliked using
Prezi. However, the PowerPoint special features did not influence April’s actions in
either assignment. Overall, April’s tool use was distinct and motivated her reflection,
problem-solving, and mental growth.

179
Table 12
Proportion of Moves by Category
Code Names
Content KnowledgeLife Experiences/Interests
Content KnowledgePrevious Instruction
Content KnowledgeTopic/Visual Details
Previous Tool UseHandwriting/Spelling
Previous Tool UseLogin/Destiny/Chrome
Previous Tool UseNotetaking/Research
Previous Tool UseWeb Evaluation
Resource UseDatabases
Resource UseGoogle
Resource UseHuman/Verbal
Resource UsePrint Collection
Resource UseWebsites
Tool UseAssignment Requirements
Tool UseNoodleTools Negatives
Tool UseNoodleTools Positives
Tool UsePowerPoint Negatives
Tool UsePowerPoint Positives
Tool UsePrezi Negatives
Tool UsePrezi Positives
Tool UseWebsites
Total

April
Assign 1
Assign 2

Charlie
Assign 1
Assign 2

Hector
Assign 1
Assign 2

Jerry
Assign 1
Assign 2

Lucy
Assign 1
Assign 2

Mary
Assign 1
Assign 2

0

-

5

.04

0

-

18

.10

0

-

6

.05

0

-

4

.02

0

-

8

.07

0

-

-

41

1

.01

7

.06

0

-

1

.01

5

.06

0

-

3

.03

9

.06

14

.10

2

.02

2

.01

-

44

12

.10

33

.29

25

.18

22

.13

2

.02

26

.22

9

.08

36

.22

10

.07

18

.17

14

.10

-

207

0

-

0

-

3

.02

6

.04

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

1

.01

0

-

0

-

-

10

6

.05

3

.03

1

.01

2

.01

2

.02

0

-

7

.06

2

.01

1

.01

2

.02

3

.02

-

29

4

.03

20

.17

1

.01

56

.32

0

-

14

.12

2

.01

26

.16

0

-

32

.30

0

-

-

155

0

-

3

.03

0

-

0

-

4

.04

4

.03

0

-

3

.02

4

.03

2

.02

11

.08

-

31

0

-

0

-

2

.01

2

.01

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

-

4

3

.03

2

.02

2

.01

3

.02

0

-

6

.05

1

.01

4

.03

4

.03

8

.07

2

.01

-

35

5

.04

5

.04

1

.01

1

.01

0

-

14

.12

7

.06

2

.01

11

.09

2

.02

0

-

-

48

3

.03

9

.08

0

-

7

.04

0

-

2

.02

0

-

0

-

0

-

5

.05

0

-

-

26

4

.03

1

.01

5

.04

24

.14

1

.01

3

.03

5

.04

12

.07

5

.03

1

.01

10

.07

-

71

44

.38

18

.16

32

.23

9

.05

59

.63

14

.12

32

.27

17

.11

56

.42

9

.08

52

.36

-

342

2

.02

0

-

0

-

0

-

3

.03

0

-

0

-

0

-

2

.01

0

-

0

-

-

7

8

.07

0

-

6

.04

5

.03

1

.01

3

.03

8

.07

0

-

1

.01

8

.07

21

.15

-

61

0

-

0

-

0

-

0

-

2

.02

3

.03

5

.04

0

-

2

.01

0

-

0

-

-

12

1

.01

0

-

9

.06

0

-

8

.09

3

.03

1

.01

13

.08

17

.13

0

-

0

-

-

52

11

.09

0

-

32

.23

1

.01

1

.01

15

.12

12

.10

0

-

0

-

2

.02

4

.03

-

78

5

.04

0

-

18

.13

0

-

2

.02

0

-

26

.21

0

-

0

-

1

.01

4

.03

-

56

8

.07

8

.07

3

.02

13

.08

4

.04

4

.03

2

.01

34

.04

6

.04

7

.07

21

.14

-

110

-

1419

117

114

140

170

94

117

120

162

134

107

144

Total

180

Differences across students
The tools that the students took up and used when completing Assignments 1 and
2 had different effects on their actions and their mediating impact appeared in a variety of
ways. Palfrey and Gasser (2008) suggest that individuals view cultural tools as pliable
and adaptable to meet their individual manner. As the students navigated the
assignments, the tools they employed mediated their actions. For example, in
Assignment 1, Charlie utilized NoodleTools notetaking features to record his notes, a
conventional use of the program. The notetaking features prompted Charlie to reflect and
analyze the facts he located to decide under what subtopic those particular facts belonged.
The notetaking features also provoked Charlie to create his citations and connect them to
the note fields for each source. On the other hand, Mary adapted the NoodleTools
citation annotation field to record her evaluation and reflections of each resource that she
used for future reference. As Mary remarked, “The notes are reminders.” She used the
annotation fields for her own distinct use. The annotation fields prompted Mary to read
and carefully evaluate the sources’ content in relationship to her research.
In Assignment 1, Jerry enjoyed using and creating his Prezi. He explained, “Prezi
just looks better.” The special zoom in and out features motivated Jerry to utilize the
feature to draw his audience’s attention to an important piece of information during his
presentation. For example, Jerry zoomed in on the eel ladders in a photo to demonstrate
how eels use ladders to bypass dams on their way up a river to spawn. The zoom feature
encouraged Jerry to reflect on what he wanted to explain as he pointed to specific ladder
details and explicitly described how the ladder works to his classmates. Branch and
Grant (2005) suggest that the use of a program’s special features aids in communicating

181

the presentation’s message to the audience. On the other hand, April and Charlie did not
like Prezi. Both tolerated and used the program because it was required. Due to a
technological mishap, April lost her presentation and had to redo it. The program
limitations of imbedding hyperlinks into the frames hindered Charlie as he created his
presentation. In both situations, using the tool encouraged April and Charlie to step back,
reflect, problem-solve, and decide how to overcome their challenges to complete the
assignment.
During her research, April adapted a highlighting strategy recalled from past
notetaking experiences to the electronic world. She highlighted important facts in the
electronic text that she decided to include in her notes. She would then record the
highlighted information on her graphic organizer. April said, “Highlighting on the screen
would be the same as on paper but it does not stay.” The highlighting strategy directed
April to read, evaluate, and select the facts that she wanted to include in her notes. The
highlighting technique encouraged April to read and evaluate the text to determine what
was important, whereas the negative Prezi experience prompted her to record her facts on
the graphic organizer. In addition, previous instructional content mediated Lucy’s
actions in Assignment 1. Her discoveries during her research prompted her to reflect and
compare past instructional content to new information. Lucy said, “I saw that [runoff] as
a problem for the puffer. I remembered we talked about that earlier.” During Lucy’s
reflection, she connected past instructional content from the environmental issues unit to
what she found about the northern puffer and included it as part of her presentation.
In Assignment 2, I continued to see that unique sets of tools mediated each
student’s action. The students employed a different set of tools as compared to

182

Assignment 1. The less structured problem design of Assignment 2 motivated the
students to problem-solve more as compared to Assignment 1. Newell (2009) proposes
that a less structured problem encourages individuals to evaluate and problem-solve to
meet an informational need. Problem-solvers may not have considerable knowledge of
the topic but they reflect and decide how to use the new information to be successful. For
example, Charlie applied his life experiences to his project as he worked. He explained,
“It [Smithsonian] is the national archives.” His fossil topic motivated him to pause and
reflect on his experiences, which he then applied to his research. April used print
resources as a guide for her work on supernovas. The images and the information she
found motivated her to reflect, evaluate, delving deeper into her topic.
Jerry had an infinity for technology and employed some PowerPoint features that
his classmates did not. For example, Jerry cropped his images in order to focus his
audience’s attention. The cropping feature guided Jerry to analyze and decide precisely
the area of the image that displayed the specific detail that he wanted to emphasize in his
presentation. Jerry also selected images that he believed best accentuated the message he
wanted to share with his classmates about Olber’s Paradox. He also overlaid an image of
the galaxy with a grain of sand image. Jerry shared during his interview, “The
perspective of a grain of sand would cover 10,000 galaxies is hard to visualize. I found a
picture that measures a grain of sand.” Thus, the topic/visual details guided Jerry to
evaluate, select, and decide to create a single image for his audience to consider. In
addition, the text box feature prompted Jerry to decide where and how large he wanted
the grain of sand image to be in the slide. In both situations, the PowerPoint special

183

features encouraged Jerry to problem-solve and decide how to enhance the message he
wanted to convey.
On the other hand, human interactions and responses prompted April to reflect on,
evaluate, and adapt her presentation. April relied on her classmates as guides that aided
her in putting together her presentation. For example, in the screencast I heard April ask
for help. She said, “Sue, what is a light year?” The classmate replied 5.88 trillion miles.
April replied, “Wow that is a lot. Mine [red giant] is 750,000 light years away.” Meyers
et al. (2009) suggest that middle school students place great importance on oral
discussion and face-to-face interaction. Face-to-face discussion prompts middle school
students to reflect on and evaluate the discussion’s content. In this situation, the oral
discussion directed April to reflect on what she and her classmate discussed about how
far the red giant is from Earth. She evaluated and decided how to modify and include the
distance of the red giant as part of her presentation.
NoodleTools special features mediated Lucy’s actions. Lucy relied heavily on the
citation fields of NoodleTools. I noticed on the screencast time clock that Lucy took
more time than the other students did as she created her works consulted. All the
students created a works consulted, but Lucy had fewer errors than most. Lucy explained
during her interview, “I did not have any problems. NoodleTools helps.” The citation
fields guided Lucy to slow down, carefully examine, and decide what pieces of
information she needed to complete each citation field. The assignment requirements
prompted Lucy to analyze pieces of text to complete successfully her works consulted,
whereas the previous instructional units encouraged her to reflect on how two
environmental issues related to the northern puffer. Overall, the students’ unique tool use

184

mediated their actions across both assignments. The varied tools used during both
assignments prompted the students to engage with and reflect on their presentations
promoting mental growth and critical thinking. In the next section, I will continue to
examine tool use and their mediating influence on student actions.
Patterns across both assignments
As I coded the student dialogues and interviews, patterns started to emerge across
both assignments. The students’ tool use was distinct but as Table 1 revealed, there were
several noticeable patterns. Four categories showed unique tool use that mediated
students’ actions as they worked on their projects. Assignment requirements, topic/visual
details, notetaking/research, and life experiences/interests categories captured 53% of the
content moves. Of these four categories, only assignment requirements were in
Assignment 1, whereas the remaining three categories were located in Assignment 2. I
will examine examples of the unique patterns from the four categories that mediated
student actions in both assignments.
Assignment requirements. Grant and Branch (2005) identify in their study the
necessary elements that are a part of a project-based learning experience. In their
opinion, items such as assignment requirements, graphic organizers, and resources
mediate student actions. Both science assignments reflect evidence of such mediation.
Assignment requirements mediated the student actions more in Assignment 1 than in
Assignment 2. Understandably so, as Assignment 1’s requirements were structured and
Assignment 2’s requirements were less structured, allowing for more student control over
content. In Assignment 1, April, Hector, Jerry, and Lucy recorded their notes on a
graphic organizer. The close proximity of the graphic organizer encouraged student use.

185

In addition, the graphic organizer contents directed the students to locate, evaluate, and
select the best information for each subtopic. The students did not have to be on or near a
computer to work. As Lucy pointed out, “The graphic organizer was part of the
handouts, so I used it.” On the other hand, Charlie and Mary used NoodleTools to type
their notes. Charlie’s poor handwriting motivated him to record his notes in
NoodleTools. Mary created annotations about her sources for future reference in
NoodleTools. The handouts did not have that affordance while the annotation field in
NoodleTools did. However, the criteria documented on the graphic organizer handout
directed Charlie and Mary to locate and evaluate information as they worked in
NoodleTools. This was similar to their classmates’ behaviors. All the students used the
graphic organizer to organize the slide order as they designed their presentations. On the
other hand, the graphic organizer subtopic contents prompted students to reflect, analyze,
and decide on the precise information they needed for their individual critter presentation.
The number of moves made in the assignment requirements category was fewer in
Assignment 2. However, the requirements mediated student actions in a similar fashion.
I noticed that one of the most important requirements in Assignment 2 that prompted
students to reflect and discuss was the option to create a presentation or take a multiplechoice test. I observed and overheard some very thoughtful discussions among all the
students, who weighed the pros and cons of creating a presentation versus taking a test.
One group of students wrote on a scrap of paper the pluses and minuses of each choice
before making a decision. I also overheard April affirm her decision by stating that she
was not a good test taker. In response to April’s statement, many of her classmates
nodded their heads in agreement. Meyers et al. (2009) propose that middle school

186

students are social beings and seek information from many sources, one of which is their
peers. The social interaction among middle school students promotes developing their
social self as well as gaining additional perspectives on which to reflect. Vygotsky
(1987) suggests that oral language is the ultimate tool that mediates an individual’s
actions. The impromptu discussions and brainstorming motivated the students to
evaluate their shared ideas and to make their own personal decision. Jerry said during his
interview that he did not want to take the science final, because as he reported, “I heard
that it [science final] was hard.” Ultimately, five of the six participating students decided
to create a presentation. The initial specific assignment requirement choice motivated the
students to discuss, reflect, and decide what would be the best course of action for them.
Similarly, to Assignment 1, after deciding on creating a presentation, Assignment 2’s
requirements prompted the students to reflect on and evaluate each of the required
elements as they planned and worked on their presentation.
An important part of the assignment requirements that mediated student actions
was the grading rubrics. Both assignments had grading rubrics, each with two sections.
The first section defined the required presentation topic content and the second defined
the required class oral presentation. The rubric criteria explained details for each portion
of the assignment as well as the point value for each. Students received the rubrics at the
beginning of the assignment so that there was no misunderstanding of the requirements.
Ball (2012) proposes that rubrics act as more than assessment tool of the final product.
Students use rubrics to analyze their progress through the assignment as well as the
quality of their ongoing product. In both assignments, I noticed that the students used the
rubrics in the manner observed by Ball. In Assignment 1, the students used the rubric to

187

evaluate and make sure they had included all the required elements. In her interview,
Lucy remarked, “I used the rubric as a checklist.” Mary also physically checked off the
required items as she worked. I observed Hector frequently referring to the rubric. He
said in his interview, “I noticed on the rubric had a time, the number of minutes we had to
have.” The individual rubric criteria prompted Hector to analyze the length of his
presentation in order to be compliant with the required amount of time.
Similar student rubric use appeared in Assignment 2. The students frequently
referred to their rubrics to evaluate their progress and the quality of their presentations as
outlined by Ball (2012). April supported this observation by stating, “It [rubric] helped
me to keep track of what I had.” The rubric criteria also prompted the students to
determine and select elements they wanted to include in their presentations. For
example, Assignment 2 requirements offered a choice of different elements described in
the rubric as “literary devices” for the students to include in their presentations. Charlie
noted in his interview that he used the rubric to make sure he had all the required
elements. While working, he outlined each element he had completed. Charlie
concluded by saying, “I have covered all that I need for the assignment.” The grading
rubrics encouraged the students to reflect and evaluate their progress as well as the
quality of their presentations to make sure that they had met all the assignment
requirements. The rubric also criteria encouraged students to reflect and decide on the
type of literacy element best suited their presentation, whereas the PowerPoint special
features directed the students to problem-solve and select the font style and size that
enhances their presentation.

188

Topic/visuals details. The topic/visual details category had mediating influence
on student actions in both assignments. The topic/visual details content moves were
higher in Assignment 2 than in Assignment 1. Ho et al. (2011) proposes that an
individual in an inquiry-driven activity wherein the individual is in control of their
learning and constructs new knowledge that is personally meaningful to them. The
student-centered learning design of Assignment 2 encouraged the students to explore and
examine more topic/visual details than Assignment 1. Newly discovered facts or images
motivated students to reflect on and evaluate whether to expand their research by digging
deeper into their topic. I noticed that the information that the students uncovered
prompted them to pause, reflect, and decide how to adapt their presentations in light of
what they discovered.
Assignment 1 had a more focused direction because of the structured
requirements. However, one subtopic titled “interesting facts” opened the door for the
students to go beyond the basics and explore their topic further. For example, Charlie
discovered that some birdwatchers mistake a cormorant for a common loon. The
topic/visual details that Charlie found about the two birds’ appearance did not fit any the
subtopics except interesting facts. The bird misidentification information prompted
Charlie to investigate further. He located images, analyzed them, and compared the loon
and cormorant. Charlie said, “I could see where they [common loon and cormorant]
could be mistaken. I wanted to show this to the class.” Ho et al. also notes the
importance of images in conveying meaning to an audience. Visual details expand the
options for learning beyond the written or spoken text. The two bird images provoked
Charlie to analyze, compare, and decide on how to adapt and expand his presentation to

189

include the new information and images. On the other hand, Charlie’s challenges in
embedding hyperlinks Prezi motivated Charlie to problem-solve to allow him to share the
loon call with his classmates.
Assignment 2 topic/visual details afforded more opportunities for the students to
expand their research. Topic self-selection as Ho et al. (2011) suggests, motivates an
individual to collect, analyze, and decide what topic/visual details to use in their
presentation. In many cases, the facts and details the students located prompted them to
pursue further information or revise their thinking based on what they discovered.
April’s work on supernovas demonstrates for example demonstrates Ho et al.’s
implications of how student-centered learning mediates an individual’s actions. April
read that scientists have been watching a particular red giant for several years. This
information about the red giant prompted April to search further for the latest status on
the red giant’s condition. I heard her say in the screencast, “Wow, it [red giant] is one of
the brightest stars in the galaxy. I am adding that to my notes.” The new information
about the red giant’s brightness motivated April to reflect, evaluate, and include it in her
notes. I noticed similar types of activity among the students throughout the project. The
topic/visual details encouraged students to explore and revise as they worked. Ho et al.
suggests that the interest in and control students have over their learning motivates them
to problem-solve and in turn, has a positive influence on the individual’s mental growth.
As another example, Lucy discovered as she gathered examples of creatures that live in a
coral reef that her subtopic was too narrow. In the screencast, I heard Lucy say, “Wait!
Many of these [sea creatures] are not mammals. I will change my paper [presearch
handout] to say, ‘What marine life lives in a coral reef?’” The topic/details motivated

190

Lucy to reflect and reevaluate the scope of her subtopic. Based on her evaluation Lucy
modified and expanded her subtopic to include all sea creatures and not just sea
mammals. The topic/visual details encouraged April to reflect and decide to search
further, whereas Lucy’s details prompted her to reflect, reevaluate, and adapt her
presentation content.
Notetaking/research. Previously I examined two categories where there was a
pattern of tool use with different amounts of moves across both assignments.
Notetaking/research category highlights a contrasting method of how students employed
or did not employ tools that were available to them. Table 1 demonstrates how very little
notetaking/research category played a role in Assignment 1. Smagorinsky (2011)
suggests that tool appropriation occurs in a specific learning experience. Individuals
have to see a need or reason to utilize tools in a particular situation. The need for
students to utilize notetaking and research did not appear to students in Assignment 1. It
is evident there was little opportunity for the students to expand or revise their notetaking
and research. Only April, Charlie, and Jerry had content moves in this category though it
was negligible. I noticed in the interviews and screencasts all three of the students’
remarks in the notetaking/research were in regards to saving their work. For example,
Jerry’s prior experiences prompted him to reflect and decide how to maintain his
information so he would not lose it. Jerry explained, “I lost my notes and had to start
over.” However, for Assignment 2, the notetaking/research category played a much
stronger role.
Assignment 2’s requirements offered more opportunities for notetaking and
research to mediate the student actions. The less structured design of the assignment

191

allowed the students the freedom to plan, redesign, and adapt their research as they
worked. Newell (2009) proposes that less structured problems are multifaceted and offer
multiple solutions. I noticed at the beginning of the project that students struggled with
deciding what they wanted to include in their project. However, as they worked I
observed the students’ subtopics or the facts that they wanted to share with their
classmates evolving as they attempted to find information. The student-centered activity
encouraged the students to reflect and problem-solve. For example, at the beginning of
the project, Charlie directed his research to types of fossils. In his interview, Charlie
outlined what his initial plans for his presentation: “I had to go to paleontology…how
they [fossils] were made and what they tell us.” However, he did not have much success
with this plan. In the screencast, I heard Charlie mutter, “It is clear I cannot find
anything.” The lack of results prompted Charlie to pause, reevaluate, and revise his topic
by modifying it from fossil types to fossil locations. Charlie’s previous experiences at
the Smithsonian directed him to explore and evaluate the museum’s website, whereas his
search terms prompted him to pause, reflect, and change his search terms for better
results.
Charlie decided to change his focus and revisit the websites he had previously
explored. Grisham and Wolsey (2006) propose that topics of high interest that are
connected to an individual’s life motivate them to reflect and problem-solve. Charlie
came across a link from BBC Nature that led him to the La Brea tar pits of California. I
noticed that he spent a considerable amount of time on the tar pit website. What Charlie
discovered about the La Brea tar pits had a profound influence on his thinking. He said,
“The tar pits helped me to understand how they [prehistoric creatures] got trapped in the

192

tar and the creatures that lived around the tar pits.” A video Charlie found on the tar pits
website prompted him to include it as part of his presentation. I noticed that in his class
presentation, Charlie adapted his slide content to include more about the tar pits than he
originally intended when beginning to work on the project. The notetaking/research
details encouraged Charlie to reflect, reevaluate, and problem-solve to create what he
determined to be a well-rounded presentation on fossils.
Life experiences/interests. The final category that displayed a contrasting tool
use across both assignments was life experiences/interests. Life experiences/interests had
a smaller and more diverse number range in content moves than the notetaking/research
category. Table 1 clearly shows that life experiences/interests category had no mediating
influence on student actions in Assignment 1. Smagorinsky (2011) proposes that in a
situated learning environment students have a reason to take up and utilize tools. In this
case, the students did not have a reason for drawing on any life experiences/interests in
Assignment 1. However, in Assignment 2, there was a small amount of influence, as
shown by the small number of content moves. In comparing the two assignments in my
field notes, I noticed during the Chesapeake Bay Critters project, students were not as
engaged as they were in the science final. The students followed the assignment
requirements to complete the project and they did add some interesting facts outside the
basic required elements. However, I could sense they were interested but not as nearly as
they were for the science final. For example, I overheard the April and Lucy discussing
Assignment 1. They both agreed that their topic was acceptable but they wished they
could have selected a more interesting critter. The nature of the Chesapeake Bay Critters
project did not provide opportunities for student life experiences and interests to mediate

193

their actions, whereas the science final assignment encouraged the students to reflect and
decide on an interesting topic of their presentation.
For example, all students shared in their interviews that their personal interests or
a topic that struck their fancy was the reason behind their topic decision-making. Lucy
and April did struggle in their topic selection, but overall, I noticed that the students were
excited at the prospect of selecting their own topic. Thompson (2012) proposes that
individual’s interests encourage decision-making. Individuals attach importance to selfselected topics and are willing to investigate further. Hector said, “I am interested in it
and so I know some other stuff about space.” Hector’s interest in space encouraged him
to reflect and select the life of a star. Hector explained in his interview that one of his
objectives of his presentation was to get his class to understand the length a star’s life.
Hector’s topic encouraged him to reflect and decide on what exactly he wanted his
audience to learn from his presentation. In a similar fashion, Charlie expanded his fossil
presentation to include an examination of how the entertainment industry exaggerates
prehistoric creatures’ size for the sake of artistic creativity. Charlie explained, “I want to
show using fossils real size and compare it to what is in the movies.” Charlie’s interest in
fossils prompted him to reflect and analyze exactly how he wanted to compare the true
size of fossils to the distorted movie versions.
As I reviewed the data, I expected to find that different Prezi and PowerPoint
special features mediated student actions. However, this was not the case. Table 1
clearly demonstrates the mediating power of the assignment requirements had on student
actions. Twenty-four percent of all the students’ combined content moves appeared in
the assignment requirements category. All six students also had the most number of

194

moves appear in assignment requirements category for Assignment 1. In Assignment 2,
four out of the five students had assignment requirements as their third category with the
most moves. Assignment 1’s requirements were very specific and detailed, whereas
Assignment 2 was more of a student-centered project where the students were in control
of their learning. Grant and Branch (2005) suggest that assignment requirements act as a
guide that directs individuals through each phase of the assignment. The assignment
requirements design influenced how other tools mediated student action. For example,
Hector sat and read the assignment handouts before beginning to work. He said, “I read
through the packet to see what I had to do.” The handouts motivated Hector to reflect
and evaluate the assignment criteria and decide how he would complete the project. One
student, April described Assignment 1’s assignment requirements as a checklist. On
further reflection, I had to agree.
Assignment 2, on the other hand, allowed for more student control of topic
selection, content, and design of the presentation. Thus, the topic/visual details and
notetaking/research categories were most influential categories for Assignment 2. The
assignment criteria in Assignment 2 afforded more student creativity and tool use than
Assignment 1. The less structured design prompted students to self-select their topic,
determine what they wanted to share with their audience, and decide how to arrange their
presentation. Neo and Neo (2009) propose that project based-learning, such as what
Assignment 2 offered, encourages problem-solving, reflections, and creativity. As an
example, Lucy decided to use Prezi for her presentation on coral reefs. I overheard her
tell a classmate that she thought the Prezi transition feature emulates ocean waves. In the
end, the assignment design and criteria requirements motivated the students to problem-

195

solve, reflect, and make decisions as they worked through each class assignment, which
in turn fostered their critical thinking and mental growth.

196

CHAPTER 5: DISCUSSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
When I started on this journey, I expected to find that the special features of Prezi
and PowerPoint would have a significant impact on student activities. What I found,
however, was entirely different. At first, I was disappointed – but what did I did discover
was fascinating. My findings indicated that a variety of tools mediate my students’
actions, especially assignment requirements. Interestingly, I noticed that the assignments
requirements played a part in how the students took up various tools to complete their
assignments. In this final chapter, I will construct an explanation of my findings with
suggestions for literacy and library educators regarding how tools mediate how
adolescents conduct their research.
Findings Summary
The objective of this study was to examine how presentational tools mediate
student action. Instead, what I had the pleasure of observing was how the requirements
of a highly structured assignment and a less structured assignment worked differently to
motivate students to employ various tools to complete each assignment. I recognized that
investigating the assignment design was not an objective of this study, but its importance
became apparent early on as I closely watched the students work. Both assignments
provided a window for me to observe actual tool use in action. As noted in the
introduction, I suspected something was occurring with students’ thinking and learning
but was not sure what it was. However, prior to this study, I had little opportunity to
examine what tools mediates the thinking and decision-making of a students. By
conducting this study, I was able to do to get a glimpse of what Vygotsky’s (1987) theory

197

of how cultural tools mediate individuals’ actions. It was exciting and gratifying to say
the least.
I observed several of Vygotsky’s (1987) descriptions of adolescents in the
transitional stage of growth in the participating students’ actions. For example, Vygotsky
suggests that individuals learn more effectively in a situated learning experience with
authentic, hands-on tool application. Individuals who take up tools during a real life
application allows them to draw on prior experiences and knowledge to problem-solve as
they work in the new learning experience. A prime example of prior knowledge
mediating action in this study was the previously learned web evaluation strategies that
they applied during both projects. Vygotsky argues that prior knowledge puts new
conditions on the individual’s thought process and promotes mental growth. The
assignment designs of both the Chesapeake Bay Critters project and the Science Final
project promoted student problem-solving and decision-making in line with what
Vygotsky suggests occurs during individuals’ learning experiences. In other words, the
students practice strategies and skills in a real-life application, wherein the teachers and
librarians are there to assist and guide them. Witnessing students be in control of their
learning was one of the most satisfying aspects of this study. I watched students make
their own decisions and not rely on Mrs. Cavender or myself. Students did have the
proper instructional supports suggested by Vygotsky to guide their actions, but how they
interpreted and used those supports was entirely up to them. The students asked
questions, but I noticed that the questions clarified a point or cleared up a misconception.
Assignment 2 provided the students with more opportunities for the kind of
learning advocated by AASL (2007): drawing conclusions, making informed decisions,

198

and becoming productive members of the global community. The less structured
assignment design prompted students to use various tools that encouraged problemsolving and reflection, which in turn promoted their critical thinking. Again, the studentcentered learning experiences with a self-selected topic reinforced the student inquiry
research that AASL encourages. Vygotsky (1998) explains that adolescents in the
beginning of the transitional stage merge concrete and abstract thinking. During the
study, there were moments that the students’ thinking followed a logical order, such as
the systematic assignment directions that encouraged them not to think beyond the
handout instructions. However, the varied tools the students employed influenced their
critical thinking – even if it was very simplistic in nature. For example, Charlie’s
discovery of the common loon and cormorant images prompted him to evaluate and
compare the similarities and differences of the two birds. Based on his reflection and
evaluation, Charlie decided he understood how the misidentification could happen and
included this as part of his Prezi. Here is an example of the beginning of the transition
stage that Vygotsky (1997) outlines for this age group. Vygotsky describes that
adolescents reach a stage in which they are beginning to think in concepts but only at
basic level. The participating students’ thinking slowly moved towards the abstract, such
as when Lucy reflected on, evaluated the three coral reef types, and then amended how
she presented the differences. The students did not rely on adults to make their decisions
but rather made their own critical judgments and analyses.
The final positive experience that stood out in my reflection was the student
interactions and discussions that occurred during the study. Vygotsky (1987) proposes
that oral communication is one the most effective tools that society has to offer. The

199

student actions during the study demonstrated just how well oral discussion mediates
individuals’ behavior and mental growth. The students collaborated, brainstormed,
supported, and pushed each other every step of the way. Throughout the study, I
highlighted examples of student discussion and interaction, demonstrating how language
mediates human behavior. I marveled at how the students discussed and problem-solved
to address the challenges that they faced. One example was the students’ serious
discussion in which they weighed the pros and cons of taking a science final test versus
creating a presentation. Again, I was awestruck to see a visible example of what
Vygotsky described. By watching and listening closely, I was able to witness how
culturally designed tools mediated student actions and mental growth. As with any study,
along with the positives there are drawbacks. In the next section, I will examine the
positives and what I would have changed given what I know now.
Implications for Research
Study Positives. While I was conducting the study, I made mental notes of what
I liked and what worked. The age group that I selected for the study was a pleasure to
work with. Eighth graders are in the transitional age range displaying the actions and
behaviors that Vygotsky (1998) defined. I have always thought that eighth-grade
students are interesting and fun to work with. They are willing to try new things, have a
sense of humor, and still enjoy activities that some might describe as elementary. On the
other hand, eighth graders are beginning to transition in their thinking and actions from
concrete to abstract. Thus, they are willing to attempt activities that are more complex
and challenging. Vygotsky (1998) describes this as the “middle ground” between a child

200

and a young adult (p. 27). I like studying this middle ground and would work again with
the same age group.
A data collection method I found valuable during the study was the visual
observation and casual listening that I describe as eavesdropping on student
conversations. The observations provided an expanded view of student actions and
physical movements throughout the library that the screencasts might not have captured.
All of the students in the school, including those who participated in the study, are
accustomed to my presence while they are in the library. My standing nearby, watching,
or listening did not inhibit their actions or discussions. However, the conversations
added or confirmed earlier students’ discussions and actions. The conversations I
overheard, similarly to my observations, added another layer of student actions and
thoughts that may have not appeared in the student interviews or screencast dialogues.
If given the opportunity to replicate the study, I would definitely use Screencasto-Matic or a similar program again to record the computer screenshots and student
dialogue as one method of data collecting. Screencast-o-Matic was an easy program to
use and it provided clear screenshots and voice recordings. The free version of the
program did not pose any challenges to the students recording or myself when replaying.
The recordings were especially helpful during the student interviews. They provided
visual as well as audio data to discuss. During the interviews, the screencasts prompted
students to analyze their actions by pointing something out on the screen to clarify or
emphasize a statement. The program thus added another dimension to the interviews.
The students enjoyed using the program, and its use did not hinder as the students worked
on the assignments.

201

The most valuable data collection method during the study was the stimulated
recall interviews. The interviews, coupled with reading the interview transcripts and
viewing the screencasts, provided me with a rich amount of data from my students. The
students were also amazed by what they said and did during the screencasts. As
mentioned, the screencasts encouraged the students to analyze their actions. Their careful
reflection provoked considerable discussion during the interviews evoking more insight
into their thinking. The student interviews and discussions were another example of
Vygotsky’s (1987) belief that oral language is a valuable cultural tool that encourages
reflection in individuals. I should point out that the participating students were not shy in
sharing their thoughts and opinions. They were thoughtful and serious throughout the
interviews and the study.
Study Changes. As with all studies, there are items that I would change if given
the opportunity. Upon reflection, I would maintain the foundation of the research
questions and I would still investigate how student tool use and the special features of
PowerPoint and Prezi mediate adolescents’ approaches to conducting research to answer
an informational need. However, instead of the free Prezi version that was used in this
study, I would invest in the subscription edition. Students had difficulties with the free
version and the challenges added to the frustration for some students. Two major issues
students faced with their Prezi presentations were presentations disappearing and the
inability to embed hyperlinks into frames. April, as well as other students, lost their
completed Prezi presentations. Despite following the publish/save function, their
presentations files vanished. April had to recreate her presentation the night before it was
due in class. Additionally, none of the students could embed a hyperlink in the Prezi

202

frames, as the function of embedding a hyperlink is not available in the free version.
Charlie problem-solved to overcome this obstacle, but having to do so enhanced his
dislike of Prezi. A subscription account would help eliminate these challenges and offer
additional special features for students to use.
Technology aside, there are four aspects of the study I would amend to gain a
wider vision of tool meditation in eighth-grade students. For this study, I recruited six
students who were advanced readers and writers. Because of this, I was left with the
question of how cultural looks mediate the actions of students who are not advanced
reader and writers. To examine tool use in students with varied reading and writing
abilities, I would increase the number of participants to eight to ten students and have a
more diverse representation of basic, proficient, and advanced readers and writers. I
would still omit students with Individualized Educational Program (IEP) and Gifted
Individualized Educational Program (GIEP). A more academically diverse group of
students would provide a larger and more accurate snapshot of tool use in eighth-grade
students. Though the results of such a study may end up being similar to the findings of
this study, the idea is worth pursuing.
In addition, I would have allowed the students to have more control over selecting
the content area instead of limiting them to one subject. I would allow students to selfselect two assignments from any of the three core subjects of social studies, language
arts, or science. By expanding the student self-selection to a higher degree, deeper
student engagement could have been achieved. For example, Charlie and Mary would
have preferred the content area of American History instead of Earth Science. Allowing
students to select the content area for the study would tap into the students’ personal

203

preferences and interests. Vygotsky (1998) explains that interests begin to change and
new ones appear during adolescents’ biological and socio-cultural maturation. He
suggests that building learning experiences upon students’ personal interests provides an
avenue for instructional strategies that promote tool use. In addition, I would expand the
number of teachers involved in the study. Having more adults involved in the study
would bring a wider perspective to the analysis. A higher number of teachers as part of
the study would allow for more and different eyes on student actions. This in turn, would
provide additional adult perspectives of student actions as well as observations that I may
not notice. Each teacher would bring to the study their own teaching style and
connection with their students that mediate student action. The teacher and student
conversations would, as a result, provide more opportunities to observe the cultural tool
that Vygotsky believes was most important in promoting mental growth.
Students also would have had more freedom to create a presentation if they were
permitted to use tools of their choice. Adhering to the same student-inquiry research
foundation, I would keep the two types of assignments: highly structured, and a less
structured research assignment. However, I would also add a third assignment in the
middle of the school year. I would space the assignments out within the school year: the
first assignment located in early in the first semester, the second assignment in the middle
of the year, and the third one located at the end of the school year. The goal of this
design would be to gain an understanding of tool development over a period of time.
Vygotsky (1987) suggests examining the progress of cognitive development, not the final
product, is most useful. Over an eight-month period, I would hope to see tool use slowly
develop as well as the mediating influence on students’ cognitive growth.

204

Future Studies. If I had the opportunity to examine tool use in studies, I would
employ several of the changes that I mentioned in the previous section. Reflecting back
on Vygotsky (1987), the adolescent transitional age is a journey of social, physical, and
cognitive development that occurs not overnight but rather over an extended period of
time. Designing a study that examines student tool use and their mediating impact on
thinking over a two-year period would capture a broader picture of such action.
Beginning with two assignments in eighth grade and concluding with two assignments in
ninth grade, researchers would gain insights into how cultural tools mediate adolescents’
actions over the transitional period.
One of the foci of my study was the mediating influence of Prezi and
PowerPoint’s special features on student actions. In a future study, I would examine the
special features of other presentational tools. My study examined presentational tools
that were primarily two-dimensional. In today’s classrooms and libraries, students are
taking up and using a wide variety of tools such as Weebly, Flash, and Camtasia to create
presentations for class assignments. The addition of different presentational tools would
allow students to step beyond the two-dimensional and use video production programs
for their presentations. Additionally, Office 365 and similar collaborative programs allow
students to collaborate on projects and assignments. Vygotsky (1987) proposes that oral
discussion and interaction is one of the most valuable tools in promoting cognitive
development. Collaborative assignments, in which pairs or triads work together towards
a common final product, would offer another opportunity to examine the mediating
influence of cultural tools and collaboration on adolescents’ cognitive development.

205

Implications for Practice
Implications when working with teachers. The study’s findings have
implications and possibilities for literacy educators, especially library professionals. The
educational mission of school librarians as described by AASL (2007), is to encourage,
promote, and teach students to become lifelong readers, writers, and problem-solvers.
Teaching students to be effective users of information is not new to librarians but
examining how cultural tools mediate student action may be for some. Gaining a
Vygotskian perspective of how students use language, writing, and other cultural tools
provides another view of how students learn and grow. For example, during the study, I
recognized in greater detail the importance of collaborative discussion. I had always
noted what I defined as “constructive discussion” among students. Students talking about
their project, sharing ideas, and giving suggestions to their classmates act as they worked
as valuable learning tools. The study’s results made even clearer to me constructive
discussion’s vital importance. Therefore, I plan to promote the notion that oral
discussion, as Vygotsky (1987) reminds us is a crucially important learning tool in my
future work with teachers and students. Smagorinsky (2013) argues that literacy
educators need to allow all students the time to discuss and brainstorm as they work their
way through an idea. Sometimes in the rush of all that educators must accomplish in a
day’s schedule, the exploration derived from conversation during a learning situation is
lost. Educators need to find an avenue to include that in their plans.
However, educators have to contend squeezing in one more item into an already
tight schedule. I noticed during the study that the science final assignment requirements
offered students more opportunities to reflect and problem-solve as compared to the

206

Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment. As a school librarian, I have the opportunity to
collaborate with content teachers in the design and implementation of research-based
instructional units. Based on the results of this study, in our future planning stages I will
promote the concepts that Vygotsky (1987) states is the avenue for meaningful learning
experiences: the student centered, hands-on activities that promotes cultural tool use.
AASL (2007) standards for the 21st century learning recommend moving from highly
structured activities to less structured learning experiences, as described by Newell
(2009). This does not mean allowing students free rein, but rather creating inquiry-based
projects and activities that promote critical thinking and problem solving.
With that in mind, I plan to suggest to teachers to slow down project timelines and
add the inquiry-based research element to the assignment. As an example of this, during
my study the students engaged in impromptu brainstorming session when they had to
decide whether to take the science final or create a presentation. Teachers will be
encouraged to make this small adjustment to the length of the unit and allow extra time
for in-depth discussion and decision-making. The additional time would also allow
students to employ and practice the cultural tools that are so important. For example, I
reviewed the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment based on what I discovered in the
study. Instead of five days for the assignment, I would suggest six days be afforded, and
I would modify the assignment to include criteria that addresses student interests,
emotions, and social wellbeing and development. In the past, these options were not
always part of the instructional plan, but should be in the future.
An example of how I put into practice what I discovered during the study
occurred in the semester following the conclusion of the study. The fifth-grade reading

207

teachers and I designed a research project where the students researched a person
described as a highly successful role model or leader. Traditionally, the students worked
individually on a self-selected notable individual. However, this year the teachers and I
paired students together and they collectively selected a person to research. The students
took turns reading aloud to each other from a variety of suggested resources. At the
conclusion of each reading session, the students discussed, analyzed, and problem-solved
what they had read in relationship to the subtopic or heading on the notetaking graphic
organizer. At the end of each discussion, the students completed their own graphic
organizer and ultimately a final project. The teacher and I discovered that the students’
notes and final projects demonstrated a higher level of student analysis and writing as
compared to the past. However, to achieve result, the teacher, and I only needed to add
one class period – 40 minutes. Smagorinsky (2013) suggests that extra time allows
students to explore, discuss, and write as they develop their thoughts and ideas about a
problem.
As a librarian, my goal is to promote students’ critical thinking and decisionmaking. I also want to instill the AASL objectives in students across all content areas. I
discovered that less structured assignments, such as the science final, promote problemsolving and critical thinking in students. Based on this discovery, I now encourage and
recommend that teachers to adapt curricula to include student-centered, inquiry-based
activities in their research units that allow students to take control of their learning.
Putting reading and writing aside, I need to keep examining what other cultural tools
students use and how they use them in the course of their learning. I also need to
continue to promote effective tool use through multiple balanced learning experiences for

208

students. By balanced, I mean a blend of the traditional tools that Vygotsky (1987)
encourages as well as the new tools that are an important part of today’s society. I
discovered that students used a wide variety of resources during their research. They did
not want to overlook any possible information that could help with their project.
Students demonstrated this during the Science Final assignment and to a lesser degree in
the Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment. Teachers and librarians do not know what
resources students may use. I suggest a varied selection of resources be available to be
available to meet the individuality of their students. Vygotsky also suggests that tool
growth occurs with practice and over time. Having several real life learning experiences
motivates students to practice and apply those tools, slowly move towards mastery. I
noticed far less problems with tool use in the Science Final as compared to the
Chesapeake Bay Critters assignment. Nothing is more gratifying than to watch and help
my students as they read, and write on topics that are so engaging they lose track of
everything else. When students start to control their tool use and learning, I know I have
accomplished what I set out to do.
Implications for working with preservice teachers. As a teacher educator
working with preservice elementary teachers and school librarians, I have discovered that
they have similar characteristics as veteran classroom teachers in regards to libraries and
library resources. Pajares (1993) suggests that preservice teachers come into the
education field with preconceived perceptions and experiences from their own K-12
schooling. For some, those perceptions also include those about libraries. In many cases,
these experiences are neutral or negative. I have been on the receiving end of those
neutral perceptions during my time in education. Preservice teachers rarely have

209

knowledge of what a librarian has to offer or what information literacy curriculum is.
Asselin and Lee (2002) suggest that many preservice teachers are overwhelmed with all
the responsibilities of student teaching, so they have a tendency to overlook libraries and
their curriculum. As a teacher educator, I will include library resources and information
literacy as part of the coursework.
During the study, I discovered that Mrs. Cavender was not aware of several
library resources that are available for students. As a part of the unit planning, I
introduced to Mrs. Cavender to these resources and their benefits for students.
Throughout the study, I reminded or introduced students to resources that helped with
their assignments. I plan to do a similar introduction for preservice teachers and
librarians, as well outline how information literacy ties into the Common Core standards.
I will also demonstrate how the standards and collaborating with a school librarian has a
positive influence on student learning. My primary teaching experiences have been at the
secondary level but I will advocate to my preservice students to integrate in the use of
varied library resources and information literacy skills, across all content areas, and grade
levels in their classrooms and instructional plans. My suggestions reflect what I
uncovered during this study but also Vygotsky’s (1987) belief that tool application occurs
overtime and with practice in many learning experiences.
Asselin and Lee (2002) propose that teacher education coursework include
opportunities to collaborate with a school librarian on a small research unit. The authors
suggest that working with a school librarian provides preservice teachers with practical
experience in creating a student-centered research activity that uses a wide variety of
resources. Students’ varied resource use was evident throughout this study. I noticed

210

that students selected different types of resources that, in their opinions best met their
informational needs. I will encourage the same with preservice teachers and introduce
how a less structured assignment design promotes more effective tool use in students than
a highly structured assignment. In the comparison of the two assignment designs, I will
stress the importance of student inquiry-based learning experiences have such a positive
influence on student actions. In addition, I will emphasize how students need time to
discuss, practice, and apply their emerging tool appropriation.
Asselin and Lee (2002) and Roux (2008) suggest that one of the more challenging
aspects that school librarians face is getting classroom teachers to collaborate on an
integrated instructional unit. I mentioned earlier how important it is for students to
engage in collaborative discussions. Preservice teachers need the same. I plan to
encourage preservice teachers to collaborate, discuss, and plan with a librarian or another
teacher. Just as I discovered that informal discussions that I overheard during the study
motivate students to reflect and make decisions, preservice teachers need the same
opportunity. The real application of Vygotsky’s (1987) theory of tool mediation applies
to preservice teachers as much as it does for eighth graders. Both preservice teachers and
eighth graders are a work in progress. They need the time to practice and slowly
appropriate the cultural tools that they need to be successful in the classroom and in life.

211

REFERENCES
Alexander, P. A., Schallert, D. L., & Reynolds, R. E. (2009). What is learning anyway? A
topographical perspective considered. Educational Psychologist, 44(3), 176-192.
American Association of School Librarians. (2007). Standards for the 21st century
learner. Chicago, IL: American Library Association.
Asselin, M. M., & Lee, E. A. (2002). “I wish someone had taught me”: Information
literacy in a teacher education program. Teacher Librarian, 30(2), 10-17.
Ball, C. E. (2012). Assessing scholarly multimedia: A rhetorical genre studies approach.
Technical Communication Quarterly, 21(1), 61-77.
Berkun, S. (2012, August 13). Why I hate Prezi. [Blog post]. Retrieved from
http://scottberkum.com/2012/why-i-hate-prezi.
Chou, P., Chang, C., & Pe, L. (2015). Prezi versus PowerPoint: The effects of varied
digital presentation tools on students’ learning performance. Computers &
Education, 91, 73-82.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (2013). Academic standards for English language arts.
Harrisburg, PA: Pennsylvania Department of Education.
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. (2012). School report card: Ephrata MS. Harrisburg,
PA: Pennsylvania Department of Education.
Creswell, J. W. (2007). Qualitative inquiry & research design: Choosing among five
approaches (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Creswell, J. W. & Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining validity in qualitative inquiry.
Theory into Practice, 39(3), 124-130.
Darvin, J. (2008). “On reading recipes and racing forms”- The literacy practices and
perceptions of vocational educators. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy,
50(1), 10-18.
DePaola, T. (1985). Tomi dePaola’s mother goose. New York, NY: G. P. Putnam’s Sons.
DiPardo, A. (1994). Stimulated recall in research in writing: An Antidote to “I don’t
know, it was fine.” In C. R. Cooper & L. Brodkey (Series Eds.) & P. Smagorinsky
(Vol. Ed.), Speaking about writing: Reflections on research methodology: Volume
8 Sage Series in written communication (pp. 163-181). Thousand Oaks, CA:
Sage.

212

Ephrata Area School District. (2013). Ephrata area school district at a glance. Ephrata,
PA: EASD. Retrieved from http://www.easdpa.org
Ephrata Middle School Eighth Grade Earth Science Department. (2015). Chesapeake Bay
critters. Ephrata, PA: Author.
Ephrata Middle School Eighth Grade Earth Science Department. (2015). 8th grade
science final project, Ephrata, PA: Author.
Foo, S. & Majid, S. (2007). Guide me, show me: Personalized coaching as a means of
instilling information literacy competencies in students. Libres, 17(2), 1-19.
Goos, M., Galbraith, P., Renshaw, P. & Geiger, V. (2003). Perspectives on technology
mediated learning in secondary school mathematics classrooms. Journal of
Mathematical Behavior, 22, 73-89.
Grant, M. M., & Branch, R. M. (2005). Project-based learning in a middle school:
Tracing abilities through artifacts of learning. Journal of Research on Technology
in Education, 38(1), 65-98.
Grisham, D. L., & Wolsey, T. D. (2006). Recentering the middle school classroom as a
vibrant learning community: Students, literacy and technology intersect. Journal
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 40(8), 648-660.
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (1994). Competing paradigms in qualitative research. In N.
K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 105117). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hesse-Biber, S. N., & Leavy, P. (2011). The Practice of qualitative research. (2nd. ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hill, A., Arford, T., Lubitow, A., & Smollin, L. M. (2012). “I’m ambivalent about it.”:
The dilemmas of PowerPoint. Teaching Sociology, 40(3), 242-256.
Ho, C. M. L., Nelson, M. E., & Müeller-Wittig, W. (2011). Design and implementation
of a student-generated virtual museum in a language curriculum to enhance
collaborative multimodal meaning-making. Computers & Education, 57, 10831097.
Jacobs, G. E. (2006). Fast times and digital literacy: Participation roles and portfolio
construction within instant messaging. Journal of Literacy Research, 38(2), 171196.

213

Jensen, J., & Tunon, J. (2012). Free and easy to use web based presentation and
classroom tools. Journal of Library & Information Sciences in Distance Learning,
6, 322-334.
Karlström, P., Cerratto-Pargman, T., Lindstrom, H., & Knutsson, O. (2007). Tool
mediation in focus on form activities: Case studies in a grammar-exploring
environment. ReCALL, 19, 39-56.
Kinchin, I. M., & Cabot, L. B. (2007). Using concept mapping principles in PowerPoint.
European Journal of Dental Education, 11, 194-199.
Kumpulainen, K., Mikkola, A. & Jaatinen, A. (2014). The chronotopes of technologymediated creative learning practices in an elementary school community.
Learning, Media and Technology, 39(1), 53-74.
Kuhlthau, C. C. (2004). Seeking meaning: A process approach to library and information
services (2nd ed.). Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Learning & Performance Support Laboratory University of Georgia College of
Education. (2004). Student technology survey. Athens, GA: Author. Retrieved
from http://lpsl.coe.uga.edu/Projects/AAlaptop/
MEMBERS/instrument/initial_student_revisedUS.pdf
Limberg, L., & Alexandersson, M. (2003). The library as a space for learning. School
Libraries Worldwide, 9(1), 1-15.
McDonald, G., Le, H., Higgins, J., & Podmore, V. (2005). Artifacts, tools, and
classroom. Mind, Culture, and Activity, 12(2), 113-127.
Meyers, E. R., Fisher, K. E., & Marcoux, E. (2009). Making sense of an information
world: The everyday life information behavior of preteens. Library Quarterly,
79(3), 301-341.
Neo, M. & Neo, T. (2009). Engaging students in multimedia constructivist learning –
students’ perceptions. Educational Technology & Society, 12(2), 254-266.
Newell. T. S. (2009). Examining information problem-solving instruction: Dynamic
relationship patterns mediated by distinct instructional methodologies. School
Libraries Worldwide, 15(2), 49-76.
Palfrey, J. & Gasser, U. (2008). Born digital: Understanding the first generation of
digital natives. New York, NY: Basic Books.
Pajares, F. (1993). Preservice teacher’s beliefs: A focus for teacher education. Action in
Teacher Education, 15(2), 45-54.

214

Purcell-Gates, V. (2011). Ethnographic research. In N. K. Duke & M. H. Mallette (Eds.),
Literacy research methodologies (2nd ed., pp. 135-154). New York, NY: Guilford
Press.
Purcell-Gates, V., Duke, N. K., & Martineau, J. A. (2007). Learning to read and write
genre-3specific text: Role of authentic experience and explicit teaching. Reading
Research Quarterly, 42(1), 8-45.
Rojas-Drummond, S., Mazón, N., Littleton, K., & Vélez, M. (2014). Developing reading
comprehension through collaborative learning. Journal of Research in Reading.
35(2), 138-158.
Roux, Y. R. (2008). Interview with a vampire I mean, a librarian: When pre-service
teachers meet practicing school librarians. Knowledge Quest, 37(2), 58-62.
Saldaña, J. (2013). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (2nd ed.) Los Angeles,
CA: Sage.
Smagorinsky, P. (2011). Vygotsky and literacy: A methodological framework. Rotterdam,
Netherlands: Sense Publishers.
Smagorinsky, P. (2013). What does Vygotsky provide for the 21st-century language art
teacher? Language Arts, 90(3), 192-204.
Smith, M. W. & Wilhelm, J. W. (2009). Boys and literacy: Complexity and multiplicity.
In L. Christenbury, R. Bomer, & P. Smagorinsky (eds.), Handbook of Adolescent
Literacy Research (pp. 360-371). New York: Guilford.
Smith, M. W. & Strickland, D. S. (2001). Complements of conflicts: Conceptions of
discussion and multicultural literature in teachers-as-readers discussion group.
Journal of Literacy Research, 33(1), 137-167.
Spires, H. A., Hervey, L. G., Morris, G., & Stelpflug, C. (2012). Energizing project-based
inquiry: Middle-grade students read, write, and create videos. Journal of
Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 55(6), 483-493.
Strasser. N. S. (2014). Using Prezi in higher education. Journal of College Teaching &
Learning, 11(2), 95-98.
Thompson, I. (2012). Stimulating reluctant writers: A Vygotskian approach to teaching
writing in secondary schools. English in Education, 46(1), 85-100.
Van Aalst, J., Hing, F. W., May, L. S. & Yan, W. P., (2007). Exploring information
literacy in secondary schools in Hong Kong: A case study. Library & Information
Science Research, 29, 533-552.

215

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The Development of higher psychological
processes. M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.)
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1987). Thinking and speech. (N. Minick, Trans.) In R. W. Rieber & A.
S. Carton (Eds.), The Collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Volume 1 problems of
general psychology (pp. 39-285). New York, NY: Plenum.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1997). Problems of the theory and methods of psychology. (R. Van der
Veer, Trans.) In R. W. Rieber & J. Wollock, (Eds.), The Collected works of L. S.
Vygotsky: Volume 3 problems of the theory and history of psychology (pp. 35144). New York, NY: Plenum.
Vygotsky, L. S. (1998). Pedology of the adolescent. (M. J. Hall, Trans.) In R. W. Rieber
(Ed.), The Collected works of L. S. Vygotsky: Volume 5 child psychology (pp. 2186). New York, NY: Plenum.
Wang, S. & Turner, S. (2006). Learning experiences in developing electronic portfolios.
International Journal of Information and Communication Technology Education,
2(3), 75-86.
Wertsch, J. V. (1985). Vygotsky and the social formation of mind. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Yee, K., & Hargis, J. (2010). Prezi: A different way to present. Turkish Online Journal of
Distance Education, 11(4), 9-11.

216

APPENDIX A
CHESAPEAKE BAY CRITTERS ASSIGNMENT AND GRADING RUBRIC
It’s time for research! You will be randomly assigned an organism of the Chesapeake Bay.
Through your research, you will become the resident expert on your organism.
Be sure to include information concerning:
The organisms common name/ Scientific name (genus and species)
Description of habitat
How it obtains nourishment (what it eats)
Role in the food chain (what level in the food chain/who eats it/predator/ prey/consumer/
producer)
Appearance of the organism
Life cycle (be VERY specific)
Status (this category varies widely by organism. Possible topics include how it is affected by
pollution, population size changes, endangered, harvested, etc. An example would be if you
were being overharvested to the verge of extinction.)
Interesting facts (wonderful or astounding things about your organism)

Project options:
1.

Create a presentation using Prezi or PowerPoint highlighting your organism and its’ specific
information.
2. Design a website for your organism. The website should be informative, creative, and
entertaining. Weebly.com, wix.com, or Google Sites are all great sites to use to complete this
option.
3. Create an informational flyer using Microsoft Publisher. This option allows for a wide range of
creative ideas.
4. Student choice: If you have a different idea on how to present information about your critter,
please discuss your idea with your science teacher and gain approval first.
**All options must include a bibliography with at least 3 resources. Bibliography must use the correct
format and include citations for where you obtained your information and pictures for your project (use
Noodle Tools).

**PLEASE REFER TO THE ATTACHED RUBRIC FOR PROJECT GRADING AND EXPECTATIONS!!**
Red-jointed Fiddler Crab
Copepod
Horseshoe Crab
Dragonfly
Black-fingered Mud Crab
Banded Hermit Crab
Barnacle
Bay Anchovy
Sand Fiddler Crab
Nine-spined Spider Crab
Macoma Clam
Grass Shrimp
Canvasback Duck

Canada Goose
Herring Gull
Green-backed Heron
Marsh Periwinkle
Great blue Heron
Loon
American Widgeon
Mallard
Snowy Egret
Sanderling
Osprey
Red-winged blackbird
Belted Kingfisher

Some Chesapeake Bay Organisms
Striped Bass
Mummichog
American Eel
Blenny
Green Goby
Lined Seahorse
Summer Flounder
Northern Puffer
Spot
American Shad
Pipefish
White Perch
Atlantic Needlefish

Sea Nettle
Sea Squirt
Common Sea Star
Eastern Oyster
Redbeard Sponge
Moon Jellyfish
Water Stargrass
Muskrat
Smooth Cordgrass
Widgeon Grass
Atlantic Ribbed Mussel
Broad-clawed Hermit Crab
Black-crowned Night Heron

Channel Catfish
Alewife
Bluefish
Cattail
Oyster Toadfish
Atlantic Silverside
Atlantic Menhaden
Marsh Fiddler Crab
Blue Crab
Eelgrass
Downy Woodpecker
Atlantic Croaker
Pipefish

217
Category

Preparedness

Presentation

Volume

Posture and Eye
Contact

Comprehension

Topic Content

Information on
Frames

Works
Consulted

Time Limit

4

3

2

Student is
completely
prepared and
rehearsed. (Did not
read frames to the
class.)

Student seems
pretty prepared but
might need a couple
more rehearsals.
(Some information
was read from the
frames.)

Student does not
seem prepared to
present.

Presentation
includes a variety of
color, animation(s),
or graphics to
improve the
understanding of
what is being
presented.
Volume is loud
enough to be heard
by all of the
audience
throughout the
entire presentation.
Stands up straight,
looks relaxed and
confident.
Establishes eye
contact during
presentation.
Student is able to
accurately answer
almost all the
questions posed by
classmates or
teacher about the
topic.
Shows complete
understanding of
the topic.
Obvious effort was
used to limit the
amount of
information on the
frames.
3 or more sources
documented in
correct MLA format
including pictures
and graphics.

Most of the
presentation
includes color,
animation(s), or
graphics to improve
the understanding
of what is being
presented.
Volume loud
enough to be heard
by the audience 90%
of the time.

Student is somewhat
prepared, but is clear
that rehearsal was
lacking. (Presentation
was incomplete or
student read most of
the frames to the
class.)
Less than half of the
presentation includes
color, animation(s), or
graphics to improve
the understanding of
what is being
presented.
Volume loud enough
to be heard by the
audience 80% of the
time.

Volume often too
soft to be heard by
all audience
members.

Stands up straight
and establishes eye
contact during the
presentation.

Sometimes stands up
straight and some
establishes eye
contact.

Slouches and/or
does not look at the
audience.

Student is able to
accurately answer
most questions
posed by classmates
or teacher about the
topic.

Student is able to
accurately answer a
few questions posed
by classmates or
teacher about the
topic.

Student is unable to
accurately answer
questions posed by
classmates or
teacher about the
topic.

Shows a good
understanding of
the topic.
Noticeable effort
was mused to limit
the amount of
information on the
frames properly.
3 sources but NOT
documented in
correct MLA format
or missing
information.

Shows a good
understanding of
parts of the topic.
Some effort was used
to limit the amount of
information in the
frames properly.

Does not
understand the
topic very well.
Little or no effort
was used to limit
the amount of
information on the
frames properly.
NO sources
documented.

Presentation is 2-5
minutes long.

Presentation is 1-2
minutes long.

LESS than 3 sources
documented in MLA
format.

Presentation is less
than 1 minute – 30
seconds long.

1

Presentation does
not include any
color, animation, or
graphics to improve
the understanding
of what is being
presented.

Presentation is less
than 30 seconds OR
more than 5
minutes long.

218

Note sheet/ Graphic organizer
Common name
Scientific name
Underlined or italicized with only genus
capitalized

Habitat
Abundant and accurate details of where
your organism lives

Nourishment
Identify consumer vs. producer and explain
specific food source

Role in food chain (who eats it)
Details about place in food chain

Life cycle
Abundant and accurate details

Special circumstance
Abundant and accurate details about a
special feature or characteristic

Excellent trivia
Intriguing and surprising information not
required in another category

219

APPENDIX B
SCIENCE FINAL ASSIGNMENT AND GRADING RUBRIC
8th Grade Science Final Project
This major project is to be completed as an option instead of the final exam. This is a
major project worth 200 points. Students will investigate a topic from one of the units covered
throughout 8th grade science to gain a deeper understanding. In order to receive maximum
credit on this project, students will need to create, design, and deliver a professional
presentation. Presentations should include an activity for your classmates to complete while
viewing your presentation. Be educational, be entertaining. Teach us something new!
"A" Additions:
Complete at least 2 of the additions listed below.
Write a reflective essay regarding how this topic
relates to the world around you and your everyday
life.

Base Requirements ("B" Category):
1.

Develop a multimedia class presentation
using a minimum of five cited sources.

2.

Deliver a thorough presentation to the class
that includes excellent eye contact, posture,
volume, and projection.

3.

Incorporate the use of a literary device
(news or magazine article, commercial,
video clip, song, advertisement, etc) into
your presentation.

4.

Create a way of collecting feedback from
your peers (preferably electronic).

Interview a qualified scientist/person working in
the field of your topic.
Include contact information and a copy of your
correspondence (letter, email, audio, etc...).
Compare your topic to something you have
learned in another class this year.
Design a website that highlights your topic. Your
presentation should be available on your website.

***Students are not guaranteed the letter grade
that they agreed to or contracted for.

Create a video, podcast, or screencast.
Make a comparison to a character or literary
selection in something that you read either on your
own or during a previous school year.
Incorporate the use of a SECOND literary device
into your presentation. (news or magazine article,
commercial, video clip, song, advertisement, etc).
Advertisements in the media can sway personal
decisions. Find at least TWO ads that try to
convince people to think and/or act a certain way
about your topic.
Find a poem written by an author that shares a
similar experience about your topic and discusses
the connection between this author’s experience
and your own.
Find a free app that connects to your topic.
Evaluate this app and explain how it can be used
in science class.

***Science Fair students are only required to
complete #1 and #2 of the base requirements, but
can supplement their project with additions per
letter grade.
“C” Category:
In order to be considered for a “C” on this final
project, the student must complete items #1-3 on
the basic requirement list.
“D” Category:
In order to be considered for a “D” on this final
project, the student must complete items #1-2 of
the base requirements above in their entirety.
This grade category is also used for students who
complete ALL of the base requirements listed
above but they decline to give a speech to the class.
Grade of Zero:
The student did not complete a final project for
eighth grade Science

220

Science Final Project Rubric
Base Requirements:
__________/ 100 points

Multimedia Class Presentation

(See attached Presentation Rubric for specific point values)

__________/ 15 points

Citation of 5 or more primary sources

(Images need to be cited, but do not count towards to the 5 required citations)

__________/ 20 points

Use of literary device

(Video, Poem, Article, Song, etc… needs to be included in citations but does not count towards
the required 5 citations. Student must reflect and refer on the literary device in their
presentation.)

__________/ 20 points

Method of collecting feedback
(Quiz, Poll, Handout, or some other approved method)

Presentation mechanics

__________/ 15 points

(See attached Presentation Rubric for specific point values)

Base Requirement Total:

__________/ 170 points

“A” Additions:
Addition #1

_________/ worth a possible 15 points

Addition #2

_________/ worth a possible 15 points

Final Project Total Score

______/ 200 points

221

Science Final Project Presentation Rubric
Category

Scoring Criteria
The type of presentation is appropriate for
the topic and audience.

Organization
(15 points)

Content
(45 points)

Presentation
(40 points)

Score
Teacher Comments:

Information is presented in a logical
sequence.
Presentation appropriately cites requisite
number of references.
Introduction is attention getting, lays out the
problem well, and establishes a framework
for the rest of the presentation.
Technical terms are well defined in
language appropriate for the target
audience.
Presentation contains accurate information.
Material included is relevant to the overall
message/purpose.
Appropriate amount of material is prepared,
and points made reflect well their relative
importance.
There is an obvious conclusion
summarizing the presentation.
Speaker maintains good eye contact with
the audience and is appropriately animated
(e.g., gestures, moving around, etc.).
Speaker uses a clear, audible voice.
Delivery is poised, controlled, and smooth.
Good language skills and pronunciation are
used.
Visual aids are well prepared, informative,
effective, and not distracting.
Length of presentation is within the
assigned time limits.
Information was well communicated.
Total Points

Total Points
5
5
5
5

5
10
10
10
5
5
5
5
5
5
5
10
100

Score

222

APPENDIX C
STUDENT TECHNOLOGY SURVEY
How often do you use a computer to complete the following tasks? Check the response
that most accurately describes how often you use each of the following software
programs or tools:
Never

Once or
Twice a Year Monthly

Weekly

Daily

Word process a document
Perform calculations with spreadsheets
Create presentations
Produce multimedia projects
Use library resources for information
Search for information on the Internet
Communicate through email
Use class management programs
Work with graphics and pictures

When using each of the following software programs, check the statement that most
accurately describes how much help you need. Skip questions concerning application
that you have not used.
I always I sometimes I rarely
I never
I can help
need help. need help. need help. need help. other people.
Word processing (e.g. Word)
Spreadsheet (e.g. Excel)
Presentation software (e.g. PowerPoint)
Databases (e.g. SIRSDiscoverer)
Multimedia (e.g. Weebly)
Internet (e.g. webpages)
Email (e.g. Outlook)
Class Management Systems (e.g.
Schoology, Moodle)
Work with graphics and pictures

Adapted from Learning and Support Laboratory University of Georgia College of Education

223

APPENDIX D
SUGGESTED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS
What made you think that?
Tell me more about…
Why did you do that?
I noticed you began the search in this manner. Why did you do this?
What made you think that was useful?
Why did you eliminate that from your consideration?
What made you go in that direction? Why?
Can you expand on that statement?
Is this always the way you approach something like this? If not? What other approaches
do you use and why?
What are you thinking about this item?
You haven’t said anything for a bit. Tell me what you are thinking.
How does this compare to what you have been taught?
How did you know that this was a good idea or piece of information?
I noticed when you started, the first thing you did was….. Can you tell me why you did
that? Did you think about doing anything else? If you did, what made you go this route?
I noticed between the two activities some similarities/differences, Can you explain why?
I noticed when you began the task by doing…Is this the way you always start? Can you
tell me how you came to make that part of the way you do research?
What do you have to say concerning this?
What do you think is happening here?

Additional questions may be generated at the time of interviews depending on the
responses.

224

APPENDIX E
SUGGESTED STUDENT PSEUDONYMS
Female Names

Male Names

Anna

Ben

April

Bobby

Bess

Charlie

Betty

David

Caroline

Dunstan

Elsie

Fred

Jill

George

Joan

Greg

Kitty

Hector

Lucy

Jack

Marjorie

Jerry

Mary

Jim

May

Joe

Molly

John

Nancy

Luke

Polly

Mark

Robin

Matthew

Ruth

Simon

Sally

Tommy

Sarah

Will

225

APPENDIX F
PRESEARCH TOPIC WORKSHEET
Research Topic:_______________________________________________
Questions
Write 10 questions about your topic. (Who, What, When, Where, How, and Why)

1.____________________________________________________________
2.____________________________________________________________
3.____________________________________________________________
4.____________________________________________________________
5.____________________________________________________________
6.____________________________________________________________
7.____________________________________________________________
8.____________________________________________________________
9.____________________________________________________________
10.___________________________________________________________
Keywords
List possible search terms.

1.____________________________________________________________
2.____________________________________________________________
3.____________________________________________________________
Adapted from Princeton University Humanities Library

