ENCODING POWER: THE SCRIPTING OF ARCHIVAL STRUCTURES IN DIGITAL SPACES
USING THE OPEN ARCHIVAL INFORMATION SYSTEM (OAIS) REFERENCE MODEL

BY

RHIANNON STEPHANIE BETTIVIA

DISSERTATION

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2016

Urbana, Illinois
Doctoral Committee:

Associate Professor Jerome McDonough, Chair and Research Director
Associate Professor Kevin Hamilton
Assistant Professor Anita Say Chan
Associate Professor Kari Kraus, University of Maryland, College Park








ProQuest Number: 10609881





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10609881
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT

The Open Archival Information System (OAIS) Reference Model is a corner stone of

the evolving discipline of digital preservation. It undergirds many of the systems that are
used in daily practice in organizations engaging in digital preservation, and directly or
indirectly influences commercial and open source tools, as well as administrative and

personnel functions. Yet it also undergirds the field of digital preservation more generally

as its design and revisions have taken place concurrent and in partnership with the growth

of the profession into one that has boundaries, curricula, and standards of practice. There is
closure around OAIS: it is ever assumed as background or foundational knowledge in new
endeavors. It is a black box. Given the pervasiveness of OAIS, this research examines the

values scripted into the sociotechnical object it represents. Using discourse analysis, this
research traces the power relationships that arise as a result of the discourses that OAIS
produces. I also explore the effects on professional practice that occur because of the

discourses OAIS brings with it from its scientific origins and archive-informed terminology.
The dissertation investigates terms like Designated Community and significant properties in
order to lay bare the imperial tendencies scripted within OAIS as well as to expose the
resistive and recuperative potential of this technology.

ii

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to thank the Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the

University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign for its generous support of my research over the

past five years. I especially thank Linda Smith for unendingly immediate assistance with all
matters administrative and research-related. Without her, this would not have been
possible.

I also thank my academic mentors for their assistance with this project and many

others. Leigh Estabrook, I thank you for your extreme generosity with your time and

hospitality. Your pragmatic writing and career advice have made these last two years
possible. I thank my committee members for their gracious spirits. Anita Chan, I so

appreciate the boundless enthusiasm you have for all of my projects. Kevin Hamilton, I am
grateful for the support of the community you allowed me to be a part of through your

Systems grant. Kari Kraus, thank you so much for your kind words and thoughtful criticism
on this project and during my early years as a graduate student when I benefitted from
your wisdom during PVWII. Your kindness in that space was invaluable.

Last and most important of all, I extend my thanks to Jerome McDonough. Jerry, you

are everything an advisor ought to be. Thank you for your time, for the research

opportunities, for your care, for your books, for your professional contacts, for the use of

your office and truly epic headphones, for your collegiality and friendship. You supported
me and my research before I even set foot on this campus and it has been an unmitigated
pleasure.

I also thank my peers who have supported this journey. Thanks to Ana Lucic for

taking care of my spouse and son when I was away doing doctoral research. To Karen
iii

Baker, your eternal optimism is something that I aspire to in life. To Tiffany Chao for

sending me links, contacts, articles, and the most beautiful copy of Le Petit Prince in my

collection. I thank Nikki Weickum and Paul McKean for being my writing companions and

for reading draft after draft of this dissertation and everything else I’ve written for the last
two years. I literally could not have written this without you.

Finally, I thank my family and friends. Gail Ferguson, you are truly my comadre in

every sense of the word. Thank you for offering help when I didn’t know I needed it, for

your constant calm and support, and for letting me be Mommy Rhiannon to your beautiful

son. Thank you to my parents Angharad Valdivia and Cameron McCarthy for your unending
support and for being the model of thoughtful, respectful collaborators with your students
and colleagues and teaching me about the kind of academic I want to be. I am so thankful
for the good fortune that brought me home to you a decade after I grew up and moved

away. Thank you to my sister Ailín and my son Lucas for inspiring me every day: watching
you grow is the greatest pleasure in life. Thank you to Alexis Meza for being my partner

through graduate school, parenthood, and life. Thank you for the weekends of work time,
for the sleep-in days, for trips to Europe, for supporting me in quitting my job in 2009 to
pursue what I was really passionate about, and for agreeing to leave New York City to

follow me to the Midwest. It has been a crazy adventure and I will always be grateful for it.

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………………….1

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW……………………………………………………………………………….28

CHAPTER 3: METHODS………………………………………………………………….……………………………...69
CHAPTER 4: AUDIENCES, ARCHIVES, AND GEOGRAPHICAL DIFFERENCE………………………94
CHAPTER 5: DESIGNATED COMMUNITIES…………………………………………………………………..135

CHAPTER 6: SIGNIFICANT PROPERTIES……………………………………………………………………...166

CHAPTER 7: CONCLUSION…………………………………………………………………………………..………204
BIBLIOGRAPHY…………………………………………………………………………………………………..………226
APPENDIX A: IRB INFORMATION……………………………………………………………………………..…237

v

CHAPTER 1

INTRODUCTION
Introduction

In 2015, Marcia Bates helpfully, and perhaps not uncontroversially, mapped

information professions within spectra of research disciplines. She begins by positing 1 that

information disciplines, like education and communication, are meta-disciplines: they exist
outside the spectrum of research domains that spans from arts and humanities through
social sciences to natural sciences and mathematics.

Figure 1: The Spectrum of the Traditional Research Disciplines (Bates, 2015)

Bates zooms in on information disciplines twice: first to the general fields contained
therein and then to more specific subfields revealed as a list spread across another
spectrum:

Again, as the case may be, as she has done so in previous literature helpfully cited in the
article.
1

1

Figure 2: Information Sub-Disciplines (Bates, 2015)

This list is not complete, to be sure. One missing component noted by my colleagues at the
Graduate School of Library and Information Science at the University of Illinois, UrbanaChampaign was history. Another is my own area of expertise: preservation and, more

specifically, digital preservation. Like history, I explain the absence of (digital) preservation

as an admission of its own invisible omnipresence: it is imbricated within the work of many
of these information science sub-disciplines, ranging from the designated humanistic
concerns such as informatics of various flavors and diplomatics to the natural-

scientifically- and mathematically-oriented concerns of digital libraries and data mining.
Like information work more generally, preservation is a meta-concern that finds itself

spread across the LIS spectrum, and therefore, according to Bates’ theory of information

2

professions as meta in and of themselves, across the entire pantheon of traditional research
disciplines.

Thus, it should not be surprising that preservation as a field of study and practice

should borrow from a range of disciplines and professions: in the digital preservation
realm, archival practices blend with systems design and computer sciences. Because

preservation borrows from all of these areas, so too does this imbue the field with a rich

mix of discourses: those brought from all of the disciplines that converge to form the field
of digital preservation; those that are formed within the sociotechnical networks of the
broad field comprised of practitioners and theorists; and those that arise in particular
locations where digital preservation work happens on a daily basis.

This dissertation constitutes a first step in understanding the discourses at play

within the field of digital preservation. It examines the ways in which digital preservation
happens in a variety of institutions by investigating the use of an ubiquitous reference

standard for digital preservation, the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) reference
model. It analyzes this work in order to answer the following research questions:

1. What values are contained within the Open Archival Information System (OAIS)
reference model and what methods or practices are prescribed by it?

2. In what ways has the adoption of this model as an organizational system for the
preservation of digital content in library, archive, and museum spaces served to

challenge or reproduce the hierarchies and discourses of traditional archives and
memory institutions?

3

I examine the implications, practical benefits, and pitfalls of using a tool imbued with

functionality and meaning firstly by the creators, the Consultative Committee for Space

Data Systems (CCSDS); and secondly by users in memory institutions, whose practice with
the model is both shaped by authorial intentions while simultaneously shaping the model
for future users2.

In this way, it becomes necessary to understand the implications of using the OAIS

reference model in a variety of spaces, far from its space science home but not so

inconceivably far from its lofty aims for broad use, which were a part of its design from the
outset. The term “open” in the Open Archival Information System refers to this very

element of the creation process: the creators were open to and sought input from a number
of collaborators in many fields and disciplines (Ball, 2006; Lee, 2005 & 2009). It is now

called the de facto standard for preservation (NSFCC, 2007), and this status is part of why a
study of OAIS constitutes a beginning effort to examine discourse within the broader realm
of digital preservation.

The Open Archival Information System reference model is purposefully high level,

designed to inform the construction of preservation repositories for digital content. Initial
drafts were released for review in 1997 and 1999; the Blue Book, an ISO standard, was
released in 2002; most recent updates were submitted for ISO consideration in 2012 3

(CCSDS 2002, 2009, 2012; Lavoie, 2004). The significance of the changes depends greatly

on the user. At each revision, a fairly minor portion of the text details the standard changes.
“As users engage with technologies… they dynamically co-construct content and the
technology itself.” (Fuchs, 2008)
3 As an ISO standard, OAIS undergoes review and revision on a 5-year cycle. The 2012
Magenta Book release will be up for revision again in 2017.
2

4

Some interviewees see these changes as important, while for others they are fairly trivial 4.
As a reference model, it does not involve particular recommendations or instruction on
how preservation activities should unfold within an organization. Rather, reference

standards operate at high levels of abstraction, to “frame future working strategies by
identifying high-level issues related to a particular problem” (Seles, 2016, page 46).

OAIS describes entities in a repository, their general roles, and their relationships to

one another. OAIS covers both an information model, denoting the types of content to be

stored (the files one is saving) and how this information could be arranged and packaged,

as well as a functional model that speaks about the positions that entities (various human
and departmental actors) need to take, such as who is or should be in charge of general
daily and long-term tasks within the repository.

The basic information model for storing content in an OAIS repository involves the

construction of information packages: one for submission into the repository, the

Submission Information Package (SIP)5; one for storage, the Archival Information Package
(AIP); and one for sending the information back out again, the Dissemination Information
Package (DIP). These packages combine the Data Object itself with Representation
Information, which comprises the information needed to render digital data

comprehensible to a human being, and Preservation Description Information (PDI), which
One interviewee in particular was keen to begin the discussion of potential revisions for
the 2017 version, expressing a hope that the creators would create a public and moderated
forum for discussion about potential changes. This desire was partly motivated by her
chagrin at the public Twitter “bashing” of OAIS by some of her colleagues. The result of this
can be seen at the dpconline.org wiki, which presents an annotate-able version of the OAIS
documentation.
5 Capitalized terms in this dissertation refer to OAIS-specific terms that appear within the
OAIS documentation, and more particularly, its glossary.
4

5

covers information about the object, including Provenance, Fixity, Context, and Reference
data. The PDI serves the additional role of documenting information necessary to
determine whether the authenticity and integrity of the digital object have been

maintained by the Archive, a function rendered all the more salient as new international
standards governing trustworthiness audits are created with OAIS as an underlying

foundation. Altogether, these packages should be composed of what is necessary to render

the intellectual content comprehensible to a Designated Community of potential users. The
idea here is that a particular set of users will have a certain amount of shared background

knowledge that allows them to understand particular objects, and that information stored

in the OAIS repository should take advantage of this. Some additional pieces of information
may need to be constructed and saved in order for an object to be comprehensible; for

example, in order for people to play the 1985 version of Carmen Sandiego, an institution
will need copies of 1985 maps as geographical borders have changed. With a target

audience that has shared understandings, there are also some pieces of information that do
not need to be saved as that knowledge already exists within the Designated Community.

For example, if the Designated Community speaks English, it is not necessary to include an
English language tutorial along with a file written in English (CCSDS, 2012; Ball, 2006).
The functional model includes roles for a variety of entities, including ingest,

archival storage, data management, administration, and access. The basic responsibilities of
an OAIS-compliant repository are distributed among these groups. The functional model is
quite complicated, and exact adherence ranges from difficult to impossible depending on
whom you ask.

6

Figure 3: Composite of Functional Entities, CCSDS 2012, page A-2

In fact, in order to be in compliance with this standard, there are considerably fewer

requirements than the above figure would suggest. To begin with, OAIS doesn’t suggest an

individual person to deal with each of the entities laid out above, nor does it suggest that an
institution must have separate departments for each of the groups of tasks. Rather, OAIS

indicates a set of concerns and the relationships among them: it is possible that in a very

small institution, many or even all roles will be filled by a single person. OAIS lays out just

six criteria (capitalizations are original to the documentation, denoting terms with special
definitions within the standard documentation) for compliance, none of which require
adherence to the information or functional models:


Negotiate for and accept appropriate information from information Producers.

7



Obtain sufficient control of the information provided to the level needed to ensure
Long-Term Preservation.



Determine, either by itself or in conjunction with other parties, which communities
should become the Designated Community and, therefore, should be able to
understand the information provided.



Ensure that the information to be preserved is Independently Understandable to the
Designated Community. In other words, the community should be able to

understand the information without needing the assistance of the experts who
produced the information.


Follow documented policies and procedures which ensure that the information is

preserved against all reasonable contingencies, and which enable the information to
be disseminated as authenticated copies of the original, or as traceable to the
original.


Make the preserved information available to the Designated Community.

(CCSDS, 2012 page 3-1)

Across different disciplines and locations of use, interpretations of what precisely is

required by OAIS differ greatly. “Misunderstandings”, readily acknowledged to exist by

authors of the standard and those who use or study it, cause of a fair amount of tension

between groups of stakeholders. In this case, “misunderstandings” refer to two particular

but distinct things. First, it is a source of frustration to many of the creators of OAIS, as well
as those involved in its continued growth and propagation 6, that there are so many

This includes people who worked in the creation and review process for the generation of
the original standards; those who have been party to its on-going revisions per the ISO
schedule; and those involved in the creation of related standards, such as TRAC and ISO
6

8

misconceptions about what OAIS actually asks of a preservation repository or Archive.
Some people claim it is virtually impossible to have a real-life implementation that is

compliant with a high-level and theoretical standard or that it is impossible by definition

for anything to be compliant with a reference model; simultaneously, others claim that the
list above makes it so absurdly simple to have a compliant repository that “even a chicken
with its head cut off could be OAIS compliant”. This particular quote is oft repeated,

particularly by the creators themselves; in fact, it was mentioned during the interviews I

conducted. A practitioner stated this belief to some members of the creative team behind

OAIS at a conference early in OAIS’ life cycle, to perhaps note the perceived generalness or
vagueness of the six requirements. This was sufficiently irksome to have made it into

preservation texts as a caution: the OAIS creators make it clear that a decapitated chicken
cannot, in fact, be OAIS compliant (Giaretta, 2011). This interchange does highlight the

tensions that naturally occur when using a model that is purposefully high-level and nonspecific to model site-specific practices that are highly detailed and involve potentially
many actors.

There is a second way in which differing interpretations of the model’s tenets, some

of which might legitimately be described as misunderstandings, are a source of frustration
between practitioners and creators. Parts of OAIS that are difficult to understand, or those
parts for which the rationale is not transparent enough, coincided in interview data with

those elements of the model that people complained about the most. Schumann and Recker
(2012) contextualize what compliance, which implies some level of implementation that
16363, standards for assessing and auditing the ‘trustworthiness’ of digital repositories
that are explicitly modeled on OAIS.
9

entails a high degree of fidelity, even means for something that is so purposefully high-level
and abstract that it cannot match perfectly to real world examples by definition. This is
important because many institutions speak about a desire to be compliant, which is

seemingly at odds with a model that claims not to be prescriptive. Daniels succinctly makes
the point: “For all its clarity, however, the OAIS is a theoretical model that intentionally

avoids any statement on how to go about creating a compliant digital archival repository”
(Daniels, 2013, page 12). Certain concepts that are less technical and more social give the
most difficulty in both the literature and interview data. Despite detailed work clarifying

the role of significant properties within OAIS (Giaretta el al, 2009), interviewees and other
literature about the use of OAIS remain dissatisfied with the creators’ treatment of

significance (Sierman, 2012). Many institutions struggled especially with the Designated
Community notion (mentioned three times in the six basic requirements alone),

particularly those working in more public spheres, such as libraries and public- and statesponsored cultural heritage bodies. Explanations about this term offered by creators in
interviews differed widely from those expressed by practitioners in interviews.

Why is a study of OAIS fundamentally a part of a larger project to understand

discourses within the general field of digital preservation? The reasons for beginning here
are manifold. Conditions such as timing are key features of OAIS’ success. In terms of

timing, OAIS was created and circulated while the iron was hot in a very real way: the
entire field of digital preservation has grown around it. This explains its very

pervasiveness: it came about at a time when the crush of digital materials was felt acutely
by organizations of all types and the need for standard operating procedures became

necessary. At a time when many were creating ad-hoc ways of dealing with content, OAIS
10

arrived and not only changed the discussions, but shaped all future ones. At this point, it

has become the lingua franca, as one interview participant put it. OAIS is around even when
it is not: two different sets of interview participants at two different institutions, one a

private college and the other a major museum, claimed they did not use OAIS, but later

admitted to using Archivematica, a digital preservation tool that is explicitly built on OAIS.
I want to address the implications of the ubiquity of the OAIS reference model here

and speak to what is meant by implementing a model that is actually a set of very

purposefully general guidelines. The benefits and the pitfalls of the OAIS reference model
would be a moot concern if it were not as widely adopted as it is; after all, there are so

many examples of wonderful tools that failed to gain any traction and many more examples
of inferior tools that won the brand war, so to speak. Spence (2006) says:

When 48 cultural institutions from 13 countries were asked by OCLC’s Preservation
Metadata Implementation Strategy (PREMIS) Working Group ‘How is your

preservation repository informed by the Open Archival Information Systems model

(OAIS)’, 80 per cent considered that their repositories were ‘informed’ by OAIS or at
least ‘partly conform to the model’ (OCLC/PREMIS Working Group, 2004).

In the same article, Spence also discusses the possibility of adapting OAIS for institutions as
small as local gardening clubs in Australia. Ball (2006) lists three pages of major

repositories that are OAIS-based across a number of disciplines and institution types.

Literature on the topic of implementation and compliance abounds (Ayoung and Tibbo,

2011; Vardigan and Whiteman, 2007; Daniels, 2013). The first page of search results on the
topic using the search function at the University of Illinois Library contains results in

Portuguese, Slovenian, and Dutch/Flemish as well as implementations in India, the UK, and
11

Germany7. The literature shows no loss of momentum: looking at bibliographic entries that

mention OAIS in the title, abstract, and/or keywords reveals new work at a fairly consistent
clip through to the present, including Seles’ (2016) excellent dissertation on the use of

digital repository standards in East Africa. I also argue that the on-going development of
standards like ISO 16363 only serve to renew interest in OAIS when it begins to wane. If

nothing else, an ISO 16363 audit would require an institution to translate its daily functions
into OAIS language, whether the audit is official, as required by many national bodies in

Europe, or informally conducted for internal planning, as is the case in most of my US case
studies.

This dissertation shows how some people and institutions have used OAIS in the

field in a way that also highlights the things they want OAIS to do. It also begins to explore
whether or not OAIS actually does some of these things by bringing in data from the

Preserving Virtual Worlds II (PVWII) grant to examine how well user-defined significant
properties of video games fit into the 2012 version of the OAIS model. There is a tension

between the use of OAIS and the thing itself; there is similarly a tension between what its
creators designed it to do and what happens when it is used out in the wild. OAIS is

supposed to be about standardization, but the data captured from interviews indicates that
this does not happen in practice: there is no consistency of deployment from institution to
institution, or even of internal understanding of basic terms that are explicitly defined in

the OAIS glossary of terms. This is not to suggest some sort of failure on the part of OAIS or
its creators. Critical claims arising from this dissertation are not criticism of the creators of

OAIS nor the people and institutions who base their practice on it in some measure. Tracing
7

However, it is perhaps telling that UIUC’s JSTOR search returned only one article.
12

socially informed discourses embedded in systems speaks to larger, historical dominance
and oppression and does not reflect personal biases.
Rather, this work serves to raise the questions:



Where does this variance come from?

What about OAIS incites this, beyond the changes that obviously come from the
variety of institutional and geographical settings?




What does this say about the practice of digital preservation?

And, finally, what do these struggles indicate about what practitioners are trying to
do when they have to ‘do’ digital preservation?

The field of digital preservation needs to contend with how these things are realized as it

continues to grow and seeks to make machine-actionable the large selection tasks inherent
to creating comprehensive archival packages. There are spaces of negotiation and spaces
where the model does not give, whether this latter is because the model is somehow

unyielding or because practitioners do not ask it to yield. This supports the notion of the

tension mentioned above, and spurs this research to find places that yield and places that
don’t, and to ask what all of this means for the growth of this evolving field.
1.1 Motivations

I submitted a very early version of the proposal for this thesis to a major academic

conference that deals in the largely technical realms of digital preservation. On Bates’

spectrum above, this professional body is comprised of the outer edge of the social science
information professionals, and the leaning is distinctly towards the natural science and
mathematical end. In proposing to investigate OAIS and the discourses around it, as

opposed to further examinations of its practical deployment in various institutional
13

settings, I received the following feedback from a peer reviewer: “I am not aware of any

significant power differentials among digital preservation practitioners… I'm not aware of
the OAIS model being very controversial; in fact its status as an ISO standard point[s]

otherwise...” This review inadvertently reveals one of the reasons why this type of research
is necessary: this object exists so pervasively and with a relatively low level of controversy
for something in such ubiquitous use. As Flanders (2013) says about adding the digital to
literary studies, “The introduction of this layer of formally expressed knowledge into the
scholarly ecology creates a burden of responsibility to understand how that layer works
and what it is saying, or at least to take its existence seriously.” The overwhelming

presence of OAIS, not just in many institutions as noted earlier, but also as a constraint on
the entire field of digital preservation, has served to render it somewhat invisible. I mean

constraint not necessarily in a pejorative sense, but instead in a systems design sense: this
is something that needs to be reckoned with in any digital preservation undertaking

because the very field of digital preservation and its history as a codified profession is

bound together with OAIS8. People, particularly younger practitioners in my interview set,

do not see OAIS even when it is there. It has become like a scientific tool or technology: like
a microscope or a telescope, people see what is on the other side without examining the

scope itself very closely (Gitelman, 2006). Just as it is necessary, at some point, to examine
the tool for its influence and role in the collection of data by seeing through the scope, it is

necessary to understand the work that OAIS is doing, particularly when it is invisible. OAIS
As one interview participant described the constraints of OAIS: “So, I mean when I said
constraint, I really mean this in a very broad way… not in a sense of we felt constrained in
this individual way, but in the systems design sense that a constraint is a condition that…
restricts the solution space to some degree.”
8

14

socialized those within the digital preservation field into believing, as the review above

appears to, that OAIS is depoliticized and neutral (Halavais, 2009). Resisting the temptation
to think of OAIS this way is all the more necessary given OAIS’ role in archival and memory
environments, spaces which already (problematically) appeal to neutrality as a means of
establishing their use-value and trustworthiness (Boyle, 2003).

As a (meta-)discipline, information sciences challenge assumptions of neutrality in a

variety of technological spaces: video games, websites, virtual worlds, search engines, code
and metadata9. Studies about the politics of standards exist within the realm of

sociotechnical systems literature, yet there does not yet exist the same kind of critical

engagement with OAIS. What is it about the archival and technological context that allows
the body of literature to continue to be about the implementation of a neutral object,
simultaneously eschewing research about the object itself?

In fact, part of the difficulty here may be that it is not possible to separate what is

embedded within OAIS from that which is embedded socially, historically, and politically in
the practice of official memory creation. This occurs for a number of reasons, the simple

umbrella of which is the fact that OAIS is less a thing in itself than a network, in the actornetwork theory or sociotechnical studies sense. Further, it is a network that exists within
other networks, some of which are very long-standing. In other words, I cannot, at least
through this study, understand the discourses specific solely to OAIS, but rather I can

understand situated discourses about practices in which OAIS is imbricated; this is another
Video games (Nakamura, 2009); websites (Nakamura, 2002); virtual worlds (Kendall,
2002); digital media platforms (Chun, 2006; Brock, 2009); search engines, (Noble, 2012;
Halavais, 2009); metadata (Presner, 2014; Clark, 2001)
9

15

way in which this study of OAIS serves as a very apt microcosm through which to begin to
understand discourse within the more general realm of digital preservation. This type of

investigation invites precisely the kind of research I have conducted here: in interviewing

the subjects I found, I was able to ask them to characterize OAIS and its role in their work.
To this question, my subjects provided many answers, both explicit and implicit.

The role of discourse is an important lens to bring to bear on this subject matter,

precisely because discourse is bound up with the Foucauldian “regimes of truth” (1972)
that are exercised through knowledge structures. Given the function of OAIS and its

pervasiveness, I argue that OAIS acts as a knowledge structure through which numerous
organizations operate. The social informatics of OAIS, in the words of Bishop and Star

(1996), examine the “… social influences, processes, practices, and effects related to how

knowledge is structured and communicated…”(page 305) in digital repositories that build
their functions according to the OAIS reference model. These discourses speak about how
institutions use OAIS in their digital preservation activities, beyond any prior functions
they had as analog memory institutions, to structure knowledge internally and to
communicate both inside and outside of the organization.

A discourse lens helps enable an examination of the ways in which a model like OAIS

reinforces oppressive and exclusionary practices inherent to memory-making models and
traditions. “The power of discourse means that it produces the things which it purports to

be describing”, (Fairclough, 2006, page 210) and this is what is so powerful about an object
like OAIS that grows with and around the field of digital preservation. In this instance, it is

tricky to know which is the creeper vine that grows on the tree and which is the tree itself.
OAIS claims it is neither prescription nor proscription, and this is true in the sense that
16

OAIS is a reference model and thus contains no information about particular

implementation. However, I assert that, through the lens of discourse, OAIS produces the

very structures for which it purports to merely provide a framework. These products – the
structures – necessarily conceive of various actors and audiences in particular ways, and
this dissertation will begin to examine them. More importantly, if OAIS creates the

structures within which preservation takes place and digital Archives are constructed, this
raises the question: how can OAIS be employed to make an intervention in spaces of

memory practice? Can OAIS be used to make better archives? This particular moment in

the history of archives, the one that incorporates digital technologies such as open-source
aggregators, post-custodial archives, and personal and community archive digital

platforms, is often posited as inherently different than previous ones, although many
scholars offer a caution to this. Selection issues, both for born digital content and in

choosing what gets digitized, as well as a perceived ubiquity and completeness of the

Internet of Things and Google create a problematic complacence that overlooks the voices

lost in the furor, either because they are not findable in the digital deluge or because, in an
act of symbolic annihilation, materials of marginal populations are not actively preserved
by memory institutions with the resources to undertake the very active processes

necessary for digital preservation10. Yet, while I argue that this archival moment is not
“Symbolic annihilation, a concept first developed by feminist media scholars in the
1970s, describes what happens to members of marginalized groups when they are absent,
grossly under-represented, maligned, or trivialized by mainstream television
programming, news outlets, and magazine coverage.” page 27, Gaye Tuchman,
‘‘Introduction: The Symbolic Annihilation of Women by the Mass Media,’’ in Hearth and
Home: Images of Women in the Mass Media, eds. Gaye Tuchman, Arlene Kaplan Daniels, and
James Benet (New York: Oxford University Press, 1978), 3-38 in Caswell, 2014.
10

17

hugely different than previous moments where the archive was paper- and building-bound,
I also firmly believe that the necessary changes that accompany the introduction of digital

preservation systems in memory institutions signal a space wherein it is easier to envision
paradigm shifts. In recent years, existing employees have seen massive disruptions to

workflow and labor practices as they are forced to accommodate the digital elephant in the
room. Such changes result in the necessary creation of new roles and departments and the
solicitation of new hires. All this disruption renders the politics of memory institutions

softer and more flexible: while I reject the techno-deterministic claims that technologies
themselves bring democratic change to practices of history and memory making, I

simultaneously assert that this is a fertile moment to advocate for institutional and

discipline-wide changes in approaches. I seek to ground this discussion in the emerging

literature that looks to the politics of technologies by centering and rendering visible the
hidden or implicit normative prescriptions therein. I see this work as part of growing

discourse that examines ethics in algorithms, following work by Chun (2006), Presner

(2014), Drucker (2013), and others. With regard to OAIS, it is necessary to understand
what is inscripted in OAIS and the relationship of the model to site-specific

implementations as being related to both the political provocations and dictates of the
institution in which it is being deployed. At the same time, it is also necessary to

understand the relationship of OAIS and its scripts to the type of content being preserved,

both in a media archaeological sense wherein we look to the particularities of the media or
mediated object itself, and in the sense of the object as boundary object, understood by
user communities, Designated Communities, and preservationists (Sherratt, 2015).

18

While I advocate an examination of OAIS itself in addition to the work it supports,

this project seeks to unpack the scripts inscribed into OAIS during its creation. Noble

(2012) notes that discourses of technology use the terminology of ‘the tool’ in a way that
focuses attention on the tool in a way that decenters the ways in which creators imbue

their tools with human values. No technological invention is value-free or neutral. This

language, when brought to bear on OAIS, brings to the fore a question that I ask of OAIS—
what is it? Is it a technology or a tool or a machine? This is contested in the sense that
interviews revealed a variety of different answers, some of which reflect different

understandings of what OAIS is and other which reflect the different uses to which it is put
in different organizations11. I will refer to OAIS frequently as a technology, and I mean this
in a Foucauldian sense; I explain this concept in greater depth in Chapter 2. How does a
technological system fit within the literature about platforms, search engines, and

algorithms? In conducting the interviews and asking participants to characterize OAIS for

me, it is possible to see how differently situated professionals characterize the technology.

This type of investigation can lead to a definition of what OAIS is beyond simply calling it a
reference model, which given its ubiquitous use in a variety of fashions is somewhat
reductive.

If the vast majority of the existing literature about OAIS covers implementation—

including how to, why to, why they did, and what happened—then it remains to be

addressed what it actually means to use a high-level model. It does not much matter what
the model was or was not meant for. The fact that OAIS is loaded with scripts does not

This is similar to the contested definitions of digital libraries found by Bishop and Star
(1996)—the kinds of services implied by the term digital libraries, the materials DLs give
access to, the interplay with traditional libraries and library services, etc.
11

19

mean they will play out the way they were intended by the creators when OAIS actually
gets used or implemented; users will always come up with their own scripts, and this is

true of any technical object (Akrich, 1992). Beyond implementation, OAIS serves a larger

goal in providing a common vocabulary about preservation roles and responsibilities, and
it has done this so well that it has become a boundary object, used to define preservation
terms and tasks across the myriad disciplines that now find themselves charged to

preserve the content they create, which at this point in time is almost inevitably digital
(Star and Griesemer, 1989). Meghini says “…the basic concepts underlying digital

preservation, including its definition, are set by the Open Archive Information System

(OAIS) Reference Model…” in an article that speaks to general preservation concerns for

anyone doing any kind of digital preservation work. The article is not about OAIS itself, but
instead states that it takes its base assumptions, concepts, and definitions from this model
(Meghini, 2013, page GRDI15). This speaks to a type of ubiquity beyond its use in

repositories themselves: for the general study, whether in practice in a particular location

or not, OAIS has become the little black box of preservation. I use this term here to indicate
an object whose presence is so pervasive in some ways that it has taken on a privileged
space of decentered ubiquity: it is there, even when it isn’t (Balsamo, 2011).

Schumann and Recker (2012) point to the fact that its wide use has led to numerous

myths and misconceptions about what OAIS is meant to do—like a game of telephone, the

more we all talk about OAIS, the easier it is to drift away from what it actually is or means.
This drift is akin in some ways to the misconceptions and differing interpretations I spoke
about earlier. I would argue that one of the key differences here is that while the

aforementioned tensions are inherent to the deployment of any technological object, and
20

indeed any reference model, this drift is both a product of the very broad use and wide

traction OAIS has garnered over the past period of almost two decades as well as a factor
that helps enable its spread. The flexibility and all-encompassing nature of OAIS are its
draw but, like a game of telephone, its wide and on-going circulation engenders
misunderstandings (McDonough, 2008).

OAIS, as a reference model, is not meant to dictate answers to all the questions that

arose in the context of my interviews. In fact, I would also say that this, too, may not matter.
It is important to say that even if OAIS doesn’t tell me how to construct or delimit nebulous
objects or huge, indefinable audiences, both of these categories exist and denote content
that needs to be preserved. Since this content needs to be preserved, and many

preservation repositories are using OAIS to do this work, this kind of information must

somehow be made to work with OAIS. Even if this does not end in a modification to OAIS

itself, it is something that needs to be modeled in relationship to OAIS so preservationists
and archivists working with these complicated collections and with OAIS-informed
repositories can do their jobs and do them well.

This project has and will often reference archives and archivists, and thus it is

necessary to clarify what I mean by these in this paper. The politics of archives play a large
role in motivating this study and trying to understand the ways in which digital practices
intervene in or replicate politics found in paper and other analog archival spaces. Most
obviously, archive is in the title: it is the A in OAIS. More broadly, however, this project
focuses on the history of archives as a model for the conservation of certain kinds of

cultural heritage materials: audiovisual materials, media art, and video games. Many types
of institutions engage in preservation work with objects from these genres, even though
21

preservation is not the primary function of a library, museum, or other information

institution. This is why the term archive and the profession of archivists will come up

frequently: they serve here as referents to a particular kind of labor that may form a part of
the mission or practices of many different professions and organizations. To be clear,

perhaps, this paper more saliently refers to preservation and preservationists in whichever
location they find themselves working. To be sure, few of the sites of inquiry call

themselves archives; whether or not they are perhaps does not matter. What matters is the

role they take in the creation and propagation of particular views of culture and history and
how OAIS aids and allows this process, what constraints it may impose, or what subtler
influencing factors it might entail. The question I pose here is whether it is possible to
understand how application of the OAIS Reference Model affects practice, our

understanding of our profession, and what impacts is has on the institution in which it is
being applied.

Most of the literature and analysis about OAIS refers to practical implementation.

What is missing is an understanding of how the model informs thinking about practice and

how it shapes goals for preservation. OAIS is open in its design, and meant for wide use and
adoption. Lee’s (2005) excellent dissertation examines its origin story carefully, starting

with the desire at CCSDS to create an overarching model to inform digital preservation and
tracing OAIS through development. In his work, the contributions of outside organizations
are made visible: through his chronology, he lists the different bodies and organizations
that became involved in shaping OAIS. While this work shows the openness of the

22

development process12, there are also ways in which it shows how much this model is a

product of and for the space data systems community. This can be seen when looking at the
major drivers of the original OAIS standard, as well as in the names that are involved in its

on-going revision and the creation of related standards. What does it mean for practice that
this tool comes from space science, a field that adheres to largely positivist epistemologies
and finds funding in the military-industrial complex? Do it origins matter more or less

when OAIS is used not for science data, but for cultural heritage like video games? The
epistemological mismatch between positivist and post-structuralist theory and the
tensions between quantitative and qualitative methodologies that occur in digital

preservation are a mirror of these same tensions, which are manifested on a larger scale

within meta-disciplines like LIS that span the traditional research disciplines spectrum. It is
perhaps not unsurprising that the bulk of the research within preservation, and on OAIS
more specifically, has focused on largely quantitative studies of implementation: this is

reflective of a power imbalance in favor of the computer science (positivist) side of this

field (Van House and Churchill, 2008). The ways in which this tension manifests itself in

practice and what this means for the field of preservation is not well explored although it is
often noted. This dissertation takes up this theme and makes a contribution by bringing

together methodologies and epistemologies to investigate OAIS as an object and seeks to
understand the role it plays in the intersection of disciplines and practices that make up

There are indeed other ways to examine this: simple searches in SCOPUS or Web of
Knowledge yield abundant literature on OAIS, and by limiting the date, articles and
conference proceedings on OAIS appear in a variety of non-space science disciplines well
prior to the first official publication of the standard. The role played by Dutch memory
institutions including the Koninklikje Bibliotheek (KB), the royal library in The Hague,
strongly influenced my decision to begin interviews in the Netherlands.
12

23

digital preservation precisely by investigating discourses and power in conjunction with
OAIS primary documentation and interviews about implementation with practitioners.

While its implementation in an institution must have social and cultural impacts on the

institution and employees, as well as on general practices and politics of preservation, the

literature thus far has not examined this. Taking this stock addresses current unknowns in
the field of digital preservation such as whether and to what extent the application of the

model informs and/or affects labor practices; enables or constrains the possibility to create
self-reflexive archives; and enables or constrains the possibility to create less imperial
forms of archives.

The end goal is something a bit more complicated: rather than a simplified OAIS that

strips the model down to very basic components for use by everyday people on simple

electronic objects (Spence, 2006), the aim is to understand how OAIS might be exploited to
document and preserve digital objects of enormous complexity: think virtual worlds like

World of Warcraft, entertainment franchises existing in many media over many years like
Carmen Sandiego, or time-based media art like Hole in Space. While it may seem that a
space science model is not likely to suit such materials, beggars (read: digital

preservationists) cannot be choosers. In recognizing the ubiquity of a tool like OAIS, the
question becomes: how to use this tool and how do users redefine this tool in some

measure for their own purposes without having to go out and reinvent the wheel (read:

another system that achieves similar goals to OAIS 13)? This research suggests even more
This might possibly be a different huge, complicated, involved, and all-encompassing
model. It could be that it means something else, perhaps an inclined plane rather than a
wheel: one could imagine an alternative that is comparatively smaller, simpler, less
involved yet sufficiently encompassing. The point is that even if such a utopic philosopher’s
stone existed or could be created by a team of plucky and tech-savvy preservationists,
13

24

specific questions based on cultural and geographic difference in interview responses:

what are the European concerns as regards OAIS and how are these similar or different to
those in the US and North America? In Europe, the focus seems to be on standardization
and its particular relationship to auditing, specifically utilizing the newer ISO 16363

standard that is explicitly based on OAIS. In what ways does this geographic concern for
standardization reflect regional concerns about politics of pan-European unity and

homogenization of a Euro-identity created in part through governmental techniques
enacted through large-scale cultural heritage projects?

This dissertation proceeds in six additional chapters. Chapter 2 examines the

existing literature about the OAIS reference model. I utilize literature about archives in the
age of the digital to understand what role OAIS could have in the changing or preserving
professional practice in archives. I employ literature about sociotechnical systems to

provide a way of speaking about the complicated network that is masked by the simplistic
term OAIS and explore literature undergirding the theoretical frameworks I use in my
analysis.

Chapter 3 details the methodologies that create this dissertation. I engaged in

qualitative semi-structured interviews with a variety of digital preservation practitioners
and scholars in Europe and North America, and I analyzed the data using content and
discourse analysis.

development, implantation, adoption, and support take enormous amounts of time and
other resources. This is true even for “free” or “open” programs. OAIS, while not trivial to
implement or even possible to implement for all institutions, is widely available, wellestablished, and has ample support in the preservation field and marketplace.
25

Chapter 4 discusses the findings from these OAIS interviews. It examines the

audiences and stakeholders implied by the OAIS model itself as well as those identified

from interview data in order to examine the discourses that enable the construction of such
subjects. I also investigate how the traditional role of archives is challenged by the current
digital moment and the role that technologies like OAIS play in the evolution of how

memory practitioners conceive of their work as institutions change. Finally, I explore the
ways in which geographical location influences the role that OAIS plays in different

institutions and investigate the politics of governmentality as they are manifested in the
use of audit standards in European archives.

In Chapter 5 I take a detailed look at the OAIS term Designated Community. I

examine how this term is approached by practitioners and how the authors of OAIS explain
the genesis of this idea. This term takes on different meanings within difference spaces

encompassed by the OAIS sociotechnical complex: in some places, it refers to an imaginary
while in others it necessarily refers to real people. The tension here is manifested
differently with different content types and I ultimately argue that Designated

Communities are unworkable in certain circumstances and new modes of thinking are
needed to address preservation intended for a particular audience.

In Chapter 6 I look at another particularly difficult term, this time one that

purposefully does not appear in OAIS. Combining data from the Preserving Virtual Worlds

II (PVWII) grant project with OAIS documentation and OAIS interviews, I examine the role
of significant properties and how well these map onto existing entities within OAIS.

26

In Chapter 7, I conclude by exploring alternatives to OAIS and suggest new avenues

of research to create metrics for bounding expanded context of digital objects and on the
creation and maintenance of records documenting the Knowledge Base of users.

27

CHAPTER 2

Introduction

LITERATURE REVIEW

OAIS serves a site of tension for multiple audiences, and these tensions impact work

in archives and other memory institutions. This project seeks an analysis of the social and
political impacts using OAIS has on particular institutions, memory institutions more
generally, and the evolving field of digital preservation. Early articles and theses

documented the history and creation of OAIS; most existing and current OAIS-specific

literature predominantly examines the implementation of the model. This encompasses

actual implementation at various points; projects that examine how possible it is or would
be to implement the model; samples or guidelines for creating the SIP, AIP, and DIP

elements; and discussions of what implementation of a reference model actually means.

Because I look at other issues in addition to implementation, it is necessary to look to other
bodies of literature in order to tie together the various concerns at play in examining OAIS
in reference to discourses in archives and preservation. Because OAIS is both an ISO

standard and a de facto standard within preservation practices (Lee, 2005; Meghini, 2013),
I continue to extend discussions about the politics of standards and standards adoption to
OAIS. I argue that the evolving nature of archival and specifically digital preservation

practices and sociotechnical analyses of systems are equally important to understand OAIS
and preservation discourse. OAIS calls itself a very particular type of archive, but the

disruption of the digital on the preservation work that happens in memory institutions is
bound together with OAIS because of its dominance in informing the kind of work that

institutions actually undertake when embarking on digital preservation projects of both
28

born digital and digitized materials. How archives conceive of themselves in this moment

and where that intersects with the digital are spaces ripe for investigation: one focus of this
work is precisely to understand and also to intervene in the ways in which memory

institutions will ‘settle’ as they develop stable workflows to address digital content in

addition to the work they may already be doing with analog content. Related to this is the

notion of the sociotechnical system. I borrow from the language of this field to understand
what OAIS is when people and institutions speak about it and use it. It is, formally, a

reference model, but the various ways in which interview subjects speak about it or even in
which authors of literature about OAIS refer to it suggest a variety of other ways to classify
it: as a tool, as a framework, as a technology, and equally, as explicitly not any of those

things. Instead, understanding OAIS within the context of a sociotechnical system, as part of
a network both inter- and intra-institutionally, gets close to describing OAIS as it is referred
to in daily vernacular among users. In combination, these different strains of literature

provide the grounds for the theoretical and methodological frames I used to analyze the
interview data collected for this project.
2.1 Literature about OAIS

The general literature about the OAIS reference model covers a period of almost two

decades at the time of writing. Primary resources on the subject include the actual

standards documentation. Because OAIS is an ISO standard, ISO documentation is available
on the subject; however, given the cost barrier, the predominant primary source on the

reference model and subsequent ingest-related standards comes in the form of CCSDS’s
documentation. The text is identical to the ISO documentation; however, CCSDS makes

their books available for download free of charge and this availability may be one small
29

factor that aided in the circulation of this model. This preference for use is borne out in the
interview data wherein people who spoke specifically about the model and its

documentation referred to the ‘color’ of the book, or the different color-codes that CCSDS

uses to denote the various stages standards move through 14. The three versions – the Blue
Book, the Pink Book, and the Magenta Book – each signify different developmental stages
according to CCSDS’s internal standards developments processes (CCSDS, 2002, 2009 &

2012). As required by ISO, the standard is reviewed and updated on a five-year cycle. The
most recent revisions were made in 2012, resulting in the Magenta Book; salient changes

between the 2012 revisions and the previous version are outlined in a blog post by Barbara
Sierman, a research and development specialist at the Royal Library of the Netherlands
(Koninklijke Bibliotheek or KB) and a member of the Primary Trustworthy Digital

Repository Authorization Body (PTAB), a group responsible for creating and training
people in ISO 16363 (Sierman, 2012).

Literature about OAIS falls into two broad categories. Firstly, there is general

explanatory literature that explains the nature and genesis of the standard. Secondly, there

is a large body of work on particular implementations of OAIS. A cornerstone of this is Lee’s
(2005) dissertation, which covers the chronology of the standard’s development. His work

documented stakeholders in the evolution of OAIS and their relationships to one another as
well as listing early literature on OAIS. These stakeholders include the member institutions

and individuals associated with CCSDS as well as others who were major and minor players
See http://public.ccsds.org/about/images/FAQ%20%20CCSDS%20Colors%20of%20Books.jpg for the summary of CCSDS’ color scheme for
documentations. Blue indicates a recommended standard; magenta indicates a
recommended practice; and pink indicates draft revisions for review.
14

30

in the development of OAIS from drafts to standard: data specialists from a variety of

scientific fields and representatives from memory organizations such as national or federal
libraries and archives in Europe and North America.

Lee’s dissertation is a purposeful attempt to understand how and why a non-LIS tool

became so prominent in LIS spaces. Lee’s work shows when and where the diverse

partners involved in the creation of OAIS were enrolled. ‘Diversity’ in this case refers to the
way in which CCSDS normally develops standards: CCSDS normally operates in a closed
environment and does not commonly seek outside input. In writing OAIS, members of

CCDSD solicited participation from representatives in all these areas. Lee’s project traces a
timeline of development wherein it is possible to see who was involved at various stages.

The stages he describes range from early drafting to the end process of soliciting comments
on well-formed and content-complete documents. A second takeaway from Lee’s

dissertation is that it demonstrates the overwhelming influence of certain bodies in

authoring OAIS and the lesser involvement of others. While the development of OAIS was

far more open than that of other CCSDS standards, the process was nonetheless dominated
by CCSDS and researchers with space science backgrounds. For example, the US was the
prominent geographical player in the creation of OAIS, although people and institutions
from Europe were also involved and continue to be very heavily involved in updates to

OAIS and the creation of related standards like ISO 16363 and ISO 16919, standards for

auditing the trustworthiness of digital repositories. However, the standard is referred to as
‘American’ by some interview participants and this geographical designation is meant to
note something of substance about why the model achieved such wide adoption outside
space science.Libraries and cultural heritage institutions played a secondary role in the
31

historical account. I suggest that this is important in understanding the scripts embedded
in OAIS and therefore the discourses that unfold when OAIS is deployed in various

organizations. The dominant creators came from positivist, global north backgrounds. They
also came from archives where the Consumer population is narrower than the populations
served by libraries and cultural heritage institutions. This is important not because it

means that OAIS cannot work in places like libraries, or organizations with broad and

heterogeneous user bases, as some have suggested. The authors of OAIS explicitly designed
it with the intention that it would be functional across a variety of disciplinary spaces,
including popular culture and cultural heritage. Indeed, in my interactions with the

creators of OAIS, they demonstrated an on-going eagerness to work with content and
institutional types that are very different to their backgrounds in space science data.

Rather, the disciplinary origins of OAIS are salient here because they inform the values the
creators scripted into the model. This also informs what kinds of information counts as

data within the model which in turn informs how to make decisions about selection and

boundary-making for dynamic content; how labor and laborers are conceived of in relation
to the model; and what kinds of knowledge and knowledge structures are valuable. This
last part is highly situated and particular to locally dominant epistemologies.

As OAIS took off as a standard, a few prominent writers and scholars in the areas of

digital preservation and general digital culture studies authored key summaries. These

studies play a prominent role in the ways in which OAIS is communicated, circulated, and
thus propagated. These are still primary sources for people seeking to understand OAIS,

and in some cases are cited as more useful than the primary documentation itself 15, much
15

Priscilla Caplan’s work in this area was noted in interviews.
32

to the chagrin of OAIS creators and purists who believe that this is part of what leads to the
misunderstandings that surround OAIS. This is also noted as a source of OAIS “bashing”
that calls for its replacement or radical overhaul. The circulation of these summaries

reintroduces, in some ways, the voices and thus the discourses of information and memory
professionals as their works become canonical along with CCSDS’s and ISO’s official

documentation of OAIS. Ball’s (2006) primer falls under both of the categories of OAIS
literature that I have previously described. First, it lays out the major tenets of OAIS.

Second, it delves into non-site-specific particulars including listing related standards for
metadata, modeling, and packaging as well as listing open source and custom tools and

projects built on OAIS. From a meta-disciplinary perspective, it is important to recognize
that when consuming and using OAIS, people do not necessarily read the primary

documentation and do not necessarily understand it as its creators describe it. Because

users turn to secondary sources that describe OAIS – its creation, purpose, contents, and
implementations — the ways in which secondary articles are organized impacts the

consumption of information about OAIS. It is necessary to look beyond just the manual to
see how OAIS is actually taken up. Ball’s article notes the information model, enumerates

the functional entities in an OAIS repository, and speaks to preservation methods all before
getting to the basic six requirements for OAIS compliance. These latter do not appear until
section six of the paper. This may be telling: a common complaint of OAIS users in Europe
was the fact that people do not read the entirety of the OAIS documentation carefully and
that they tend to dwell on the information and functional modeling, particularly the
diagrams. Without understanding the model as a whole, there are many common

misconceptions about what is actually required for OAIS compliance, leading perhaps to
33

the two widely held views that compliance is either impossible or possible even for a
headless chicken.

Noted digital preservation scholar Lavoie (2000 and 2004) makes the important

move of explaining the acronym first and then immediately detailing the six mandatory
requirements, as well as laying out the relationship between OAIS and PREMIS, a

preservation metadata schema maintained by the Library of Congress 16. Lavoie notes that

‘compliance’ is a necessarily vague notion when dealing with a reference model that avoids
specificity by design; this notion of compliance came up in many of my interviews as one

that particularly preoccupied European practitioners and one that US practitioners were

quick to dismiss. It is, however, perhaps telling that they felt the need to dismiss the need
to be compliant; it was important enough to mention even when I did not ask about it

specifically. Lavoie says that compliance might look like a detailed mapping of existing

activities into OAIS terms; it might also look like an organization faithfully implementing
significant portions of the model. Written in 2004, the article looks forward to TRAC and
ISO 16363, audits which determine trustworthiness through OAIS with much greater

detail, although I would argue that achieving compliance with the main six repository
requirements does not necessarily require the level of fidelity to the general OAIS

documentation implied by Lavoie towards the end of his article. Schumann and Recker

(2012) try to contextualize what the idea of compliance even means for something that is
It should be noted, in a move that perhaps continues the trend in the US preservation
community of beginning to move beyond OAIS, that the most recent changes to PREMIS
include looking beyond the functions of the repository itself to outside actors like
depositors. Angela Dappert (2015) describes the move of looking beyond the repository as
a move away from the early ties to OAIS, which constrained PREMIS’ earlier ability to
account for actors outside of the preservation repository.
16

34

so purposefully high-level and abstract that it cannot match perfectly onto real world

examples by definition, and this is important given that institutions try to comply with a

model that claims not to make prescriptions. This means that such attempts must have an

inherent locally-determined set of values attached, increasing the heterogeneous nature of
the OAIS sociotechnical system. Daniels succinctly makes the point: “For all its clarity,

however, the OAIS is a theoretical model that intentionally avoids any statement on how to
go about creating a compliant digital archival repository.” (Daniels, 2013, page 12).

The second major category of OAIS literature focuses on its deployments. This can

be further broken down into two categories: one set of literature that deals with place- or

site-specific implementations and a second that deals with general implementation guides
or suggestions around a particular issue, term, or discipline. For site-specific work,

interviewees, especially those in Europe, frequently mentioned Priscilla Caplan’s work on
the Dark Archive in the Sunshine State (DAITSS) as a particularly helpful and in-depth

model (Caplan, 2004 and 2007). Kara van Malssen wrote a piece about OAIS commissioned
by Beeld en Geluid, the national audiovisual archive of the Netherlands; the chief

information officer of that same institution details their workflows and implementation of

OAIS in a white paper (van Malssen, 2010; de Jong, Delaney, and Steinmeier 2013). Spence

(2006) conducted research on the far-flung users of OAIS, noting how many different types

of organizations were currently using it. Her analysis showed that it was even of interest to
organizations such as gardening clubs in Australia, which demonstrates a remarkable

breadth of scale in the types of repositories implementing it. The implication of this work is
that OAIS is such a usable tool that it should be made more accessible to small

organizations, and as such Spence proposed the creation of an “OAIS simplex”, a simplified
35

version of the reference model designed specifically for small programs with severely
limited resources. David Giaretta et al (2009) take on the notoriously nebulous term

significant properties. In so doing, they dismiss the term as too unspecified, noting several
sometimes contradictory definitions from various reputable sources in their literature

review. Instead, they seek to explore which features already in existence in OAIS might
serve the general ethos of preserving those properties deemed most important to the

interpretation of an object or, more basically, the rendering of its bits. This latter marks an

intentional distinction: as I will explore in Chapter 5, significance can be located outside the
bits and the computing environment of an object, and so contextualizing how to render bits
will not necessarily account for all the significant properties of a digital object.

Articles focusing on specific issues in relations to OAIS cover topics such as

OAIS/FRBR mapping; OAIS and disaggregated, distributed preservation environments 17;

mapping PLANETS preservation planning within OAIS; OAIS as specifically applied to the

social sciences; and OAIS’ relationship to other standards (McDonough 2011a and 2011b;
Giaretta et al 2009; Knight and Hedges, 2007; Spence, 2006; Subotic, Schuldt, and

Rosenthaler, 2011; Becker et al, 2009; Ayoung and Tibbo, 2011; Vardigan and Whiteman,

2007). These articles cover a variety of different disciplines, including a significant chunk of
This particular project, SHERPA DP, was like many of its kind completed and appears to
have fallen off the radar. A check of the website yielded a long set of links that resulted in
404 error messages; a search of the University of Illinois’ library catalog for this project
yielded only one set of conference proceedings on the subject, from 2006 prior to the
completion of the project (Wilson, 2006). This is only interesting because the notion of
distributed compliance is something that OAIS will have to deal with and authors
acknowledge this struggle. While this project looked at distributed dark archives for eprints, the creators of OAIS admitted that linked data, a different form of distributed
content, pose real challenges to the model and said, “Be sure not to be audited [on linked
data].”
17

36

literature from library and information science as well as computer science, health

sciences, cultural heritage studies, and a number of domain-specific explorations of OAIS

and its relevance to preserving the data of that domain. This variety highlights the breadth
of material and disciplinary interests covered in OAIS literature that is grouped under the
more general heading of implementation literature: the existing body of literature is rich
despite its rather singular focus.

What is missing from the literature about OAIS is precisely the conversation that

this dissertation seeks to start: an examination of OAIS itself as a sociotechnical system,

from a perspective that seeks to understand the ways in which OAIS functions in power

relationships within institutions and more broadly within the realm of memory creation.
This is a gap in understanding that is highlighted by the existing work done in related

fields: the kind of work that has been done on organizations in STS literature and the body

of literature that examines power dynamics and discourses within institutions like archives
and standards adoption has not yet been extended to cover the realm of the digital archive
or the work that memory institutions do when trying to preserve digital content. I aim to

bring these lenses to OAIS, examining the object itself and the role it plays in institutions.

The call for this type of research has certainly started to appear: Lindlar (2013) starts her
article on OAIS by noting that the largest preservation issues are not technical ones, but

largely about the network of stakeholders involved. Research about OAIS has only recently
begun to focus beyond the system to an understanding of the larger impacts on practice
and the effects on institutions. Schumman and Recker (2012) take on the notion of

compliance in relation to OAIS in a way that is being very well received via Twitter. That

“Digital preservation is not a pure technical task…” (Lindlar, 2013) is something that can
37

easily be forgotten in a body of literature about an object that stems from disciplines like
space and data science, both of which have decidedly scientifically-informed positivist
epistemological leanings and qualitative research preferences.

This dissertation extends the discussion begun in these types of articles. Both

acknowledge that sociotechnical networks are at play when working in an OAIS-informed

environment18, one by highlighting the importance of context in determining levels of OAIS
compliance and the other by engaging in a discussion of preservation policy that

foregrounds the human stakeholders. I add to this discussion by examining the object itself
and the role it plays in larger discourses of preservation and memory institutions.
2.2 Archives and Digital Preservation

Digital preservation and digital archives are a space of friction (Tsing, 2004). It

brings together disciplines and bodies of practice with very long histories such as archives,
conservation, and diplomatics. The long-standing traditions of these bodies of practice
include strong codes of professional ethics and practice guidelines. Archives and

diplomatics also have juridical roots: their work is bound up in the maintenance and

production of evidentiary records. Digital preservation sits at the intersection of this

branch of information work and computer science and systems design, disciplines that are
somewhat newer and have different core values. These disciplines work together on

projects of digital preservation, each informing and constraining the other, and there are

considerable spaces of tension between them. One such example is precisely struggles with
significant properties. They are difficult to describe and even more difficult to render into
However, it is important to note that neither article uses the term sociotechnical or
explicitly references that literature; the application of the term in this context is mine.
18

38

something machine-readable. A reviewer for the iPres conference noted in reference to
OAIS and significant properties:

The use of the term “information properties” in the 2012 version of OAIS instead of
“significant properties” reflects an unresolved difference of opinion between

domains, computer science and archival science, and there has not been substantial
and productive discussion of the issues, though there has been some heat over the
issue. Some authors in the computer science portion of the digital preservation

community feel uncomfortable with what they perceive as ambiguity in the use of
the term significant properties, though the term is informed by longstanding
appraisal discussions and practice in the archival community.

The epistemological challenges are another aspect of the friction within digital

preservation. As Van House and Churchill (2008) note, “This uneasy alliance of the

unreflexively positivist, engineering-oriented computer science with post-structuralist

social theory and qualitative methods is often problematic, especially since most of the
power in the field resides with computer science.”

The digital archive as a construct is even more problematic, because this term is so

nebulous, or rather very generous in what it currently encompasses. Trevor Owens

(forthcoming, 2016) nods to this and offers a list of the some of the things that might be
included under this umbrella term:





Collections of Aggregated Digitized Primary Sources
Digitized Copies of Entire Archival Collections
Born Digital Archival Collections
Web Archives

39



Collections of User Generated Born Digital Primary Sources

These are a set of activities more than anything else, or perhaps a description of the

materials that an information worker handles, but certainly these are not institutional

divisions: many or all of these activities might be carried out, to some degree, by a single

institution. The question is: why use the term archive to refer to these various activities and
material collections? It suggests something about the way in which the term archive is

perceived. Colloquially, it gets used by popular graphical user interfaces (GUIs) such as

email clients or blog sites and tools: archive refers to the collection of content you could

down load from Gmail, for example, to save a local copy of your correspondence record or,
more to the purpose of the tool that enables this, to copy content over to another email
client. In blog spaces, archive refers to what is old, or at least older. These both suggest
something about public imaginaries of the archive: they are bound up with discourses

about collecting, saving, and age. An archive has a very specific meaning within its own subdiscipline; though archivists played a role in the creation of OAIS, OAIS uses this term to

mean something distinct. OAIS contains the word archival in its acronym, the Open Archival
Information System, and it means something very specific by the term:

An OAIS is an archive, consisting of an organization, which may be part of a

larger organization, of people and systems that has accepted the responsibility
to preserve information and make it available for a Designated Community. It
meets a set of responsibilities as defined in the standard, and this allows an OAIS

archive to be distinguished from other uses of the term “archive”. (Giaretta, 2011
page 47)

40

This definition is specific to an organizational context, and speaks about the general

activities involved in preserving content without specifying a content type or even a

particular type of preservation activity, and so could be applied to any of the collecting
practices listed by Owens—all of them could happen in archival organizations that use

OAIS to model or describe their activities and products. Interestingly, this does not say

anything about digital content specifically; indeed, the OAIS AIP model has an entity for
physical objects. It would, however, be disingenuous to suggest that OAIS was not

intentionally designed for digital content: the nod to physical objects is a recognition that
physical objects provide structural and semantic support to digital objects. The role of

particular hardware as part of a preservation package is a topic of on-going debate: there is
not an entity for hardware in the archival information package, although the more recent
acknowledgment of the role software plays in an information package may imply or

contain references to specific hardware given the ways in which some software elements
are necessarily tied to hardware elements.

What is salient about this discussion is what, if anything, the digital archive does

differently for the field of memory work than paper and manuscript archives have done
previously. Apart from the technological difficulties in managing digital content that is
dynamic, unbounded, and interlinked, does the digital moment challenge the largely

imperial traditions of archives (Bowker, 2006)? The question is not whether or not these

compendia of projects and institutions that can be grouped under the aegis ‘digital archive’
have more democratic potential: instead, it is whether or not that democratic potential is
realized and the methods by which interventions are made to reach this potential. OAIS
informs the construction of many of the digital archive types above in the sense that it
41

undergirds the systems that allow for the preservation of otherwise very ephemeral

content. Just as paper archives reflected the practices of those that “had the resources to
make their discourses substantial through books and pictures, and these were the

materials then put into libraries and archives” (Fairclough, 2006, 221), the issue is less
about whether those who existed in archives previously as traces in the margins,

marginalized and/or subaltern populations without the power or privilege to leave records
of the sort that memory institutions collected, can create digital content and establish a

digital presence. It is about whether these populations who are now perhaps better able to

make user-generated collections of content online can get this content into a system that is
OAIS-compliant so that it persists. I only use this latter term to denote systems that are

generally considered appropriate and capable of maintaining material long-term, and longterm here merely refers to the ISO 16363 concept of long enough to safely pass materials

on to a responsible and trustworthy successor institution. More content is being created by
more people (Rawson, 2014 for example): will more content from those who are not

powerful last, or will it be relegated to traces if it cannot find its way into institutions with
the resources to engage in its active maintenance over time?

The way in which archives privilege the powerful is built into their very structures

at the most granular level. Archives are built on records, and what precisely constitutes a

record was historically relegated to documents of various types that were the province of
the powerful: letters from the literate with the leisure time and other means to write

letters, marriage records from those legally allowed to marry, etc. In order to effectively

archive digital content, it is necessary to reconceive both the notion of the record as central

and what constitutes a record, opening archival spaces to new, sometimes nebulous classes
42

of objects. Archives as a practical discipline has begun to move beyond the record as

central object. Within the historical tradition of archives, archives consist of predefined

collections of records from a particular organization. This admittedly reductive definition is
important because it speaks to the functions and practices of archives for thousands of

years. First and foremost, the record is central. Another example of the use value of this

conception of archives is that it in some ways obviates the need to talk about selection and
organization issues, frequent concerns in libraries, as the assumption is that all records

from an organization will be collected and organized according to their use function within
the institutions where they originated. The vast work of InterPARES speaks to definitions
of digital records, covering classes of records that exist in digital realms, how these map
onto analog equivalents, the ways in which they do not, and how they are unique to

computing environments (Duranti and Thibodeau, 2006; Hackett, Underwood, Eppard,
2008; www.interpares.org). Digital content is so easy to create and so ubiquitously

available that we cannot collect every record, a main tenet of traditional archival theory.
While the cost of storage of vast quantities of digital data decreases fairly rapidly, the

ability to store data does not guarantee access to, or even persistence of, such materials.
The persistence of not only the content, but also the ability to view and interact with it,

assumes a role of primacy with digital content. What this means is that simply having a

record is no longer sufficient to guarantee authenticity; the record is decentered in favor of
activities needed to reproduce content and meaning sustainably (Bradley, 2007).

Addressing value and meaning in the OAIS reference model is a purposeful attempt

to understand what implications technologies, tools, or systems have for archives. The
digital challenge to the primacy of the record is a complex shift. OAIS was created as a
43

framework to assist institutions in navigating these changes and answer some of the
questions about the role of the record and the archive more generally. This type of

discussion is important because it enables the critical examination of politics hidden under
technologies and historical processes, such as the structures of power existent in

traditional archival practice. OAIS has been a success in pervading a field that is a mashup
of disciplines. This success speaks to the way in which it is a potentially catalytic part of a
network of relatively stable and aligned interests among actors who do not otherwise
share interests (Bowker and Star, 1994 and 1998). The sociotechnical lens and the

borrowing of terminology about networks and scripts aid in the process of “…inverting our
commonsense notion of infrastructure means taking what have often been seen as behind
the scenes, boring, background processes to the real work of politics and knowledge

production and bringing their contribution to the foreground” (Bowker and Star, 1998,

page 234). There are reasons why OAIS has not yet adequately tackled the complex social
and political aspects of preservation work like significant properties (Bradley, 2007) and

these reasons are parallel to why work has not been done to investigate OAIS as an object
itself. Rather than addressing a gap in the literature, this study renders visible processes
that are often overlooked, a common occurrence in preservation and information work
more generally, such that their politics and knowledge production discourses can be

brought to the fore and examined for what they contribute, or could or should contribute,
to the practical discipline.

There are ways in which digital preservation as a professional practice maps very

well onto analog archival principles, and other ways in which it does not. Daniels (2013)

provides one interpretive mapping of traditional archival principles onto OAIS terms from
44

the perspective of a cultural heritage institution, although like many of the previously cited
OAIS papers, her work focuses mainly on a local interpretation and less on a deep,

theoretical understanding of the ways in which OAIS and archival science do and do not
overlap. I argue that trends in archival science, such as calls for more pluralistic forms

(PACG, 2011) and towards sociohistorical understanding (Douglas, 2010) as opposed to
constructs and assumptions of neutral history, need to be brought to bear on OAIS.

The push for pluralism in archives from a single cultural paradigm to a multiverse

(PACG, 2011; Caswell, 2013) offers particular promise for some of the difficulties facing

digital archives in general and those implementing OAIS in particular. A common complaint
from librarians about the restrictiveness of the Designated Community entity in OAIS

reflects the fact that digital preservation has been conceived of in ways fundamentally

different from analog conservation. If analog conservation is about a particular object and

what is done to it to keep it safe and sound—think acid free folders and climate controlled
rooms—digital preservation is less about the object itself as well as being a more active
endeavor. It is not about where the item is put and left, but more about the ongoing

activities around an object to ensure access to its content for a particular set of projected
users: digital preservation is fundamentally aimed at a particular population (the
Designated Community). It does not happen in a user-less vacuum. While analog

conservation rarely happens in such a vacuum, the major difference here is that it can.

Recently, OAIS creators working for the APARSEN project have begun to acknowledge and
codify the value of preserving for multiple communities (APARSEN, 2015).

45

Figure 4: APARSEN Common Vision Model

Expanding access to content to multiple communities is part of a business model based on

a digital object lifecycle where preservation is based on OAIS. The pitch for curation of data
to serve multiple user communities is a financial one that happens after primary

preservation activities for a Designated Community have occurred. I argue that digital

preservation needs to look at multiple audiences earlier in the process and for reasons

beyond the admittedly important ones of establishing financial stability in the long run.
Caswell (2013) describes the basic principles of archival pluralism as being

informed by the four basic principles of religious pluralism: “energetic engagement,

understanding, strengthened commitment, and dialog” (page 274). Of equal importance in
this call is that archival pluralism simultaneously seeks to avoid four major perils: “claims

46

of universality, inattention to power, silencing dissent and collapsing difference”. This

latter lens can be applied to archives generally, as Caswell has done. It can also be applied

to a critical reading of digital preservation and of OAIS itself. This is in keeping with recent
trends in archival practice that challenge traditionally assumed Jenkinsonian neutrality of

archivists and archives (Nesmith 2002; Cook 2001; Ketelaar 2001). As laudably open as the
OAIS process was, end users of the content do not represent a significant part of the design
process. The audience for the open design process was a collection of users of the model

itself, and so there are many examples of communities that could be considered marginal in
relation to the financial and reputational power of data science present in negotiations and
renegotiations of OAIS as it moves through drafts and through periodic revisions. Next

generations of OAIS revisions, or perhaps next generations of digital repository standards,
should consider real end users who represent Designated Community members, in much
the same way museums and archives have begun to solicit participation from both

audiences as well as from marginalized groups who contribute content (Caswell, 2013;

Boast, 2010; Schwartz and Cook, 2002). There is a possibility for OAIS or models like it to
act as recuperative technologies (Coombe and Wiess, 2015), to provide spaces wherein
formal organizations of record and memory like archives include voices that have been

traditionally overlooked; this is not built into the current model given its origins and design
process. This dissertation highlights the spaces where this is a possibility, to inform and

argue for the need to include these voices in future iterations. Such recognition requires a
more qualitative understanding of the design practice.

47

2.3 Standards and reference models

It is important to view OAIS through a sociotechnical lens as a complement to

viewing it through the lens of standards development/adoption and the role of reference
models. Reference models are generally high-level, aimed at shaping future practice and

discussions: subsequent standards about actual practice will be built around them. They

are not guidelines to practical implementation, and therefore ‘compliance’ can be difficult
to determine: it is hard to comply with something that denies that it is prescriptive, and
perhaps impossible according to this definition of reference models. One question that

arises is who gets to decide what is minimally critical in the realm of compliance? How are
disputes about this mediated? OAIS is in use in a number of institutions: how do these
organizations deal with concerns that still exist around the concepts of Designated

Community or significant properties, for example? Herbst’s (1974) concept speaks to the
ethos behind the creation of OAIS- it seeks to reduce barriers and allow for seamless and

continual work within institutions that were/are already coping with the realities of digital
preservation. Rather than prescribe adequate systems or methods, OAIS sought instead to
codify activities, to give a shared language and thus prescribe the boundaries of good
preservation work for all the denial about prescriptions within OAIS.

It is, importantly, a standard and a particular kind of standard, a reference model as

opposed to other kinds of standards that dictate more specific rules and guidelines, like ISO
standards on food safety temperatures or even trustworthiness audits like the 9000 series,
or ISO 16363 and ISO 16919, which are about digital repositories. Previous theses about
OAIS, prominently those by Lee (2005) and Seles (2016), delve into standards and

standards adoption literature since both theses are concerned with adoption, albeit in
48

different ways and settings. In some ways, an investigation into OAIS is inherently an
investigation that looks at a successful instance of standards adoption. I call OAIS

successful given the overwhelming reference to OAIS by practitioners in a large number of
developed world memory institutions; Seles labels it less so in an investigation with both
developed and developing world institutions wherein participants from both types of

region listed their difficulties in implementing digital preservation programs that match

well with the ISO 16363 audit standard. OAIS is a standard. It is a de facto standard by way
of its adoption even prior to it becoming an official standard. It is also a de jure standard in

the sense that it gained ISO status and that certain governmental agencies began to require
audit processes and certification for state-mandated and -operated digital repositories.

Lee’s historical investigation into the creation of OAIS examines literature regarding

the creation of standards in order to note the varying motivations different actors have in

participating in such processes; this discussion helps ground his examination of the way in
which the creation process unfolded, particularly how different agents representing

different interest groups and disciplines came to be involved. This is the main impetus of

the project: to understand how this object, not created within the realm of LIS, came to be
so widely discussed in that discipline in the early 2000s. OAIS is also a particular kind of
standard: it is a model, and more particularly, a reference model. Lee identifies 22

characteristics of reference models, and the single major consensus in the literature about
standards, as summarized by Lee, is that reference models in particular exist at a higher
level of abstraction than other standards models and that they are useful tools in the

structuration processes within a field. OAIS came into being at such a time that it was able
to play a large role in the structuration of digital preservation as a sub-discipline by
49

directing the development of the field and by giving a language to the type of work that
people within the field were doing. In this way, this particular standard is tightly

imbricated with the entire field a way that other standards, such as ISO 15489, an

Australian-based standard for record management, are not. The role that Lee describes for
OAIS as a standard is a role that I still find it to play. In interview data, participants noted
the fact that OAIS is a highly used ISO standard as part of its allure to their organization,

and European participants did indeed use it to describe and in some ways legitimate their
work.

Lee’s dissertation forms the germinal cornerstone of in-depth research about OAIS.

Seles references it heavily; my interview participants mention it as informing their practice,
particularly those in Europe; and it was the starting point for my own research on this

topic. My dissertation, like Seles’ and Lee’s, takes as a basic assumption or hypothesis that
OAIS is packed full of biases (Lee), and what I would also call scripts (Akrich, 1992) and

discourses. Fundamentally, standards are social constructions that need to be understood

within a particular milieu. Importantly, they have the power to both anticipate change and

sow “seeds” to enable change to occur, while simultaneously having the power to reinforce

existing social structures (Lee). This recognition is important because it explicitly rules out
a techno-deterministic reading of OAIS wherein it has the inherent power to do one thing
versus another or where it is a neutral object that does not carry the weight of human

intentions shaped by social circumstances. Seles notes that means that existing digital

preservation standards have a developed-world perspective that may impede their wide
adoption in the global south, and this outcome is yet another manifestation of the way in

which I argue that OAIS serves to replicate power structures that have existed in archives
50

for millennia. Seles refers to ISO processes for standard making more specifically, noting
the following four criteria that drive the creation of a new standard:
(1) Standards must answer a market need.

(2) Standards must be developed by a team of international experts…

(3) who must be drawn from various industries and sectors to ensure a balanced
representation of interests.

(4) Standards must be based on consensus, and the comments and opinions of all
stakeholders must be given equal weight and consideration.

(ISO in Seles, pages 51-52)

Seles’ overarching critique of OAIS (ISO 14721) and RAC (ISO 16363) is that the

representatives from a variety of agencies involved in creation were not representative

enough: the developing world was poorly represented (or not represented at all), and this
resulted in standards that contained assumptions that render it non-transferable to

developing world situations. Such assumptions include, according to Seles, the presumed
access to stable infrastructure for electric power and Internet and access to technologies

such as computers or HVAC equipment. Her findings, based on research in East Africa, are
that these assumptions make OAIS virtually impossible to implement as it is currently
written in that geographical context, and her recommendations include having more

representative groups involved in future standards creation and revisions. This last is

important because ISO standards are required to be revised on an on-going set timetable.
While Seles explores the various reasons why East Africa was not included in the

development of the dominant digital preservation standards, she notes that issues related
to technology access that are endemic to the area do not mean that there is no need for
51

digital preservation and digital preservation standards in the developing world. The

exclusion of East African and other developing world areas can be partly explained by the
same assumptions which render OAIS un-useful: OAIS creators interviewed by Seles

thought that “anyone” could participate in open meetings regarding standards creation

because all that was required to participate was an internet connection. I would argue that
part of this disconnect is explained in the very wording of ISO’s key criteria for standards
development. It is telling that the first criterion is a “market need” for a standard. ISO’s
website says:

ISO does not decide when to develop a new standard, but responds to a request
from industry or other stakeholders such as consumer groups. Typically, an

industry sector or group communicates the need for a standard to its national

member who then contacts ISO. Contact details for national members can be found
in the list of members.

ISO lists its members, which are predominantly professional organizations and industry

specific groups in the developed world. The “market need” can be read in relationship to

the members of this group: in developing a standard, there must be a demonstrable market
need according to the markets of the ISO members. ISO standards are not universal.

Perhaps they are not even global: they address the needs of predominantly developed

countries. So while it is true that East African nations have a demonstrated need for digital
preservation of electronic records (the primary subject of Seles’ work), it is not a market
need according to ISO or its members. Seles’ own demonstration of the general lack of

digital preservation professionals in East Africa in some ways points to a “market” that is

not yet developed enough to express a market’s needs, or was not when OAIS in particular
52

was developed. This type of language firmly situates the projects of standards bodies

within the realm of capital, and thus it is unsurprising that standards are developed to be

pitched at those with the capital to purchase them, and not just in the sense of being able to
afford the fee associated with purchasing the actual documentation for a standard. Instead,
standards are a form of commodity (Schiller, 2006), and those without purchasing power
do not have a say in their construction. The move of capital to exclude the margins and
continually centralize power is not unintentional; exclusion from standards excludes

marginal actors from the very language and infrastructure that would allow participation
in the market. ISO standards like OAIS do not transfer well to developing nations because

they are not meant to, and I argue that they will not be designed to accommodate the needs
of non-developed world actors until the electronic records of East Africa and other

developing world regions fill a market need for the developed world. In this way, standards
seek to homogenize processes and facilitate exchange and transfer of goods and knowledge
in ways that privilege already privileged classes while purposefully excluding the margins.
These discourses are scripted into OAIS because OAIS was developed within this

framework of understanding about the role of standards. Making standards functional in
different ways, for non-dominant populations or projects, requires a fairly radical

rethinking of such projects, and this dissertation seeks to lay the groundwork necessary to
do just that.

2.4 Sociotechnical Systems

The focus here is to look at OAIS through a sociotechnical lens. One question I posed

to interviewees is how they would characterize “OAIS.” This is a very particular request in
that it elicits not only people’s automatic responses based on the common discourses
53

around OAIS with which they are familiar, but also because it often elicits personal analysis
on the part of the interview subject about how they classify OAIS. Many people say it is a

standard and/or a reference model, because on paper it is. In practice, this may also be the
way most people perceive OAIS. It is certainly the way they most often write about it.

However, there are other ways of categorizing it. Characterizing OAIS as a technology in the
critical theory sense opens the possibility of examining the ethics and politics of design as
well as possibilities of counter-hegemonic potential when technologies are used in ways
counter to their original intention to empower oppressed classes of actors. Mirroring

Trist’s (1981) findings about the organization of workers and technologies in mines, the
deployment of OAIS in institutions similarly follows many of the principles he identifies.
OAIS foregrounds functions over particular jobs or individuals; it presumes group work
processes in the sense that it divides up responsibilities among different entities that
comprise a whole functional model 19. The overarching processes take primacy over

particular workers and their responsibilities because it is a reference model that looks

globally across an institution to examine the confluence of processes necessary to make
digital preservation function. In another sense, the primary six requirements for OAIS

compliance are often taken up by what might be termed a primary work system in STS

parlance: a group of people and digital architectures that comprise the functional group
However, it is important to note that this group of entities may actually be filled by very
few individuals. Particularly in very small organizations where all technological
infrastructure is handled by one person, the vast majority of tasks might be filled by the
same persons. The full model speaks to functions outside the preservation tasks
themselves, including administrative and funding tasks, meaning even in very small
institutions, it’s likely that there are at least a few people involved. It is conceivable,
however unlikely, that someone creating an OAIS-informed system of preservation for
personal materials could fill all roles on the expanded diagram in Chapter 1 by themselves.
19

54

responsible for digital preservation. This is particularly true in larger organizations

wherein preservation is not the primary focus: think, for example, of the department
involved in digital preservation at a library within a larger college or university. In

organizations for which the primary responsibility is preservation, archives in particular,
the whole of the OAIS functional model might still comprise only a work system 20. Of the

institutions I visited, there was still a marked divide between the entities responsible for
analog conservation of paper, film, and art in several of them. In others, however, there
were moves towards integration. This includes enrolling existing employees in digital
workflows and integrating new employees building a new sociotechnical network by

“disentangling (and possibly disassembling) humans and non-humans from old sets of ties
within a large sociotechnical network and reframing…” them within a new space that not
only has to deal with digital concerns, but which is also prepared to foreground them

(Callon, 1999 in Kaghan and Bowker, 2001, page 263). In effect, organizations have to
create and manage boundary conditions to give employees not directly involved with
digital work a sense of autonomy. In such cases, OAIS is a macro-organizing tool that

touches on many elements within a broader work system. It is not just a reference model,
but also an actor of sorts within such institutions.

Part of the process for the manager, and for OAIS in general, is the construction and

constant reconstruction of networks that keep OAIS central and essential. Law (1992)
defines the concept of durability within a sociotechnical system:

The first has to do with the fact that some materials are more durable than others

“The work system, which comprised a set of activities that made up a functioning whole,
now became the basic unit rather than the single jobs into which it was decomposable”
(Trist, 1981, page 9).
20

55

and so maintain their relational patterns for longer. Imagine a continuum. Thoughts
are cheap but they don't last long, and speech lasts very little longer. But when we
start to perform relations – and in particular when we embody them in inanimate
materials such as texts and buildings – they may last longer. (page 387)

OAIS, taken as a representation of a network of stakeholders, constructs durability for

itself. That is, it maintains its position of power in systems by constantly embodying itself
in materials and practices, by perpetuating its role through the creation of new tools and
standards: it is always part of the digital preservation discourse, even when it is an

unnamed background assumption, decentered and invisible yet still present. Part of the
way in which OAIS constructed its durability was fortuitous, which is not to say

deterministic: numerous interviewees related that it came about at just the right moment
to gain sweeping adoption. Many institutions were in an episode of having to cope with
digital materials but not yet having formalized systems for preservation and long-term

access when OAIS first began development in the 1990s. OAIS was widely adopted because

so many institutions needed a framework like the one it provided and there were not major
alternatives. It grew with the field of digital preservation, such that it is an obligatory part
of the field. It has maintained its position as an obligatory passage point (Latour, 1987)

through the creation of additional standards and tools that bring it back to the forefront of

the digital preservation discourses when it might otherwise have faded away. Examples of
this include the creation of other standards based on it, like PAIMAS and PREMIS; tools

designed with it in mind like DSpace and Archivematica; and most recently, the creation of
ISO 16363, an ISO standard for auditing trustworthiness built on OAIS. With durability,
effects change and things become located in new networks of relations. This engages
56

materials in networks more thoroughly and makes them more stable over time, making it
all the more difficult to alter the ways in which the network constructs power: durability
itself is relational, not inherent. As OAIS solidifies its presence as central to the digital

preservation discourse, it becomes more difficult to conceive of the alternatives that the

successful punctualization (Law, 1992), or representation of OAIS as a single, static entity,

masks. The question of alternatives is an important one, and one that I asked interviewees
about. No one presented a concrete answer to this question, other than the handful of
respondents who said simply that there was (and/or is) no alternative to OAIS.

While the admitted project of this dissertation was to understand more about OAIS

so as to put it to more democratic and imaginative uses than it has been, thinking about the
alternatives calls to mind two particular theorists, Akrich (1992) and Drucker (2013). My
work with OAIS springs from a desire not to waste already limited resources reinventing
the wheel: in seeking the perfect model for reflexive digital archives, I thought it best to

begin with the models in existence and see if they could be made to work for my longer-

term research interests in the preservation of dynamic digital popular culture. Channeling
Akrich (1992), my advisor carried this metaphor forward and suggested that the problem
might not be the wheel at all: perhaps the real issue here is that what is needed is an

inclined plane. In other words, how can the digital preservation community consider

alternatives that perhaps require something radically different rather than a rebuilding or
recasting of what is already existent? Akrich’s work on the deployment of technologies

touches on this in speaking to the ways in which what is actually needed by the group who
will be primarily working with the technology is not always what is created by the
designers. She talks about this through the language of scripts, examining what is
57

inscripted in new technologies and how these scripts play out or fail to do so upon

deployment. Akrich’s work comes from the sociological arena of actor-network theorists,
and it is easy to cast OAIS’ deployment in the language of this school of thought. In fact,

OAIS might be something of a black box—something that is quite present, used often, but

whose inner workings as a sociotechnical system are poorly understood or largely ignored.

Black boxes are a process of closing off parts of a sociotechnical network, but this process is
always a negotiation and never complete, like Law’s concept of durability (Kaghan and

Bowker, 2001). This type of on-going negotiation is typified in the continual redeployment
of the OAIS standards through new standards and industry tools. For example, the ISO

16363 standard for auditing repositories based on trustworthiness is built explicitly on

OAIS; so too is the popular, off-the-shelf tool Archivematica. The original creators of OAIS

have explicit interests in these, and in the case of ISO 16363, authors can be seen working
on both projects. However, in a bid to be cautious about the over-use and deterministic

employment of the term black box (Hamilton, 2015), perhaps another term one might use
from this same body of literature is punctualization. That is, OAIS masks itself as a single
entity, a non-human object, simply a reference model, when in fact it is a heterogeneous
network comprised of a number of actors which can be human, organizational, and

technological. To present itself this way is a purposeful strategy to increase its own power
in relationship to other actors, other institutions, objects, architectures, peoples, and

schools of thought about the general subject of preservation. In its resistive struggle to
maintain a stable position, strategic moves like the creation of attendant standards for
ingest and audits or partnerships with (relatively) easy-to-use open-source asset

management tools like Archivematica introduce OAIS into new networks while helping to
58

solidify its position and maintain a considerable amount of power as an utterly obligatory
passage point in the shifting network of the world of preservation, and the other

macrosocial networks of which this is a part. Like Foucauldian discourses, these moves

both recreate the object and help to propagate it. These moves happen in both temporal
and spatial ways. OAIS came to prominence at a time when many organizations were

seeking just such a system for purposes of regulation, standardization, and control. Its

emergence at this particular point in time makes it hard to have conversations about digital
preservation where it does not creep in: it constitutes the very lingua franca of the field. Its

spatial mobility can be seen in its creation at the global center—the US and Washington, DC
specifically, and its subsequent spread to global peripheries, laid out in the literature in the
numerous case studies about its deployment in Asia, Eastern Europe, Australia, Latin

America, and Africa. As is the case when working within a very pervasive system, it is hard

to envision alternatives; in this case, an alterative to OAIS would mark a very real paradigm

shift. What would alternatives look like? Could they be tools to eschew some of the need for
control in ways that encourage more open and transparent processes? This is a fairly

radical consideration to make, because the inclined plane, as opposed to the wheel, might
require practitioners to reconsider the commonly held standard goals of preservation in
favor of less straightforward understandings of what needs to be preserved and how.

Rather than making a new standard that advocates control and normalization, the shift

might be in changes to expectations in the direction of something purposefully messier and
seamful. This calls to mind the work of Drucker (2013), who specifically notes that the
difficulty in changing how we think about interface design is that the very dominant

vocabulary comes from the engineering community; in much the same way, we can see
59

how the dominant vocabulary in preservation given to us by OAIS and its creators at CCSDS
make it difficult to understand what a humanist version of preservation might look like. It
is perhaps interesting to note that the interviewee who had to most to say on this subject

decried the lack of alternatives and had many possible preservation futures to suggest was
an engineer, not a humanist. Drucker’s work on performative materiality suggests a
limitation to OAIS that has yet to be explored: how to document and thus preserve

performativity. While there is a solid body of literature about performance preservation 21,
preserving the performativity of digital materials (or interfaces) is a challenge, something
that I would argue requires the documentation of data that archives in general are not
accustomed to collecting. It is not something that OAIS treats directly, and indeed is
something that I am convinced is not adequately dealt with by the alternatives to

significant properties proposed by some of the OAIS creators (Giaretta et al 2009).

It is necessary to keep the humanist focus at the forefront of this investigation.

Theories like actor network theory really focus on scientific communities (Bowker and

Star, 1998). While I do not make the claims that digital preservation is a science, this type
of discourse is popular in the general meta-disciplines where I locate the sub-field digital

preservation: library science, information science, and archival science. Even if this is not
language that is commonly used, “preservation science” being uncommon, I suggest that
this is a background assumption in the sub-field. As is the case with digital preservation

In fact, this is something the creators of OAIS are quite keen on. In literature and in
interviews, they showed an eagerness to engage with interactive dance/music/art
performances, such as dances that had digital technology elements and accompanying
music elements. There is a ready admission to not fully understanding such work on the
part of the authors: this serves their point even more, which is to demonstrate the
flexibility or transferability of OAIS to contexts as far flung from science data as possible.
21

60

more broadly, OAIS itself comes from scientists: data and natural scientists as well as

library, information, and archival science specialists. This assumption can be seen in the

appeals to notions of neutrality and naturalness inherent in discourse around what makes
a digital repository or archive trustworthy. Digital preservation seeks to place itself, as a
discipline or set of practices, outside of discourse, as demonstrated by a reviewer who

stated that digital curation audiences would be interested in the institutional findings of a
project about OAIS and not critical studies that explore Foucauldian discourse and

constructions of power. This explains, in part, the quantitative bent of the existing OAIS
research.

2.5 Theoretical Frames of Analysis

Under the aegis of locating discourses, I asked a number of questions about my data

throughout the coding process and after I had coded and grouped nodes and responses.
Some of these questions were mentioned previously in Chapter 1:


What about OAIS incites variance of use and approach, beyond the changes that
obviously come from the variety of institutional settings?




What does this say about the practice of digital preservation?

And, finally, what do these struggles indicate about what practitioners are trying to
do when they have to “do” digital preservation?

Additionally, I borrow from the work of Dean (1999, page 32) in asking of my data:


What forms of person, self, and identity are presupposed by different practices and
what sorts of transformations do these practices seek?



What statuses, capacities, attributes, and orientations are assumed of those who
exercise authority and those who are to be governed?
61



What forms of conduct are expected of them? What duties and rights do they have?
How are these capacities and attributes to be fostered? How are these duties

enforced and rights ensured? How are certain aspects of conduct problematized?
How are they then to be reformed?


How are certain individuals and populations made to identify with certain groups, to
become virtuous and active citizens, and so on?

These questions are aimed at eliciting the discourses that exist within the realm of digital

preservation work, and how these vary among people with different statuses and projects.

Through these questions, I aim to locate and investigate the role of existing discourses that
come from the various fields of expertise that combine to create a digital preservation

profession; I also look for new discourses that arise when traditional archival and memory
work go digital.

The type of discourse analysis I use is inspired by the work of Michel Foucault and

focuses on how power works and how it does what it does (Barrett, 1991). This type of

discourse analysis examines the material practices of institutions via the collected verbal

and written texts (Rose, 2011). I look to find discourses that are not formed by individuals,
but are rather socially constructed by interactions with individuals, institutions, and

technologies. “Socially constituted forms of discursive power include constructions of
difference and authority, blame, accountability, how it categorizes particularities”

(Fairclough, 2010), and I investigate the organizing impulses behind OAIS, the politics of

particular institutional deployments, and the role of authority it invests through this lens.

This type of discourse analysis focuses on the production processes and uses of objects like

62

OAIS, and thus this method acts as a complement to the investigation of scripts that focuses
on the object itself via an understanding of the processes and uses.

My data collection approach, multi-site interviews, provides a broad survey across

institution types and geographical locations. Because preservation work is informed by so
many different disciplines and areas of professional practice, I examine the role of existing
discourses of archives and the interplay of these with the introduction of digital

technologies in memory institutions with a focus on the work that OAIS does in this space.

Discourse is “a coherent pattern of statements across a range of archives and sites” (Green,
1990). Part of the power discourses have in addition to rhetorical strategies and claims to
truth comes from their institutional location (Fairclough, 2010). This might refer to the

institutional location of OAIS within CCSDS and ISO; to its use in particular institutions; and
further to particular locations or segments within institutions. This allows me to locate

trends that enable the construction of an understanding of discourse as it is constructed
around digital preservation as a practice or meta-sub-discipline. The broad survey of

locations and institutions helps paint a better picture of the discourses as manifested
within a number of Archives.

In the Introduction, I noted that I often refer to OAIS as a technology. It is from the

Foucauldian analytic framework that I borrow the notion of technology to refer to the OAIS
reference model. While OAIS is a reference model and therefore not a concrete piece of

technology, as is pointed out by users and authors, I refer to it using this term throughout

the dissertation. This term refers to particular use where technologies refer to techniques
of power/knowledge that are “diffuse, rarely formulated in systematic discourse, made of

bits and pieces” (Foucault in Rose, 2011). This echoes the piecemeal construction of digital
63

preservation as a profession and discipline as well as the heterogeneous creation and use
of OAIS more specifically. Further, it centers the idea that memory institutions especially

provide a setting for “works of culture [that] also functions as a technological environment
which allowed cultural artefacts to be refashioned in ways that would facilitate their

deployment for new purposes as part of governmental programmes aimed at reshaping
general norms of social behavior” (Bennet, 1995, page 6). This ties in part to Foucault’s

later work on governmentality and the ways in which techniques of government can be
enacted through cultural programs; this lens become useful in understanding the

difference between the adoption of OAIS in Europe in contrast with the United States. I
argue that politics and programs to foster a centralized pan-European identity that

encompasses the heterogeneity of local populations plays into the literal adoption of OAIS
and the push for de jure audit practices.
3.4.2.2 Akrich and Scripts

The use of discourse analysis enables the exploration of the material institutional

politics of OAIS’ deployment in a variety of settings. I use the work of Madeleine Akrich to
examine what values are contained with OAIS itself so that I can examine the role these

play in these institutional politics. Inscription is the process by which the authors of OAIS,

for example, imbued their technology with assumptions and values. Its subsequent spread
and adoption in heterogeneous locations provide spaces of tension that expose the seams

in the object itself, rendering these scripts visible and allowing me as a scholar to de-scribe

what has been packed into OAIS. Akrich and Latour define scripts and the various modes in
which they are created, read, and otherwise discerned as follows:

64

Script, description, inscription, or transcription: The aim of the academic written
analysis of a setting is to put on paper the text of what the various actors in the
setting are doing to one another; the de-scription, usually by the analyst, is the

opposite movement of the in-scription by the engineer, inventor, manufacturer, or

designer (or scribe, or scripter to use Barthes’s neologism); for instance, the heavy

keys of hotels are de-scribed by the following text DO NOT FORGET TO BRING THE
KEYS BACK TO THE FRONT DESK, the in-scription being: TRANSLATE the message
above by HEAVY WEIGHTS ATTACHED TO KEYS TO FORCE CLIENTS TO BE

REMINDED TO BRING BACK THE KEYS TO THE FRONT DESK. The de-scription is

possible only if some extraordinary event – a crisis—modifies the direction of the

translation from things back to words and allows the analyst to trace the movement
from words to things. These events are usually the following: the exotic or the

pedagogic positions (we are faced with a new or foreign setup); the breakdown
situation (there is a failure that reveals the inner working of the setup); the

historical situation (either reconstructed by the analyst through archives, observed
in real time by the sociologist, or imagined through a thought experiment by the
philosopher); and finally the deliberative experimental breaching (either at the
individual or collective level). No description of a setting is possible or even

thinkable without the mediation of a trial; without a trial and a crisis we cannot
even decide if there is a setting or not and still less how many parts it contains
(Akrich and Latour, 1992, pages 259-260).

I find this method of analysis to be an appropriate complement to Foucauldian discourse
analysis and generally applicable to this research for a number of reasons. Discourse
65

analysis aims to trace exchanges of power. Within the realm of memory in particular,

power is what enables allocation of resources and values: quite simply, what is preserved is
what is valued by those in power. Akrich’s language of scripts is precisely a method by
which analysts and academic researchers examine what is in-scribed into a new
technology; in other words, what values are written into OAIS by its authors:

...when technologists define the characteristics of their objects, they necessarily

make hypotheses about the entities that make up the world into which the object is
to be inserted. Designers thus define actors with specific tastes, competences,
motives, aspirations, political prejudices, and the rest, and they assume that

morality, technology, science, and economy will evolve in particular ways. A large

part of the work of innovators is "inscribing" this vision of (or prediction about) the
work in the technical content of the new object. (Akrich, 1992, pages 207-208)

Akrich later names part of this process the I-methodology, to indicate that designers often
base their assumptions about values, capabilities, status and general subjectivities of end

users on themselves (Akrich, 1995)22. They constitute a Designated Community for a new

technology that is filled with variants of themselves, to use language I will discuss in depth

later. As noted in the definition of scripts, a de-scription exercise can only follow a trial and
a crisis: that is to say, I as an academic am only able to look for scripts in OAIS if there is a

mismatch at some juncture that renders an object seamful (Sherratt, 2015). If no such crisis
occurs, then the technology remains seamless and such analysis cannot take place. The

To be clear, as this is often misunderstood, the I-methodology is not a method that
designers purposefully apply nor is it something Akrich advocates for. It is to describe an
often unconscious practice that explains the frequent mismatch between development and
reception of ‘technologies’.
22

66

ability to look for scripts presupposes the tension that I hypothesize as the crux of this

dissertation: as stated earlier, mainly that OAIS is a source of tension in the spaces where it
is adopted locally and generally within digital preservation as a growing profession and

meta-sub-discipline. It is this crisis that results from the multiple readings of OAIS as an
object and technology that results in its heterogeneous adoption and the loss of the

univocal authority on the part of the authors of OAIS. Per Derrida, these multiple readings

allow for deconstruction which “…counters… the authority of the author by focusing on the
material aspect of signs inscribed on pages… such inscription leaves language open to
multiple meaning, that spacing of traces differs and displaces meaning away from the

author, that the linear form of the book… are open to close reading…works by exclusions,
supplements, and marginalizations which may be reintroduced in a subversive reading…

Deconstruction attempts to destabilize the march of univocal meaning in written texts by

unlocking the logic of difference that it hides.” (Poster, 2004, page 406). These are precisely
the scripts I seek to find in the ways in which practitioners and scholars use and
characterize OAIS.
2.6 Summary

In this chapter, I have reviewed literature about OAIS; literature about archives in

the era of the digital; and the relation of literature about sociotechnical systems to the
project of this dissertation. The primary value in these bodies of literature is their

intersection. This work takes OAIS as a punctualization of a network, and this concept is

important to avoid statements that seem to ascribe thought processes and sentience to a
document while acknowledging that there is intent behind OAIS and that it yields a

considerable amount of power even as a paper or digital document. Recent work in the
67

field of archives to address long-standing politics of exclusion ground an understanding of

the work that OAIS does, as it both supports existing archival discourses while challenging
others.

Literature about OAIS reveals the pervasiveness of the standard and its importance

for the growth of digital preservation as a sub-discipline of information work. It

simultaneously demonstrates the need for research applying a critical lens to its mass

adoption in ways that have already happened for other standards. It is within this context
that I analyze the interview data to understand what OAIS means to the practitioners and
scholars I interviewed for this project.

68

CHAPTER 3
Introduction

METHODS

In this chapter, I describe my research approach and justify its appropriateness in

reference to the research questions and my own epistemological leanings. I offer three

justifications of my process in the purpose statement. Firstly, I explain what can be gained
by semi-structured interviews for answering the research questions. Secondly, in light of
the literature in the previous chapter, I speak about why I chose this line of inquiry.
Thirdly, I offer a justification for my focus on practitioners in cultural heritage.

I also describe the data collection process as well as information about my interview

subjects and the places where I encountered them. Next, I outline my analytic methodology

and the theoretical frameworks I used to understand my findings. I used content analysis to
examine the trends within the codes I applied to the interview transcripts and additional
documents. Two complementary theoretical frameworks enable the exploration of two

aspects of the data in relation to my research questions: I employ Foucauldian discourse

analysis to examine institutional and professional politics and exchanges of power within
the realm of digital memory preservation; and I use Akrich’s language of scripts to

understand the values written into OAIS and how they play out in these institutional

contexts when OAIS gets unpacked. Finally, I discuss some limitations to both the methods
and the project more generally.
3.1 Research Questions

The two central questions underpinning this research are:

69

(1) What values are contained within the Open Archival Information System (OAIS)
reference model and what methods or practices are prescribed by it?

(2) In what ways has the adoption of this model as an organizational system for the
preservation of digital content in library, archive, and museum spaces served to

challenge or reproduce the hierarchies and discourses of traditional archives and
memory institutions?

I argue in this dissertation that OAIS serves as a site of tension for the multiple audiences
who play a role in the creation of digital archives and the general sub-discipline of digital

preservation. One site of tension arises precisely because the authors of OAIS inscribed the
model with values inherent to their own professional practices. While its creation was an
open process compared to other standards developed by CCSDS, it was still driven by the
space science community and took place in a very elite, first world and predominantly

North American context. Yet, it is simultaneously deployed in a variety of locations where

the local values and epistemologies may come into conflict with those inscribed in the OAIS
reference model.

Because of the hybrid and meta nature of digital preservation as a sub-discipline of

information sciences, it is informed by the dominant discourse in all of the fields from

which it borrows. Additionally, this participation is a space for constituting new discourses
about the role of technology in memory practices and the role of the memory institution in
the digital era. In this case, discourse refers to a coherent pattern of statements across a

range of sites (Green, 1990) that has the power to produce the things which it purports to
be describing (Rose, 2011). As such, this research examines how the actual use of OAIS in

70

the field speaks to existing discourses and the role it plays in the creation of new ones
particular to the evolving profession of digital preservation.
3.2 Collection Methodology

These research questions presume two spaces of analysis: understanding the use of

OAIS in the field and understanding the values and discourses implicated by this use. In

order to investigate these questions, this research project involved two lines of inquiry: an
analysis of semi-structured interviews with a variety of practitioners and scholars who
have come into contact with OAIS and of the OAIS reference model itself as a boundary

object and sociotechnical system. The method of data collection, which I describe in detail
in section 3.2.2, focused primarily on semi-structured interviews with people who

encounter OAIS in their professional activities. Through the interviews with practitioners, I
can assess the role that OAIS plays in their profession; examining the crises identified by
interview participants in concert with a close reading of the documentation about the

object itself allows me to examine the values contained within the model itself as well as
the values attached to it by users when it gets deployed.
3.2.1 Purpose Statement

In this section, I offer a three-part justification of my research methods: why semi-

structured; why this kind of analysis; and why the focus on cultural heritage. I argue that

there is a tension between the network of technologies, standards, and human/institutional
actors that make up the sociotechnical network that is indicated by the colloquial use of the
term OAIS; the intentionality or scripts of the design; and its real-world uses. By comparing
interviews about how OAIS has been implemented and literature about OAIS, digital

archival practice, and sociotechnical systems, I can understand the values contained within
71

the object itself and how these values play out when the object is used in memory practice.
In the previous chapter, this dissertation provided a meta-analysis of the literature that

suggested the tension incurred by OAIS and its various implementations. This tension also
manifests in the ways in which the reference model is formally described in

documentation; by practitioners who have learned about its use for work; and the ways in

which it actually functions in practice. This is occasionally described explicitly in literature,
where people find that OAIS does not neatly serve an organization’s functions. However,

these tensions are not often legible even to the authors of the literature. Instead, they often
describe the formal terms of OAIS, and in describing their deployment reveal the spaces of
friction that come from applying the model. To that end, a meta-analysis of the literature

allows us to see tensions in what otherwise appear to be purely descriptive explainers of
local implementations.

Second, semi-structured interviews confirm the existence of these tensions between

what authors intend the model to do, what practitioners feel it should do, and what they
actually do with it. This is present, albeit indirectly, in the existing literature. This

dissertation aims to make these tensions explicit. In cultural heritage and libraries, these

differences are particularly apparent. Describing objects with very large and diverse user

communities or complex media objects that reference outside materials are difficult within
the current iteration of the model 23. Articles with titles like “Beyond OAIS” (Nicholson and
I use this phrasing for a number of reasons. Firstly, because OAIS must continually
undergo revisions as long as it is an ISO standard; it was last revised in 2012 and is
currently undergoing revisions to be formalized in 2017. Second, because I do not believe
that there is something fundamental to the core of the model that makes it
incommensurable with solutions for preserving things like distributed content. There are
two aspects to this: firstly, it is possible that the model itself can be updated to handle this
content; secondly, it is also possible to build new standards or industry protocols that sit
23

72

Dobreva, 2009) suggest the struggles that cultural heritage institutions face. This research
project continues this line of inquiry by seeking out the situated stories of users. In asking

interview participants to characterize OAIS, the tensions between the formal model and its
application come to light. In order to understand the implications of its ubiquitous use in

preservation, I use interviews as a data collection method in order to find out how people

characterize OAIS and their relationship to it in order to understand what OAIS does within
the networks constructed around it.

I focused the semi-structured interviews on institutions and researchers working in

the realm of cultural heritage. This choice stems in part from my own previous work and
research experience in the area of film, art, and video games. My work on the Preserving
Virtual Worlds II (PVWII) grant served as an inspiration for this dissertation: while

exploring significant properties of video games, the situatedness of significance became
very apparent (Hedstrom and Lee, 2002). One of the challenges in documenting

significance for preservation is that the social construction of significance means that what
is most important about a game is as likely to be something external to the code of the

digital object as it is to be imbricated in the object itself. This is where the difficulty for
preservation arises: what needs to be preserved is not a particular instantiation or a
particular object, but a larger work24 (IFLA, 1998; Tillett, 2003). This work must be

atop OAIS that might address issues like vast Designated Communities and distributed
content. The particular tensions around these two issues will be discussed in chapters 4
and 5 respectively.
24 I use this term in the sense it is employed by Functional Requirements for Bibliographic
Records (FRBR). The FRBR group 1 entities are, hierarchically:
 Work: a "distinct intellectual or artistic creation."
 Expression: "the specific intellectual or artistic form that a work takes each time it is
'realized.'"
73

represented within a digital archive as a digital object or collection of objects, which in turn
must be artificially bounded because what fits within the broad notion of work is fluid and
changing. With boundaries, it becomes possible to pick an array of discrete objects that
serve as a representation and preserve these, a process and view of what digital

preservation means that is not currently standard. The field still struggles with some forms
of basic bit-level preservation; the notion of preserving a collection of items to represent a
work is on an entirely new scale of difficulty. This type of preservation activity would

include the preservation of digital objects like the code as well as documenting other items,
such as information about the social and technical context of a specific time period

embodied in existing documents, or in purposefully created documentation about the
Knowledge Base of a particular set of users. Cultural heritage institutions are thus an

exemplar of the tensions between OAIS standards and implementation and the larger

cultural context in which they operate given the complexity of their audiences and digital
objects.

An investigation of the role OAIS does or could play in the growth of preservation

practice to adequately address these issues does not lend itself to quantitative methods.

Digital preservation, as a field and in its literature, acknowledges the need to account for
the significant properties of an object as part of preservation practice, while

simultaneously acknowledging that it has not yet found a way to address these issues



Manifestation: "the physical embodiment of an expression of a work. As an entity,
manifestation represents all the physical objects that bear the same characteristics,
in respect to both intellectual content and physical form."
Item: "a single exemplar of a manifestation. The entity defined as item is a concrete
entity."

74

(McDonough et al, 2010; Webb, Pearson, and Koerbin, 2013). Key here is that, within the
profession, there are no agreed upon manual methods for selecting and bounding the
content to comprise complicated Information Packages that ensure on-going

manifestations of the most significant properties. Because this kind of consensus has not

yet been agreed upon, there are likewise no machine-actionable methods for creating this
content as of the writing of this dissertation.

Rather, given the nascent stage of this part of the sub-discipline, it is necessary to

gain a clearer picture of the situation from within which each participant expressed these
experiences and views. Since cultural heritage objects are inherently socially constructed
and a product of a particular place and time, so must their preservation be.
3.2.2 Semi-Structured Interviews

Semi-structured interviews enable me to garner information about the situation and

context within which the participants labor. A qualitative approach allows for the mutual
construction of meaning between the interview and interviewee. Because it was my

intention at the outset to interview participants with varied backgrounds and experiences,
a rigid interview schedule did not make sense for this project. Rather, the levels of

experience differed from participant to participant such that while I was able to ask

questions along similar topics in most cases, specific questions and phrasing needed to be

adapted to each interview. The interview process was very iterative: if I noticed a trend in
previous interviews, I incorporated questions about these in future interviews in addition
to the general topics common to all interviews.

This variance among participants has it benefits, and there were also ways in which

this entailed more work on my part as a researcher. Madison (2005) points out that the
75

more precise the questions in the interview process, the more concise the data will be and
that codes for later analysis will flow in a more obvious manner. For this research project,

it was important to balance a desire for simplicity on one end with the recognition that the

varied experiences and roles fulfilled by the subjects meant that the questions could not be
as detailed and specific at the outset as they might be when interviewing a group of

subjects with more homogenous experiences and thus, perhaps, more homogenous
responses.

The topical interviews I engaged in with subjects encompassed elements of both an

oral history, or the recounting of the emergence of OAIS and what that meant for

participants’ practice/profession/industry, as well as personal narratives, or their

individual expressions and perspective on OAIS, their experiences with it, and points of

view. The oral history component is important because I am looking for information that is
at the intersection of personal subjectivity and a particular place and moment in time
(Madison, 2005); this is important for locating OAIS within the general landscape of
preservation discourse, particularly when looking at how interview participants

characterize OAIS itself. This work effectively classifies OAIS, a task which necessarily

involves spatial and temporal elements (Bowker and Star, 1998). Within the interviews, my
focus was not about what happened or happens, and indeed such information is largely

captured by the existing literature about OAIS. Instead, the focus was on the how and why:
not “what are you doing”, but rather “why do you do it that way”, for example.
3.3 Specifics of the Data Collection Activities

I conducted semi-structured interviews, the purpose of which was to get

participants to examine how implementation of OAIS in their particular institution is
76

connected to the way they practice. In total, I conducted 19 interviews and spoke with 28
different individuals, 20 based in the U.S. and seven in Europe. The discrepancy between
the number of interviews and interview subjects occurs because I interviewed some

subjects together. Indeed, where possible I tried to conduct interviews with multiple

people at the same time as I found the information garnered from these types of interviews
to be the most enlightening: when people spoke to their colleagues or appended my
questions with questions of their own, it yielded rich data.
3.3.1 Participants

In choosing interview participants, I looked at a number of criteria. My prior

experiences speaking with practitioners who, anecdotally, expressed frustrations with

OAIS that they identified as stemming from its origins, combined with findings from the
literature and the nature of my previous work led me to concentrate my interviews on

those working in the cultural heritage and library sectors. While I began with a cultural

heritage focus, I also aimed my net broadly to capture a variety of different perspectives. I

wanted to speak with users in both Western Europe and the US, because these are the two
geographical sites that figured most prominently in its creation and that feature most
prominently in the literature about OAIS deployment 25. I also hoped to capture the

experiences of people across the sociotechnical networks that form around OAIS. This

meant talking to people who work specifically with the model itself such as technology and
research personnel in large institutions; founding digital project managers in smaller

I overlook here the obvious privileging that allows European and US institutions to
engage in pricey preservation projects and the production of academic literature about
these endeavors.
25

77

organizations; and digital project managers in paper organizations making the gradual shift
to digital work. I also intentionally spoke with people who were more tangentially aware of
OAIS, those working in technology and systems support roles who perhaps have heard of
OAIS but are not trained in library or archival science and thus are aware only of the
functions of the model for which they are responsible.

The final group of interview participants is the worker who perhaps is not aware of

OAIS at all but is required to engage in digital preservation work in an institution that is
using OAIS. In my field work, these tended to be traditional archivists and catalogers at
large, long-standing institutions who were required to adapt to the digital changes

occurring in their organizations. Their familiarity with OAIS would vary: some people I

spoke with had never even heard of OAIS, despite their organizations being leaders in its
deployment and the fact that they headed major departments. Their impressions of the
ways in which “the digital” has impacted their profession is key to understanding the

sociotechnical implications of the ubiquity of OAIS, even if they cannot directly characterize
the object and even if these interviews required a very different set of questions than those
posed to the other interview participants. In all phases of the research, particularly the last
phase, I had to consider that the roles of participants were sufficiently varied such that
OAIS did not function as a known boundary object.

The interviews took place in three phases, and the participants in each are

described in brief below.

Phase 1: This was the first round of interviews conducted. It followed the most

scripted pattern in comparison to other interviews as the OAIS experiences among these
participants were fairly homogenous. This phase was time-limited based on travel
78

constraints. The interviews took place in a Western European country that has been

actively involved in the construction of OAIS and its attendant standards like ISO 16363

since the late 1990s. This participation was reported by the participants themselves and
confirmed by a review of OAIS literature. I began with participants in an audiovisual

archive working in the office of information and research and development. Through

recommendations, I spoke with participants at a national library and a center that deals

primarily with performance art. All three institutions are tasked with its preservation by
the state. In the national library, the interview subject was the head of the research

department. Due to the small size of the performing arts organization, the participant there
was in an administrative role and wore many hats. The three organizations were located in
three different cities, but had considerable communication between them. All three sites
were aware of the work of the others, and all participated in state-wide and European

Union-wide preservation initiatives among other shared projects. Of the five interviews
conducted for this dataset, four were audio recorded. The fifth was not recorded as the
interview subject opted not to sign the consent form until after our conversation had
concluded; instead I took notes.

Phase 2: This phase follows the ISO accreditation of a new standard related to OAIS

in 2014, the ISO 16919 standard that certifies auditors to conduct ISO 16363 audits for
trustworthy repository status. As this standard was built on the OAIS model very

intentionally, many of those involved in its creation were also involved in the creation and
revisions of OAIS. I attended a course related to ISO 16919 and ISO 16363, and over the

course of one week attended sessions about digital preservation standards from about 8am
to 5pm each day. During the course of the training, I was able to speak with the instructors
79

about the standards and ask them questions about OAIS and their experiences with it. The
instructors were predominantly from Europe; one was based in the US. Three came from
space science and one from state archives. This perspectival difference was noticeable in

the data collected. Part of the data stemming from this phase of the research includes the
instructional materials distributed to participants in the course—the content analysis of
this dataset includes these materials as much as the conversations. Unlike the other two
datasets, these conversations were not audio recorded. Instead, I took extensive notes.
Phase 3: The data garnered during this phase is the most varied as it involved

participants across North America over the space of approximately six months according to
the availability of the interviewees. The initial site of investigation was a large private

university. I chose to begin here because of its large audiovisual collection and because it
has archives that are dedicated to the representation of political and non-mainstream

causes. Because this research looks at the ways in which digital archives can resist the

hegemonic discourses in traditional memory institutions through new technologies and

policies of preservation, finding “reflexive archives” was a priority. In this one institution, I
interviewed six different people involved at different levels of preservation. This sub-

sample included three traditional archivists who have had to adapt to working with digital

materials and systems; these archivists were trained in paper and even papyri. One was the
head of a sub-unit at the university, while two others were archivists within different sub-

units. The three other interview participants worked in the department that handles digital
technologies for the university’s collections in libraries and archives. Two worked in more
macro policy and research roles, and a third in much more technical spaces. Five of the
participants had long-standing ties to the organization; one was newly hired.
80

From here, I followed contacts and suggestions to a variety of different institutions. I

can roughly divide these interviews into practitioners and researchers. I spoke with

practitioners in a public library, a private archive, three different private universities and

colleges, a museum, and a consulting firm. I also spoke with science curation researchers as
well as two researchers who work in digital preservation more generally.

After conducting the interviews, I was surprised in practice by the total lack of

awareness of OAIS on the part of some participants. This is not pejorative or a judgment to
say that participants lack knowledge they should have, but rather an interesting finding
that points to a fragmentation and siloing of labor roles involved in preservation work:

institutions known for their adoption of OAIS and their role in digital preservation have
numerous preservation employees who have never even heard the acronym OAIS. For

those working directly with OAIS as part of their daily tasks, many pointed to the common
language stemming from OAIS as part of its appeal. However, there were participants,

particularly those whose work began in and still focused more on analog materials, who
used very different vocabularies and knowledges to describe their relationships to the

technological object in question. The work tying the datasets together into common groups
occurred during the coding and analysis processes (Madison, 2005; Carspecken, 1996;
Lofland and Lofland, 1984).

I sought different classes of interview participants based on their experiences with

OAIS and the types of labor they perform in the preservation environment. Unintentionally,
the types of roles occupied by interview subjects also tended to follow patterns based on

geographical location. Participants in Europe working in preservation-oriented institutions
filled roles such as a research and development (R&D) manager and chief information
81

officers responsible for overseeing OAIS and translating it for the institution and
technology teams. In other words, these are people who are tasked with really

understanding what OAIS is and interpreting it for others. In the US, the interviews covered
a significantly larger number of institution types, but in those instances where people were
working in organizations with a preservation focus, the participants were more likely to be
what I call practitioners, those working generally in the area of digital preservation and

handling a number of day-to-day preservation tasks. I spoke with participants who work
with the model without knowing much about archival or other preservation
theories/sciences.
3.3.1.1 Sampling

This research relied heavily on snowball sampling: I began with just three specific

people or institutions that I wanted to speak to, with the intention that they would tell me
who they thought was doing the most interesting work in the areas of OAIS and cultural

heritage. In each instance, interviewees mentioned additional institutions or individuals

they thought could contribute to the project and I followed each recommendation given to
me. I was able to contact all but three of the people recommended by interview subjects.
It was not my intention at the outset to interview people in the realm of science

data. However, as the interviews progressed, it became clear that many of the participants
assumed that the application of OAIS within science disciplines was easier given that OAIS
originated in space science. They assumed that the creation of a Designated Community in
particular would be a simpler process in science, while describing this process as
challenging if not impossible for themselves. As such, I decided to add interview

participants who work with science data. While these are not meant to be representative—
82

I do not assume that two people speak for all of science—I felt their perspectives were

necessary to round out the data. I especially wanted to ask them the question: is this easier
for you because you are in the sciences? They also brought an interesting curation lens to
the project, as both work in data curation.
3.3.2 Locations

Here, I detail the geographical locations for the interviews. I aimed to capture

perspectives from a variety of locations, and I make these locations explicit here because of
the large role geographical difference played in perspectives about OAIS and the kind of

work being done with it currently. The initial points of contact for interviews varied in their
geographical location, because I purposefully chose one institution in the US and one

institution in Europe. The third planned inquiry took place as part of a training course

about a standard related to OAIS. This training took place in a third country. I conducted
these interviews at different points during the research project; snowball sampling and
geographical separation meant that I conducted a number of additional interviews in
between each of these preliminary contact points.

I set up the first set of interviews via a professional contact at an audiovisual state

archive in Western Europe. I chose both the person and institution for a number of reasons.
The institution is key here, because the nature of cultural heritage preservation in Europe
in particular means that practitioners often work both in a particular institutions and for
many broader preservation projects funded centrally by the European Commission (EC).

The country was selected based on a review of existing OAIS literature and looking at the
early non-science adopters of the model; this one was a particularly early and active

developer and adopter of OAIS. I had only one contact here thanks to a colleague, and
83

through him was put in touch with two other participants working in the same national
institution.

The second set of interviews were conducted with professionals who were involved

in the creation and deployment of OAIS. The opportunity to speak with some of them arose
through a training program for a different digital preservation standard. This opportunity
also occurred in Western Europe and yielded a distinct yet informative body of data from
the OAIS author perspective.

The third planned inquiry took place in the United States. I chose to conduct

interviews in a large East Coast city given the concentration of entities engaged in digital

preservation located in or close to the metropolitan area. I began here with another set of

professional contacts established through my earlier coursework in preservation at a large
research university that engages in digital preservation through its library. In this case, I
started with the institution (the university) and reached out to several contacts spread
throughout branches and departments there.

Where possible, I conducted the interviews at the institution where the interviewee

worked. These site visits are of interest because discourses are occasioned by their

rhetorical strategies and claims to truth, but also by their institutional location; these

institutions act as apparatuses for discourse formation and so are worth studying in and of
themselves (Rose, 2011). While the study of the institutions themselves is not the focus

here, these undoubtedly play a role in the variance of responses from different participants.
I did conduct a number of additional North American interviews via Blackboard

Collaborate in order to speak with participants who were located in places I was unable to
visit.

84

3.3.3 Interviews

Interviews lasted between 30-150 minutes, with the average length being around an

hour. In all cases, I began by asking for consent according the IRB exempt classification of

my research project. In most cases, I followed this by a request to record the conversation.
Audio recordings were subsequently transcribed for analysis.
3.3.3.1 Interview Questions

Given the different levels of familiarity with OAIS on the part of the interview

participants, I did not use a specific interview schedule. I also added questions iteratively:
as themes arose in analysis of audio recordings and transcripts, I specifically asked about

these in subsequent interviews. While the interviews were semi-structured so as to allow

changes that are informed both by subjects’ experiences and the variety of different kinds

of work the subjects do, the questions centered on a similar set of themes. Common topics
of conversation included:

(1) Characterizations of OAIS

(2) Experience working with OAIS and related standards like PAIMAS and TRAC/ISO
16363

(3) Alternatives to OAIS

(4) What is helpful about OAIS

(5) What is constraining about OAIS

(6) Awareness of others using OAIS and the relationship of their institution to others
engaged in digital preservation

85

(7) I concluded all interviews by asking the participant(s) if there were any questions or
themes they thought I would ask about but did not or if there were additional things
they wanted to share with me.

Where it was relevant, I asked practitioners to share copies of internal policy and workflow
documents. As themes about Designated Communities, future iterations of OAIS, and

differences in adoption between the US and Europe emerged, I began asking subsequent

subjects about these themes. In particular, I asked participants to conjecture about causes
of geographical differences in adoption and was explicit that I was asking for conjecture. I

was similarly careful about asking about the future of OAIS and upcoming revisions: I was
explicit that I was inviting participants to speculate and that I wanted their informed
speculation.

As the project progressed, I came into later interviews where subjects knew that I

had been working in this area for some time, and I was solicited to explain certain aspects
of the model for participants. In particular, subjects would say things like “you probably

know more about this than I do” or “I am probably getting this wrong”. Additionally, there

were cases where people spoke erroneously about requirements in OAIS. I did not in any of
these instances “correct”, although I did offer clarification if subjects asked for specific
information.

3.4 Frame of Analysis

The method of analysis involves examining the provided texts, interview transcripts,

OAIS documents, and materials given to me by interviewees. The framework for analyzing
these texts is qualitative and reflects my own epistemological leanings.

86

I use the term “texts” to refer to the objects of analysis in this project. While much of

what I examine are written documents, there are also a number of “verbal texts” in the

form of interviews, which are then rendered into fixed text via transcript. There are many

things that are conveyed in a verbal exchange that cannot be conveyed in a transcript, and
it is a limitation that I predominantly coded transcripts over the audio recordings

themselves. The use of text over speech shifts power away from the speaker to both the
author (me, in this case) and readers:

Compared with speech, writing is a way of storing language, fixing it so that it can be
read by those not directly intended by the author. Writing thus promotes the
transmission of culture from generation to generation, the transformation of

cultural works into monuments and the elevation of authors in authorities. Writing
also fosters the development of critical thinking on the part of the reader: by

stabilizing the words on the page, the reader can reflect upon them, go back to

earlier passages and re-examine links of argument, and accomplish all of this in

isolation without the presence of the author or community exerting any pressure on
the act of interpretation. (Poster, 2004, page 405)

This is important to note because it is yet another incidence of the role my own biases play
in the construction of the work: I had the compounded privilege of selecting and

conducting interviews; overseeing the transcription process; and providing my own
interpretation of these materials through this dissertation.
3.4.1 Coding

I used qualitative, iterative coding (Charmaz, 1983) to begin the analysis of texts. I

coded for specific terms within OAIS, particularly where they appeared frequently in
87

interviews. These included: SIP, AIP, and DIP; Designated Community; Knowledge Base;

and Representation Information. I also coded nodes where people spoke specifically about
their use of and experiences with OAIS, including nodes about characterizations of OAIS;

descriptions of institutional deployment; and explanations about why practitioners chose
to use it. I used a number of in vivo codes where I noticed trends, such as:








THAT OAIS diagram26
Alternatives to OAIS
Services

2012 Revisions

We are/aren’t doing a good job

Bit level preservation is hard enough without extras

Audits (a set that included formal uses of audits, informal uses of audits, TRAC and
ISO 16363, DIN, Nestor, and Data Seal of Approval)



Tools (a set of child nodes that included general mentions of tools used for

implemented preservation work, as well as frequently mentioned specific tools

including, most predominantly, Archivists Toolkit, Archivematica, Islandora, and
FTK)

I also employed codes aimed to collect data for the identification of discourse and scripts,

including themes about cost realities, decision making protocols, constraints, and values. I
I add capitals here to note the emphasis with which numerous participants spoke about
THAT diagram. I do not actually think this always refers to a single canonical diagram
within OAIS: OAIS contains many and there are a few that are used with regularity in
papers or presentations about OAIS and preservation more generally. Many people
complained of seeing “THAT diagram” at too many conferences or asked me to give them a
minute to find “THAT diagram” online to refresh their memory.
26

88

used NVivo coding software to make codes, code sets, and memos on transcripts, OAIS
documents, and e-texts submitted by interview participants.
3.4.2 Analysis

While my method is not ethnography, the types of interviews I conducted were

influenced by the commitments of this type of work. Ethnographic work speaks to my own

epistemological positionality in how I ask questions and how I describe and interpret data.

This positionality is exemplified by the way in which Madison (2005) describes the work of
ethnographers:

As ethnographers, we employ theory at several levels in our analysis: to articular
and identify hidden forces and ambiguities that operate beneath appearances; to
guide judgments and evaluations emanating from our discontent; to direct our
attention to the critical expression within different interpretive communities

relative to their unique symbol systems, customs, and codes; to provide insight and
inspire acts of justice; and to name and analyze what is intuitively felt.

These ‘critical expressions’ are precisely what I seek to elucidate from the interview data,
and these are the types of questions I ask of my data to conduct the analysis. As per

Madison, when I go to these locations and engage with participants within their own

professional spaces and situations, the work is ethnography whether or not I choose to

label it in this way. Through my interpretive standpoint I represent a place and people to
others, and it is worth describing the interview exchanges in this way because it renders

visible how much power in I hold in being allowed to make a public interpretation of the
situations and experiences of others.

89

I include this to highlight the hybrid nature of both the investigative as well as

analytic processes. I combine methods and frameworks that are grounded in similar
epistemological concerns that echo my own: I aim to make meaning in concert with

participants, to understand the power implications of the mass adoption of OAIS and the
role that the values inscripted therein play on the discourses of memory practices in the

digital era. My data collection method was to conduct semi-structured interviews as well as
to collect documents: official documents about OAIS as well as those submitted to me by
participants. This work is qualitative and ethnographic in nature.

In order to analyze these data, I used a single method of analysis informed by two

theoretical frameworks. I iteratively and qualitatively coded texts. This is the primary

analytic method. I engaged with the coded content by asking questions of my data. These
questions are inspired by and grounded in the guiding theoretical frameworks of this

project: Foucauldian discourse analysis and Akrich’s work on scripts in technology. While I
explain these in greater detail below, let me preface this by explaining why I use these two.
My data collection yielded information about OAIS itself as well as the institutional space
within which it operates. As such, I sought complementary methods that allowed me to

investigate these two related but separate concerns. Akrich’s work on scripts provides a
language for speaking about the values put into OAIS by its authors. Discourse analysis

focuses on the institutional materiality of power; in other words, this gives the language to
speak about what happens when those values get unpacked in a variety of institutional
contexts.

3.5 Limitations of the Study

90

OAIS is a very large object, if it can even be seen as a single object. Furthermore, it is

widely adopted, as I have discussed above. As such, any project on the OAIS Reference

Model is, by virtue of taking on such a topic, limited in its scope. I am choosing on purpose
to focus on small parts of it that seem important to the populations I am interviewing.

Additionally, my sample is small, consisting of 28 participants. While I cover a wide

variety of institutions, the data I gathered is not representative of all of the types of

institutions using OAIS. The variety of institutions may also constitute a drawback: because
I looked at so many institution types, I gathered between one and six perspectives from
each, meaning that these results cannot speak generally to the experiences of most

practitioners in each of the areas. Additionally, I spoke to people who are practitioners and
scholars about OAIS. My sample does not include users of OAIS Archives or content
producers, although I introduce the latter in Chapter 5, where I include interviews

conducted with video game programmers. These producers were not interviewed within

the context of OAIS, but nonetheless provide a different perspective. Additional research is
needed to examine the ways in which OAIS transmits discourses to Consumers and the
ways in which it constructs subjects through its activities.

There is also the potential language barrier to consider: seven participants are non-

native English speakers, and while all work frequently in English-speaking institutions and

consortia, there is the possibility of lost meaning. I chose to work with organizations in first
world countries, many of which were large and very well-funded. As such, it is important to
understand that despite the differences between the various interview responses and the
anticipated heterogeneity of responses from subjects, most institutions were constructed
within similarly powerful and mainstream discourses.
91

These experiences may not speak very much to people in other types of institutions

and do not take into account the kinds of discourses found in and around smaller,

alternative organizations; likewise, the preservation practices that may grow from this
research may not be applicable at all types of institutions.

Rose (2005) describes Foucauldian discourse analysis as not inherently reflexive.

She also describes the way Foucault and practitioners of discourse analysis have lacked

elements of reflexivity in the ways in which they separate themselves as authors from their
works and the subjects, and in the manner in which they make claims to truth. She also

asserts how claims to modesty in the analysis process can have an effect of reflexivity; it

will be important to this research to be mindful of any claims to truth or truth making that I
might engage in while describing findings in the interviews and other primary materials on
OAIS. Discourses are also, by their nature, persuasive and self-producing. In engaging in
this space and making the call for reflexive archival projects that recognize their own

discourses, I am of course creating one of my own. This is like the unavoidable catch of

archives themselves: they can never be made neutral, nor would it be beneficial for them to
be. At best, I can continually recognize and identify my own discourses and document

them, rendering my own power centered and visible rather than de-centered and invisible.

Akrich (1992) names some of her own limitations in her work on the de-scription of

technical objects. The size and complexity of an object like OAIS makes an analysis of all

aspects of the entire object all but impossible. Here, I recognize that I am looking at a very
limited piece of the object and that my analysis of the scripts related to it will also be

partial. The analysis here is purposefully limited and does not seek to make sweeping
statements about the entirety of OAIS and all of the institutions that use it.
92

Finally, my own epistemological proclivities constitute a bias that has a strong

bearing on the project. My own post-structuralist leanings are at odds with some of the

more positivist authors of OAIS, and indeed there were times where my questions did not

make sense to them. Because my focus was to trace discourses, power, and scripts, I looked
for these and asked about the themes and terms within OAIS that seemed most promising

for research in this area. For example, while a large portion of the body of this dissertation

examines the term Designated Community and while most of this is drawn from incredibly
rich data on this theme provided by interview subjects, it is important to note that I

solicited this information and it did not often come up organically in a conversation that

was generally about characterizations of and experiences with OAIS. I recognize that this

dissertation is about a particular slice of issues within digital preservation broadly, while
also suggesting that these findings provide a useful heuristic for thinking about the

relationship between the digital and analog eras in archives and futures for preservation
practice.

93

CHAPTER 4

Introduction

AUDIENCES, ARCHIVES, AND GEOGRAPHICAL DIFFERENCE

This dissertation examines the hypothesis that the Open Archival Information

System Reference Model (OAIS) serves as a site of conflict and tension for multiple

audiences in ways that impact preservation work in memory institutions. Implicit in this
hypothesis is the notion that OAIS performs myriad roles in a variety of spaces: within
specific institutions; within the developing practice and professional boundaries of

preservation as a sub-discipline of information science; and within larger spaces of

discourse about preservation, archives, and the practice of collecting and keeping things

over time. The hypothesis also assumes a variety of audiences, including content producers
and users as well as digital preservation practitioners and other workers in institutions
charged with doing preservation. This chapter uses the interview data described in the

previous chapter to investigate these roles and audiences. I discuss three of the themes that
arose during the coding of the interviews and other texts: audiences and OAIS; the

traditional and changing roles of archives; and adoption differences in Europe and the US.
4.1 Discourse, Audience and OAIS

As stated above, the deployment, use, and continual revision of OAIS presuppose a

number of audiences. Audiences identified within the OAIS documentation itself are laid
out in general categories (CCSDS, 2012, page 2-2):

94

Figure 5: OAIS Audiences

According to the OAIS documentation, a Producer is not necessarily a person, but rather a
“role played by those persons or client systems that provide the information to be

preserved. This can include other OAISes or internal OAIS persons or systems” (CCSDS,
2012, page 1-14). The language of “role” here serves to clarify not simply that the actor

could be nonhuman—it could be sensors feeding data into an Archive, for example, or an

institution depositing content—but also that the Archive itself might be the source of the

content. Consumer likewise refers to the “role played by those persons, or client systems,

who interact with OAIS services to find preserved information of interest and to access that
information in detail. This can include other OAISes, as well as internal OAIS persons or

systems” (CCSDS, 2012, page 1-10). Consumers can be client systems rather than human
actors as well.27

These terms have particularly defined meanings within OAIS that differ in

connotation from their popular use, though they aren’t wholly incommensurate. In
interviews, subjects spoke about Producers in ways that connoted external bodies,

In all my research I have never heard anyone describe a Designated Community of
nonhuman actors, although this is explicitly accounted for in the definition of Consumer.
27

95

something akin to donors in the traditional archival sense. Interview subjects frequently

cited donor and user agreements in reference to Producers. As a researcher I am guilty of
this too: when coding interviews, I noted my own tendency to label any discussions of

donors as automatically falling under the node of “Producers.” The interview subjects made
no explicit references to the term as defined in the OAIS glossary. This may be in part
because use of this terminology predates institutional adoption of OAIS.

In interview data, a common theme emerged regarding Producers and producers

qua donors: the people and institutions who donate the bulk of the materials were
described as not caring about preservation. This was common across a number of
institution types, and interviewees levelled this description as a complaint about
broadcasters, twentieth-century artists, scientists, and humanists. In the case of

researchers, the primary concerns as identified by practitioners in preservation and data
curation were the production of scholarship and later access for additional scholarship.

Access was a constant theme: interview participants described framing their preservation

activities as a means to provide access in order to “sell” services to content producers. This
distinction between preservation and access suggests a division that is not necessarily
present in OAIS: while the model is designed to guide preservation activities, virtually
immediate28 access to content within an Archive is consistent with the informational
model. When someone or something can query the system, find material, and get a

response (the DIP), which is based on some kind of content within the Archive (the AIP), it
does not matter whether this exchange happens hours or hundreds of years after ingest;

That is to say, access that seems immediate to a human actor, as opposed to ability of a
computer to keep track of the infinitesimal but real lengths of time it takes to process
queries and kick out a material response.
28

96

time frames are not specified by OAIS. What constitutes “long” is entirely situationally

dependent. One interview participant, a manager of digital preservation at a European

national library, noted that her department voted on a definition for the concept of “long-

term”: “So I tried to, I advised the organization let’s start with policies, then at least we have
starting point what we want to achieve, if we talk about long term preservation, what do

we mean when we call long term, is it five years, 10 years, 100 years? Nobody asked that
when they were collecting paper collections but for digital collections you need to say

something about it, it’s now 100 years, we voted for it, it’s 100 years, at least we have a

figure.” The glossary within OAIS defines long-term as, “A period of time long enough for

there to be concern about the impacts of changing technologies, including support for new
media and data formats, and of a changing Designated Community, on the information

being held in an OAIS. This period extends into the indefinite future” (CCSDS, 2012, page 112). In other words, not a particular time period but subsequent to a series of defined

events, similar to the temporal aspect of the move from SIP to AIP to DIP. The “future” in
this case is a moving target. It is, of necessity, an imaginary unto itself. In the case of an

OAIS and within the context of this thesis, it refers more to a place within the visual of the
model than a time. It is the output or what comes out on the other side. While the

Dissemination Information Package (DIP) must temporally followed the Submission and
Archival Information Packages (SIPs and AIPs), this does not necessarily connote long
length of time: it can happen in a matter of miniscule computer-calculated pieces of

seconds that seem instantaneous to a human interacting with a system. It could also refer
to information being requested from the system at some point in the colloquially defined

future: tomorrow or 100 years from now. During a training course for ISO 16363 and ISO
97

16919 (standards for trustworthiness of digital archives and the standard to certify

auditors to make such designations), an instructor, a European OAIS author with origins in
space science who has also been heavily involved in the periodic updates to OAIS, noted

that “long-term” means long enough for any aspect of an AIP to change. Within the context

of an audit refers, the length of time something must be preserved is concrete: it is the time
it takes an Archive to hand off its content to successor Archive(s). “‘Future” is very
situationally dependent.

Because people use OAIS to think about long time periods when in fact OAIS

describes a set of relational processes that are not time-dependent, it creates a tension.

While many practitioners recognize that OAIS functions do not necessarily refer to long

periods of time, discourses of archives and preservation connote durability and longevity.
Discourse refers to groups of statements that structure the way something is thought
about, which in turn influences the actions taken within the spaces of the discourse.

Popular discourse about the longevity of archives inspires technology companies to use the
“archive” label for older web posts or emails, for example. The social spaces occupied by
popular imaginaries about the role of archives produce the rules and conventions that

govern how we understand the work of archives: practitioners are as much subject to these
discourses as the general public. They understand archive models to connote periods of
time, which overrides their understanding of process and order as described in OAIS
documentation.

Language from interview participants suggest that practitioners within archives are

equally subject to such discourses in the way it becomes difficult to understand the

temporal component (or lack thereof) of processes described by the information model
98

within OAIS. It is hard to think about immediacy within the context of OAIS because it is

employed precisely to guide thinking about keeping things for long periods of time. This

creates a mismatch where one need not necessarily exist: an OAIS-informed system can be
about providing ongoing access to content.

What was common across these discussions was that the Producers are less an

audience for OAIS and more stakeholders in some larger network of which OAIS is a part.

Participants denied using OAIS-specific terminology with donors and content producers. A
technology officer at a European national archive said, for example: “No, I don’t think we

[are] bothering [external Producers] with SIPs and DIPs and [AIPs]… no, it’s [that] we try to
describe in the contracts what’s required of [external Producers], in terms of which

metadata they should deliver and which format they want us to preserve…” Yet while

interview subjects do not use OAIS language with Producers, they simultaneously appeal to
OAIS as a method to “sell” the services of the Archive to Producers. The head of digital

programs at a US private archive explained: “...there is something about [OAIS] being a

standard, and I think it actually helps that it is… science-based… that lends a credibility to it
for our donors.” This latter is not specific to OAIS, of course, but rather is part of larger

discourses about standards adoption or what is purchased by an organization by investing
resources in adopting and implementing a standard, even if only in part. While OAIS is not
“implementable” as a reference model, the process of mapping workflows to it or

employing tools and technologies built atop OAIS purchases a legitimacy with audiences of
the Archive who are not necessarily audiences for the standard itself.

99

The role of Producers is intimately tied to the ingest process and the Ingest

Functional Entity as described by OAIS. 29 In terms of post–OAIS developments, there has

been a strong focus on the ingest function. As per Lee (2005) and Cargill (1997), there have
been strides in the creation of industry standards by information technology providers.

CCSDS created the Producer–Archive Interface–Methodology Abstract Standard (PAIMAS)
to detail relationships between content producers and the deposit archive (CCSDS, 2004).
This standard, ISO 20652, has not seen the same level of adoption as the OAIS reference

model. The technology officer at a European national archive summed up the general ethos
of most of my participants when I asked about the use of PAIMAS or whether any of

CCSDS’s other standards or models were useful to their daily work. The response: “not on

[the] level of [OAIS].” Others were not even aware of the other standards. 30 Yet despite the
fact that ingest is perhaps the best-defined part of OAIS, not because it is necessarily

treated differently within the model itself but because it was the subject of subsequent
developments, interview participants still expressed a desire for more specificity and

guidance about the role of the Producer/producer because these roles are not adequately
described by OAIS. This is true both (and separately) in the sense of dealing with external
content donors and in the sense of acknowledging the fact that sometimes the Archive is

the Producer. Multiple participants spoke about “pre-ingest” work, which they felt was not
“Ingest Functional Entity: The OAIS functional entity that contains the services and
functions that accept Submission Information Packages from Producers, prepares Archival
Information Packages for storage, and ensures that Archival Information Packages and
their supporting Descriptive Information become established within the OAIS.” (CCSDS,
2012, page 1-12)
30 Even among the already narrowed pool of interview participants who were well aware of
the OAIS standard. I did not ask this question of people who self-identified as knowing little
or nothing about OAIS.
29

100

well-defined by OAIS; at one institution, workers developed and named additional

Information Packages specifically to deal the space between existing IPs pre-ingest and the
staging space between SIP and AIP. The technology officer at a European national archive
said: “Yeah, I think the whole part on pre-ingest part, of course, in OAIS you just have

ingest, but we have for [our subject domain] the negotiations with the [donors/producers],
we have sort of defined a pre-ingest phase where you do all the negotiations with your
producers.” This space, so comparably well-defined by CCSDS, was still considered
inadequate by users of OAIS.

The audience for OAIS itself as conceived by practitioners plays an important role in

power negotiations and the status of the Archive and archives more generally. Alan Sekula

(1986) says, “…archives are not neutral; they embody the power inherent in accumulation,
collection and hoarding as well as that power inherent in the command of the lexicon and
rules of a language…” (page 155). The ability of some within an organization to use the
fluent language of digital preservation connotes additional power for the Archive over

Producers and Consumers. Moreover, this exists in relationships between the digital elite
and those who work in related analog spaces within the same organization. Within the

fragmented labor of the organization, for those who do not speak OAIS-informed language
but need to conform their daily activities to fit within digital workflows, there is tension
engendered by non-digital laborers’ need to speak the lingua franca for communication

purposes, their need for status and to be taken seriously by the digital elite, and their desire
to continue with the daily work they have done previously. This desire is not a reticence to

take on new tasks or arbitrary resistance to change. It is also motivated by the commitment
of existing employees to the professional expertise they embodied in an era before “we
101

[were] all digital archivists…” (Owens, 2014). 31 The balance between enrolling existing

participants without deskilling them or stripping away existing professional expertise can

be encapsulated in two quotes from different participants within the same institution. Both
are “traditional” memory practitioners who now have to shape some of their work to cope
with the digital initiatives at the major private US university where they both work. One, a

special collections curator, said: “I have watched my job go from being a working humanist
to basically a soulless bureaucrat, technocrat… It's hard to do, we're expected to become
not just cognizant. We're expected to do it all ourselves.…” The other, a senior special
collections archivist, said:

So, I would say I'm trying to educate myself on those tasks that are really relevant to
me as a supervisor, and a reference archivist, and working with donors. So, I'm only

trying to acquire the knowledge that affects my daily duties, you know what I mean?
… [There is] the often bandied motto: every archivist should be a digital archivist,

which I totally understand, the point of that statement, but when you're managing

the number of people and collections that I am, I cannot have the level of technical
knowledge that [a member of the technology services staff] does.

Both participants express different levels of tension, with varying approaches to the

changes wrought on daily work. But the limited knowledge of both partners about OAIS

was telling: it speaks to whom an organization considers worthy of including within the
Two participants mentioned this interview to me as explaining how they felt about their
role within an organization, and none of them did this in a way that expressed explicit
discomfort with the change in their role and day-to-day work. This speaks to the incredible
diplomatic skill of Sybil Schaefer to enroll participants in digital projects without alienating
them, something that is all the more notable given the stories I heard about alienation from
participants at more than one institution in more than one country.
31

102

official parlance and whom it does not. This inclusion/exclusion places power in the hands
of those who possess fluency of language. It is not just those outside the Archive who are
disempowered by this: the introduction of the digital repository into organizations like

archives and university libraries serves to fragment workers within these institutions, and
the power, status, and funding shifts away from long-standing domain experts such as
subject-specialist documentalists, archivists, and curators to digital services.

Questions of audience are imbricated in a discussion of discourses within the sub-

discipline of digital preservation because of the ways in which discourses produce subjects
(Rose, 2011). The audiences explicitly delineated in the documentation of the model

include the Producers and Consumers, as well as staff within the archives, connoted by the

management block on the diagram at the outset of this chapter. The writing above suggests
where the model places more power and influence. This raises a follow-up question: what
kinds of subjects does OAIS produce, according to the interview data? There are donors,
who are variously described in the interviews as: outside the archive; enthusiastic

participants; bread and butter of organizational activities; frictional partners in the

creation of memory; uneducated about the role of archives and particularly the digital
functions therein; and uninterested in preservation. There are the practitioners

themselves: those who wrote OAIS and continue to evolve it through updates and new,
related standards and tools as well as those who read and write about OAIS. Within an
Archive itself, there are divisions among the engineers and designers and memory

practitioners, particularly those with an analog focus. This manifested in interviews and

exchanges; there is a particular tension even among authors of OAIS from different sides of
this divide as articulated by participants.

103

While more than one participant explained that different approaches and different

difficulties in implementation were not domain-specific—that is to say, there was not a

noticeable difference in working with cultural heritage data over science data within the
realm of digital preservation projects informed by OAIS—some participants noted an
overreliance of memory institution professionals on the OAIS reference model. One

researcher chalked this up to the lack of experience by less-technology- and systems-

educated partners in digital preservation: their lack of knowledge in this area made them
cleave unhelpfully to OAIS. This participant, a Canada-based digital preservation scholar,
said:

In terms of the attitude, I think I find the cultural heritage sector being much more
stuck in the OAIS model than others. And so that might be because it's always

worked so well for cultural heritage, but I actually doubt that. I think it's more

because there is less of an engineering understanding. And the funny thing is—{the

funny} thing maybe about that is that it's not about the know-how to actually design
it.

OAIS conceives of a number of audiences, both for itself as a technology and for the

products its technology has helped wrought. The ability to participate in the OAIS network
through use of its language and an understanding of how its processes were derived

fragments labor into the audiences “in the know” versus those who are relatively outside,

even when some of these outsiders are actually working within the record-keeping spaces
of archives. In the next chapter, I will delve more deeply into yet another conception of

audience: the all-important Designated Community, which is the stand-in for users within
OAIS.

104

4.2 Traditional Role of Archives

OAIS borrows heavily from archival theory, just as the field of digital preservation

does. In trying to cope with the challenges of digital preservation, practitioners and

scholars alike have sought analogies with existing practices of conservation, record-

keeping, and diplomatics: sometimes these analogies are helpful, particularly as archives
have begun to move in more inclusive directions. In other cases, they constrain what

practitioners are able to do with digital technologies. In all cases, borrowing from archival

science means the terminology and foundational concepts come laden with discourses and
scripts of their own which are then incorporated and changed within the digital
preservation environment.

An OAIS is an Archive, albeit in a very particular sense:

An OAIS is an archive, consisting of an organization, which may be part of a

larger organization, of people and systems that has accepted the responsibility
to preserve information and make it available for a Designated Community. It
meets a set of responsibilities as defined in the standard, and this allows an OAIS

archive to be distinguished from other uses of the term “archive.” (Giaretta, 2011,
page 47, emphasis original)

While it may not be an archive or archives in a traditional sense, the use of this language is
purposeful. The authors of OAIS are careful to stake a particular claim such that they are

able to employ this term without having to engage with the field of archival science about
definitions of the profession. The tenets borrowed from general archival theory here are
the notion of a preserving information over time and doing something with that content

such that it remains accessible in some way. There are also explicit assumptions in here,
105

bound to imaginaries about the role of archives. As mentioned earlier, an appeal to archival
terminology connotes longevity of the information, an important move given that the

creation of OAIS comes out of space science which began developing technologies like OAIS
precisely because they became increasingly aware of the ephemeral nature of their digital
content. The European OAIS author with origins in space science mentioned the

importance of trying to hold onto digital intellectual capital. This language also purchases a
reputation associated with imaginaries about archives: archives are supposed to be

neutral, authentic guardians of historical evidence. This discourse dovetails with the largely
positivistic epistemologies of science data. Indeed, one author of OAIS noted that the

authors did not worry very much about authenticity in early versions of the model when

the only content under investigation was science data, as though this type of information

contains inherent authenticity that is conveyed simply by preserving readable content. The
implicit assumption is that this kind of content is also neutral and needs only guarding, not
interpretation. OAIS also appeals to archival language about Provenance as yet another

way to guarantee authenticity. OAIS employs the term Context Information, which means

something akin to “archival bond.” So while OAISes are Archives, they are not necessarily

all archives. By borrowing from this field and history of practice, so too does OAIS borrow

from the dominant discourses of archives, which becomes apparent when OAIS is deployed
in memory institutions in a move which is often concurrent with said institutions having to
make changes to long-existing practices to cope with digital materials.

Though digital technologies may not necessarily result in major changes to memory

practices, new technologies have caused a disruption in existing workflows in many

organizations. Digital content behaves in such a way that it requires archivists to think
106

differently about their daily work. For example, value within an archival tradition is often
based on notions of originality or scarcity: when processing a donated collection,

institutions will deaccession commercial items, particularly those which are readily

available in an open market and those whose intellectual property rights belong to a third
party. The focus is on the rare and the unique. The volume and ubiquity and very

functionality of digital content challenge foundations of value as assessed in this way

(Smith, 2007). There is so much digital stuff, and with search engines like Google finding
random digital detritus with such ease, digital stuff seems ubiquitous. Concepts of

originality are hard to translate to a digital environment: there is no one single canonical

version of a digital document, because every time a file is reopened or sent via email, a new
copy is made. In fact, the work done in digital preservation is fundamentally different from
analog work in the sense that in analog spaces, a discrete object is preserved, while for

digital content, what is preserved is a set of instructions that allow for a recreation of the

digital file. In this way, coping with the digital has resulted in changes in archives where the
labor of official memory making and keeping take place.

The media-archaeological approach aims to deal with both discursive and

nondiscursive elements in constituting nondeterministic narratives of the interactions

between humans and technologies as a way to understand more about the technologies

themselves. In this way, it is a promising method for understanding more about OAIS as a

technology in the Foucauldian sense. The role of archives in constructing historical objects
is bound together with the influence that media and memory technologies like microfilm

and library catalogs have on the content and the ability to understand that content within
an archive (Ernst, 2013). Ernst uses the phrase “expanded archive” to refer to this type of
107

analysis. I suggest that this notion of the expanded archive is something that becomes

possible and even desirable with tools like OAIS, which allow for the documentation of

contextual and interpretive information that has not been the province of archival science

in previous historical moments. This is a disruptive shift in traditional archive practice. For
example, Duranti (2010) explicitly separates medium and message in a presentation about
coping with the “Digital Wild Frontier” as part of the InterPARES project. She defines

document as “recorded information (i.e., information affixed to a medium in an objectified
and syntactic form)” (page 10) as part of what makes a record; she defines medium as a
“necessary part of the technological context, not of the record” (page 11) as part of the

characteristics of a digital record. This language suggests that technologies, systems, and

historical objects are somehow separate concerns, or perhaps concerns at separate spaces
of labor within an archive: it is someone’s job to deal with technology issues, which are a
different set of concerns from those who deal with the actual content.

This type of thinking echoes my earlier findings about the fragmentation of labor in

digital archives. What allows these conceptions of archive to live side by side with the
digital archive is precisely these declinations in terminology: Ernst deals in expanded
archives, OAIS deals in Archives, and Duranti works in a space that might be called

traditional archives. These definitional differences also allow the three things to be put in

conversation with each other, because it creates a space of sufficient difference that allows
for engagement, as opposed to someone simply dismissing an OAIS as not being a “real”
archive. Yet the work of an OAIS-based repository that considers media and message

jointly is a challenge to existing notions of an archive. Representation Information within

an AIP takes the inherently generative practices of archives and dials them up: preserving
108

content in an OAIS archive is an autocatalytic process that continually generates more

content and more work for itself in a way that pales in comparison to the accumulation of
benign neglect that happens in analog settings.

An additional challenge to more traditional archival practice is related to the desire

for sufficient control over archival materials, something that is complicated by the external
dependencies of digital content. At the outset, the ability to gather widely dispersed and
nontraditional documents challenges not only standard collecting practices in many

institutions but even their technological capabilities. In one of her East African case studies,
Seles (2016) describes the way official government business is often transacted over

mobile networks given the relatively ubiquitous access, stability, and intuitiveness of

mobile technologies and networks in places where the availability of computers, consistent

internet, and consistent electricity are not as present. Archives in this region were aware of
such transactions but had no remit or method to obtain this data. A suggestion from the

author was that archives be given the ability to set such a remit, to influence departments
in the way they create and disperse documents such that they are better able to capture
and preserve government records.

This notion of catching material earlier in its lifecycle, of pushing practice upstream,

is a newer one for preservation practice. The example I use with my students is this: in the

past, collectors did not warn sculptors not to carve statues in marble because their weighty
extremities might fall off. Yet this is precisely what happens in many digital preservation

exchanges. While some institutions and some interviewees made it very clear that they do
not make format proscriptions or prescriptions with donors, particularly museums, in

other places administrators were actively exploring solutions to extend the influence of the
109

archive back into production for future ease of ingest, access, and preservation. Entire

projects, like the Preserving Digital Public Television initiative funded by NDIIPP have

operated in this way (Rubin, 2010). Research and technology workers at a national archive
in Europe described the process by which documentalists were being retrained under the
OAIS-informed institutional reorganization as media managers with the job of working
within production spaces as liaisons to aid in ingest processes.

Archives also traditionally exercise considerable control over the reception of the

information that it disseminates. Cvetkovich (2003) says of archives, “The audience for the
story is crucial to its effect…” (page 93), and in the space of the digital archive this takes on
additional weight. In paper archives, access to content is limited: often, to access content,
researchers have to travel to a particular institution and seek permission to work with

materials which are then brought out by an archivist who may monitor the use of materials.
The process is highly controlled so that archives can control the story via their control of
the audience. However, through digital dissemination methods, these situational

constraints can be removed. While requiring authentication of remote users is possible and
even assumed or suggested (E-Ark, 2015), viewing and using materials happens in a much
less-contextualized space when users query Archives from a distance and engage with the
materials from their own homes or offices. This kind of distant interaction lends itself to
more voyeuristic kinds of engagement with archived content. Cvetkovich promotes

feminist interventions that aim to create opacity by encouraging witnessing instead of

voyeurism, where witnessing “… requires a kind of participation on the part of the listener
that is not merely voyeuristic” (page 93). This raises a question: can and should digital

archives police the use of records? This is a question that archives need to answer in the
110

digital era, as the control they have previously exercised over records looks different now.
What makes digital archives different is, in part, the wider or simply more removed
audience.

4.2.1 Knowledge Bases and Traditional Archives

A knowledge base is defined in the OAIS glossary as “[a] set of information,

incorporated by a person or system, that allows that person or system to understand

received information” (CCSDS, 2012, page 1-12). It speaks to the shared understandings of
a particular Designated Community and lightens the preservation load in terms of what
needs to be documented in Information Packages. A common example is language: if all

members of a Designated Community speak English, then a digital text in English need not
come with English grammar, lexicon, and other language tools. If at some point in the

future, the Designated Community comes to speak Spanish largely or entirely, then the

Information Package would need to be changed to contain English-to-Spanish language
assistance, as the Knowledge Base of the Designated Community has changed. OAIS

requires Information Packages to change with time as Knowledge Bases change or at least
require Archives to monitor for such changes, though few of the many implementation
studies available on the application of OAIS in particular organizations touch on the

methods or strategies to document this Knowledge Base or understand when and how it
changes. Additionally, OAIS and OAIS-related audits explicitly do not require formal

documentation of a Designated Community’s Knowledge Base. As such, this is a particularly
difficult concept within OAIS, one that was described as being unexpectedly difficult to

account for during the creation of ISO 16363 and the test audits that were done to vet the

standard. I argue that part of the difficulty here is bound up in the role discourses about the
111

traditional role of archives play in institutions where OAIS is deployed. Elitist and imperial
notions about what work a memory organization does and for whom prohibit the process
of exploring Knowledge Bases and, more pertinently, of expanding the type of work an

archive does to supplement any deficiency between an Information Package and a user,
given what is or is not a part of their Knowledge Base.

The Knowledge Base is supposed to contribute to the understandability of the

digital objects preserved within an Archive. Digital objects are meant to be independently
understandable to members of the Designated Community; what exactly this means is

nebulous and part and parcel of some larger concerns that arise with the use of OAIS. I

begin with an example. While working as a researcher on the Preserving Virtual Worlds II
(PVWII) grant, my primary focus during the game-analysis phase of the work 32 was an

analysis of the video game franchise Carmen Sandiego. Throughout the course of this work,
I was tasked with documenting the content of the game play experience in addition to

technical metadata about a variety of the games within the series in order to investigate
significant properties: I was tasked with understanding what makes Carmen, Carmen.
Among many findings, what made her a special video game heroine was her detailed

backstory, a pioneering idea that came about because one of her creators was a former

Disney animator who brought with him the Disney practice of creating detailed “character
books” that described history and personality traits for main-story characters.

What Carmen would and would not do was largely conceived of during this early

creation process, and this came to have enormous meaning throughout Carmen’s

transmedia journey from 5-¼ floppy disk to television character. She is a product of a
32

PVWII, its phases and deliverables will be detailed further in Chapter 6.
112

particular time and place, and carries signifiers that indicate these things immediately for
those in the know, that is to say a particular Designated Community with a common

Knowledge Base of basic twentieth-century Western history. Among other things, the

character Carmen wears a red coat: as a figure of mayhem and espionage in the 1980s, this
color connotes her background as a vaguely Soviet bad guy à la Russian villainesses from

the Bond franchise and similar popular media sources. This red coat is one of the few ways
in which this affiliation is presented in relationship to the character: her other traits, such
as her name and hair, code her as vaguely Latina, in itself another trope to indicate how

dangerous she is. But the connotation of the red coat is lost when she is transported to a

post–Cold War era; undergraduates, as of the writing of this paper, are too young for this

connotation to have any meaning. Is Carmen’s red coat significant enough that an Archive

should invest in preserving a record of it? For example, should the Context entity within a
Carmen AIP link to an article or an interview with creator Gene Portwood, where these

links between red and Russia are made explicit? In a digital era, the addition of this kind

contextual information is not outside the realm of possibility; it is not even that difficult or

resource-intensive to do. McDonough et al (2010) suggested the following model for an AIP
for video games:

113

Figure 6: Adventure AIP
This mock-up of an OAIS package for the video game Adventure suggests utilizing a couple
outside resources to fulfill requirements for three entities: Data Object, Provenance

Information, and Context Information. Using a model like this would make the red coat of
Carmen Sandiego understandable to a Designated Community of North Americans born
after 1985.

So how could the preservation of Carmen’s red coat work within an OAIS-informed

archive in actual practice? During a session on sustainability auditing, a European OAIS
author who is an archivist at a state archive said:

114

We have so many things in the history of mankind, [it is okay to] lose some bits. 33…
We have preserved a lot, and we lose a lot because otherwise it is impossible.

Preservation is always losing something. In the digital environment you lose less.

You add things! [It is the] opposite issue: we preserve too much! [We] have to have a
balance some way.

This quote suggests that this notion of adding information in Information Packages is a

feature that is made newly easier by digital and networked technologies. Yet this author
also questions whether or not archivists should be preserving this additional contextual

information. This is echoed in a comment made by a manager of digital preservation at a
European national library about the introduction of the PREMIS metadata standard:

…then came PREMIS 2007 and the pressure became bigger to add more metadata
and to think about metadata and in a new system, we can do it now. And we are

thinking about it, but then you have the everything is open now, so people say “oh

oh, we can add lots of things” and other people think “why should we do that,” so we
have lots of discussion. And then, well, it in my opinion you should have the

discussion why are you using it, can you explain why you put that information there
and if you can't find a reason, why should you add it?

On the one hand, I reject the deterministic notion that just because it is possible to do

something, it is desirable to do something. On the other hand, I argue that there is tension

between what it is possible, even desirable, to do with digital technologies and what people
in certain professions are accustomed to doing. Librarians and archivists, for example, are
This statement occasioned looks of consternation and/or reprobation from her fellow
OAIS authors in the room at the time; it is notable that she was the sole archivist and the
other three authors were all in space data.
33

115

in highly codified professions with rich histories that support standards of practice. These
exist in tension with what can be done with a technology like OAIS. This same library
professional above said, in response to my question about Carmen’s red coat:

…yeah well, I did eighteenth-century literature for my studies and went to archives
and libraries and read books and records in the archives and what you explain

about the red coat wasn’t there, I need to find that for myself, so how far do you go
by giving information to your public or what do you expect them to know

themselves, and that’s, well we haven’t discussed this here.… We have some old
material, from the Middle Ages, we have pieces of books, not the book but just

fragments of it, we don't give an explanation. The people who are doing research on
that already know it's a fragment, so I'm not so sure how far you need to go.

A research and development officer at a European national archive described an ongoing

project with Wikipedia that involves the use of the archive’s data and allows for members

of the default Designated Community to “crowdsource” additional descriptive metadata. He
mentions a similar ethos:

They add categories to [articles] so it’s better. It’s really enriching on both sides. We
don’t have a way… [to] bring back that sort of knowledge. Yes. [Capturing and

preserving this crowd sourced data] is something that we could… do. There are

some tools being developed but it’s still a new thing and also it’s a consideration.
Like, do we really need all that knowledge? Is this knowledge that’s beyond the
scope of our media historical expertise?

A digital preservation and curation scholar at a US public university expressed a need for

balance, like the OAIS author/archivist, saying: “And so, I don't know. I think the real design
116

challenge there is figuring out where the sweet spot is for some, you know, sort of initial

knowledge that you can convey without too much additional work that will go a long way,

right?” This suggests that there is the desire to do more with technology, but real concerns
about resources have to be factored into decisions about what to preserve.

Yet this last interview subject also said, tellingly, during the course of the same

interview: “I mean, if somebody is writing a history dissertation in the future, you can't

expect every interpretive element to be handed to them. That's part of what they are trying
to figure out, right?” There are two things at work here. First, there is the lack of standards
or even conventions governing how to go about making boundaries around expanded

context to fill in a Knowledge Base precisely because this is not something archives have
done in the past. The digital preservation and curation scholar at a US public university

said: “So, it's like you look at the conventions…, right? You have a scope and content, you

have a biographical node and things. But it has to have an end to it, right? Otherwise, you

would be explaining every item which is not something that we do, right?” There is the real
anxiety over trying to do too much that is informed by real constraints on resources within
most memory institutions. Yet the second anxiety is bound up with discourses about what
it is exactly that archives are meant to do.

There are two distinct sets of discourses at play here. First, there are clear

discourses about the traditional role of an archive or memory-preserving institution. The
idea is that objects are preserved so that they can be examined and studied by users, but
this is the limit of the role of the archive. The archive, and those who do the labor and

record keeping, are not supposed to engage in what is considered to be the interpretive

work of seeking out and defining the boundaries of contextualizing information. I suggest
117

that this is related to dominant discourses about the neutrality of archives and libraries,

because rendering decision-making processes about which articles to link to within an AIP

inherently means that a practitioner has made the subjective, or perhaps situated, decision
of deciding where the edges of sufficient context lie. The second discourse at play has to do
with “doing all the work” or “giving it all away.” What is interesting in the quotes above is

that both the US university professor and the European state library administrator assume
that those at risk of having too much “handed to them” are researchers in pursuit of the
creation of some imaginary brand-new scholastic production. Such researchers are a

rarified and elite Designated Community: if the basic Information Package at a state library
does not make information independently understandable to a doctoral candidate, for
example, what does this say of the ability of nonacademic audiences to access and,

separately, use this same content? Such an attitude inadvertently perpetuates elitist

practices within memory institutions that limit usability under the umbrella of providing
general access.

In asking the OAIS authors about this particular scenario with Carmen’s coat, the

European OAIS author with origins in space science suggested that there is a difference

between an institution making content independently understandable to all of its users and
presenting the content of the Archive in a way that these users can do “everything with it.”

That is to say, it is sufficient for users to be able to simply view content and know what they
are looking at, even if they cannot participate in it, analyze it, remix it, etc. The example is
easy to see within a science context, befitting this author’s experience: it is sufficient for

researchers to see the resulting tables if this is what the Archive has preserved; the onus is
not on the Archive to provide the user with everything needed to perform the experiment
118

afresh. Another OAIS author, a consultant from the US, gave the analogy of a religious text:

an archive can preserve the textual content of a religious treatise, and when it is presented
in a readable format in the right language to a user, they should be able to read it. He said,
“… [We] need to know ASCII, for example, to be able to read the content. But who really

understands [a religious text]?” The notion of using versus understanding versus “being
able to do everything” with an object is one that is not explicitly defined within OAIS.

Because it is not, it is a space wherein other dominant discourses will come into play, in
this case those from archival and library professions about the traditional role of
practitioners in these professions.

Another discourse bound together with popular conceptions of archives is about

control. Control is an archival discourse as well as part of the discourse about standards

and the purpose of standards. Standardization represents a desire to exert control over a

body of heterogeneous actors—in fact, participants identify this as part of the reason why

they adopt OAIS. OAIS Archives want to participate in this control: adoption is purchase on

a measure of control over whatever industry activities are covered by a standard. The need
for control was expressed explicitly by European interviewees who were aiming,

eventually, for official audits as an internal measure and as required by national and pan-

European formal and informal requirements. This topic was tempered in US environments:
while practitioners there do not mention the word control so explicitly or often, they

simultaneously look to standards like OAIS and audit standards like ISO 16363 as tools for
internal improvement or loosely benchmarking internal processes. 34

Although it should be noted, as pointed out by an interview subject who is a Canadabased digital preservation scholar, that there is nothing specific enough in any of the
standards to act as benchmarks. The authors themselves do not speak in this way, as they
34

119

OAIS borrows some terms and standards of practice from archival science. This

imbues this newer discipline with some of the power vested in archives: simply using this

word connotes longevity, neutrality, control, and trustworthiness. Yet while digital archives
build on the foundations of traditional archives, the technologies that undergird them

simultaneously challenge longstanding practices and beliefs. Apart from the disruption
caused by the changes in workflow wrought by the volume and difficulty of digital

materials, there exist tensions between what archives can do with technologies and self-

conceived notions of the neutral role of the archivist. These discourses, as much as what is

scripted into OAIS itself, are part of what dissuade the use of this technology in any radical
or recuperative fashion.

4.3 European Union and United States

Over the course of this research project, data emerged to suggest that practitioners

in the Europe and the US have different attitudes towards OAIS that are generalizable

based on geographic location. This section examines some of the differences that became
apparent between the two regions; how the participants themselves explain these

differences; and the ways in which the socio-political environment in each place helps
shape responses to OAIS.

My interviews took place largely in the US and Europe. They included participants

from the UK, Italy, the Netherlands, Canada, New Zealand, and the US. Because of travel

requirements, the European interviews happened in a short space of time at the outset of

the project; the North American interviews spanned a period of six months and happened
come from similar backgrounds to the interview participant, who described the reticence
of engineers and systems designers to speak about a specificity which they cannot claim.
120

after the conclusion of the European interviews. I decided to get perspectives from both of
these geographic locations during the design phase of this project. I chose the locations

because the authors of OAIS hail largely from these places and, because of this, institutions
in these places have the longest experience with OAIS. 35 The country where I started my
research in Europe is one of the earliest adopters of OAIS in its national memory

institutions; this was noted by interview participants there and confirmed by a bibliometric
study of existing literature on OAIS, dates of publications, and countries of origin. This

country also has institutions dealing with preservation of a number of different format and
content areas: audiovisual materials, library materials, art materials, web content, and
scholarly data. I did not begin the interview part of this research project with any

preconceived hypothesis about geographical differences in attitudes towards OAIS or

policies/politics of adoption. I also did not pick the sites to function explicitly as geographic
comparisons: instead, I chose interview subjects and locations to cover a variety of roles
played within institutions working on preservation and a variety of levels of maturity in
terms of preservation work and policies.

Yet a noticeable finding in this research was the stark difference between adoption

and attitudes in the US and Europe. These became apparent as soon as I began my Phase 3
interviews in the US. In European interviews, OAIS was either stated to be or could be

assumed to be very central to preservation planning. Institutions built explicit workflows

around it and used custom commercial software that was build atop the OAIS information

model. One interview participant, a manager of digital preservation at a European national
I acknowledge that I have largely left out the Australian contingency here and also
acknowledge the excellent and mature preservation programs they have in place and the
contributions they have made to standards that complement OAIS.
35

121

library, noted that the program her institution uses was used by another national library in
another European country. Three other interview participants at a single institution, a

national archive, explained that their institution decided to reorganize their departments

and processes to map directly to OAIS, so that all departments would now fall under OAIS
functional entities. One of them, technology officer at a European national archive,
explained this process in part:

[For] our reorganization… we have built the new digital archive structure on OAIS
so at the ingest process you have the storage process and data management and
then you have the access process. … [T]he functions of the people working here,
they are really embedded into these processes so but still it’s theory. This

organization will start … and people [will] really change their way of working

because now they are part of the ingest and now they are part of the storage.… I

think also a very important aspect of introducing OAIS in an organization like this
that has been working and archiving for several decennia you need a lot of

communication you really need a lot of, well, knowledge transfer. Otherwise people
will not understand where they are part of. So what we have done the last couple of

years we did a project to sort of formulate all the requirements we need on all these
levels in order to implement OAIS. So that means we make instructions for setting
up submission agreements and owner agreements we set up quality criteria, you
describe your designated communities…

122

While this level of literal adoption was surprising even to some European authors of

OAIS,36 European practitioners seemed to take OAIS much more seriously than their US
counterparts do now.

I say “now” to suggest that there is a temporal element to this: perhaps it was the

case that when OAIS was newer, institutions in the US hewed to the standard more literally.
This was partly because it provided guidance for institutions that were really looking for

something to help them grapple with digital content in the era before major standards and
projects in this area. One participant, a digital development director in a US public library

who has worked in a number of US preservation-oriented institutions and projects, noted:

So… [when] OAIS was still new enough that it merited significant explanatory work

on our part as managers to staff and executives, and I would assume it would be safe
to say, did not quite have the ubiquity of a place in the technical service layers that it
does now, like of— of it being at least something that one could take for granted as

an element of discussion. I think at the time.… There was quite a bit of excitement at
the model. The effort was to incorporate it, because it was seen as the cool kid on
the block.

Many interviewees mentioned Priscilla Caplan and her work on the Dark Archive in the
Sunshine State (DAITSS), the Florida digital dark archive. One US participant, a digital

preservation and curation scholar at a public university, described this as among the more
literal interpretations of OAIS saying, “So, DAITSS, for example, right? When Priscilla

Of the OAIS authors I spoke to, three were European and one was American. This was
perhaps not surprising given that these interviews took place in Europe and that many of
these authors are involved in consortial digital preservation projects that span Europe and
take OAIS as a founding assumption.
36

123

Caplan was doing her work… in Florida, I think she took a much more direct—like let's map
the OAIS to our architecture approach—than most initiatives that you see in the US.” As

time has passed, the atmosphere that engendered these literal deployments has faded in
the US. More than one US participant told me they do not take OAIS too seriously, but

rather consider it background noise, use it for the common terminology, and, as three of my
younger interview subjects noted, reference it because it is what is taught in library or

archive school. In the US interviews, there were considerably more references to off-theshelf tools that were built based on OAIS, such as Archivematica. One archive had been

using Archivematica for a fair amount of time relative to its development, while a couple of
other institutions were just rolling it out for new initiatives. In one case, a major private
grant funded the roll-out project; in the other, it was the start of that institution’s first

systematized digital preservation efforts. One participant said, “…it just so happened that
Archivematica, it is built to very much like reflect that OAIS model.…” The relationship

between OAIS and Archivematica is not accidental and this quote connotes the role that
OAIS has begun to take in US contexts: it has become not only black-boxed, referring to

something that is accepted without people peeking too much under the hood, 37 but also has
assumed a place of even greater privilege: dominant invisibility.

Dominant invisibility refers to traits that come to be assumed because of their

dominant roles: they do not have to be stated because they are always assumed to be in

play. If a gender is not specifically ascribed to someone in positions of relative power, they
More than one person complained that people do not really understand OAIS, and one
OAIS author and one OAIS practitioner stated that this is largely because people do not
read past “the first 80 pages” of the model and rely on a simplistic understandings of
“THAT diagram.”
37

124

are assumed male. If an ethnicity is not described, the assumption is Whiteness. OAIS has
begun to move into this kind of space within digital preservation: it is becoming an

invisible discourse. Of course it did not “just so happen” that Archivematica maps to OAIS:

in fact, it was designed specifically to do that. And to the credit of this particular interview

subject, he knew this. But his choice of language is telling about the role that OAIS takes in
US contexts.

As this variance between EU and US perceptions became apparent in interviews, I

asked subsequent participants to speculate about its cause. I received a number of answers,
and will discuss them below according to the following themes, which are not mutually
exclusive: compliance, cost realities, and audits.
4.3.1 Compliance

The notion of OAIS compliance is inherently complicated by the fact that OAIS is a

reference model. OAIS authors therefore claim that it is without prescription: if it does not

tell institutions what to do (or what not to do), then it is hard to see how institutions could

be said to comply, if compliance is defined as adequately adhering to a set of prescriptions.
Yet compliance with OAIS was a topic that arose frequently in interviews, despite the fact
that I never asked any participant whether they were compliant or wanted to be.

In a European setting, compliance did not arise as a separate topic of conversation.

Rather, the discussions focused more on successfully meeting the requirements for a full
audit. These discussions were very technical in nature, and addressed processes,

workflows, and research that the institutions were doing to ready themselves for an audit.
At one institution, the technology officer kindly gave me copies of a white paper detailing
workflows of their OAIS implementation: such documentation is an essential step for an
125

audit. She also described other internal documentation efforts that were underway, such as
the creation of a controlled vocabulary specific to the domain of the institution.

In the US, however, compliance with OAIS was often mentioned as something

separate from auditing. Instead, it was related to general imaginaries about doing what

OAIS requires: I say imaginaries because notions of compliance were very institutionally

specific and sometimes people suggested they were doing things to comply with OAIS that
OAIS does not actually stipulate. As mentioned previously, OAIS only “requires” six things,

and much of its functional model is entirely voluntary. A manager of digital preservation at

a European national library and a European OAIS author with origins in space science both
suggested that most people do not read OAIS closely enough or all the way through. This
lack of application or attention may be partly to blame for the anecdotes about even

headless barnyard animals being compliant, much to the annoyance of the OAIS author and
the preservation manager, the latter of whom was troubled by people “bashing” OAIS on
Twitter when it appeared that they did not adequately understand the standard.

Additionally, compliance in US interviews echoed the more casual attitude US

practitioners espouse towards OAIS. A US-based data curation specialist suggested, “So,
OAIS does have this concept of packaging your data, and… we may not be using an OAIS
compliant packaging formats approach, whatever that means.…” A digital archivist at a

small liberal arts college in the US said, “I feel like I've kind of done that in my mind, like
casually I've been like oh yeah, I like use OAIS, but I probably am not conforming to the
actual standard like of the way it's been written, like the big blocks in my head, I'm like

those are useful.” The director of digital services in the library of a private US university

said, “So, we're pretty—the repository where we do OAIS is pretty compliant, and so we do
126

it. But, again, we're not—I don't think we're that obsessed about it, and [rethinking our

next repository iteration], we're not thinking that hard about it.” These quotations sum up
the casual attitude towards OAIS. They also confirm, to some extent, the concern of the

European practitioners who suggested that many institutions and professionals are not

reading the standard carefully or referring to the actual documentation of the standard.
Instead, they build on the general ideas they have of OAIS, of the black-boxed popular

image of what they think OAIS represents. This is not a criticism, but rather speaks to an

evolution of the role that OAIS plays within preservation networks in the US: it has become
a foundational assumption that, because decentered, is not often closely examined.
4.3.2 Cost Realities

When asking participants to speculate about the causes of the different attitudes

between the US and Europe, the most recurrent theme among these explanations boils

down to the cost realities of developments in digital preservation and the relationship this

has to institution-specific projects. A Canada-based digital preservation scholar who works
frequently in Europe as well said, “And one guess might be the dynamics of the large scale
research project that happened. In the last 10 years, a lot of the research in Europe, that

was highly visible, was done in those large integrated projects.” A digital preservation and
curation scholar at a US public university said:

This [centralization of work and reliance on standards] also percolates through
research funding, right?... So, many countries have depended a lot on European

Commission funding that has these high level frameworks that everybody has to fit
into. And even at their national level, then they often have a relatively centralized

research council that determines funding for research within that country. The US,
127

on every one of those fronts is just more diverse, right? We have a huge number of
university based archives, and libraries that are in many ways setting a lot of the
trends for the research and development. You have a much larger diversity of

funding sources, you have no one central national library archive that's basically
setting the expectations for everybody else to follow.

This lack of centralization in the US was seen as another cause for the more relaxed
attitudes towards OAIS. Many US participants described the Ford, Mellon, Grammy

Foundation, and federal grants that they received as individual institutions to work on

institution-specific projects. In the US, there is no centralized requirement to follow certain

digital preservation standards and there is less centralized funding to informally encourage
standard participation. This de-centralization was often tied back to the difference in the

standings of national memory institutions in the US versus Europe: participants from both
Europe and the US reminded me frequently that the US has no national library.

Interviewees described institutional partnerships and related funding opportunities as

much more centralized in Europe. A digital preservation manager at a private US university
said:

So, basically everyone… seems to be in research over here, where [in Europe

researchers comes from] a national organization, or a public sector organization.
[They have to] say that this is an obvious need that's going to be as a society, you

have to make some sort of argument [to] someone who wants to give you money.

Work in the US is dispersed to academic research institutions, where projects are often

specific to a particular collection or set of collections at the institutions receiving the grant.

128

In Europe, national memory institutions and other professional organizations are

involved in large consortia of projects for the development of digital preservation
standards. A US-based data curation specialist similarly said,

But they have the EU, they have places where a large number, or a big percentage, a

majority of the funders can get together and basically say, "We're going to go about doing it
this way." So, that's an area that has national trends, national viewpoint, that simply
doesn't exist in the United States.

Another data scientist put it more starkly: not only is the money more centralized,

but this imbues the funding agencies with power to dictate the paths of future preservation
projects. Further, the funding opportunities are greater in Europe than in the US, which

leads to more institutional development and adherence which are not possible given the
smaller scales of US funding:

Yeah, certainly from—at the government level, for sure, and even within the funding
agencies, the research councils in the UK for example. Some of them actually have

very strict policies that allow them to shut down funding for an entire institution.… I
would say that, you know, the amount of funding that Europeans are putting aside
for managing data is substantially greater, of what the US is doing.

These findings are mirrored in language from European interview participants. A manager

of digital preservation at a European national library noted their institution’s participation
in a “European project about costs.” A research and development officer at a European

national archive described a number of projects wherein his institution worked with all the
national memory organizations in his country as well as numerous other preservation
hubs.

129

The centralization of funding and thus power to dictate procedures for preservation

has other effects too. The next section touches on the different geographical attitudes

towards official audit processes. Audits are expensive: an OAIS author with a background in
space science estimated around $10,000 per year to maintain the certification and a higher
layout for the initial, in-depth audit. A digital preservation manager at a private US

university shared that his institution was prepared to budget $50,000 over five years for
auditing. The cost is prohibitive to many organizations. One interview participant, a

Canada-based digital preservation scholar, suggested that no small institution has the

resources to undergo official audits. US practitioners similarly pointed out the cost and

other resources entailed in an official audit as part of why they were not going to engage in
one. More than one participant noted that European funding agencies are moving towards

requiring certification for institutions seeking funding, meaning that European institutions
are more likely to budget for costly auditing.
4.3.3 Audits

In the realm of digital preservation, there exist a number of audit and risk

management tools designed to help institutions assess strengths and weaknesses as well as
put forward public documentation that certifies their trustworthiness. In terms of internal
assessment, there are tools like the “largely defunct”38 Digital Repository Audit Method

Based On Risk Assessment (DRAMBORA), which is based on risk assessment modeling and
provides a framework via a web tool or paper checklists for institutions to identify and
categorize risks. For public certification, there are protocols like the NESTOR seal of

38

So described by interviewees.
130

approval based on DIN, the German standard for long-term preservation, and its Dutch

counterpart, the Data Seal of Approval. The most commonly referenced audit standards in
my interviews were TRAC (OCLC/CLR, 2007) and its successor, ISO 16363 (CCSDS, 2011).

Audit standards like the Data Seal of Approval, TRAC, and ISO 16363 are all explicitly based
on OAIS. This means that undergoing an ISO 16363 audit requires a mapping of

institutional functions into OAIS language even if systems were not designed this way. I
argue that ISO 16363 has served to reinforce and recreate OAIS’s role within a larger
sociotechnical network for digital preservation. Where OAIS started to fade into the

background in some settings, ISO 16363 serves to thrust it forward again. This move
reinforces the dominance of the scripts within OAIS as they now require levels of

adherence to gain certification. While OAIS as a reference model is not prescriptive, ISO
16363 is entirely so: it details the myriad things an Archive has to do in order to be

certified as trustworthy. This does not boil down to specifics of workflow descriptions or

best format recommendations, but rather serves to keep the higher-level notions about the
relationships among the parts of an Information Package and the roles of various actors
within an institution intact. This is especially true in a European context, where many

institutions want certification and where larger, pan-European institutions are pushing for
certification as well. In speaking to professionals at three state memory institutions in

Europe, all spoke of working towards eventual ISO 16363 certification. None felt they were
ready as of fall 2014.

The US attitude towards audits, similar to US attitudes about OAIS more generally, is

less formal. While one participant described his institution’s financial commitment to
submit to an ISO 16363 audit by an outside body after having spent some time with a
131

consulting firm preparing materials, most US participants expressed their use of ISO 16363
and even its predecessor TRAC as a tool for internal use rather than public certification. A
digital repository manager in a US museum summed up this ethos, saying, “we need to

know is are we doing our job right and that doesn’t require official certification but that
standard was very useful for understanding where we’re falling short.”

In these cases, the use value is described as something to help the institution

measure the status of its programs in order to identify strengths and weaknesses. This kind
of work plays the dual role of providing a platform on which to build conversations with

non–preservation people inside institutions: it helps explain and in some cases justify the

work the preservation people are doing. These types of conversations are, not exclusively,
but often strongly linked to discussions about funding. In terms of strengths and

weaknesses, the need to document policy was a common struggle, as identified by pilot

projects for ISO 16363 itself and the work of Sierman (2014) which noted the disconnect

between policy and practice, and vice-versa, in Archives. A digital repository manager in a
US museum noted sagely that audits would aid the creation of essential documentation

saying, “So, if I get hit by a bus tomorrow and any colleagues need to get X done, they can
just look at this and know who they need to talk to.”

A US-based data curation specialist also pointed to limitations in what is purchased

by the audit process, saying:

I think we're probably landing in a similar place to other kind of certifications,

which is— and I don't mean this to be disrespectful in any way. There's almost a

mechanical aspect of something like 16363 that it's a checklist, it really is a checklist.
And if somebody were to say, "Do you have secure access to your data center?" And
132

you say "Yes," you know, you could potentially get that checked off your list. So,

what does that really mean? You know, does that mean that there is a card swipe

system to your datacenter? Does it mean that there's a key? How many people have
that key? How secure is the card swipe system, so on, and so on, and so on.… So, I

think something like the TRAC audit checklist addresses those mechanical pieces,
sort of the necessary conditions, but not necessarily sufficient conditions.

At the end of the day, most US practitioners eschewed the need to undergo official audits,

even if some of them rather wistfully explained that they would like to be auditable at some
point; no one felt that they were ready to be audited currently. Instead, as a digital library
director at a private US university explained, “If you can get your content together and
disseminate it, that's proof that you had [laughter] good archival practices.”

These examples highlight the differences in dominant concerns among

preservationists in Europe and in the US. Processes in Europe are much more centralized
and much more standardized. This can be seen as part and parcel of politics of pan-

European identity espoused by the EU. These politics of governmentality trickle down into
the individual memory institutions as they are swept up into a project of creating a unified
European identity.

US concerns revolved around moving beyond OAIS and the future of digital

preservation. The general assessment is that OAIS has been useful, but that perhaps its

heyday has past. Radical changes are needed, if not new standards entirely and for now,
practitioners adhere to surface elements of OAIS as opposed to engaging in literal
deployments of its functional or information models.

133

4.4 Conclusions

This chapter has examined many findings from the interview data under three

overarching themes: audiences, the role of traditional archives, and geographical

difference. This chapter identified scripts embedded into OAIS that stem from its positivist
origins as well some of the discourses in which it participates: for example, discourses of

archival neutrality or of unified pan-European identity. Following these general themes, the
next chapter will examine a single term in close detail: the Designated Community. By

examining this particular aspect of OAIS more closely, I will argue that there are ways in

which OAIS fundamentally does not work, but simultaneously contains the potential to act
as a recuperative and resistive technology, with the power to democratize archival
practices.

134

CHAPTER 5

Introduction

DESIGNATED COMMUNITIES

The previous chapter looked at some general themes that arose across multiple

codes in the interview data. This chapter provides an in-depth look at one particular term.
One site that exemplifies the tensions brought about by the deployment and general

reliance on OAIS is the conversation around the term Designated Community. Designated

Communities are manifestations of a particular kind of audience imagined by OAIS, not for

the model itself but the content OAIS will be used to preserve. Designated Communities are
constructed end users that are more often simulacra (Baudrillard and Glaser, 1994) or

personas (Miaskiewicz, Sumner, and Kozar, 2008; Lage, Losoff, and Maness, 2011) rather
than real people. This term is a source of frustration to some in digital preservation,

particularly librarians who find the need to specify a particular community to be at odds
with their professional, and sometimes legal, mandate to serve broad populations. The

authors of OAIS, in response, insist that the requirements that are built around Designated
Communities are meant specifically for use by Archives that serve diverse publics or, in
some cases, “the world.” The authors’ conception of the term’s use value to memory

practitioners who deal with large audiences and popular material is based on a set of

assumptions stemming from an epistemological space that results in a mismatch between

what OAIS recommends and requires and how some memory professionals see their workrelated duties.

In this chapter, I examine the definition of Designated Communities and the ways in

which this term arose in interviews with OAIS practitioners, scholars, and authors. The first
135

section serves to expose the characterizations and concerns users express with the

requirements of OAIS as dictated through this very central term. The section that follows

uses two theoretical frameworks, scripts and discourse analysis, to examine this subset of

data. I argue that Designated Communities are fundamentally at odds with the professional
ethos of certain memory professions. I also contend that this term is the source of

considerable power for the Archive, in a way that privileges the institutions more so than

the publics and audiences they serve; simultaneously, I discuss how this term is also a site
where OAIS can be used to make interventions in traditional memory practices that allow
the co-construction of more inclusive and pluralistic histories.
5.1 Defining Designated Communities

Designated Communities are defined in the OAIS documentation as: “An identified

group of potential Consumers who should be able to understand a particular set of

information. The Designated Community may be composed of multiple user communities.
A Designated Community is defined by the Archive and this definition may change over

time”39 (CCSDS, 2012, page 1-11). This definition is packed with a considerable amount of

tacit information. Firstly, the word potential denotes the fact that these Consumers are not
necessarily real. Instead, “potential” immediately indicates that Designated Communities

refer to a particular imaginary about the kind of Consumer who will use the content stored
For clarity, I include here the definitions for the 2 specific terms mentioned within this
definition:
 Consumer: The role played by those persons, or client systems, who interact with
OAIS services to find preserved information of interest and to access that
information in detail. This can include other OAISes, as well as internal OAIS persons
or systems. (Ibid page 1-10)
 Archive: An organization that intends to preserve information for access and use by
a Designated Community. (Ibid page 1-9)
39

136

by an Archive in the future. In other words, Designated Communities are often entirely

conjectural. They could refer to something as concretely constructed as personas. Such a
formal construction proves tedious and frustrating to some users. A participant who is a

digital preservation and curation scholar at a US public university said: “…if you take it so
literally that you think that it's almost like doing, you know, like personas when you're

doing interface design, where you have to characterize exactly who these people are, and

like what they eat for breakfast and everything, you know. It might be frustrating, because
you're thinking, ‘I can't specify my users that clearly.’” On the other hand, the use value to
such a process is helpful when projecting future activities and needs. Later in the same

conversation, the same participant continued, “…and I do think that that's why a designated

community notion can be useful. And again—I mean, maybe it actually—I was dismissive of
it before, but maybe it even is something kind of like personas and human factors work,
right, where it's like you just think—as a heuristic, you think, ‘Okay, 20 years from now,

what are the main things that if somebody didn't know them, they would be in a complete
loss, you know.’”

Designated Communities might, on the other hand, be a simulacrum derived from

qualities imagined by the managers of an Archive, some hybrid constructed of an

understanding of Producers and Consumers in addition to assumptions held by the Archive
managers themselves (Akrich, 1995). The important thing is that Designated Communities
are rarely, if ever, a reference to real people in real time. A single Designated Community
could encompass a number of different user groups, as Kari Kraus, a Preserving Virtual

Worlds II (PVWII) investigator and digital preservation and English scholar at a public US

university, noted. As business cases, audits, and maturity models are derived from the OAIS
137

reference model, it is possible for an Archive to have multiple Designated Communities for

discrete collections. Findings from the APARSEN project mention additional user groups in
relation to expanded services and sustainable business models: Archives can seek to

promote their relevance and increase or ensure revenue by catering services curatorially to
different groups of users by expanding the Representation Information 40 of objects

(APARSEN, 2015). In this APARSEN deliverable, the authors move away from Designated
Communities to users. This terminology is significant, given the presence of OAIS

specialists within the APARSEN project: the curation work that expands the usability of

content to more Consumers, now finally termed users, is thus indicated to be a separate or
additional process to core preservation activities because the authors mention users, who
are purposely not part of the OAIS model.

Two additional things about the definition of Designated Communities: first, the

definitions of Designated Community and Archive within OAIS are circuitous. The

definition of the former notes that Designated Communities are defined by the Archive; the
definition of the Archive is “an organization that preserves and makes accessible and

usable content to a Designated Community” (CCSDS, 2012 1-9). In other words, the Archive

defines the Designated Community and is similarly defined by it. This places a considerable
amount of control in the hands of the Archive, who is able and required to make this

“Representation Information: The information that maps a Data Object into more
meaningful concepts. An example of Representation Information for a bit sequence which is
a FITS file might consist of the FITS standard which defines the format plus a dictionary
which defines the meaning in the file of keywords which are not part of the standard.
Another example is JPEG software which is used to render a JPEG file; rendering the JPEG
file as bits is not very meaningful to humans but the software, which embodies an
understanding of the JPEG standard, maps the bits into pixels which can then be rendered
as an image for human viewing.” (CCSDS, 2012, page 1-14 - 1-15)
40

138

designation, and leaves relatively little control for actual end users as there are no

recommendations within OAIS that suggest consulting with user groups to make the

designations: the third of the six requirement mentioned earlier says only that an Archive
must “determine, either by itself or in conjunction with other [unspecified] parties” who

the Designated Community is (CCSDS, 2012 page 3-1, insertion my own). This is important
in light of the second item of note: that Designated Communities can change over time.

“Change over time” gives an organization attempting to build an OAIS-based repository or

to use OAIS-based audit models to obtain certification of trustworthiness latitude to modify
its Designated Community in a way that matches the work it is already doing. This is not a
pejorative statement about activities or practices of the Archive: while this could refer to
organizations that change their documented Designated Community to avoid workflow

changes, for instance,41 the intent as expressed by OAIS authors matches concerns that also
find expression in the first of the core OAIS requirements: that archives “negotiate for and
accept appropriate information from information Producers” (CCSDS, 2012, page 3-1).

Digital preservation can be complicated. Several interview participants note that they do
not have criteria about which formats to accept. Some say their concerns with this are

occupying unnecessary thought and time on the part of practitioners and others express

that they are not allowed by their organization to discriminate against content in that way.
This possibility was acknowledged frequently during conversations with OAIS authors
within the specific context of talking about documentation of policy and practice by an
institution for audit purposes: authors I spoke with frequently noted that Archives “can do
whatever they want” and still be technically certified, but that this probably was not in
their best interest. There was an explicit recognition that merely being certified as a
trustworthy digital repository according to a scheme like TRAC or the more recent ISO
16363 standard does not guarantee that the Designated Community or other stakeholder
groups actually trust and would chose to work within said organization.
41

139

On the subject of formats, one participant, a digital preservation manager at a private US
university, made an apt analogy: paper could be considered a single format, and

conservators have devoted copious resources and time to the methods and tools that

ensure its long-term persistence. Spending similar amounts of time on each digital format
is exponentially taxing. The authors of OAIS recognized this, and continue to be keenly
aware of this difficulty as they make periodic updates to OAIS and write additional

standards like ISO 16363. Thus this type of language occurs throughout OAIS explicitly and

implicitly, conceived to give organizations codified license to reject certain types of content

or formats, or to treat different content and formats differently within daily workflows. The
ability to change a Designed Community can be seen as part of a larger discourse within

archives relating to an expressed need for control to manage a gargantuan task; control and
the inherent complexity of digital preservation work are active discourses themselves

within the field that drive institutional decisions as well as ongoing choices OAIS’s authors
make about how it evolves.

5.2 Designated Communities in Interviews

The topic of Designated Communities fascinated me before the outset of this project

in relation to two issues: first, the difficulties posed by serving very broad audiences and
second, the fundamental assumption within digital preservation that preservation is for

someone, rather than simply a set of activities performed on a thing. In this chapter, I use

terms like complicated digital objects and very broad user bases. I do not signify a dichotomy
with this language, nor do I assume that OAIS was only designed for comparably simpler
cases. As OAIS was written and continues to be reimagined by its authors and primary

proponents, it is a tool that is applicable in any discipline with [almost] any kind of content.
140

I say “almost” because of an admission from an OAIS author I spoke with that linked data is
something that they are still working to include. That is the only content type I have heard
OAIS authors admit might not fit with OAIS. Otherwise, they argue strenuously for its

flexibility and usefulness in all other situations with all other content types. The terms I

employ here are inherently relational, however, and used commonly by practitioners in

everyday speech and it is worthwhile examining what they mean. The development and
maintenance of OAIS was spearheaded by scientists dealing with space data, and the

assumption that arose in conversation, both formal interviews for this dissertation and
more casually with colleagues, is that OAIS works best for science data because it was
designed by scientists. In this case, the Designated Communities are not broad or

heterogeneous because the materials are not popular. Rather, a Designated Community is a
specific set of scientists who share a Knowledge Base of domain-specific knowledge and in
this case the Designated Community can be seen to generally align with a large portion of
the projected Consumers: the people most likely to want access to the digital objects are
fellow scientists within the same discipline. This contrasts in some ways with popular

content like video games wherein there are many end Consumers who interact with the
content for a large variety of reasons. A Designated Community for video games as

conceived of by an Archive may include only a small subset of actual Consumers or users of

the original content. Likewise, when dealing with science data, the example often given is of
data tables: in this case, the object consists largely of text or perhaps still images and is

largely static. This contrasts with the myriad components that make up a virtual world in a
video game, including particular peripherals and hardware required for interaction;

specialized copyright-protected media; dynamic input by multiple users, etc. While there
141

are certainly kinds of science data for which the Designated Community would be broader
than a specific set of domain colleagues and science data that is more complicated than

text, I argue that video games can be safely said to constitute an outlier, difficult case by
comparison.

What happens when an Archive has to preserve popular culture content for which

the audience might conceivably be “the world,” as two interview participants said? A

manager of digital preservation at a European national library and I had this exchange:
RB: For a video game series like that, the Designated Community is…
Participant: The world [laughs] and that’s the problem for libraries.

A US-based data scientist also used this same language in reference to the communities

served by university consortia data repositories. My previous work with the preservation
of video games, which have incredibly large and heterogeneous user bases, 42 highlighted

this challenge and brought to the fore the way in which this notion is bound together with
the assumption of preservation for someone rather than preservation of something. One

interview participant, a US-based data curation specialist, summed up this central tenet of
digital preservation: “the concept of a designated community is also an important

one…who you're actually trying to preserve your content for is equally important in some

sense to what you're trying to do with the content.” This quote serves to show how tightly

the core terms of OAIS are bound to the foundational principles of digital preservation as a
professional practice and a sub-discipline.

See, for example, the number of copies of a new video game title that sell in week one for
a popular series like Halo or Grand Theft Auto, and compare this with movie box office
numbers for the same week.
42

142

The idea of preservation for someone plays out in a number of ways within OAIS-

informed archives and here I will speak to how it is inextricably linked to the notion of

Designated Communities. Henry Lowood, one of the investigators from the PVWII research
project who is a game preservation scholar from a private US university, said during the
final grant meeting: “I need to speak up for my designated user community. There are
people who are more interested in the source code than they are in the game. In my

environment, technological historians are a pretty important stakeholder.” Examining

significance of video games for preservation necessarily invokes discussions of Designated
Communities because significance is situational: it depends on the audience and their

relationship to the digital object. This in turn determines what aspects of the digital object

are given precedence for resources: with very complicated digital objects like video games,
the digital preservation community acknowledges that some concessions will have to be

made over the long term and some aspects may not be preservable indefinitely. The quote
above from Lowood highlights the tensions that arise from this. While game producers

interviewed for PVWII expressed that the affective play experience was more important
that the underlying code, Lowood notes that for a different Designated Community, the
original and executable code remained of primary interest. The point is simply that

different people want to save different things, or, in OAIS speak, different Designated

Communities require different Archives and different Archives create different Designated
Communities through their daily actions, despite what they may or may not put on paper
about who is in their Designated Community.

It is also interesting to note the language used by this game preservation scholar: he

uses the term “designated user community.” First, he is employing terminology that stems
143

from the common language of OAIS, despite the fact that OAIS was not an explicit part of
the conversation in which this comment was made, or indeed a focus of the multi-year

grant project at all. This is yet another demonstration of the ubiquity of the OAIS reference
model and how it is often invoked unconsciously. Yet this phrase also demonstrates a
misconception among more casual users of OAIS. 43 The investigator did not say

“Designated Community” but rather “designated user community.” I confess to speaking in
this same way myself prior to commencing serious research and study on this topic: as a
casual user of OAIS, a practitioner in digital preservation who did not deal with OAIS

structures daily, I often conflated the term Designated Community with the concept of

users and in fact used this same linguistic hybrid of the two until I was sharply admonished
by a European OAIS author with origins in space science. Designated Communities are

importantly not users, and the OAIS documentation stays away from language about users

in reference to Consumers. This is a purposeful move as described by the authors of OAIS. I
asked OAIS authors to explain the concept of Designated Communities further in particular
reference to repeated comments by library and national archive professionals about the

ways in which the Designated Community requirement felt restrictive compared to their

remit. The authors of OAIS employ the term Designated Community instead of users because
they do not want to speak about real users for two main reasons. First, OAIS authors do this
to avoid the pretense of a level of precision that is impossible to have about what is

essentially, as one interview subject who is a digital preservation and curation scholar at a
Although I note at the outset of this argument that, because this quote is taken from a
conversation that is about digital preservation generally and not necessarily OAIS
specifically, this language is not conclusively indicative of a conflation between users and
Designated Communities. I think, however, that is statement is more telling than it appears
at first glance and perhaps even more so than the person who said it realized.
43

144

US public university put it, a “heuristic” to help plan for dissemination needs in the future.
Designated Communities are purposefully vague, therefore, much to the annoyance of
some interview subjects. One subject, a Canadian digital preservation scholar, said:

“[Designated Community is] also extremely weakly defined in the OAIS. There is almost
nothing about it. It's there. It's there and it's supposed to work.”

The second reason Designated Communities are different from users, according to

the OAIS authors, is precisely to serve institutions that deal with popular materials and
broad, heterogeneous user populations. It is when dealing with complex materials and
large user bases, as opposed to specific research data with smaller user bases, that it

becomes necessary to make selection decisions about content and how it is treated over
the long term. The example given by the European OAIS author with origins in space

science was that of a national library. In that case, the institution is required to serve users

who encapsulate the entire population of a country. This means from birth to death, across
all levels of education, language, ability, etc. To make all digital content usable and

independently understandable to all these users, the OAIS author argued, would mean that
the Archive would have to include an entire education system with each object. The

implication: it is not possible to do this, so for policy and planning purposes, institutions

like libraries should construct a representative Designated Community that has common
capabilities and understandings and create Information Packages around this,

acknowledging that while such a constructed Designated Community might encompass

some of the institution’s actual users, it by no means pretends to be a stand-in for all users
more generally.

145

I found this explanation to be enlightening; that is to say, the content of it was not

something that I had garnered independently from all the reading I had done about the

standard. I asked some of the interview participants about this, and in fact two interview
participants, a digital preservation manager at a private US university and a digital

preservation consultant at a boutique US firm, were present at the exchange I had with the
OAIS author. They both expressed that this explanation about why Designated

Communities are not users was similarly enlightening to them. In sharing this anecdote

with other colleagues and interview subjects, many expressed surprise and one colleague, a
digital preservation and STS scholar at a public US university, even described this

explanation as “disingenuous,” perhaps suggesting that this story was constructed post
facto to answer the frequent criticisms about this term. However, the same interview

participant who was quoted above describing the definition of Designated Community as
“weak” also said the following in response to my recounting of this story:

So, I mean that's an obvious argument to someone with my perspective, for

example. So, maybe it's so obvious that we all [in the realm of systems design] fail to
communicate [the real purpose behind Designated Communities] in writing

properly.…There's a curious divide, sometimes, in communication between the

designers, engineers, scientists, and the others, where the scientists and engineers
are much more aware of the limits of what they mean when they say those things,
models and systems and processors. But to those who are not scientists or
engineers, it sounds—like it sounds a little scary and it sounds too strict.

The notion of a Designated Community might also be part of the moment in which OAIS

was developed: early realizations about the difficulty and resources entailed in doing good
146

preservation work inform the fundamental notion that digital preservation is not just

preservation of a thing but rather preservation of a thing for someone and, further, for

some purpose. The purpose is something that gets taken up in greater detail in spaces like

the APARSEN Common Vision report that suggests an expansion of dissemination services
as a model for encouraging funding. It is also what current data curation practices are

based on: the idea of adding value to existing content through its arrangement and delivery
in a way that allows for better use according to someone and some purpose. The idea that
digital preservation is a set of ongoing activities that happen with an intentional outcome
beyond the analog practice of keeping things as much the same as possible is concurrent

with the development of OAIS. The concept of preservation for someone is inscripted into
OAIS authors in the way they describe the term Designated Communities as well as the

antiprograms44 constructed by practitioners engaging with the model in the real world.

Yet part of what may make the aforementioned European OAIS author’s explanation

seem so eye-opening to some practitioners is that, despite the reassurance contained
within this origin story for the term Designated Community, it is a concept that is

fundamentally at odds with the purposes of certain types of organizations. I had two

participants describe their Designated Communities as “the world,” one from a European

national library and one from a consortium of US universities. When it becomes necessary
to cut some users from the designation, it results in a system that may allow public access
without allowing usability of digital materials. The US-based data scientist said:

This language similarly comes from Akrich and Latour (1992): “Antiprograms: All the
programs of actions of actants that are in conflict with the programs chosen as the point of
departure of the analysis; what is a program and what is an antiprogram is relative to the
chosen observer” (page 267).
44

147

So, if you decide that you are going to designate your community, that you are going

to say that, "I'm only targeting this set of people that I'm—you know, so even though
this information is available to the world, the things that I do to that information to

make it usable are only targeted at this set of people, then the problem is easier. And
I think, you know, in the end that's what you do, no matter what. So, yes, this is

publicly accessible information, but it's not publicly usable information. And I think
curators have, you know, have a hard time with that. I mean I would think curators
hate that.

I suggest that most librarians are not too fond of this idea either, and this explains their
consistent complaints about the Designated Community requirement in OAIS. It is

complicated to align the Designated Community to the Archive’s preservation tasks so that
there is consistency, a fit between the overall tasks and objectives and how those tasks are
carried out by an Archive. The issues of fit and Designated Community are made clearer
when talking about institutions like libraries which have heterogeneous user bases and

trade in popular materials. The inherent claim here, however, is not just that it is difficult to
designate a community in a library, but that OAIS is misaligned with these institutions: it

does not fit their social reality or the objectives of the organizations, and it does not fit the
work practices of staff. Video games, as I will discuss in the next chapter, are another

excellent digital preservation heuristic because of their complexity but also because of their
popular appeal. Cultural productions like games enable new practices and, with their wide

reach, new publics (Cvetkovich, 2003, page 10). These creations serve as a challenge to the
notion of the Designated Community, because they suggest an ongoing creation of publics
through the cultural productions spurred by the consumption of popular materials like
148

games. This represents an inherent tension and breakdown of the system. On the one hand,

OAIS and those who speak for it, like the authors I interviewed, would say that the notion of
the Designated Community is designed precisely to deal with this type of situation: a
recognition of the ongoing forming and reforming of consuming groups that places

untenable demands on the resources of digital archives that are themselves still evolving,
like the cyclical and episodic nature of memory itself (Bradley, 2007). Yet this is an

insufficient explanation when confronting the practical realities of implementation: it is yet
another acknowledgment that OAIS as currently scripted is not functional for the needs of
institutions with large user bases like public libraries or archives of culture, and it is
disingenuous to claim that it is. This term Designated Community shows, from a

sociotechnical standpoint, one of the real problems of OAIS being applied rigidly: to require
Designated Communities to be separate from users is a fundamental misalignment with
some organizations.

Despite the importance of this term, many interview subjects did not have the

Designated Communities of their Archives formalized. One participant, the digital

preservation manager at a private US university, noted that he meant to put it into the

overarching policy he developed with his organization but had not yet, although he felt
there was an obvious place that it would fit. One of the OAIS authors I spoke with, an

archivist from Europe, described how difficult it was for many organizations to identify

their Designated Community when she and her team were doing a tour of test audits ahead
of the standardization of ISO 16363. In explaining what constituted sufficient proof of a

Designated Community and what certainly did not (“everyone” was explicitly forbidden, as
were “implicit” definitions), she said, “We didn’t know that [this aspect of the audit
149

process] would be so hard.” Another subject, a manager of digital preservation at a
European national library, said of her peers in the field of digital preservation:

And sometimes people say, well there is no need to trouble about it, because

everyone is your designated community so you don’t need to do extra things,

compared with what you need to do with researchers, because you need to explain
the formulas and et cetera, but I am not so sure.… No, I always in the TRAC

discussions, in the TDR discussions, I always added my web archive as an example

where the exception was because we don't have a designated community, but don't
have a user either.

Designated Communities came up in relationship to audits precisely because they are

required documents for audits and because, while many institutions think and assume a
Designated Community, many have not yet defined one on paper. This lack of policy and

documentation, as well as the mismatch between documentation and practice in archives is
something that has been covered in recent research as a fairly pervasive phenomenon
(Sierman, 2014), and this was recognized by the authors of ISO 16363 and ISO 16919.

These authors repeatedly pointed out the need to independently assess not only what
Archives say they are doing but to verify and document (on the part of auditors) what
Archives are actually doing: saying and doing were of equal importance as there is a
potential for considerable gulf between them in practice, and this was highlighted
constantly during the training course with the OAIS authors.

The role of multiple Designated Communities also arises in reference to audit

processes: it is possible and sometimes preferable to name different Designated

Communities for different collections within a single institution. During an audit, this
150

process would be necessary especially if different Designated Communities meant that
their respective collections had different workflows, AIP contents, and other such

processes or facets. One interview subject, a US-based data curation specialist, noted that

his diverse collections have different assumed uses and that this plays an active role in how
he and his colleagues define their processes and services:

Same questions come up of—so, if your designated community's medievalist versus
geologist versus astronomer, is there some common layer in that structure where

those—all those designated communities have the same requirement? My answer is

yes, in our view, but again, to ask that question in that way is really important and to

understand at what layer of the stack there is that kind of commonality, it's probably
consistent with the OAIS…. But if you're thinking about the service a little higher up
the stack, like an image viewing tool, for example, there probably are differences in
some sense between what a medievalist wants to do with an annotation versus a

geologist, and again, there can be some commonalities, but it's at that layer where I
think you start to see the differentiation and the sifting out of different kinds of
requirements.

What is key here is the notion of layering: at some layers there is a commonality of services,
and at some subject specificity may dictate a need for different approaches to serve

different Designated Communities. There is power in having commonalities across multiple
Designated Communities: it demonstrates to non-preservation-oriented administrators
and funders a poignant need for certain services in a way that a single Designated
Community with a single set of needs cannot.

In relation to these layers, this same researcher also said:
151

And if we think about it from that conceptual viewpoint, the question for me, or for
[my institution]… has been what are you trying to accomplish, and for whom, and
it's the ‘for whom’ part that's the designated community aspect of it. And it does

depend on what layer of a management, data management stack, or for some kind of
infrastructure, infrastructure stack you're talking about.

This further suggests that only at certain layers does the Designated Community play a

large role in defining processes. If this is true, I would suggest the impact occurs at a very
macro-level; within the functions of those tasked with detailing workflows and policies;
and for those working with Consumers and Producers. However, it is worth noting that

audit processes for a repository indicate something along the lines that an auditor should

be able to pick any member of the Archive staff, at any layer, and ask them basic questions
about the central policies of the Archive. I would posit that, given the foundational nature
of the Designated Community and its role in the basic six requirements of an OAIS-

informed repository, OAIS authors would intend for this information to be mentioned

within such policy statements. Therefore, the Designated Community is meant to play some
role in all layers of an Archive.

The idea of a stack of expertise and that the very foundational knowledge about

Designated Communities is only essential for certain functions within the Archive raises a
question about the relationship between Designated Communities and the

compartmentalization of work. In the previous section, I discussed the ways in which OAIS

and OAISes conceive of audiences and the fragmentation of labor roles in archives between
analog subject specialists and digital specialists. Here, I suggest that Designated

Communities also play a role in the compartmentalization of work by further entrenching a
152

difference between the grand Archive-wide labor and the subject-specialist, Designated
Community-specific labor.

5.3 Designated Communities: Scripts and Discourses

Why are Designated Communities so important? Obviously, within the space of OAIS

they are tantamount. Though not the most-mentioned aspect of OAIS in interviews, the

very project of an Archive as described by OAIS is predicated on this notion: an OAIS is not
functional without a Designated Community. Within discursive practice and my project of
tracing power, this term designates a space of actual and potential power if for no other

reason that the fact that “…[r]epresentation has consequence-- how people are represented
is how they are treated” (Hall 1997; Madison, 2005). The ability to designate a group of
people grants power to the archive when looking at historical politics of oppression

governing group identity formation. In this instance, the group’s identity is formulated and
regulated by an outside body, the Archive, with no writing or scholarship as of the writing

of this dissertation about the potential to include community members in this designation
process. I situate a collective process of negotiating a Designated Community between an
Archive and its Consumers within progressive work in archive, library, and museum

practices as cited in Chapter 2. The one sidedness in group creation also lends itself to a
form of imperial inclusivism, where inclusivity dictated by one group rather than cocreated in partnership is likely to result in subordinate groups being ‘‘swept into the

interpretive schema of another tradition’’ (Eck, 1993 in Caswell, 2013, page 282). OAIS can
be used by any kind of organization wishing to do preservation, but the cost realities are

such that it is an expensive project and those with functional repositories tend to be official
memory organizations, often with links to public- and state-sponsored institutions. These
153

institutions are products of formal processes that are guided by the ideologies of dominant
groups and thus guide how subjectivities are represented in the digital objects within the
Archive (McCarthy, 1994). This constitutes a layer of representational discourse. An
additional layer is the historically obvious fact that those not represented within

Designated Communities, often nondominant or subordinate groups, are not likely to be

documented within artifacts in the Archive at all, and vice-versa. Designated Communities

are groups and the application of theories about group formation and representation are a
fertile ground for future research.

At the same time, Designated Communities has the power to be among the more

recuperative terms with OAIS regarding traditional discourses. The very notion of different
Designated Communities creates a space with the power to resist notions of “universal
human being[s], unmarked by difference” (Noble, 2012, page 81), a space in which

difference can be co-constructed and preserved as difference by community members and
the Archive in more inclusive, pluralistic ways. Stripped of specificity, the assumed

Designated Community of many official state- and public-sponsored memory institutions,
the universal subject, is in fact a representation of dominant norms of neo-liberal

individualism: it is white, it is male, it is Western, etc. But the creation of thoughtful

Designated Communities has the power to restore subjectivity, to allow nondominant

subjects to maintain “opacity,” in the language of postcolonial scholar Edouard Glissant
(Britton, 1999). That is, it allows nondominant subjects to appear in official memory

without becoming objects of close reading and fetishized imaginaries for dominant publics
(Best and Marcus, 2009).

154

Bishop and Star (1996) describe the potential for agency that arises from

technologies that undergird the construction of digital libraries: “One potentially positive
implication of the increased mutability of document surrogates and bibliographic

instruments, however, is that DLs could allow users to move beyond standardized records

to create and manipulate knowledge structures in document surrogates that suit their own
needs and practices” (page 321).The power of the of the Archive to create Designated

Community and the ways in which this guides what information is collected and how it is
structured belies the kind of agency that Bishop and Star describe here. The important
thing is that the potential for agency exists in technologies and imaginaries of digital

libraries, yet constructions of digital archives as informed by OAIS serve to constrain such
possibilities.

There are difficulties in creating these types of Designated Communities in practice,

above and beyond the ways in which practitioners struggle to narrow “the world” to a

particular group of imagined users. Part of the difficulty in using OAIS as a recuperative
technology lies in the epistemologies and ideologies of those in charge of actually

designating the communities. Without casting aspersions on the digital preservation

community about the commitment to the creation of equitable memory practices or lack
thereof, there are other difficulties in designating users and creating services for these

ideals. Practical struggles that emerged with philosophies of participatory design highlight

some of these difficulties and serve as a reminder that, among other things, inclusion is not
merely the opposite of exclusion. Oudshoorn, Rommes, and Stienstra (2004) note that

many macro-sociological approaches to design, which are time and resource intensive
enough for the creation of a single cog—the Designated Community—within an OAIS,
155

nonetheless “…cannot explain how technological artifacts come to incorporate barriers to

specific groups of users” (page 31). This speaks to the creation of Designated Communities
within an OAIS, but also to the creation process of OAIS itself. In addition to designing for
themselves—Archives creating Designated Communities but also OAIS authors creating
OAIS—designers often design for idealized users like the “econs” of the pop economics
book Nudge (Thaler and Sustein, 2009). In that book, the authors claim that many

economics projects fail because economists imagine perfect universalized subjects who
behave robotically, predictably, and most notably, rationally at all times, for example

always saving prudently rather than spending for pleasure. In discussing the disconnect
between products and end users in relation to video game designers, Kerr (2002) notes
that:

A common theme emerging from this work is that while designers may try to design
for certain ideal users this design process is often based upon partial or indeed misinformation about end users. Silverstone and Haddon point out that designers’

knowledge of users is often tacit, contradictory and untested and in this uncertain
environment organisational cultures and powerful sub-groups can compete to
determine design. (Kerr, 2002, page 280)

I suggest that the ways in which some interviewees, and indeed authors of literature about
implementations of OAIS cited in Chapter 2, speak about Designated Communities even
though their institutions have not formally defined one means that their conceptions of

users are based on tacit knowledge. This is not to say that Archive management does not

have real information about the types of users that informs what they build into Designated
Communities, but interviews and existing literature seem to indicate that processes like the
156

one described by Kerr in relation to game design are similarly pervasive in digital

preservation repository design as well. In light of Designated Communities, how many of
these concerns need to be taken into account? Do Archives have to go out into the world

and base Designated Communities on an assessments of actual users? On paper, this is not
necessary: the Archive can designate whichever community it wants. During the training
course, another trainee in the class asked one of the OAIS authors about such situations.
The response was that archives can make such assumptions if they want, but that this

inhibits their ability to engender trust among Producers and Consumers. In essence, the
response of the OAIS author was something analogous to a neo-liberal conception of
market self-regulation: it is not necessary to regulate the construction of Designated

Communities because Archives will do this themselves in order to sell their services to

Producers and Consumers. Given the level of trust state and public memory institutions

engender by their designations as official spaces of memory, particularly in the global north
where these OAIS authors are based, I argue that this response is insufficient: in fact,

history shows such institutions can do very dubious things and still maintain trust, funding,
and users.

Designated Communities are often implicit rather than officially and publicly

documented. Because so much of the daily processes in an Archive are imbricated with the
construction of AIPs which are in turn built to express particular information to these

Designated Communities, an implicit Designated Community means that the operations of
the Archives are relatively invisible. Dissemination packages are not necessarily windows

into these processes. Galloway, Lovink, and Thacker (2008) note how the digital interface,

like the public facing content of an OAIS Archive that allows users to query for and receive
157

Information Packages, is material reality that structures a discourse embedded with

historical relations. In fact, OAIS does not encourage transparency. Instead, the authors of
OAIS, in their explanation of of Designated Communities, effectively direct archives to
inscript users into their practice and archival constructs. By inscripting users via the
Designated Community technology, archives are also directed to create power

relationships between the included and excluded users that privilege assumed, default
groups of users.

Kerr (2003) additionally writes about the line between configured users versus

imagined users to note the difference between more versus less intentional conceptions of
projected Consumers. To call users “configured” is somewhat too deterministic, where

imagined is a better term: it is possible to imagine a user that will behave in a way that an
Archive determines, but not actually configure such a user. However, I argue that this

underestimates the power of the imaginary given the role constructions like Designated
Communities play within the network represented by OAIS. Akrich and Latour (1992)
diagram the interplay of human and nonhuman actors to demonstrate how they coconstruct reality through impact on society and social relations:

158

Figure 7: Human and Non-Human Actors
The presence of the nonhuman actors is key here: OAIS is likely one such nonhuman actor
in its role as a technology; I argue that the imaginaries of users like Designated

Communities have a role in this space as well. This is echoed by Akrich (1992) who says,

“The inscription of representations of users and use in artifacts results in technologies that
contain a script: they attribute and delegate specific competencies, actions, and

responsibilities to users and technological artifacts (pages 208).” Presumptions about users
in turn affect access to and the relationship between users and technologies in what

becomes a reflexive, constitutive and self-propagating process that mirrors the creation

and role of discourse: the definition of users via a Designated Community impacts the ways
in which real users can interact with an Archive and some of the tacit assumptions about
them are self-fulfilled as a result of predefined modes of access. While this process is not
entirely deterministic as users effect change on technologies all the time, the power

inherent to this process and the power of imaginaries should not be overlooked. Van House
and Churchill (2008) argue that “…what is remembered individually and collectively

depends in part on technologies of memory and the associated sociotechnical practices…”
159

(page 296). In other words, the creation of Designated Communities that then inform

Archive practice is a discursive process wherein Archives are creating the Knowledge Base

for future user communities. What makes this particular concept of Designated Community

so tricky is precisely that it asks Archives to predict the future, as a digital preservation and
curation scholar at a US public university put it, not just technologically but socially and
politically; further, the relationship is cyclical.

Science has dominated not just in the creation of OAIS but also, in some ways, the

field of digital preservation more generally, and Designated Communities can be used a

heuristic to examine the impacts of this positivist domination on evolving practice. This can
be seen in comments like this one from a US-based data curation specialist who explained

the scientific leanings of terms on OAIS thusly: “So, let me start by, you know, this idea that
[designating a community is] easier for the space sciences community or the biology

community or so on. I think what that reflects more than anything is that the best examples
of data archives that we have so far are in fact disciplinary based.” Without making a

deterministic claim about this, I would argue that this participant is entirely right that there
is a non-coincidental link between the things he describes. This interview subject says

“easier for,” meaning of course that the logical counterpart of this is that it is “harder for”

people not in space sciences or biology, etc. Most participants, when I asked them questions
about whether there were different subject-specific or disciplinary responses to OAIS, said
that there were noticeable differences of needs and attitudes but that these differences
stemmed from other sources (read: not disciplinary differences).

Despite this frequent claim, answers to subsequent questions in those same

interviews belied the suggestions that humanist–scientist differences do not play much of a
160

role. Here is an example from a Canadian digital preservation scholar: “…[Designated

Community] is also extremely weakly defined in the OAIS. There is almost nothing about it.
It's there. It's there and it's supposed to work. And surely it is a little easier in a science
background.” Moments later, he continued: “I see very little reason why [the term

Designated Community] should be any less workable in cultural heritage than in science

data. There is repurposing and norms all over, and this is about prediction of the future, so
that's not easy.” During the course of the PVWII grant project, this disciplinary division
became a focal point when speaking about Designated Communities within a broader

conversation about significant properties, a concept that will be discussed in detail in the

next chapter. In this context, Jerome McDonough, a digital preservation and STS scholar at a
public US university said: “The NASA community is the birthplace for OAIS... The problem

outside of NASA is that there isn’t always a really well defined designated user community.
As opposed to, say, who’s the designated user community for the Library of Congress?”
Trevor Owens, a US-based digital preservation scholar and practitioner responded by

saying: “Scientists seem to assert that they know exactly what they care about, but there’s
always going to be another humanist example where you’re going to want something else
to be captured.” Chris Melissinos, a practitioner at a major public museum in the US

rounded out the exchange by saying: “This user community is also really passionate about
exactly what they want and what they think is important. If we’re too academic, we can
overlook the humanity of the [a digital object] if we’re only trying to preserve the bits.

There’s got to be a balance between academics and [users] in trying to decide what parts to
preserve.” Here, there is a continuation of trends mentioned above: for example, the hybrid

“misconception” of “designated user communities.” The language of OAIS is also elided over
161

the course of the conversation: by the final exchange, a museum practitioner shifts entirely
to invoking “users,” indicating the point at which OAIS ceased to be the common language
of the discussion. The transcript of the entire conversation, only parts of which are

reproduced here, began with an explicit reference to OAIS, the lack of information it

provides about how to define Designated Communities, and what this means in terms of

understanding the sub-groups that might be represented within a Designated Community.
By the end, the conversation started by digital preservation scholars from major public US
universities had shifted to the larger group, which included practitioners in digital

preservation but also in museum and art spaces more generally. The OAIS boundary object
disappears as an explicit node of the conversation yet remains in the ways in which

participants talked about what it was that an Archive needed to provide users with when

dealing with the preservation of video games. This move generally reflects the way that, in
the US in particular, OAIS has become an invisible, yet ever-present player in digital
preservation discussions and projects.

When speaking with OAIS authors, I posed a question about Designated

Communities: is it possible for a community to refuse to be designated? This question is not
trivial given historical precedents of oppressive forced grouping in both physical and other
ways, such as oppressive catalog designations in Library of Congress subject headings. It is
telling, however, that I was not able to convey the meaning behind such a question to a

space scientist author of OAIS: the epistemological space between us was too large. But
there are other things that are imbricated in this kind of question. When conducting an

audit, OAIS authors suggest auditors check on the quality and compliance of Information
Packages by finding an actual member of the Archive’s Designated Community, plunking
162

them down in front of the Information Package, and asking them to demonstrate that they
understand the content. This is an interesting suggestion because it forces a connection

between Designated Communities and real people, something that comes from the audit

process more than OAIS itself, wherein it is possible for the Designated Community to be

imaginary as a heuristic for planning. But it does raise questions about communities who
might refuse relationships with archives. This might be seen in politically unstable

countries where there are issues of trust and safety with ruling regimes (Caswell, 2013b).
But this can also be seen in spaces where there is a fundamental mismatch between the
labor and recording keeping being done by the archive and the wants or needs of the
Designated Community.

Consider the example of “missing” US census data. There was, of course, the loss of

Hollerith cards in a 1921 fire which resulted in a loss of records from 1890. But the more
telling incident here stems from the 1960 census. Researchers who use census data tell

what NARA describes as “apocryphal stories” about missing US census data (Adams and
Brown, 2000). In this case, the designation “missing” signifies a dearth of data that

researchers want. The National Archives notes that these data are not technically missing
because they were not meant to be kept: there was no records schedule to preserve the
data that researchers want. This is a mismatch: the 1960 census information is not lost,
because what is missing was not meant to be kept, yet the researching community

definitely misses it. If the Designated Community for this census data is this group of
researchers, then the National Archives is not OAIS compliant in the sense that the

Designated Community disagrees with the assessment of sufficient authenticity stemming
from the preservation activities on the part of the Archive. Or rather, given that the
163

Archives insist that the data are not lost or missing, does this necessarily preclude these

researchers from actually being the Designated Community for this Archive? The question
of who gets to be in the Designated Community and what actual communities get to say
about this is not explored yet in the OAIS literature and this type of back and forth

relationship does not work well with the ways the authors of OAIS conceived of Designated
Communities. Given the central function of the term to the Archive and its processes, this

has a profound effect on the ability to use OAIS as a recuperative technology for inclusion.
5.4 Conclusions

In this chapter, I considered a single term from OAIS, Designated Communities. This

term was brought up both in response to specific questions I asked about it but also in
relationship to a number of other themes that arose in interviews: audit processes,
challenges of digital technologies, the challenge of heterogeneous user groups, the

relationship between the sciences and the humanities, etc. Its omnipresence in the data
matches its omnipresence throughout the OAIS documentation: it is required for the

central functions of an OAIS such that its percolates implicitly throughout the entirety of

the information and functional models. It is also a term embedded with many scripts that

participates in many discourses. The power the Archive has to make this designation is not
trivial, and this is a continuation of the power archives have had for millennia to dictate

official memory and who or what gets included in it. Just as archives have been engaged in

the practice of forgetting as much as remembering, the term Designated Community forces
digital Archives to be in the business of necessary exclusion.

Yet this is also a space of potential for OAIS: it can be used in a recuperative fashion

if Archives look to recent literature about inclusive and pluralist archives, libraries, and
164

museums for methods by which they can create Designated Communities with input from

actual users and communities. I suggest that this is less likely to happen given the absence

of formal models to help describe the process of actually making a Designated Community:
when there is no guide, people will fall back on assumptions about users which will only

serve to perpetuate the power disparity between archives and communities, particularly

communities of sub-ordinate populations. It is precisely for reasons like this that one of the

central arguments of this thesis is that additional metrics are needed to guide the processes
that arise as part of deploying the OAIS reference model in memory institutions.

165

CHAPTER 6

Introduction

SIGNIFICANT PROPERTIES

The previous chapters examined findings from interviews conducted with digital

preservation practitioners that highlighted, among other things, how situational

understandings of OAIS are and the power relationships between the sociotechnical

network that is represented by OAIS and its audiences. This chapter expands on the theme
of situational discourses and understandings. I broaden the interview pool by bringing in
interview data from Producers and transcripted conversations with practitioners and

academics who work on the preservation of video game content. Here, I engage with the

concept of significant properties and how these do and do not fit within the OAIS reference

model. Note that the term significant properties is not capitalized: that is because it is not an
OAIS specific term. Rather, this term is borrowed from traditional archival practice. Coping

with this term represents another point of tension between the various disciplines brought
together to construct the sub-discipline and profession of digital preservation.

Webb, Pearson, and Koerbin (2013) of Australia’s National Library sum up the state

of current development of significant properties as actionable within the general realm of
digital preservation:

We have come to a tentative conclusion that recognising and taking action to

maintain significant properties will be critical, but that the concept can be more of a
stumbling block than a starting block, at least in the context of our own institution.

This simultaneous acknowledgement of the critical yet poorly understood nature of

significant properties demonstrates both the importance of the term, but also the barriers
166

to its productive impact given a lack of definitional clarity: significant properties have

become an elephant in the room for digital preservation. Thus, this chapter argues that one
method of synthesizing these various definitions is to engage with how this term is used in
practice.

This chapter marries data from interviews conducted for the dissertation with data

from the Preserving Virtual Worlds II (PVWII) grant alongside the framework set out by

Giaretta et al (2009). I use these data to examine how well user-described significance fits

within the OAIS entities for Representation Information, Provenance, and how this data fits
within the OAIS conception of Authenticity. This work explores a concern laid out by

Sierman (2012) in examining the extent to which Transformational Information Properties
serve as an adequate substitute for significant properties. I argue through these data that

some significant properties fit within the entities of the OAIS reference model, particularly

those related to the digital object itself and the software/hardware environments required

to make an object function. I also argue that OAIS, as it currently exists, cannot encapsulate
all the types of significant properties derived from the interview data. The places where

these mismatches occur are places wherein other preservation practitioners and scholars
have identified weaknesses in the model related to the changing landscape of digital
content, in addition to fundamental disparities in epistemology and values.
6.1 Significant Properties

There is a general consensus that significant properties are important and yet there

are no widely adopted methods by which one can determine what is significant for

preservation purposes. The lack of a simple and widely accepted definition is one part of

the difficulty in actually evolving the term significant properties into concrete preservation
167

and curation strategies. General discourse on the topic refers to properties that are most
essential to the understandability of digital objects over time. That is to say, significant

properties recognize both the situatedness of digital artefacts and the fact that it may not
be possible or practical to save every aspect of every object over time.

The term significant properties has been used in preservation and curation literature

for over a decade. The most commonly referenced definition, and also an early one

compared to others I reference here, is the one by Hedstrom and Lee (2002), who define

the term as “those properties of digital objects that affect their quality, usability, rendering,
and behaviour”. The term is described variously in many places, and Giaretta et al (2009)

discuss the difficulty in settling on a single definition for the term in part by exploring some
of the myriad definitions that currently exist in disciplinary literature. Such discussions
occur across institutions, information types, and research disciplines. Of science data,
Sacchi et al (2011) say:

Although this notion has clearly demonstrated its usefulness in cultural heritage
domains, its application to the preservation of scientific datasets is not as well
developed.

What precisely is meant by demonstrated usefulness is not entirely clear, as many

practitioners in cultural heritage acknowledge the use-value of this notion without being
able to advance either a concrete definition of what it means or how to account for it

formulaically or machine-readably. One of my OAIS interview participants, a manager of
digital preservation at a European national library, suggested that libraries are well
equipped to deal with significant properties, “because…as a library we have a lot of

experience in describing things so we are very good at metadata”. This quote suggests that
168

she perceives a relationship between descriptive metadata and significant properties.

Echoing the findings of Giaretta et al (2009) about the occasionally contradictory nature of

various definitions of significant properties, another OAIS interview participant, a research
and development officer at a national archive, said “well, it’s just technical metadata, isn’t
it?”

The other difficulty with this term is that it represents a larger schism within the

field of digital preservation between practitioners and designers from computer science
and those who come from archival or library science. Kevin Bradley (2007) presciently
said:

“All God’s children got significant properties,” we can sing in unison, but this takes

us no further if we cannot define its meaning in such a way that we understand what
properties are under consideration, and describe them in a way that is machinereadable and automatically actionable.

This encapsulates the tension between the social, the human and the technical. Because all
of these elements are at play in preservation, particularly when it comes to cultural

heritage, significant properties serve as a potential flash point within larger preservation

discourses, exemplifying the tensions that I have highlighted throughout this dissertation
that arise around OAIS and the growth of the field of digital preservation.
6.1.1 Significant Properties and OAIS

The OAIS reference model has long and wide adoption within the digital

preservation community. Further, the terms contained therein have come to function as
boundary objects across different types of preservation and curation. As such, mapping

significant properties to established entities from OAIS is a promising project for moving
169

concepts of significance into the realm of practice given the large constraint that OAIS

provides for the development of any major preservation methodology or standard. Giaretta
et al (2009) took on this task as part and parcel of what were to be upcoming revisions to
OAIS in 2012, in response to calls by many in the field for clarity on this term and an

expansion of its role within OAIS. In the cited article, the authors firstly examined various
uses of the term significant properties and secondly proposed a number of existing, and

thus more precisely or homogenously defined, terms from within the OAIS reference model
that might be used instead of having to either consolidate or propose yet another canonical
definition for this term. This was an important project: significance in this way does not

appear in earlier versions of the model. In the resulting changes in 2012, the most recent as
of the writing of this dissertation, significant properties are mentioned without being
sufficiently addressed for some audiences (CCSDS, 2012). Barbara Sierman (2012)
compares the most recent version of OAIS with its predecessors and notes:

The Information Property is related to the commonly known but not always clearly
defined term “significant property”, but I think more discussion is needed to define

better where the differences and similarities between the two concepts lie and how
to translate this into the daily practice.

The Transformational Information Property in the 2012 revisions of OAIS is meant to stand
instead of significant properties, rather than in place. During my interviews with OAIS

authors, some interviewees noted that they decided to side-step this discussion entirely by
creating a separate entity that would serve a distinct set of functions because of the sheer
number of incommensurate existing definitions for significant properties. The key is that
Transformational Information Properties are meant to work in conjunction with other
170

existing features in OAIS, in lieu of actually defining the term significant property, thus

avoiding the need for authors and OAIS as a sociotechnical network to engage within this
space. In practice, the outcomes are not so neat: by choosing not to wade into the

significant property debate, the OAIS authors are taking an effective stand that indicates
that the concept of significant properties does not need to be incorporated within the

major standard of the field: it is not useful or important enough. This dictates in part how
well it can be taken up by others given the pervasiveness of OAIS and the ways in which
practitioners struggle to envision alternative frameworks for their preservation work.

Additionally, the solution conceived of by the authors to avoid the term has not stopped

practitioners within the profession from continuing to call for OAIS to deal with significant
properties more explicitly.

Giaretta et al (2009) propose a framework utilizing existing OAIS entities as

containers for the types of data that might be considered significant. A particularly

important part of this move is the emphasis on the Designated Community, as authenticity
does not exist in a vacuum but is instead a product of the relationship between a potential
end-user and the data they might receive from an Archive.

Here, I use the term a potential end user purposefully to refer to the broadest set of

possible users, because the term Designated Community refers to a specific audience rather
than general users. This distinction is particularly pertinent for institutions such as

libraries, whose users are a vast and heterogeneous group. In such a case, the Designated

Community is necessarily artificially constructed in order to scale preservation practices so
they are manageable within the resources of the institution. OAIS does not say how broad
or narrow a Designated Community must be.

171

The previous chapter details the tensions engendered by the term Designated

Community in OAIS: it is ‘weakly defined’ in the sense that the model does not concretely
detail how to form and document such a community. While such specificity is not

necessarily within the purview of a reference model, the missing piece here is that a
subsequent guideline or standard about Designated Communities has not yet been

developed, and that many institutions have not, at a site-specific level, formally defined
their Designated Communities. Lee (2005) describes the genesis of standards within a
particular field: reference models happen first, are high-level and aim at providing

foundations for future work. Rather than providing specific guidance, they are meant

instead to spur the creation of further standards that will detail implementable workflows.
Lee provides this diagram by Cargill (1997, page 92) to explain this genesis:

Figure 8: Genesis of Standards

Work that does not address the Designated Community cannot address the significant

properties elephant. In dealing with a concept like significance, it becomes necessary to ask
172

significance for whom, something that is often implied but not always specifically

addressed in discussions of significant properties. Yeo (2012) sums this up eloquently:

However, the determination of ‘significant properties’ is no less problematical than
the debate about notions of value …not least because different user communities
will bring different perceptions of what constitutes significance.

The situated nature of the Designated Community and the idea of preservation for someone
arises from the same discourses of place and time that inform conversations about

significant properties. Struggles I identify here are due in part to changes in technological
landscape the importance of which authors of OAIS were not able to predict. This is not

new: for example, earlier versions of OAIS assumed migration 45 to be the default method

for continual use of obsolete formats in future, yet recent years have seen a shift away from
migration and normalization towards a more mainstream acceptance of emulation. The

2012 OAIS revisions encapsulated this change. Recent developments in areas like linked

data and other forms of distributed content pose a challenge to the current iteration of the
OAIS reference model, and practitioners like David Rosenthal (2015) have made calls for
attention to this as OAIS heads into a new round of revisions in 2017.
6.2 Preserving Virtual Worlds II

This chapter utilizes data gathered as part of the Preserving Virtual Worlds II grant.

PVWII was funded by IMLS and concluded in 2013. It included investigators from the

University of Illinois, the University of Maryland, Rochester Institute of Technology, and
Stanford University. Investigators examined the concept of significant properties as it

I use migration here in the sense of moving content to a new, perhaps related, format
that results in changes to underlying code and structures even if surface aspects remain the
same or similar. OAIS uses the term Migration to mean something specific.
45

173

applies to video games with the aim of informing preservation practices for complex media,
building on previous projects that examined the significant properties of software and a

previous game preservation project, Preserving Virtual Worlds I (PVWI) (Matthews et al,

2008; Knight, 2008; McDonough et al, 2010). Broken into two investigative phases, Phase 1
entailed a two-fold method for examining significance. Investigators performed technical
and content analyses of a number of video game series. The game series spanned a time

frame from 1971 to the present and ranged across different game genres 46. Simultaneously,
investigators conducted interviews with people involved in the design and dissemination

of games from the case set; with designers working in other game design studios; and with
fans and programmers who have worked on more well-known modifications (mods) of
some of the games from the case set. These interviews were qualitatively coded and

analyzed by members of the research team across the various institutions involved in the
project.

Phase 2 of PVWII focused on the development of tools and metrics to assist in the

preservation of the significant properties identified from the research in Phase 1. These
included an examination of how such properties could inform decisions about the

emulation, migration, and re-implementation of games as well as defining benchmarks for
authenticity in playback. The Phase 1 research painted a very complex picture of

significance within the realm of games, and a key finding was, unsurprisingly, that

significance is highly situated, which echoes findings about the deployment of OAIS as
I use the term genre very loosely and will not attempt to classify the game set by genre;
the investigative team for PVWII struggled with this, particularly the way that existing
genres popularly used for games are neither commensurate nor mutually exclusive. As
PVWII wrapped, the team decided not to include a category for genre in the wiki tool
designed to collect user-defined significant properties.
46

174

discussed in previous chapters. The research data indicated that what is significant about
games may not be something inherent to the game’s code (bits) or even computing

environment (platform, operating systems, controls), but could include elements as varied
as underlying data models or general surface affective experiences. As such, PVWII

suggested a layered model for looking at games, delineating different aspects of each
system wherein different users might locate significance. I will discuss this model in
greater detail later in this chapter.

A second deliverable was the creation of a survey tool which borrowed from earlier

projects such as the Variable Media Questionnaire (Ippolito, 2003) that aims to capture
significant properties as defined by various stakeholders, including designers, players,

archivists/preservationists, and curators. This tool is designed as a wiki for the purpose of

collecting and automating the analysis of large quantities of data that will serve as a record
of the Knowledge Base of different user communities. In combination with game-specific
contributions to format registries, another PVWII phase 2 goal, the hope is that

preservation of games can be enhanced by crowd participation in the process of gathering
and centralizing previously dispersed but necessary information about games.
6.3 Mapping Significance

Given the ubiquity of OAIS, I wanted to understand how complicated multi-part

works like video games and virtual worlds fit within the model by allocating significant

properties to existing OAIS entities and identifying those which are a mismatch with the

model. Video games are exemplars for preservation work because of their complexities: as
digital objects, they have numerous dependencies, both analog and digital. They also, by

way of their popularity, have enormous user bases. They are often highly proprietary and
175

yet belong to companies that go in and out of existence, with intellectual property traded,
sold, and occasionally abandoned. They also function as heuristics for understanding the

essential yet nebulous OAIS concept of Knowledge Base: “…The games of a people reveal a
great deal about them” (McLuhan, 1964). The heterogeneous users of video games, which
include leisure players, professional players, in-game laborers and others, have the
possibility to help illuminate the boundary between necessary and non-essential

information that make an object understandable: basic assumptions that players will
understand the nature of a simple d-pad for 2-D representations, for example, are

necessary for some kinds of play. Understanding that Yoshi is a dinosaur instead of a horse,
for example, is not necessary: the essential piece of information there is that the creature
can be ridden and this is how game players should approach it.

Video games and other complex types of work pose a challenge to digital

preservationists for two reasons: first, as mentioned above, the large and general category
of significant properties is one that OAIS intentionally avoids. Second, while the notion of
Archive in OAIS is very specific, it shares some foundational tenets with the study of

traditional paper archiving practice. Several interview participants told me that it is not the
job of the archive to collect and preserve external significant properties. The tension here
arises from the fact that cultural heritage objects are inherently socially constructed and

products of a particular place and time. As Gitelman (2005) points out, humanistic histories
look at objects whose role over time changes in different ways than the artefacts of the

history of science: art is still art hundreds of years later while scientific objects of similar
age are rarely still used as active instruments in the production of new scientific

knowledge. Both the science of archives and the positivist scientific discipline that helped
176

form OAIS are suspicious about the notion of selection particularly as it relates to value.

Within traditional archival practice, the term selection is used very narrowly: the scope and
collection statement determine the type of content to be collected, and all such content

from the organization is archived rather than an archivist selecting certain materials for

processing and preservation in a more colloquial sense. Creating Information Packages for

complex media requires some measure of more colloquial selection, where selection means
precisely this latter concept: that the Archive must choose a set of things to include in the

package that encompasses the most significant properties. The purposeful and transparent
creation of artificial boundaries is at odds with foundations of archival practice which

inform the authors of OAIS and how OAIS gets deployed. This is the second mismatch.

I will focus on interview data related to two games franchises from the PVWII case

set: Carmen Sandiego and Civilization. For both games, multiple creators were interviewed,
painting a broad and varied picture of significance as determined by creators. In order to
determine how well this significance data can be captured by the entities in OAIS, I parse
the data to look specifically for information that could be modeled as Representation

Information; the documented as Provenance; benchmarks for authenticity; and that can be
modeled as Transformational Information Properties.

In keeping with the requirements of OAIS, I define the Designated Community based

on self-descriptive information derived from the interviews with the broader notion that,
for this case study, the Designated Community is comprised solely of the interview

participants. The process of defining a Designated Community for this portion of the

dissertation acknowledges a limitation of this work: the preservation here is for someone,
so the model here aims to preserve what this Designated Community identifies as
177

significant. The process of designating a community acknowledges that these properties
may not be significant for everyone and what I propose preserving may not constitute a
sufficient or authentic representation of the content for everyone.

Finally, I identify significant properties that do not easily fit within the

Representation Information of particular digital objects and discuss why it is that these do
not work within the current iteration of OAIS. Some of these properties are related to the
tricky OAIS term Knowledge Base; others are distributed in a manner that challenges
OAIS’s requirement for adequate control of the content.
6.4 Findings

My study examines a difficulty in the day-to-day deployment of earlier frameworks,

whose basic constructions often insufficiently account for significant properties that are

not inherent to the digital object itself, such as those that are not intrinsic to the code yet

still essential to some kind of long-term understanding. The current interest in emulation
as a preservation method does in some measure move the preservation community

towards an acceptance that things beyond the object themselves are significant and require

preservation – in the case of emulation, significance is found in the behaviors of the original
computing environment. The work here looks to extend this by forcing the consideration of
even broader data about significance that may encompass aspects of the social and cultural
and aspects of the Designated Community’s Knowledge Base. These data about what really
make a game, and relatedly what really constitutes a ‘digital object’, are not and should not
be incompatible to the precisely defined categories existent in OAIS because the model

requires updating AIPs as the Knowledge Base of the Designated Community changes over

time. This requirement acknowledges that there is more involved in understanding objects
178

than simply recreating the objects themselves: artefacts are a product of a particular place
and time, and are understandable as such. They have an ‘aura’, a term from Walter

Benjamin that Abby Smith (2003) roughly equates with an experiential and affective

authenticity. If what is called ‘significant’ by participants in the PVWII survey and interview
data does not map well into the Information Package particular to individual video game

Digital Objects, this does not absolve the Archive from the need to treat and preserve this
kind of information.

6.4.1 Significant Properties in PVWII Data

Giaretta et al (2009) note that, “The notion of Significant Properties has emerged as

a key concept in preservation within the library community but has not been a concept that

is much used in the context of the preservation of research data that is not normally viewed
as a document.” This speaks to disciplinary divisions like those discussed in previous

chapters, in particular the assumption from systems designers, engineers, and computer

science practitioners that the other professions involved in digital preservation bring with
them a level of imprecision and unhelpful adherence to tools and terms borne of a lack of
understanding about purposeful systems design.

The CEDARS project defined significant properties as:
those characteristics [both technical, intellectual, and aesthetic] agreed by the

archive or by the collection manager to be the most important features to preserve
over time.

It is very much in this vein that the PVWII project team approached significant properties,

beginning with a note from the PVWI final report when the project team for the first grant
noted: “Without a clear understanding of which aspects of a game are likely to be
179

considered significant by scholars in the future, it is extremely difficult to choose an

appropriate preservation strategy and preserving games without any change in their

appearance and play may simply not be achievable in many instances” (McDonough et al,
2010, pages 6-7).

Sergeant (2002) on the other hand proposed that “Significant Properties are those

attributes of an object that constitute the complete (for the intended Consumer)

intellectual content of that object”. While the notion of completeness here is an interesting
one in light of the PVWII findings—for example, could a preserved version of Carmen

Sandiego be considered complete without its accompanying analog paper encyclopedia—I
find the primacy given to an individual object problematic. Singling the object out as

divorced from is spatial and temporal context will not guarantee the understandability of
the object over time, even if its rendering environment and bits are preserved. This is a
problem that both Giaretta and colleagues and the OAIS model acknowledge: that the

situation (that determines the situatedness) of an object needs to be preserved. I argue that
this is what is encapsulated by the terms Knowledge Base of the Designated Community
within the sociotechnical complex of OAIS, even if the explicit definitions in the OAIS
documentation do not indicate this. The often described example is the shift from a

dominant language of English to Spanish, at which point the records in traditionally English
speaking archives need to be marked as explicitly English, a denotation that was previously
unnecessary as English enjoyed a decentered and invisible privileged position as the

dominant norm. Another example that stems from the PVWII research is the change in

geography and maps over time: Carmen Sandiego games frequently involved chasing ‘bad

guys’ across various geographic locations (read: followed that VILE agent from country to
180

country). The contemporary Knowledge Base of the 1985 game player (assuming this

person is part of the Archive’s Designated Community) involved maps that, for example,

did not contain South Sudan and North Sudan as separate countries and that showed the

USSR as a single block rather than the de-federated former Soviet nations contemporary to
the writing of this dissertation. Maps are often represented as documents, and documents
make for easy pieces of Representation Information to store along with the digital object,

all under the OAIS entity entitled “Content Information”. But when a digital object like the
1985 original floppy disk version of Carmen is seen as imbricated in a complex and everchanging sociotechnical network (or as a network unto itself), then there are subtler

changes that occur that are more difficult to document than an English dictionary or a map.
In several Carmen games, South East Asian countries are typified by images of people in

conical hats working in rice fields. Even as of the writing of this dissertation, this image still
allows game players to identify a certain part of the world, but this knowledge will change
rapidly. Damming of the Mekong River and rising water levels associated with global

warming trends mean that large swathes of the Mekong River delta, known as one of the

top rice producing and exporting areas in the world, are at risk of being flooded with salt
water from the sea. These climate changes threaten to end the farming of rice in these

areas: if these trends continue unabated, within a few decades this region will no longer be
the center of the rice growing industry. With it will go the cultural association of people in
conical hats bent over rice fields as production shifts to Africa, where popular imaginaries
suggest different visual markers to note time, place, and occupation. At this point, parts of
the game that rely on tacit knowledge that recognizes images of conical hats and non-

descript green fields (this non-description being due largely to technological limitations at
181

the time these games were produced) means that the game can no longer be played as it
was meant to be: the very behaviors of the digital object break down without enough
understanding about the contemporary Knowledge Base of original intended users:

without this knowledge, players do not recognize that this image connotes a particular

location. Without recognizing a location, a player cannot continue their pursuit of Carmen
across the world.

And so this situatedness, I would argue, is a significant property in the sense it was

described by PVWII: without this kind of information, the game is not playable over time
even if the bits and computing and rendering environment are preserved. A current

presumption of game preservation is that a game, by its nature, is meant to be played, so if
it cannot be played, we cannot be said to have preserved a working copy (McDonough,
2013).

Significant properties, as identified in interviews from PVWII, could be located at

any point in the layered model developed during PVWII for representing video game
components.

Figure 9. Layers of a video game (Decker et al, 2012)

182

For example, some video games were designed around specific software support layers,
layer three on the stack, such as the first Civilization game designed to work with early
Windows operating systems. The function of the then-novel eponymous windows was

incorporated heavily into the game, and constituted a significant property to the developer
we spoke with, who mentioned the role this operating system played in the game’s
development. The Nintendo game Duck Hunt notoriously used a special peripheral

hardware piece, layer five on the stack. A light gun (as opposed to the normally used d-pad
and 4 button controller) allowed players to shoot at ducks, as the name of the game

implies, and the game is not functional without this piece of equipment. In 2010, a fellow
student at New York University did a term project on the preservation of Duck Hunt and

noted the comparative ease of finding working cartridges and working Nintendo hardware
and the relative difficulty in finding the special light gun 47. As of the writing of this

dissertation, six years later, another piece of the hardware layer of Duck Hunt has become
increasingly difficult to locate: the cathode ray tube (CRT) televisions that the light gun
needs in order to function. A CRT monitor might be considered hardware or might be

considered part of the physical layer, layer two in the stack, as part of the physical interface
to the player. These twin external hardware dependencies, both of which are essential to a

functioning version of the game and so might be considered significant by some Designated
Communities, together pose a double difficulty in preserving the game.

Yet most significant properties identified by the interview participants in PVWII fell

unambiguously under the top, application layer of the stack, which is the representation of
A student of mine at the University of Illinois similarly noted the difficulty in finding the
mouse peripheral that came bundled with the Super Nintendo game Mario Paint.
47

183

the game. As a result, I divide the significant properties in this data into three categories,
according to where they can be located in relation to the layered model: two of these lie
within the top layer of the stack and the third lies, purposefully, outside the stack
altogether.

Figure 10. Application and experience as separate layers

I firstly break the Application/Experience Layer into two parts: Application and

Experience. These encompass many of the significant properties identified by PVWII

participants. The application layer includes things like the game code itself, as well as items
like jump tables for early Mario Brothers games or historical statistical mortality data that
determined how likely a player was to die when playing Oregon Trail. The experiential

layer encompasses the surface and affective experiences of playing the game, the ‘aura’: the

fact that Carmen Sandiego is first and foremost a scavenger hunt and that it is only kind of a
one-player game despite its single avatar, for example. I separate these two because I argue
that they are not necessarily related. To be sure, the original code in conjunction with a

computing environment were necessary to manifest the original playing experience. But to

recreate experiences like this, the mnemonic experience rather than evidential information
184

(Smith, 2003), to give an authentic representation of the experience of play, the original
code is no longer necessary. PVWII investigators posed the question to game designers:

how important is the original code if you can generate the same surface appearances and
behaviors with a different backend? Most responded that they were not wedded to the

original code, but more so to the experience of play. Some noted that the original code itself
was ‘poor’, often due to time constraints. These two things can exist separately: because it
is possible to save 1s and 0s and even consoles and media without saving the experience

and it is possible to recreate the experience without the 1s and 0s, I separate this layer into
two discrete layers.

Finally, I also argue that some kinds of significance, as described by PVWII

participants, lie outside the stack altogether—that is to say, they cannot be found in code or
computer environment. These include significant properties like those I term relationally
significant. PVWII investigators asked participants to name their favorite game franchise
and to explain what made it so important. One point of significance that was mentioned

was the way that a particular title within a game franchise was ‘leaps and bounds’ ahead of
its predecessors and other titles available at the time. I term this relationally significant
because understanding this statement about what makes a game important requires

placing it in context almost like archival bond with other games of its time. To understand

this property of a game does not require a playable copy, although it might entail placing a
playable copy up against playable copies of its contemporaries to demonstrates its

advancements. But there are other ways to represent and benchmark this: for example,

placing visuals from saved game files, videos of play, or machinima in relation to visuals of
its contemporaries. The constant feature here is that is impossible to understand the
185

“advancedness” of a game by looking at the game itself: it has to be seen in relation to other
things.

PVWII interviews also raised other affective aspects of game play as significant. For

Carmen Sandiego and Oregon Trail, two franchises that are often termed edutainment

games to the chagrin of their producers, interviewees expressed that understanding them
in the educational context of the mid-1980s is important to understanding the experience
of play. Like the tangible difference between playing a quarter-guzzler like the original
Donkey Kong and playing a game on a home console (one designed to be short to eat

money, the other designed to be long to engender customer loyalty to a product), there is a
tangible difference between playing Carmen Sandiego solo at home, with Google at your

fingertips to answer questions, versus playing it in its original environment: picture several
kids clustered around a tiny and expensive computer in a school, because no one had a

computer at home. One person might have controlled the keyboard; another would have
held the accompanying encyclopedia. One interview participant who worked on

programming for Carmen Sandiego said that seeing these games in context was how he
envisioned ideal preservation for his games, while acknowledging the difficulty in

manifesting something like the mnemonic impressions of a particular time and place.
6.4.2 Significant Properties as per OAIS Interviews

While coding the interviews with OAIS practitioners, authors, and scholars, I

identified two nodes regarding significant properties. Firstly, there were explicit mentions
of significant properties. There were only three instances in which significant properties

were brought up by my interviewees, and this makes sense given that the dominant theme
of these interviews was OAIS and the fact that significant properties is not an OAIS term. I
186

mentioned one of these instances earlier in this chapter: a technology officer at a European
national archive suggested that significant properties for the data she had to preserve,
mostly video and audio files, were technical metadata. The three explicit significant

property instances echo the dominance of the OAIS authors in shaping how people within
the realm of digital preservation continue to respond to and understand their work in
relation to OAIS. In one instance, I asked an interview participant about significant

properties specifically because I knew this participant had made public statements about
them in relation to OAIS in the past. In this particular discussion, the interviewee

mentioned significant properties in relation to enrolling analog professionals within
libraries in digital work. The interview subject said:

…we have more analog material… and lots of people were trained to deal with

analog material and fewer people are trained to deal with digital material. And as
you can’t just give them the sack [laughs], you need to deal with them, you train

them or whatever, so that takes a long time and I think that’s one of the problems all

main libraries are dealing now with that they have staff that’s not quite prepared for
digital material. So that the thinking about OAIS starts within a… small group of

people… and we tell them ‘I think you should interpret it like this or like that’ and
what you don’t see is that they try to translate it to their analog environment and

sometimes that does not work because it’s digital. So it’s difficult to translate I think,
although the model itself is very clear, I think it’s rather straight forward, but when
you go the significant properties, well, endless discussions.

This interview participant, someone who is both a library practitioner and actively

involved in OAIS revisions and related standards, describes OAIS as “relatively simple”. In
187

this case, the designation of simplicity is meant, as much as anything, to indicate how not
simple the concept of significant properties is. The situation in which she is working is

already a fraught one to some extent: the library has a large analog collection and many

analog employees, and moving into the digital space requires people to learn new skills.

The interview participant says that it is not possible to simply fire the analog professionals
who cannot make the shift to digital, and this is meant literally as well as to suggest that to
do so would be wrong. This interview took place in Western Europe, where labor laws
would prohibit such actions. Indeed, this was not the only person out of the European

interviewees to make just such a comment about analog employees. The fact that firing

analog-skilled employees is stated consistently across different institutions, however, is

suggestive: someone at some point thought firing reticent, or “conservative” as three other

participants described them, employees was the best solution moving forward in the digital
era. And it is under this umbrella discussion, speaking about employees who work with

analog materials, who cannot make analogies between their previous work and their digital
futures, who struggle with a simple model, often because they “only read the first 80 pages
[of OAIS]” according to the same interviewee, that the subject of significant properties

arises. As suggested elsewhere, this notion comes from library and archive traditions, and
therefore clashes with data and systems design origins that dominate the construction of

OAIS. This is the unresolved tension a reviewer noted in response to an article I submitted
on the subject to a major preservation-oriented conference. And perhaps it is the

perception by OAIS authors that significant properties come from libraries and archives
that predicates its continued exclusion from OAIS.

A second mention of OAIS came from a US-based data scientist who said:
188

I mean, if OAIS didn't exist, you know, people would still need to preserve things and
they would come up with some other framework, and obviously it would be not

exactly the same as OAIS. It would probably have a lot of the same ideas in it. There

were, you know, obviously… concepts that I used before I ever saw OAIS, but when I
saw it, I thought, “Oh, yeah, this maps to this in OAIS.” And OAIS has concepts in it
from earlier versions of OAIS that aren't the same anymore like format migration
isn't called format migration anymore, it's called transformation. And significant
properties are now like transformational information property, you know, and
things like that.

This suggests a familiarity with the process of OAIS creation and revisions, such that this
person is aware of the fact that Transformational Information Properties are the official

term meant to deal with significant properties. This interview subject speaks from a place
of privilege: as a data science scholar, this person was already familiar with the type of

terminology that is contained within OAIS, and is happily fluent in its lingua franca. In fact,
of all my participants, this one had the fewest complaints about OAIS, expressing most
answers in form similar to the quote above.

The comment by the US-based data scientist about the relationship between

significant properties and Transformational Information Properties is a common

misconception, if it can be called that. It may simply be a casual simplification. While
Transformational Information Properties are meant to encompass some aspects of

significant properties, they are not a replacement. Defined in the 2012 revisions as an:

[i]nformation [p]roperty the preservation of the value of which is regarded as being
necessary but not sufficient to verify that any Non-Reversible Transformation has
189

adequately preserved information content. This could be important as contributing
to evidence about Authenticity. Such an Information Property is dependent upon

specific Representation Information, including Semantic Information, to denote how
it is encoded and what it means. (The term ‘significant property’, which has various
definitions in the literature, is sometimes used in a way that is consistent with its
being a Transformational Information Property). (CCSDS, 2012 page 1-16)

It is stated quite clearly that this definition is meant to cover only some versions of

significant properties. Depending on the definition of significant properties one employs

from among the myriad ones in existence, some of these properties are contained within

entities that predate the 2012 revisions, including under the Digital Object itself as well as

in places like the Preservation Description Information entity, without necessary reference
to a Non-Reversible Transformation.

These are the two distinctly interesting explicit mentions of significant properties in

my interview data. The more populous node, however, was for what I identified as implicit
significant properties. I applied this label to any discussions wherein an interviewee
mentioned some aspect of a digital object without which that object would not be

understandable, functional, authentic, or worth preserving; in other words, properties
labeled by the participants with any of the descriptors from the myriad definitions of

significant properties at the outset of the chapter. These include a number of references

that echo the PVWII data. One practitioner mentioned a concern about the dependency on
outside objects for understandability, in particular external technologies. This US-based
museum practitioner also said:

190

Yeah, like Windows ‘95, we need a place to track that information and because there
is a many-to-many relationship there, it makes sense to record that in a structured
way where we have some kind of master record of all these technologies.

This comment was in reference to the difficulty of creating mutable AIPs using the software
programs the institution uses to track all the information needed to keep digital art

functional. The substance of the comment mirrors discussions with video game creators
who referenced the significance the role of the operating system, coincidentally also
Windows ’95, played in the creation of a title within an iconic video game franchise.
Likewise, the experiential aspects of digital objects also arose in the OAIS

interviews. One participant, a digital preservation manager at a private US university, said:
…Maybe we need to be more clear about it's not just about providing [access] to the

files, it's about providing an experience… I mean, I like to think about it as being able
to present the same content to the user…we could have documented that content,
regardless of the experience through which they receive that content, even if the

content is an experience… I don't know. It's complicated…And I also feel like… just
in general… there's so much interaction, and the experience of being able to work
and build, something like that.

This is not to say that engaging with analog materials is not experiential: indeed, reading a
paper book is an experience, and reading a Dickens novel as a set of serialized chapters

over the course of months is not quite the same experience as reading the entire work at
once when it has been collected into a single volume. But in this case, the interviewee is

expressing something fundamental about the interactivity of many types of digital content.
I take this ethos to be the same one that motivates the response on the part of video game
191

programmers that it is the look and feel and even social experience of playing a game that
is more important to preserve than the code. This is precisely the difficulty that

preservationists face with dynamic and interactive content like Twitter: preserving the text
and even the still images embedded within Tweets along with time stamps and GIS data is

not, in and of itself, a particularly difficult task: these are fairly simple information types for
which the profession has begun to develop fairly robust means of preservation. Rather, the
difficulty lies in the preservation of a surface experience, which is as much a significant

property as the content of the text itself. Cases like video games and Twitter offer heuristics
that demonstrate one of the chief difficulties in the realm of preservation: it it very hard to

predict the future. If, in future, the notion of limiting forms of speech to 140 characters has

disappeared, then the intellectual labor of using a combination of Internet slang (LOL, SMH,
U, etc) and emojis to express long thoughts ceases to be visible. In fact leaving the

contemporary moment is not necessary to see how situated tacit knowledge is necessary to
understand the experience of digital objects: this concept is particular not only to a time
but also a place. China’s social media tools that also limit character numbers offer far

greater latitude in terms of some kind of depth or length given the way that ideographic

languages work versus something like a Roman or Cyrillic alphabet or even Japanese kanji.
The greater difficulty is how to demonstrate, through the DIP, the temporal nature

of Twitter: just showing the volume of Tweets around a particular subject or hashtag does
not connote the process of Tweets evolving in a particular moment. There is a qualitative
difference between the long, slow accrual of anecdotes to go with the hashtag

#dissertationproblems versus the rapid-fire and time-sensitive torrent of Tweets about

192

#hasjustinelandedyet, in reference to a woman who posted a seemingly offensive Tweet
moments before taking off on a long flight, during which time her story went viral.

These are particularly challenging significant properties for preservation, and I

argue that this is partly because the work of conveying this information back to users is a
function that happens in a couple entities within the OAIS information model. First, an

Archive must store sufficient information within its AIPs to know enough about an object to
be able to convey this information: this includes something like the OAIS/FRBR mapping

constructed as a result of PVWI wherein the model suggests linking to an outside source for
Context and Provenance information (McDonough et al, 2010). Perhaps in a case like

#hasjustinelandedyet, the AIP would contain not only the Tweets with text, images, and
time stamps, but also references to articles both popular and scholarly explaining what
happened. The digital preservation manager at a private US university quoted above

describing the interactive nature of technology mentions the practice of documenting the
experiences of users, and for very complicated media that is one of the few (perhaps the

only) option at this point in time. Another interview participant, a researcher at a European
national archive, said:

I looked at technological hardware preservation. I looked at simulation—yeah,
migration and emulation then documentation. Documentation is kind of like a

separate thing but I felt because so many of these other things there are so many

reasons why we can’t really do that yet. I feel like documentation is basically what
we’re left with.

The second entity that is implicated in this process is the DIP. Conveying these types of

experiential significant properties to Consumers requires creative work through the DIP—
193

this information must be disseminated in a way that connotes the affective experience of
the digital object or collection. The DIP is one of the more poorly defined entities within
OAIS in large part, as one interview subject said, because it requires a prediction of the

future. While querying Twitter or the Library of Congress’ Twitter archive now, Consumers
are contemporary enough to many situations that a mere return of text and time stamps is
sufficient. But at some point in the future, when the Knowledge Base has changed and

people no longer understand what Twitter is or how it works, this DIP has to change. There
is recent work that provides formal modeling of DIPs displayed as a set of services and

exchanges with Consumers (E-ARK, 2015) and this work acknowledges the need for DIPs
to change according to queries by Consumers; it suggests tracking these and potentially

adding them back into the AIP using the PREMIS standard for documentation 48. But even

though this is a more specific and prescriptive standard that follows OAIS, it does not and
perhaps cannot help to address what will need to be somewhat imaginative solutions to

conveying the experiences of interactive and dynamic digital content. For something like
Twitter in future, this may be an interactive display that shows the speed, rapidity and

global spread of Tweets as dots on a map or time-lapsed video of a Twitter interface. This

entire concern is imbricated in the complexity of Designated Communities and Knowledge
Bases. Archives are supposed to track Knowledge Bases and update content when

Knowledge Bases change. This is a difficult task, not only because there are no current

guidelines that deal specifically with this 49, but also because change is both a hard thing to
Note that PREMIS is another standard that was built to conform with OAIS and one that
claims to be moving ‘beyond OAIS’ (Dappert, 2015) in it’s latest revision which was made
public in the summer of 2015.
49 Although one interview subject suggested the outcomes of the SCAPE project: “a lot of
the idea in the SCAPE approach of preservation monitoring and planning is predicated on
48

194

notice in the moment and a more difficult thing to document after the moment has passed.
That there is no one solution is part of what makes this kind of thing hard to standardize;
that there should be guidelines anyway is probably obvious given the complexity of the
task.

There are also ways in which it may be possible to overstate the difficulty of the

digital preservation task: it may be that at this particular juncture, the preservation of

surface and affective experience is not possible, particularly not at scale. One interview

participant, a senior digital preservation consultant at a boutique US firm, noted that these

preoccupations can serve to paralyze the field in such a way that getting to grips with what
should be relatively simple tasks like bit-level preservation still have not been definitively
addressed:

Yeah, I think it actually… and this isn't OAIS's fault, it's just I think this field has

suffered from -- in my opinion, it has suffered from too much fixation on those kinds
of issues and not just doing the absolute minimum to get you to a point to have a

future opportunity to visit those questions when the need really arises. We don't
even have good bit preservation nailed down, and that should be very easy. It's

really simple, it's dumb, just do it, and stop talking about it, please. I'm so tired of it.

This participant also noted that concerns about significant properties are more challenging
for some kinds of content that others. For audiovisual materials, she argued: “Watch it and
listen to it, and look at it.” Another participant, senior special collections archivist at a

private US university, said, “So, for us to be able to push [a digital object] into something
evolution of and instruction of the designated community in technology, in semantics, in
usage, in requirements.”
195

where we have, you know, huge, huge disk space, and to be able to say well, at least you

know, it's safe, the original is safe. I would think that would be like a big plus to people, just
to be able to provide that as a service for their materials.” Keeping the 1s and 0s safe is a
most basic requirement, and this might be seen as sufficiently significant in many cases,

particularly if this is explicitly stated in users and donor agreements. Yet at the same time,

multiple people have pointed out, including the authors of OAIS that I spoke to, that 1s and
0s alone are rarely sufficient, particularly when longer time scales are involved. A digital

library director at a private US university summed it up nicely: “I mean, files are not that
useful without something…”

6.4.3 Mapping Significant Properties in OAIS

The previous two sections have detailed some of the significant properties that

arose in conversations with game programmers and OAIS practitioners and scholars. Here,
I will demonstrate what maps well to the existing OAIS entities, informed by the work of
Giaretta et al (2009) and the 2012 OAIS revisions. I will also show what works less well.

The figure below is an image from OAIS that details the contents of the AIP. I have

highlighted in purple the entities wherein some significant properties could be located and
I speak about some of these in the examples that follow.

196

Figure 11: Significant Properties in OAIS

Some significant properties fit well within the Content Information entity in the AIP model.
Content Information includes the Data Object itself, which can be comprised of both Digital
Object(s) (bits) and Physical Objects. Source code of games fits here as do some essential
physical ephemera, like Carmen Sandiego’s analog copy protection World Encyclopedia.

Ephemera can be documented as a separate object and related to the digital data via the
Context Information entity.

Access software, and by extension, access hardware may be documented as part of

the Data Object itself or as Structural Representation Information. Changes in the

Designated Community’s Knowledge Base may be documented as Semantic Information,

although there are limits. Including software as part of the digital object itself is something
that OAIS does not do very well yet, according to some practitioners. One of the interview

subjects has argued vociferously and publicly for its inclusion as part of the object itself in
the 2017 revisions. Semantic Information can document significant properties like a

197

language shift from English to Chinese, for example. Preservation professionals dispute

whether or not it is the role of the repository to document changes in common knowledge,
such as geographical names and borders or popular imaginaries in the case of Carmen
Sandiego, as discussed in the previous chapter.

Sometimes what is significant about a game is its relationship to other games. One

game programmer said, “Doom, for example, it made some of these huge graphics and

texturing leaps and bounds, [these were] obviously… a product of its time.” “Leaps and
bounds” progress in one game necessarily relates it to a history wherein a game was
markedly different that its contemporaries, as noted previously. Another significant

property noted by interviewees is the relationship of a particular title to a larger franchise,
for example a particular release of Civilization in relation to all versions. This was stated
explicitly but is also tacitly implied when participants spoke about franchise games by
punctualizing an entire series into a single sociotechnical entity, saying things like,
“Civilization is one of my really favorite games of all time,” as opposed to naming a
particular version or release of Civilization.

In OAIS, this relationality can be mapped as Context Information within the

Preservation Description Information entity. What is meant by Context Information is

unclear to some interview participants; its description in the OAIS literature is similar to

archival bond. Therefore, a repository can only express this Significant Property as Context
Information if it holds enough games to demonstrate how a particular game relates to
others.

Many interviewees acknowledged that preserving the affective and social aspects of

games is a most challenging task. Playing games in arcades is a fundamentally different
198

experience than playing at home; these locations impact game design, for example the

simplicity of original Donkey Kong versus the deeper interaction of Super Mario Brothers.
The creators and players describe the school-setting of the earliest Oregon Trail and

Carmen Sandiego titles as a significant property. The need to understand the time and place
in which a game was made and/or played might be easiest to understand with a game like
September 12th, a news game predicated on the events of September 11, 2001. The twin
difficulties are encapsulated by two quotes from different game developers. The first, a
contemporary developer, said, “…it’s hard to differentiate between what is like your

nostalgia and what is sort of useful, right?” A second quote, from a developer of a game
series that is no longer in production, said, “So you really have to sort of capture the

essence of the time. Now I don’t obviously have a good answer for that, but somebody
should think about it.”

These Significant Properties do not fit well within OAIS. This may be because

documenting this type of information in relation to a particular object has not always been

seen as the province of the archive itself. In some cases, the preservation of some non-code
significant properties of a game is more desirable than preserving working code itself: a

video of game play, a textual narrative of a walk-through may better capture the experience
than working copies of obsolete technology. In fact, these expanded descriptions of what
might be significant about a game challenge the very assumption that a baseline for a
game’s authentic preservation is its functionality or playability.
6.5 Conclusions

Some significant properties, as suggested by interviewees from my OAIS research

and PVWII respectively, fit well within the existing OAIS entities. For others, one could
199

argue for their inclusion within existing entities although it may mean stretching the

capacity and meaning of these entities beyond what was envisioned by the designers of

OAIS. This latter is not to indicate that such actions would be wrong: indeed, it is the role of
the reference model to inform things in the future which likely entails moving into spaces
the original authors could not envision. Further, as I have argued throughout this

dissertation, OAIS is more than a single standard defined by a single document; it is a
complex of authors’ and users’ scripts and other standards like PAIMAS and PREMIS.

Within the larger sociotechnical system, entities and terms take on meanings that, while
not exactly the same as those in the OAIS glossary, are still valid.

Data from PVWII suggest that social and affective attributes of games are considered

significant by designers and players. These significant properties are largely expressed as
relational properties: they obtain in relation to objects, events, spaces, and times outside

the object and often outside the archive or repository. These relationships are also nuanced
in nature: certain properties are more important than others, or are only important in

certain cases (for example, to particular Designated Communities). In fact, the situatedness
of significant properties suggests that, for popular content like video games, the notion of
Designated Communities is too vague and it is more important to think about archived

objects in the context of Ranganathan’s (1931) third law: every [digital object] its [user].

Some significant properties fit within OAIS; others will require either new metrics or

changes to the existing standard. These findings are echoed by similar comments from
OAIS interview subjects, and this is all the more pertinent given both the variety of

participants in this latter study and the fact that the conversations I had with them were

200

very different in nature and subjects from the PVWII interviews. The similarities between
the two data sets speak to the salience of these themes.

What was surprising about this project was just how much data I struggled to map

to OAIS: my original hypothesis when I began this mapping project was that all Significant

Properties should fit within OAIS, given its commitment to changing Knowledge Bases over
time. For example, the process of documenting context is nothing more than moving

additionally pre-inscribed affordances of a digital object into the circumscribed setting of

the Archive. In the language of scripts, adding information from the Knowledge Base of the
Designated Community to the AIP as additional documentation is taking what is normally

afforded to the actants forming the Designated Community and pulling it into the AIP. This
is merely an extension of an on-going balancing act, of finding the line for sufficiency in

deciding how much to document: this is precisely why I call for the creation of metrics to

help drawing these artificial boundaries so that this work can be made machine-actionable

for work at scale. My conclusion is, therefore, that all significant properties do not fit within
existing OAIS entities and I echo the calls of other preservation scholars that changes are

needed in the ways in which we think about the responsibilities of repositories, especially
given the potential for distributed digital preservation in linked data environments.

Additionally, I posit that these difficulties will be exacerbated in areas where OAIS already

does not work as well. A couple of interview participants noted that the scripts within OAIS
presume a level of infrastructure. While Seles (2016) demonstrates how this plays out in
situations where Archives are located in geographical regions where the legal, electrical,
and network infrastructure are missing, some of my interview participants pointed out

201

that, even in wealthy first world contexts, institutions wherein preservation is not a
primary function will lack many of the structures presupposed by OAIS.

I argue that the ability of the OAIS authors to choose what not to deal with explicitly

within OAIS connotes a position of relative power. This is what prevents significant

properties from becoming a dominant discourse in the field and serves to relegate them to
comments like those by Webb, Pearson, and Koerbin (2013). There is power in being able

to ignore something or to deem it inconsequential. If the gradations implied by significant
properties are not acknowledged to exist, then the Information Packages saved by the

Archive become the sole representative of a particular historical moment without needing
to acknowledge other views for other audiences. I argue that a concept like significant

properties opens the space for broader participation in official memory making processes.
This again ties to audience, the power of the Designated Community, and the power the

Archive has in being not only allowed to but required to create it. Further, when Designated
Communities are not explicitly stated or created, as interview participants admit is often
the case, what is the default? This raises the privileged invisibility of the presumed

audience, the dominant population presumably informed by assumptions of the OAIS

makers and Archive makers (Akrich, 1995), and of the assumption that what is selected by
the archive encompasses what is most important about an object and its place in time and
space and history.

I situate claims that significant properties are situated and sometimes outside the

digital object and it computing environment within a growing body of archival science

literature referenced in Chapter 2 that speaks to the situatedness of archival content and
what is needed to contextualize it (MacNeil and Mak, 2007). The juridical and legal
202

undercurrents of archival conceptions of authenticity are balanced by work in practice,

where archivists understand that evidence, for example, aids in interpretations about the
world (Caswell and Gilliland, 2015) and that archives may have the role of preserving

mnemonic devices in addition to evidence (Smith, 2003). What is necessary is for digital
preservationists to decide whether what is wanted is particular bits of information or
impressions of the past. This is perhaps the difference between the archive and the

museum, for example, and the fact that a single tool like OAIS needs to provide guidance to
all is demonstrative of its inherent inadequacy or at the very least a sign that memory
institutions should50 begin to reconceive their role in a digital future.

I say ‘should’ here because this is a prescription on my part, not a techno-deterministic
statement that digital technologies will necessarily lead to a convergence of memory
practices. Rather, this is a space to counter some of the hegemonic and imperial discourses
that manifest in different ways in different types of institutions: this loosening of role
signifies a loosening of boundaries in which it is possible to change some problematic
practices.
50

203

CHAPTER 7

Introduction

CONCLUSION

In 2017, OAIS will be revised again according to the timetable of required periodic

updates by the International Standards Organization. This will be its third go around of

revisions as an official ISO standard, with previous revisions having occurred in 2007 and
2012; obviously it has been undergoing informal revisions as long as the idea of what it

would become was well formed enough that early drafts could reasonably be seen as the

same sociotechnical object and not aborted predecessors. The European OAIS author with
origins in space science gives 1992 as the year for this.

Within my interviews, participants disagreed as to whether or not these revisions

resulted in substantive change. The manager of digital preservation at a European national

library said, “there are some important concepts that are introduced in the new one.” Other
participants allow for small changes to particular concepts or terms, saying things like, “So,

there were some small changes to the OAIS when it got renewed, but nothing huge, right? A

couple of things to figure and some stuff; a couple of new terms” or “like for me the changes
in the Magenta Book were not a big deal or of any huge interest to me. I started using the

Magenta Book as my reference, because it was the new reference, but the changes in there
did not have a significant impact on, you know, how we would build systems.” Others,

however, argue that new changes do not really arise as part of the official revision process:

a digital preservation consultant at a boutique US firm said, “It doesn't -- because it was for
so long the accepted practice it hasn't been updated to reflect new developments I would
say.”

204

These quotes indicate two things. One is that OAIS as a sociotechnical complex is so

large that it engenders considerable inertia. This means that it does not and cannot change
substantively in a short space of time, with a handful of revision periods constituting a

short space of time. The second issue at play here is whether or not it would be desirable
for OAIS to change substantively. To be sure, practitioners want to see changes in OAIS.

David Rosenthal (2015) has been vocal about this, as have his partners in the online space

designed to elicit public commentary about OAIS ahead of its revisions. The desire for wide
community participation in revisions was palpable: one interview participant expressed a

desire for a public forum to discuss potential changes, and since I interviewed her just over
a year ago, she has been instrumental in creating such a space. There was a feeling among
interview participants that ‘the community’ was not well consulted for revisions, with a

digital preservation and curation scholar at a US public university saying that according to
his informal observations, “There were very little… community input, as far as I can tell.”

Additionally, within my data there is a well-populated coding node about OAIS needing to
change.

Yet for all this desire, there is a recognition that as a foundation of the field of digital

preservation, in addition to being a keystone in the sociotechnical network that includes
implementation documents, professionals, and related standards like XFDU, 16363,

PAIMAS, etc., it is not perhaps wise or possible to affect radical changes to OAIS itself. It

would be rather like pulling a key bottom block from a Jenga tower. A digital preservation
and curation scholar at a US public university described the situation thusly, “But, for the

205

most part, the presumption is these are the terms as people are using them, so we probably
shouldn't make too many changes to them...”

So what does this mean for the 2017 revisions and beyond? One Canadian-based

digital preservation scholar said:

So, I mean, I know that in the last review cycle, essentially nothing was changed, I

mean almost nothing… Well, yeah. The change that would be really beneficial would
be almost a different model in that perspective.

In other words, where we go from here is some place different. While the same participant
argued that OAIS does not talk much about foundational concepts, I have argued

throughout this dissertation that OAIS constitutes a real part of the foundation of the

profession and sub-discipline of digital preservation. As multiple participants have said, the
field has reached closure on the subject of OAIS. A digital preservation and curation scholar
at a US public university compared it to gas pedals on the right and brakes on the left. He
finished by reminding me, though, that closure does not last forever.

From here, big changes to OAIS and to the field of digital preservation more generally

require building new and different things on top of OAIS, and letting OAIS sink further into

the background; in other words, focusing on the top of the Jenga tower. As the same scholar
above said, who knows if the field will be using OAIS terms in 20 years’ time; perhaps,

certain terms may be the only vestige of it left at that point, particularly if standards like

ISO 16363 do not succeed in engendering new interest in OAIS. The other solution to the

grumblings about the inadequacy of OAIS (and the “Twitter bashing”) is to knock the Jenga
tower over and start from scratch. More than one participant expressed a desire to see

someone suggest something completely new, but no one could offer a viable alternative
206

that is currently in existence. I suggest that this latter, while potentially beneficial, is

enormously difficult to conceive of given the pervasive influence OAIS has had on the
development of the field. As the throw away remark about the relationship between

Archivematica and OAIS earlier in this dissertation shows, even when people do not see

OAIS, it is often there. Developing new foundations for digital preservation is like trying to

build a new boat from the one you are currently floating on, or imagining a functional noncapitalist alternative while living in the current neoliberal moment: the scripts are

embedded so deeply it is hard to be aware of where they start and stop, and it is hard to get
away from them.

This conclusion will explore alternatives and futures of OAIS and digital

preservation. I begin with brief summaries of the major findings of the previous chapters. I
will then talk about answers to the questions I posed to frame this research: both the

formal research questions that shaped this entire project and the questions that arose as

part of the theoretical framework that has guided how I have understood the results of the
project. Finally, I will discuss the futures: futures of OAIS and the field of digital
preservation, and research futures that this project suggests.
7.1 Dissertation Findings

In this section, I highlight some of the major findings described throughout this

dissertation. I suggest, based on the literature, that OAIS is not a static object but is better
seen instead as a sociotechnical complex that encompasses numerous other standards,

technologies, and actors. OAIS stems from the space sciences although it borrows heavily
from archives to purchase the authority and connotations of longevity that are part of
popular archival discourse.

207

In Chapter 4, I argue that OAIS conceives of a variety of professional roles within the

Archive Management entity, and when OAIS gets deployed in institutions, employees of the
organization whose labor does not fit within the entities of the functional model are

disempowered. This happens not only because of the privileging of digital material in some
environments, but also because a lack of fluency with OAIS language among some workers
serves to exclude them further within organizations in a way that mirrors how they are
literally excluded from the model.

Aside from the internal staff of an Archive, OAIS speaks about both Producers and

Consumers, and in many cases, interviewees suggested that external content producers and
users are not included within the linguist fold of OAIS, while OAIS’s inherently alien terms
are referred to in some relationships between the Archive and Producers/Consumers

precisely so the “foreign” language can be employed to connote authority. The fact that

OAIS calls itself an Archive also lends it authority in exchanges with donors and users, and

it borrows from other archival discourses that mean it is subject to some similar limitations
to those faced by traditional archives.

While OAIS uses a number of scripts from archives, none of the participants I asked

about the causes of the geographical differences in attitudes to OAIS suggested the
difference between modern archival practice in Europe and the US as a cause. One

interview participant, a digital repository manager in a US museum, explained the use of an
archival science-based tool, Atom, at his institution, saying:

Atom originally was designed for archival collections, so it was more – and

specifically European archival terms, so it was like fond and sub-fond and I don’t

208

remember the other terms but not even – I don’t even know if you can convert it to
American archival language…

His language indicates an awareness of the differences in practice wrought in part by the

Jenkinsonian traditions in US archives, yet this was never suggested as a potential cause for
the disparity in attitudes towards OAIS between Europe and the US. Instead, the two

overarching causes that were suggested by interviewees related to the centralization of

funding in Europe and the related centralization that governs preservation projects. This

results in much larger scale investigations than in the US. I suggest that at the root of this
centralization are politics of European unity through shared cultural initiatives, part of
European Union politics of “unity in diversity.”

Chapter 5 explored the term Designated Community as it is defined literally in the

model but also as it is described by the authors; perceived by users; and implied by the ISO
16363 audit standard. The fact that there are so many gradations in how this term is
employed supports my contention that OAIS is not just a document but instead a

sociotechnical system. One of the most significant findings of this dissertation is the

relationship between Designated Communities and actual users. In the chapter, I discuss
why Designated Communities are not users and when: in OAIS they can be entirely

constructed and not a description of real users, while for ISO 16363, real users are all but
required to check that an Archive has made its content “understandable” to a member of

the Designated Community. I also contend that the concept of Designated Communities is

fundamentally at odds with certain memory professions, particularly those in institutions
that serve diverse populations and that handle popular content. While the OAIS authors
offer an explanation about the genesis of the Designated Community requirement, their
209

explanation in fact means that they are telling libraries and archives that they should be
actively inscripting their archive in precisely the way Akrich uses this term. OAIS is

essentially requiring these memory institutions to state their intended and preferred

community and implicitly build practice around that. Implicit practice becomes explicit at
the point of the audit. This process gives power to the Archive and favors the Designated
Community users. These are the ones who get helped and get usable access. The non-

Designated Community members do not. Many organizations have not formally stated a

Designated Community, and this has power implications because the default tends to be an
empowered one: an assumed dominant population often reflective of the Archive makers
themselves. The default is rarely if ever a subordinate default. Being able to change the

Designated Community is another manifestation of the power of the Archive. Whether or
not an Archive wants to or actually does change Designated Communities, the salient
matter is that OAIS allows them to: they can and every time they do, this has some
constitutive power and creates a new self-perpetuating discourse.

In Chapter 6, the difficulties of the long-term become more apparent. It is hard to

predict the future, and significant properties have different potential meanings for digital
objects in the future depending on the user and social context. At least, the ability to

represent what was significant at one period in time might be more challenging in future.
Some significant properties fit well with OAIS, while others do not. The ability to

exclude significant properties from OAIS denotes power on the part of the authors. This
term is symbolic of the tensions between memory practices and the sciences. This is

interesting, particularly in light of Van House and Churchill’s (2008) contention that, in

spaces where the two must work together, the advantage of resources and influence lies
210

with the sciences. There is also tremendous power in the ability to erase differences, in

getting to choose a single canonical form rather than allowing for differences. By relegating
significant properties within OAIS to elements that are things already inherent to the

digital object itself, the authors of OAIS preclude bringing into the archive a mechanism for
the interpretation of differences. Such a mechanism would stem precisely from how the
scripts in technologies are unpacked in difference places of use rather than what is

contained within the technologies themselves, still bundled up: as Akrich says, it is not even
possible to see the scripts if the technology is never deployed. Only through using

something do its seams become visible. OAIS, in excluding significant properties, excludes
the seamfulness that is required for more pluralistic archives.

In conclusion, power relationships are manifested throughout the OAIS

documentation and in the ways in which it gets deployed in local contexts. Requirements
like the construction of a Designated Community, the need to speak in particular OAIS

language, and the ability to exclude significant properties place considerable power in the

hands of the Archive. The directive to script preservation and dissemination services for a
preferred set of users, the Designated Community, encourages the reification of existing
imperial tendencies that existed in pre-digital, analog archives.
7.1.1

Research Questions

This research project began with two research questions, and here I will describe

some answers as suggested by the findings. First, I asked about the values contained within
OAIS and what methods or practices were prescribed by it. A script built into OAIS is that it
is above all things flexible and all-encompassing—multiple interviewees declared that

anyone should be able to use it for anything. Yet this is not what people find, even some of
211

those same interviewees—for whatever reason, when OAIS gets implemented, there are

things that people do not like about it and, more importantly, things that they identify as
not working. This is a source of tension: people say in the same interview that it should

work for everyone while spending considerable time discussing the cultural disconnects

between OAIS and their daily realities. I argue that part of this tension results from the role
that the OAIS sociotechnical complex has played on the genesis of the sub-discipline of

digital preservation more generally: OAIS and the evolution of digital preservation as a

profession with boundaries, standard practices, curricula, etc. happened concurrently. OAIS
is bound up in the very basic ways that people think about preservation, even when they
are not aware of it, and this makes looking for real alternatives very difficult. This is

problematic because of some of the practices that OAIS encourages or mandates among
practitioners, mostly notably to script daily practice to favor some users over others.

Secondly, I asked: in what ways has the adoption of this model as an organizational

system for the preservation of digital content in library, archive and museum spaces served
to challenge or reproduce the hierarchies and discourses of traditional archives and
memory institutions?

While OAIS is a reference model, and therefore not a technology in the sense this

word is most commonly deployed by its own creators, it is still a technology of control in

the way in which this term is employed in post-structuralist critiques like Foucault’s theory
of governmentality. Cast in this light, it is necessary to question the ways in which OAIS is a
reflection of a need to govern or control that ‘facilitates the exercise of…power’ beyond

simply being widely adopted for its great efficiency or productivity; in fact, the number of

cases wherein inferior technologies win primacy wars abounds (Marglin, 1978, page 88). In
212

considering OAIS in such a light, its machinations can be seen as techniques of capital as
well, in the ways in which digital preservation practices tends to create new silos and

hierarchies of work as I described in Chapter 4. Gorz described precisely the fragmentation
of labor I saw in some locations in Marxist terms:

Capitalist techniques were not meant to maximize the production and productivity

in general of all workers whatsoever. Instead they were to maximize the productivity
for capital of workers who had no reason to give of themselves, since an enemy had
dictated the aims of their production. To make them bow to this will it was not

enough that they should lose the ownership of the means of production… They had
to lose what their professional and practical knowledge and skills had given the so

far: the power to run the machines without the assistance of a hierarchical corps of

engineers, technicians, maintenance experts, foremen, and so on. (Gorz, 1978, page
56)

This is borne out by interview data with both OAIS practitioners themselves as well as
those working in such institutions whose daily work does not necessarily focus on the

digital. Smith (2003 and 2007) argues in much the same vein as Schaefer (Owens, 2014)

that the way to address this kind of divide is for all participants in an organization to learn
to understand the technologies in use. This is especially true for subject and analog
specialists who are anxious about the perceived deskilling happening with their

replacements: new technology-savvy employees that lack content-specialist knowledge or,
in the case of some employees, automated cataloging and descriptive metadata tools that
obviate their jobs entirely.

213

In fact, the Marxist critique plays out in interview data in other ways as well. One of

the stark features of OAIS adoption is precisely the functionalist essentialist ideology that
accompanies its adoptions: it was the only tool that supported the inevitable needs of the
institutions in the late 90s and early 2000s, and in most cases, no alternatives were

considered. Common essentialist narratives about the need for everyone to think, and by
extension eventually become, like a digital preservationist are expressed by multiple
interview subjects with differing job titles and descriptions.

It is important not to overstate the disruption caused by digital technologies in

traditional memory institutions and practices. To do so smacks of a kind of techno-

determinism. Yet a disruption has occurred, and it is important to question the eventual

outcomes of this disruption precisely because it is still taking place and outcomes are not

decided yet: this can be seen in the interview participants who describe how nascent their
digital preservation efforts are. Archives may find a way to continue as they have for
thousands of years with digital technologies.

Things operate in circuits of value, which themselves can be spatially located and
temporally varying. Dear treasures in one part of town may be garbage, and

laughable, in another. Indeed, Pierre Bordieu noted that there is perhaps no more

telling indication of cultural capital than the ability to bestow value where there had
previously been presumed to be none. (Acland, 2007, page xv)

The way in which the Designated Community concept in OAIS has been employed is a

perfect example of this: it takes a process that was implicit in previous archival practice

and explicitly prescribes it: in fact, archives are “rewarded” with official certification for
excluding users in creating a well-defined Designated Community.
214

While this dissertation is not an explicit gender analysis, I would be remiss if I did

not mention some of the gendered aspects of the deployment of this technology and how
these too lend themselves to the power dynamics already identified in this dissertation.
There are feminized and masculinized discourses within digital preservation practice,

particularly revolving around notions like authenticity. Authenticity is a central concern of
digital preservation practice and much of the alternative constructions for significant

properties within OAIS are aimed at establishing just this. Smith cites Walter Benjamin’s
notions of authenticity in archives and describes Benjamin’s view that authenticity is a
quality that is intrinsic to the object itself. Indeed, she makes the comparison that

“Authenticity is like virginity: it can be lost, but it can never be regained” according to

Benjamin (Smith, 2003, page 176). Yet the dominant discourses about the preservation of
digital content and its fragile authenticity are dominated by men: these discourses and

technologies originate in techno-masculine spaces like space data. In eschewing a term like

significant properties that comes from the more feminized memory institutional sector, the
OAIS sociotechnical complex constructs a discourse in which Authenticity is more or less

inherent to an object itself. It is at least inherent to the AIP and the Archive of which it is a
part: it is fragile, breakable, and must be guarded by the archive.

There are distinct power relations even in the poorly defined space of DIPs.

Galloway notes that the quest to make a perfect visualization manifests a desire for a

representation that is imperial itself (Galloway, Lovink, and Thacker 2008). I suggest a
relationship here because in order to make good DIPs in the future, as the examples of

Twitter and Carmen Sandiego demonstrate, Archives will have to get creative. And yet, it
will be considerable work on the part of the Archive to ensure that the solutions do not
215

compound the existent imperial tendencies of archives. Such DIPs will need to connote

mnemonic devices that express the affective experience of using a digital technology at a

particular place and time as well as show the Archive’s own values and scripts. This is an
avenue of necessary work in the future, because the default alternative is merely a
continuation of existing imperial discourses within archives.

The evidence in the interviews is that people are using OAIS more than they realize. It

is easy to overlook the influences of OAIS like those mentioned above precisely because

OAIS is pervasive and foundational to field of digital preservation. There are ways in which
OAIS could be employed for purposes that resist the construction of the power relations

described above. There is also a need to find a way to develop some salient alternatives to
OAIS: I see this as necessary not only from a utopic desire to see a more plural and

democratic form of archive, but also as a practitioner myself. I recognize the difficulty of the
labor that goes into record-keeping and memory-making, and alternatives are necessary in

the form of concrete metrics and machine-actionable standards that assist the practitioners
in their daily work. In these last sections, I discuss the futures that might assist in this area:
futures for OAIS and research beyond.

7.2. Futures of OAIS: Alternatives and Closure

Invention involved the development of new technological artifacts by inventors and

provided the basis on which economic transformation might proceed. Innovation on
the other hand involved introducing these new technological artifacts into a routine
economic cycle of production and consumption and thus reorganizing the world

around these new inventions…. Both invention and innovation involved dealing over

216

time with “messes” (i.e. systems of ill-defined but interrelated problems) and
resolving the messes in some fashion… (Kaghan and Bowker, 263)

Multiple people noted in interviews that the uptake of OAIS was largely dependent on

timing: it happened in an era where many institutions had begun to realize they needed

assistance in thinking through the process of preserving the growing onslaught of digital
materials. I do not suggest a causal or inevitable relationship, either between “the times”

and OAIS or vice-versa, but suggest that conditions including time did play a large role in its
becoming the invisible foundation it has become today. Because of this, alternatives are
hard to find.

The very notion of standards is that they exist as a process of closure and

stabilization of boundaries (Ole et al, 2006): they purposefully close off infinite alternatives
and focus the attention of a field in a particular direction. Lee (2005) notes in his work that
closure has been reached on the subject of OAIS, and indeed had been as early as the early
2000s. This explains one reviewer’s comment to me about OAIS being “uncontroversial.”
Closure is also neither static nor permanent. The OAIS sociotechnical complex is

continually redrawing its boundaries to maintain its position. It does so through the

creation of new standards and new tools. This is purposeful: this is precisely the role of the
reference model as it seeks to inform future practice and derivative, industry specific

standards, protocols, and solutions more generally, in the way the Lee (2005) and Cargill

(1997) describe. OAIS has effectively closed a space that leaves very little room to imagine
alternatives—people could not think of alternatives where they were thought necessary.
Others thought that nearly anything could be fit within OAIS so that even ‘alternatives’

would not be too alternative, and I would argue this is partly a result of the OAIS discourse
217

of flexibility. The boundaries around OAIS are flexibly drawn and actively maintained in a
way that allows them to continually encompass changes—in a super concrete and

simplistic way, this happened in 2012 with revisions that addressed concern for the
preservation of computing environments and the rise in popularity of emulation. It

happened again with the release of ISO 16363 and ISO 16919 and the subsequent push by

European memory organizations and political bodies to require certification through these
standards. Like capital, this becomes a very hard space in which to theorize alternatives.
This kind of pervasiveness requires a paradigm shift in order to create the intellectual
space in which to conceive of alternatives (Kuhn, 1996) 51.

When the majority of the power lies with one set of actors (I argue that the

dominant actor here is still CCSDS and systems science), the solutions imagined by

dominant actors for others are inflected by assumptions of otherness based on self-

identity. This approach to design is all the more pertinent when the dominating central

actor (Law, 1999) is one that already yields more power in heterogeneous negotiations

(Van House and Churchill, 2008). In fact, the pervasive inability of interviewees to name or

imagine alternatives to OAIS suggest that it has become a black box. If a black box is defined
as, “…a frozen network element, often with properties of irreversibility” (Walsham, 1997,
page 468), the language of freezing constitutes an absolute closure of boundaries, the
absolute zero of standardization processes.

And yet, there is an inherent tension between what is expected of a reference model

and complex cases like digital preservation, wherein the stakeholders are so diverse and
I used the language of Thomas Kuhn in describing practices in the sciences without
making any claims about whether preservation work is a ‘science’.
51

218

the relationships so frictional that closure in the classical sense cannot be reached. Ole et al
(2006) describe standards in such cases:

These cases are described as worlds too complex to be closed and ordered

according to a single mode or logic. There is only partial order, interacting in

different ways, or interconnected and overlapping subworlds, ordered according to
different logic. The interconnectedness of the subworlds means that while one is

trying to make order in one subworld by imposing a specific logic, the same logic is
causing disorder in another: each order also has its disorder (Berg and
Timmermans 2000; Law 1999). (Ole et al, 2006, page 566).

This is all the more pertinent given the heterogeneity of stakeholders engaged in digital
preservation, and that digital preservation is a meta-sub-discipline within a meta-

discipline. What is functional in one part of this vast pantheon is less so in others. The shift,
as described by Ole, is a move towards adhoc collections of local solutions, and OAIS was
developed within such an environment: it was developed openly by a large consortium
rather than by a single standards body while simultaneously aiming to standardize

approaches as a replacement for the adhoc approaches that existed prior to OAIS in the late
1990s and early 2000s. This is where the space of alternatives lies. While people could not
articulate alternatives, one interview subject, a Canadian-based digital preservation

scholar, suggested that some solutions lie within careful systems design. The implication
here is perhaps that such sweeping standards are not serviceable now that the field and

digital technologies have developed: for particular projects and places, the design needs to
be more or less focused on local needs. OAIS is very functional in certain disciplinary

settings. While it is possible to make changes to it to make it functional elsewhere, perhaps
219

such changes would render OAIS less functional in the spaces where it works right now. In

this case, the alternatives are really that: other standards that exist alongside OAIS to serve
the spaces it cannot. This could include cultural heritage spaces, but it could also include
distributed networks and distributed content, as well as projects like preserving the

intellectual labor of digital collections without duplicating the work of preserving the

objects themselves. All of these areas of researcher, however, are in nascent stages if work
has begun on them at all. For real alternatives, it is necessary to look to future research. I
suggest some possible avenues below.
7.3 Future Research Avenues

In keeping with the hybrid nature of the discourses that inform OAIS, these research

avenues are similarly hybrid. I suggest the need to challenge the assumption within

archival spaces that artificial boundary making is undesirable; rather, embracing the

artificiality of the task of rendering something like a virtual world into a static object of

preservation requires good metrics that celebrate the interpretive work required of such a
task. I also suggest that while documentation is a good stopgap for preserving those

affective experiences that we cannot currently render technologically, we should continue

to look for better solutions. One space that needs particular attention is the Knowledge Base
term within OAIS.

7.3.1 The need to document beyond the digital object and beyond

This research notes the fundamental ways in which OAIS is not sufficient to

document the kinds of relationships and affective experiences associated of digital objects
that make them significant cultural items. I argue for the need for more context. Figuring

out what constitutes sufficient context is difficult precisely because in digital preservation
220

there is no starting point and no stopping point. As preservationists, we must construct
both of these for any digital preservation project and in so doing we create a

punctualization, an archival package that represents an artificially static object in place of
an ever-moving network of actors, objects, and technologies. This type of language is

uncomfortable for many memory practitioners who see their roles as guardians rather than
as creators. The word “artificial” applies a negative connotation to a creative act. I argue

against this application and suggest that a first step towards realizing this kind of practice
is to embrace the fact that the work preservationists do with digital objects is inherently
artificial: it is artificial to name a fixed object in place of something like a video game or

virtual world, and representations of this in the future will be artificial as well. But if this

type of work can be seen less under the traditional archival umbrella of evidence and more
along the lines of imparting an affective experience, the field of archival science can open
itself to the possibilities of better, more inclusive work through networked technologies.
The need for metrics to define the creation of artificial boundaries should be

obvious. To begin with, the very nebulousness of this task makes this type of work difficult

in computational terms. This dissertation is another call for the end of precisely the type of
simplified yet arbitrary guidelines that dictate that web crawlers, when documenting the

Internet, stop at a depth of 3 links, for example. In suggesting more nuanced approaches, it
is necessary to develop tools that assist practitioners in their necessary daily work of
bounding and documenting. Acknowledging the artificiality of this type of work is

important, because it promotes a transparency of process and denounces claims to

neutrality or naturalness in the work we do: in fact, archivists are always engaged in

constructive and creative processes of reinterpretation, and the goal here is to make that
221

explicit in the digital realm (MacNeil and Mak, 2007). In so doing, it is equally important to
avoid essentializing the objects of preservation and to avoid creating narratives that serve
to reinforce normative practices and relationships without question. We need to avoid
creating imperial visualizations.

While one of the very benefits of such an approach would be to bring fragments and

ephemera away from the margins, such work must be undertaken in a way that appreciates
the ability of the fragment to purposefully resist incorporation into larger, often dominant,

narrative structures (De Villiers, 2012). This means we must also allow certain things to be
hidden, and indeed an archives and special collections librarian at a small liberal arts

college in the US expressed discomfort in the use of tools like FTK and the potential to

uncover things which donors did not wish to share. There is an ongoing tension between
the desire for transparency and the simultaneous desire not to compel exposure,

particularly as this has been forced onto certain populations more violently than onto

others. In developing metrics of expanded context we must avoid the use of discourses that
“make confession and disclosure … less than liberatory.” (Cvetkovich, 2003; Sedgwick
1997).

7.3.2 The Fetish of Documents

And while documentation is good, we need to move beyond it. There are limits to

what can be done with documentation: it is not a perfect solution.

This shift from an approach grounded in what something is to how

something works changes the analysis of material evidence from iconographic

reading to indexical reading, leading us into the lifecycle of production, use, control,
resource consumption, labor, cost, environmental impact and so on — so that an
222

artifact’s materiality is read as a snapshot moment within continuous
interdependent systems. (Drucker, 2013)

This compelling statement from Drucker echoes what I have argued numerous times

throughout this dissertation: important behaviors related to the object may or may not be

inherent to the object itself. Concrete examples might be something like the sound and time
it took to flip and load a floppy disk while playing a game in 1985. The materiality of this
experience is lost when using an emulated or migrated copy of the executable code. In
some ways, it probably should be: in digital preservation terms, either of those

preservation strategies, emulation or migration, is more tenable long term than keeping

working machines for every kind of media. So how do we create such “snapshots”? I argue
that this requires work in the area of DIPs, beyond the formal description of information
exchanges created by the E-ARK (2015) project.

Current thinking about such topics in digital preservation amount to what I call a

fetishization of documentation, which is closely related to the “panacea of metadata”, a

phrase Giaretta himself uses in the introduction to his advanced digital preservation text

(2011). We are in an age of ‘supermodernity’ that is characterized by documentation that

arises when linked data and digital archives are not the panacea they were assumed to be
in the realm of preservation and memory (Acland, 2007). Documentation is an important
digital preservation strategy, like emulation or migration. The assumption is that when

something is too complicated for its bits to properly maintained, or when it is admitted that
even saving the bits is not sufficient, the current answer is to document the object: fill the

open text notes field in metadata standards with descriptive information, take screenshots
and video. This impulse results in an interesting tension that arises between the graphical
223

moves away from the document in the digital era and the simultaneous rise of the

document/metadata as the solution to all our problems about replicating behaviors, acting
benchmarks, or connoting significance.

Bann says, “History certainly abhors continuity” (in Ernst, 2013, page 45). There is

simultaneously a tension between the push in archives for continuity and the need to

recognize the space between ourselves and objects of the past. Documents as discrete, noncontinual entities represent this inherent discontinuity. Tying this to OAIS, I see the need
for more work in the area of the Knowledge Base. Concretely, how do we document this
and track its changes without this activity becoming an all-consuming sort of project? A

real exploration of what that looks like must take into account the inherent discontinuity of
such a project as well as the general inability of human beings to see changes as they
happen.

7.4 Conclusions

The research projects proposed above all function within a discursive space created

by OAIS. This is partly because of a pragmatic recognition that OAIS and the field of digital

preservation are so tightly bound that, given the resources available, working within these
structures makes some sense. It was this kind of pragmatism that drove me to study OAIS
as an exemplar of digital preservation to begin with. Further, I believe with the right

subsequent standards, it is possible to use OAIS to do some new and different things. Many

of my arguments take as an underlying assumption the fact that significance is situated, and
I believe this is an unintentional script within OAIS as illustrated by concepts like the

Designated Community and Knowledge Base: OAIS recognizes how important situations

are, and this is a space of potential. OAIS stacks power very much in favor of the Archive,
224

and the discourses common within digital preservation stack power very much in favor of
OAIS. This being the case, it is also possible to use the power-laden parts of OAIS to create
more inclusive projects. This might include metrics for the creation of Designated

Communities that purposefully seek out sub-ordinate populations for active inclusion.
None of this is possible, however, without being very aware of the politics and power
relationships that undergird this technology which is used so pervasively. Without

understanding the complicated term Designated Community, for example, it is difficult to

render OAIS a resistive technology. As such, the primary take away from this dissertation is
an un-boxing of OAIS: I have attempted to lay bare elements of this profession that are

normally decentered and invisible. This type of investigation is necessary and must be ongoing: without active intervention in this space, it is entirely possible that the digital
futures will carry the same scripts as the analog past.

225

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Acland, C. (ed) (2007). Residual Media. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press.

Adams, M. & Brown, T. (Winter 2000). Myths and Realities of the 1960 Census. Prologue
Magazine, National Archives. Retrieved from:
http://www.archives.gov/publications/prologue/2000/winter/1960-census.html

Akrich, M. (1992). “The De-Scription of Technical Objects”. In Shaping Technology/Building
Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change, eds. Bijker, W. and Law, J. Cambridge, MA: The
MIT Press.
Akrich, M. (1995). User representations: Practices, methods and sociology. In Managing
technology in society: The approach of constructive technology assessment, eds. Rip, A.,
Misa, T.J. and Schot, J. London: Pinter Publishers.

Akrich, M. & Latour, B. (1992). “A Summary of a Convenient Vocabulary for the Semiotics of
Human and non-Human Assemblies.” In Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in
Sociotechnical Change, eds. Bijker, W. and Law, J. Cambridge,MA: The MIT Press.
Ayoung, Y., & Tibbo, H. (2011). Examination of Data Deposit Practices in Repositories with
the OAIS Model. IASSIST Quarterly, 35(4), 6-13.
APARSEN (2015). Report on a Common Vision of Digital Preservation. Retrieved from:
http://www.alliancepermanentaccess.org/wpcontent/uploads/sites/7/downloads/2015/02/APARSEN-REP-D11_5-01-1_1.pdf

Ball, A. (2006). “Briefing Paper: The OAIS Reference Model” UKOLN: University of Bath.

Balsamo, A. (2011). Designing culture: the technological imagination at work. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press
Barrett, M. (1991). The Politics of Truth: From Marx to Foucault. Cambridge, UK: Polity
Press.

Bastian, J. (2003). Owning Memory: How a Caribbean Community Lost Its Archives and Found
Its History. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.
Bates, M. (2015). The Information Professions: Knowledge, Memory, Heritage. Information
Research: An International Electronic Journal, 20(1).
Baudrillard, J., & Glaser, S. (1994). Simulacra and Simulation. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.

226

Becker, C., Kulovits, H., Guttenbrunner, M., Strodl, S., Rauber, A., & Hofman, H. (2009).
Systematic planning for digital preservation: evaluating potential strategies and building
preservation plans. International Journal of Digital Libraries 10, 122-157.

Bennett, T. (1995) The Birth of the Museum: History, Theory, Politics. London, UK: Routledge.
Best, S., & Marcus, S. (2009). Surface reading: An introduction. Representations, 108(1), 121.
Bishop, A. & Star, S. L. (1996). Social Informatics of Digital Library Use and Infrastructure.
ARIST 31, 301-401.

Boast, R. (2010). "Museum as Contact Zone Revisited," Museum Anthropology, 33:2: 56-70.
Bowker, G. & Star, S.L. (1994). Knowledge and Infrastructure in international information
management: Problems of classification and coding. In Information acumen: The
understanding and use of knowledge in modern business ed. Bud-Frierman, L. London, UK:
Routledge.
Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (1998). Building Information Infrastructures for Social WorldsThe Role of Classifications and Standards. Community computing and support systems,
(1519), 231-248.
Boyle, J. (2003). "The Second Enclosure Movement and the Construction of the Public
Domain." Law and Contemporary Problems 66:33, 33-74.

Bradley, K. (Summer 2007). Defining Digital Sustainability. Library Trends 56(1): 148-163.
Britton, C. (1999). Edouard Glissant and postcolonial theory: Strategies of language and
resistance. Charlottesville, VA: University of Virginia Press.

Brock, A. (2009). Life on the Wire. Information, Communication and Society, 12(3), 344363.
Caplan, P. (2004). ‘DAITSS overview.’ URL: http://www.fcla.edu/digitalArchive/pdfs/
DAITSS.pdf

Caplan, P. (2007). "The Florida Digital Archive and DAITSS: A Working Preservation
Repository Based On Format Migration." International Journal of Digital Libraries 6(4).

Cargill, C. (1997). Open Systems Standardization: A Business Approach. Upper Saddle River,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Caswell, M. (2013a). On archival pluralism: what religious pluralism (and its critics) can
teach us about archives. Archival Science, 13(4), 273-292.
227

Caswell, M. (2013b). Rethinking Inalienability: Trusting Nongovernmental Archives in
Transitional Societies. American Archivist, 76(1), 113-134.

Caswell, M. (2014). Seeing Yourself in History: Community Archives and the Fight Against
Symbolic Annihilation. Public Historian, 36(4), 26-37.
Caswell, M., & Gilliland, A. (2015). False promise and new hope: dead perpetrators,
imagined documents and emergent archival evidence. International Journal Of Human
Rights, 19(5), 615-627.

Charmaz, K. (1983). “The Grounded Theory Method: An Explication and Interpretation.” In
Contemporary Field Research, ed. Emerson, R. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Chun, W. (2006). Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Clark, K. (January 31, 2001). "The Politics of Schemas: Parts 1 and 2.” In O'Reilly XML.com.
Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media, Inc.
Cockburn, C. (1983). Brothers: male dominance and technological change. London, UK: Pluto
Press.
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (2002). Reference Model for an Open
Archival Information System (OAIS). CCSDS 650.0-B-1, Blue Book. Issue 1.
Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (2004). Producer-Archive Interface
Methodology Abstract Standard (PAIMAS). CCSDS 651.0-M-1, Magenta Book.

Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (August 2009). Reference Model for an
Open Archival Information System (OAIS). CCSDS 650.0-P-1.1. Pink Book. Issue 1.1.

Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (June 2012). Reference Model for an Open
Archival Information System (OAIS). CCSDS 650.0.M-2, Magenta Book. Issue 2.

Coombe, R. & Weiss, L. (2015). Neoliberalism, Heritage Regimes, and Cultural Rights. In L.
Meskell (ed.) Global Heritage: A Reader. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell, 43-69.
Cvetkovich, A. (2003). An archive of feelings :trauma, sexuality, and lesbian public
cultures. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

Daniels, M. (2013). Where the OAIS ends: Archival principles and the digital
repository (Conference Paper) Archiving 2013 - Final Program and Proceedings 2013, 10th
IS&T Archiving Conference, Archiving 2013; Washington, DC; United States, 12-14.
228

Dappert, A. (2015). Digital Preservation Metadata and Improvements to PREMIS in Version
3.0. Webinar.
Data Seal of Approval: http://datasealofapproval.org/en/

de Jong, A., Delaney, B., & Steinmeier, D. (2013). OAIS Compliant Preservation Workflows in
an AV Archive. White Paper, Netherlands Institute for Sound and Vision.
De Villiers, N. (2012). Opacity and the closet: queer tactics in Foucault, Barthes, and Warhol.
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press
de Vries, H. J. (2003). Standardization: A Business Approach to the Role of National
Standardization Organizations. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Dean, M. (1999). Governmentality: power and rule in modern society. London, UK; Sage
Publications.

Decker, A., Egert, C., Phelps, A., & McDonough, J. P. (September 2012). Technical properties
of play a technical analysis of significant properties for video game preservation. In Games
Innovation Conference (IGIC), IEEE International, 1-4.

Douglas, J. (2010). Origins: evolving ideas about the principle of provenance. In Currents of
archival thinking, eds. Eastwood, T., MacNeil, H. Santa Barbara, CA.: Libraries Unlimited.
DRAMBORA: http://www.repositoryaudit.eu/

Drucker, J. (2013). Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface.
Digital Humanities Quarterly, 7(1).

Duranti, L. (2010). "The appraisal of digital records: the return of diplomatics as a forensic
discipline." International Conference on Surviving the Digital Wild Frontier. Singapore,
Singapore.
Duranti, L. & Thibodeau, K. (March 2006). The Concept of Record in Interactive,
Experiential and Dynamic Environments: the View of InterPARES. Archival Science, 6 (1),
13-68.
E-ARK. (2015). E-ARK DIP Draft Specification. D5.2, Revision 4.

Ernst, W. (2013). Digital Memory and the Archive. Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota
Press.
Fairclough, N. (2006) Language and globalization. London, UK; Routledge.

229

Flanders, J. (2013). The Literary, the Humanistic, the Digital: Toward a Research Agenda for
Digital Literary Studies in https://dlsanthology.commons.mla.org/the-literary-thehumanistic-the-digital/
Foucault, M., trans. Swyer, R. (1972). The Archaeology of Knowledge. London, UK: Tavistock
Publishing.
Fuchs, C. (2008). Internet and Society: Social Theory in the Information Age. New York, NY:
Routledge.

Galloway, A. R., Lovink, G., & Thacker, E. (2008). Dialogues Carried Out in Silence: An E-mail
Exchange. Grey Room, (33), 96-112.
Giaretta, D. (2011). Advanced Digital Preservation. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

Giaretta, D., Matthews, B., Bicarregui, J., Lambert, S., Guercio, M., Michetti, G., & Sawyer, D.
(2009). Significant Properties, Authenticity, Provenance, Representation Information and
OAIS Information. iPRES 2009: the Sixth International Conference on Preservation of
Digital Objects. California Digital Library, UC Office of the President

Gitelman, L. (2006). Always already new: media, history and the data of culture. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press
Gorz, A. (ed) (1978). The Division of Labour. Brighton, UK: Harvester Press.

Green, N. (1990). The Spectacle of Nature: Landscape and Bourgeois Nature in NineteenthCentury France. Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.

Hackett, Y., Underwood, W., & Eppard, P. (2008). Part One—Case and General Studies in the
Artistic, Scientific and Governmental Sectors: Focus Task Force Report. International
Research on Permanent Authentic Records in Electronic Systems (InterPARES), 2.
Hall, S. (1997). Representation: Cultural Representation and Signifying Practices. London,
UK: Sage.
Halavais, A. (2009). Search Engine Society. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Hamilton, K. (2015). Black Boxes. The Hedgehog Review.
Hedstrom, M. and Lee, C.A. (2002). “Significant properties of digital objects: definitions,
applications, implications”, Proceedings of the DLM-Forum 2002.

Herbst, P. G. (1974). Socio-technical design: Strategies in multidisciplinary research. London,
UK: Tavistock.
230

IFLA Study Group on the Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records. (1998).
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records, Final Report. UBCIM Publications, New
Series; v. 19. Munich: K.G. Saur Verlag.
International Standards Organisation, ‘How Does ISO Develop Standards?’ Accessible at:
http://www.iso.org/iso/home/standards_development.htm.

Ippolito, J. (2003). Accommodating the Unpredictable: The Variable Media Questionnaire.
In The Variable Media Approach: Permanence Through Change, eds Depocas, A., Ippolito, J.,
and Jones, C., 47-55.

Kaghan, W. & Bowker, G. (September 2001). “Out of Machine Age? Complexity,
Sociotechnical Systems and Actor Network Theory.” Journal of Engineering and Technology
Management 18(3-4), 253-269.
Kendall, L. (2002). Hanging Out in the Virtual Pub: Masculinities and Relationships Online.
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Kerr, A. (2002). Representing Users in the Design of Digital Games.
Proceedings of Computer Games and Digital Cultures Conference, ed. Frans Mäyrä.
Tampere: Tampere University Press.

Kim, J., Warga, E. & Moen, W. (October 2012). Digital Curation in the Academic Library Job
Market. In: ASIS&T, ASIS&T 75th Annual Meeting. Baltimore, MD, USA, 26-30.
Knight, G. (2008). Framework for the definition of significant properties. Retrieved from
http://www.significantproperties.org.uk/documents/wp33- propertiesreport-v1.pdf

Knight, G. & Hedges, M. (2007). Modelling OAIS compliance for disaggregated preservation
services. International Journal of Digital Curation, 1(2), 62-72.

Kuhn, T. S. (1996). The structure of scientific revolutions (3rd ed.). Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Lage, K., Losoff, B., & Maness, J. (2011). Receptivity to library involvement in scientific data
curation: a case study at the University of Colorado Boulder. portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 11(4), 915-937.
Latour, B. (1987). Science in action: how to follow scientists and engineers through
society. Milton Keynes, UK; Open University Press.
Lavoie, B. F. (January/February 2000). Meeting the challenges of digital
preservation: The OAIS reference model. OCLC Newsletter, No. 243, 26-30.

Lavoie, B. F. (2004) The Open Archival Information System Reference Model: Introductory
Guide. Microform & Imaging Review, 33(2), 68-81.
231

Law, J. (1992). “Notes on the Theory of the Actor-Network: Ordering, Strategy, and
Heterogeneity.” Systems Practice 5(4): 379-393.

Lee, C. (2005). “Defining Digital Preservation Work: A Case Study of the Development of the
Reference Model for an Open Archival Information System.” Doctoral Dissertation. The
School of Information, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Lee, C. (2009). "Open Archival Information System (OAIS) Reference Model." In
Encyclopedia of Library and Information Sciences, Third Edition, eds Bates, M. and Maack, M.
Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 4020-4030.
Lindlar, M. (2013). Time to Change Effects and Implications of Digital Preservation in an
Organizational Context. IASSIST Quarterly, Fall Winter 2013.

MacNeil, H. & Mak, B. (2007). "Constructions Of Authenticity." Library Trends 56(1), 26-52.
Madison, D. S. (2005). Critical ethnography: method, ethics, and performance. Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.

Marglin, S. (1978). “What do bosses do?” In The Division of Labour, ed. Gorz, A., Brighton,
UK: Harvester Press.

Marino, M. “Reading the Transborder Immigrant Tool,” HASTAC. January 18,
2011. http://www.hastac.org/blogs/markcmarino/reading-transborder-immigrant-toolmla-11-cross-post.

Matthews, B., McIlwrath, B., Giaretta, D., & Conway, E. (2008). The significant properties of
software: A study. JISC report, March.
McCarthy, C. (1994). Multicultural Discourses and Curriculum Reform: A Critical
Perspective. Educational Theory, 44(1), 81-98.

McDonough, J. (2008). "Structural Metadata and the Social Limitation of Interoperability: A
Sociotechnical View of XML and Digital Library Standards Development." Balisage: The
Markup Conference 2008. Montreal, Canada, Aug. 12-15, 2008. In Proceedings of Balisage:
The Markup Conference 2008. Balisage Series on Markup Technologies, vol. 1.

McDonough, J. (2011). Packaging videogames for long-term preservation: Integrating FRBR
and the OAIS reference model. Journal of The American Society For Information Science &
Technology, 62(1), 171-184.
McDonough, J. (2011). 'Knee-deep in the data': Practical problems in applying the OAIS
Reference Model to the preservation of computer games (Conference Paper) Proceedings
2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 1625-1634.
232

McDonough, J. (2013). A Tangled Web: Metadata and Problems in Game Preservation In
The Preservation of Complex Objects: Volume 3. Gaming Environments and Virtual Worlds.
JISC.
McDonough, J., Kirschenbaum, M., Reside, D., Fraistat, N. & Jerz, D. (Fall 2010). “Twisty
Little Passages Almost All Alike: Applying the FRBR Model to a Classic Computer Game.”
Digital Humanities Quarterly 4(2).

McDonough, J., Olendorf, R., Kirschenbaum, M., Kraus, K., Reside, D., Donahue, R., Phelps, A.,
Egert, C., Lowood, H., & Rojo, S. (2010). Preserving Virtual Worlds Final Report. Retrieved
from IDEALS online 2011-11-30.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man. New York, NY: McGraw
Hill.

McMeekin, S. (2011). With a Little Help from OAIS: Starting down the Digital Curation Path.
Journal of the Society of Archivists, 32:2, 241-253.

Meghini, C. (August 2013) Data preservation. Data Science Journal Volume 12(10), GRDI51GRDI57.
Miaskiewicz, T., Sumner, T., & Kozar, K. A. (April 2008). A latent semantic analysis
methodology for the identification and creation of personas. In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1501-1510.

Nakamura, L. (2002). Cybertypes: Race, Ethnicity, and Identity on the Internet. New York, NY:
Routledge.
Nakamura, L. (2009). Don't Hate the Player, Hate the Game: The Racialization of Labor in
World of Warcraft. Critical Studies In Media Communication, 26(2), 128-144.
National Science Foundation Cyberinfrastructure Council (2007). Cyberinfrastructure
Vision for 21st Century Discovery. Available from
http://www.nsf.gov/pubs/2007/nsf0728/nsf0728. Pdf

Nesmith, T. (Spring 1999). “Still Fuzzy But More Accurate: Some Thoughts on the ‘Ghosts’
of Archival Theory,” Archivaria 47.

nestor: http://www.langzeitarchivierung.de/Subsites/nestor/DE/Home/home_node.html

Nicholson, D., & Dobreva, M. (2009). Beyond OAIS: Towards a reliable and consistent digital
preservation implementation framework. DSP 2009: 16th International Conference on
Digital Signal Processing, Proceedings, art. no. 5201126.

233

Noble, S. (2012). Searching for Black Girls: Old Traditions in New Media. Doctoral Thesis.
Graduate School of Library and Information Science, University of Illinois, UrbanaChampaign.

OCLC/CLR. (February 2007). Trustworthy Repositories Audit & Certification: Criteria and
Checklist, Version 1.0.

Oudshoorn, N., Rommes, E., Stienstra, M. (January 2004). Configuring the User as
Everybody: Gender and Design Cultures in Information and Communication Technologies.
Science Technology Human Values, 29(1), 30-63.
Owens, T. (2014). We’re All Digital Archivists Now: An Interview with Sibyl Schaefer. The
Signal Digital Preservation Blog. Library of Congress.
Owens, T. (2015). Digital Sources & Digital Archives: The Evidentiary Basis of Digital
History (Draft). Retrieved from: http://www.trevorowens.org/2015/12/digital-sourcesdigital-archives-the-evidentiary-basis-of-digital-history-draft/
PACG (2011). Educating for the archival multiverse. American Archivist, 74, 69–101.
Poster, M. (2004). "The Mode of Information and Postmodernity." Chapter 27 in The
Information Society Reader. London, UK: Routledge, 399-410.

Presner, T. (2014). "The Ethics of the Algorithm: Close and Distant Listening to the Shoah
Foundation Visual History Archive," forthcoming in: History Unlimited: Probing the Ethics
of Holocaust Culture (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2015), paired with Stephen
Smith, “On the Ethics of Technology and Testimony: A response to Todd Presner.”
Ranganathan, S. R. (1931). The five laws of library science.

Rawson, K.J. (2014). Transgender Worldmaking in Cyberspace: Historical Activism on the
Internet. QED: A Journal in GLBTQ Worldmaking 1(2), 38-60.
Rose, G. (2011). Visual Methodologies: An Introduction to the Interpretation of Visual
Material. London, UK: Sage Publications.

Rosenthal, D. (2015). The case for a revision of OAIS. Digital Preservation Coalition OAIS
Wiki. Available at:
http://wiki.dpconline.org/index.php?title=The_case_for_a_revision_of_OAIS
Rubin, N. (2010). Preserving Digital Public Television Final Report. Library of Congress.
Sacchi, S., Wickett, K., Renear, A., & Dubin, D. (2011). A Framework for Applying the
Concept of Significant Properties to Datasets. In Proceedings of ASIS&T 2011.
Schwartz, J. & Cook, T. (2002). "Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of Modern
Memory," Archival Science, 2:1/2, 1-19.
234

SCAPE- Scalable Preservation Environments: http://scape-project.eu/

Schiller, D. (2006). How to Think About Information. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.

Schumann, N., & Recker, A. (2012). De-mystifying OAIS compliance: Benefits and challenges
of mapping the OAIS reference model to the GESIS Data Archive. IASSIST Quarterly, 36(2),
6-11.
Sedgwick, E. K. (1997). Paranoid reading and reparative reading, or, You're so paranoid,
you probably think this introduction is about you.

Sekula, A. (1986). ‘Reading an archive: photography between labour and capital’, In
Photography/Politics: 2, eds. Holland, P., Spence, J., and Watney, S. London, UK: Comedia,
153-161.
Seles, A. (2016). The Transferability of Trusted Digital Repository Standards to an East
African Context. Doctoral Thesis. Department of Information Studies, University College
London. London, UK.
Sergeant, D. (2002). Interpretation of the OAIS Model. Retrieved from
http://www.erpanet.org/events/2002/copenhagen/presentati ons/dmserpanet.ppt

Sherratt, T. (2015). “Seams and edges: Dreams of aggregation, access & discovery in a
broken world” ALIA Online 2015: Sydney, Australia.

Sierman, B. (2012). “OAIS 2012 Update” in Digital Preservation Seeds Blog accessible at
http://digitalpreservation.nl/seeds/oais-2012-update/

Sierman, B. (2014). The SCAPE Policy Framework, maturity levels and the need for realistic
preservation policies. iPRES 2014: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference on
Digital Preservation, 259-266.
Smith, A. (Summer 2003). Authenticity and Affect: When is a Watch Not a Watch? Library
Trends 52(1), 172-82.
Smith, A. (2007). Valuing Preservation. Library Trends 56(1), 4-25.

Spence, J. (2006). Preserving the cultural heritage: An investigation into the feasibility of
the OAIS model for application in small organisations. Aslib Proceedings: New Information
Perspectives, 58(6), 513-524.
Star, S. & Griesemer, J. (1989). Institutional Ecology, 'Translations' and Boundary Objects:
Amateurs and Professionals in Social Studies of Science, 19(0), 387-420.
235

Subotic, I., Schuldt, H., & Rosenthaler, L. (2011). The DISTARNET Approach to Reliable
Autonomic Long-term Digital Preservation. In DASFAA 2011, Part II, LNCS 6588, eds. Yu,
J.X., Kim, M.H. and Unland, R., 93–103.
Thaler, R. & Sunstein, C. (2009). Nudge: improving decisions about health, wealth and
happiness. New York, NY: Penguin.
Tillett, B. (September/October 2003). What is FRBR: A conceptual model for the
bibliographic universe. Technicalities, 25(5).

Trist, E. (June 1981). “The evolution of sociotechnical systems: a conceptual framework and
an action research program.” Occasional paper No. 2.
Tsing, A. (2005). Friction: an ethnography of global connection. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Tuchman, G. (1978). ‘‘Introduction: The Symbolic Annihilation of Women by the Mass
Media,’’ in Hearth and Home: Images of Women in the Mass Media, eds. Tuchman, G.,
Kaplan Daniels, A., and Benet, J. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Van House, N. & Churchill, E. (Sept. 2008). Technologies of Memory: Key Issues and Critical
Perspectives. Memory Studies 1(3): 295-310.
Van Malssen, K. (2010) Planning Beyond Digitization: Digital Preservation of Audiovisual
Collections. in Zorgen Voor Onzichtbare Assets: Over Het Behoud van Digitale AVCollecties, ed. Annemieke de Jong. Beeld en Geluid and AVA_Net, Netherlands.
Vardigan, M. and Whiteman, C., (2007). ICPSR meets OAIS: applying the OAIS reference
model to the social science archive context. Archival Science, 7(1), 73–87.

Walsham, G. (1997). Actor-Network Theory and IS Research: Current Status and Future
Prospects. In Information Systems and Qualitative Research: Proceedings of the IFIP TC8
WG 8.2 International Conference on Information Systems and Qualitative Research, 31 st
May-3rd June 1997, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 466-480.

Webb, C., Pearson, D., and Koerbin, P. (2013). ‘Oh, you wanted us to preserve that?!’
Statements of Preservation Intent for the National Library of Australia’s Digital Collections.
D-Lib Magazine 19:1/2.
Wilson, A. (2006). An Innovative Shared Preservation Service: The SHERPA-DP Project:
Securing a Hybrid Environment for Research Preservation and Access - Digital
Preservation. Archiving Conference, Archiving 2006 Final Program and Proceedings, 1-6.

Yeo, G. (2010). "‘Nothing is the same as something else’: significant properties and notions
of identity and originality." Archival Science, 10(2), 85-116.
236

APPENDIX A: IRB INFORMATION

Consent to Participate

Encoding Power: Digital Spaces using the Open Archival Information System (OAIS) Reference
Model

You are invited to participate in a research study on the use of the OAIS reference model in preserving
cultural heritage and audio/visual content. This study is being conducted by doctoral student Rhiannon
Bettivia in the Graduate School of Library & Information Science from the University of Illinois Urbana
Champaign.

This study will take approximately one to two hours of your time. You will be asked to participate in an
interview regarding your experience with the OAIS reference model and your judgments regarding the
importance of various aspects of model in your daily work. This interview will be recorded and
transcribed, but your name and identity will not be included in the transcription and any personal names
occurring in the course of the interview will be replaced with pseudonyms in the transcription. The
original audio recordings will be deleted once transcribed. Audio recordings are preferred for this study;
if you do not wish to be recorded, you may decline.

Your decision to participate or decline participation in this study is completely voluntary and you have
the right to terminate your participation at any time without penalty. You may skip any questions you do
not wish to answer.

Your participation in this research will be completely confidential. I will not collect or store personal
identifying information regarding you or include any personal identifying information in research results
that we disseminate. Interview transcriptions will be maintained in secured storage in the researcher’s
office. Possible outlets of dissemination for our research results may include publication through
journals such and presentations at conferences in areas of digital preservation. Although your
participation in this research may not benefit you personally, it will help me understand which aspects
of the OAIS reference model are significant to the preservation community and assist in the preservation
of culturally significant materials.
There are no risks to individuals participating in these interviews beyond those that exist in daily life.

Your decision to participate, decline, or withdraw from participation will have no effect on your status at
or future relations with the University of Illinois.
If you have questions about this project, you may contact
RHIANNON BETTIVIA
Doctoral Student
Graduate School of Library & Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493
Champaign, IL 61820-6211
(917) 334-3519
rbettivi@illinois.edu

237

JEROME P. MCDONOUGH
Associate Professor
Graduate School of Library & Information Science
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
501 E. Daniel Street, MC-493
Champaign, IL 61820-6211
(217) 244-5916
jmcdonou@illinois.edu

If you have any questions about your rights as a research participant in the study, please contact the
University of Illinois Institutional Review Board at 217-333-2670 (collect calls accepted if you identify
yourself as a research participant) or via email at irb@illinois.edu.
You will be given a copy of this consent form for your records.

I have read and understand the above consent form, I certify that I am 18 years old or older and, by
signing this form, I agree to participate in this study.
I consent to have my interview audio recorded (please check one) : yes ____

no ____

I consent to be contacted for brief follow up questions, not to take more than 15-20 minutes of time via
email or phone (please check one): yes____
no ____
If yes, please note preferred method of contact for follow
up:____________________________________

--------------------------------------------------------------------------Signature
Date

238

239

