STUDENT AWARENESS, UTILIZATION, AND PROMOTION OF LIBRARY
RESOURCES

By
Esra Abdoh

A Thesis Submitted to the Faculty
of Southeastern Louisiana
University
in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
for the Degree of Master of Science
in Integrated Science and Technology

Southeastern Louisiana University
Hammond, Louisiana
May 2016

ProQuest Number: 10120815

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10120815
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright by
Esra Abdoh
2016

i

STUDENT AWARENESS, UTILIZATION, AND PROMOTION OF LIBRARY
RESOURCES

By
Esra Abdoh

ii

Name: Esra Abdoh
Previous degree: B.E., Taibah University, 2011, (Information System)
Date of Current Degree: May 14, 2016
Institution: Southeastern Louisiana University
Major Field: Integrated Science and Technology
Major Professor: Dr. Ihssan Alkadi
Title of Study: STUDENT AWARENESS, UTILIZATION, AND PROMOTION OF
LIBRARY RESOURCES
Pages in Study: 60
Candidate for Degree of Master of Science

An academic library is a good resource for both graduate and undergraduate
researchers and is a great way to develop skills that are useful for different careers and
expand their knowledge in different fields. This study assessed the students’ utilization of
library’s information resources in the Sims library. The study found that utilization of the
library information resources was not only affected by information literacy skills but also
that the students frequency of use of these resources indicated that a lot needed to be done
to increase students awareness of library’s information resources. These results serve as a
baseline for improving the rate and efficiency at which students use the library. With the
evolution of technology, the study found that it was important to find effective ways to
keep the students up-to-date with available library resources.
Key words: promoting library resources, reference services, library’s tutorials,
information literacy, information seeking

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
First of all, sincere thanks are due to Dr. Ihssan Alkadi, my committee chairman,
for his magnanimity in expending time and effort to guide and assist me throughout the
thesis process. I also thank all the faculty members of my graduate thesis committee,
namely Dr. Ken S Li, Dr. Ghassan Alkadi, and Dr. Kuo-Pao Yang, for the invaluable aid
and direction provided by them. I also would like to thank Dr. Eric Johnson who is the
library director, for the invaluable aid and revising the questions of the survey.
Additionally, for always encouraging me and providing with all the materials needed for
me to complete my research. I would like to express my thanks to Dr. Dayne Sherman,
who is the library coordinator of User Education, for spending the time to teach me how
to revise the format and helping me also in designing the survey. I also want to express
my thanks to my husband Muayad for his supporting and encouraging me. Finally, I wish
to thank all my friends in the program for their friendship.
Thank you also to those people whose names I have not mentioned, but have
helped me academically, morally, financially, and so on; you know who you are

iv

TABLE OF CONTENTS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ...................................................................................... iv
LIST OF TABLES ................................................................................................ vii
LIST OF FIGURES ..............................................................................................viii
CHAPTER

I.

INTRODUCTION ................................................................................. 2
Background information on Sims Memorial Library ............................... 4
Statement of the objectives ..................................................................... 6
Statement of the Problem ....................................................................... 7
Assumptions ........................................................................................... 7
Definitions of Terms .............................................................................. 8

II.

REVIEW OF THE RELATED LITERATURE .................................... 10
Electronic Resources ............................................................................ 10
Free vs. For-Fee Information ................................................................ 14
Reference Services ............................................................................... 14
Federated search tool ............................................................................ 16
Library Tutorials .................................................................................. 17
Marketing and promoting ..................................................................... 18
Proposed approach and main research .................................................. 20

III.

RESEARCH METHODOLOGY .......................................................... 24
Research approach ............................................................................... 24
The population size .............................................................................. 24
Data Analysis ....................................................................................... 25
v

IV.

RESULT AND DISCUSSION ............................................................. 27
Demographic Data ............................................................................... 27
Overall Perception ................................................................................ 29
Library Activities .......................................................................... 29
Reference Services ........................................................................ 31
Library’s electronic resources ........................................................ 31
Reasoning of the students to use the library’s electronic information
resources ............................................................................... 32
Free vs. For-Fee Information ......................................................... 35
Library Tutorials ........................................................................... 36
Relations .............................................................................................. 36

V.

CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION ..................................... 48
Conclusion ............................................................................................ 48
Recommendation .................................................................................. 52
Promote Reading and Supporting Research Model (PRSR) ............ 52
Model Structure ............................................................................. 52
Functionality of the Model ............................................................. 54
Future Work and Future Research Section ............................................. 56
Limitations and Delimitations of the Study............................................ 57

VI.

REFERENCES .................................................................................... 59

vi

LIST OF TABLES
1. Relation between status, gender, and frequency of visiting the library ........ 38
2. Relation between the purpose of visiting the library and status, gender, and
college ............................................................................................. 38
3. Relation between purpose for visiting and colleges ..................................... 39
4. Relation between frequency of using the library electronic resources and
the reason to choose the library electronic resources ....................... 40
5. Relation between student status, gender, college, and student start of
information search .......................................................................... 41
6. Relation between frequency of using the library electronic resources and
student start of information search .................................................. 42
7. Relation between the library electronic information resources used and
frequency of visiting the library ...................................................... 43
8. Relation between the reason to choose the electronic resource(s) and
student start of information search .................................................. 44
9. Relation between the reason to choose the electronic resource(s) and
purpose for visiting the library ........................................................ 45
10. Relation between reference services and student start of information search 46
11. Relation between reference services and online library tutorials ................. 47

vii

LIST OF FIGURES
1. Percentages of undergraduate vs. graduate students surveyed ..................... 27
2. Distribution of students by Gender ............................................................. 28
3. Distribution of students by discipline ......................................................... 29
4. Frequency of use Sims library .................................................................... 29
5. Percentage of the students doing activities at the library ............................. 30
6. Student reference services preferences ....................................................... 31
7. Percentage of students use library electronic resources ............................... 32
8. Percentage of students use different various type of library’s electronic
Resources ......................................................................................... 33
9. Reasons for how the students know about the library electronic resources .. 33
10. Distribution of students by where students begin to search for information . 34
11. Show the preferable search engines used by students .................................. 35
12. Distribution of students pays for the information ........................................ 36
13. Student opinions regarding the usefulness of online library tutorials ........... 36
14. PRSR Assist diagram ................................................................................. 53
15. Example of the prospective model output ................................................... 56

viii

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION
Academic Libraries are a good resource for both graduate and undergraduate
researchers and are a great way to develop skills that are useful for different careers and
expand their knowledge in different fields as well. The main source of education is
housed throughout the library’s information resource, which is secondary to teaching.
With the evolution of technology, the library must keep pace with technical advances
and provide effective and desirable services to users. Sims library provides the students
with many services and resources. However, it is not known if the students are utilizing
this service effectively. This research will examine the awareness of student who use the
library. Then, this research will help the Sims library to recognize the needs of students.
Also, with using technology, this research will provide an effective method to promote
utilizing the library’s resources.
In order to appreciate what the research attempts to provide, one must first
understand the evolution of libraries. Weiner (2005) pointed out that the first academic
libraries created were in the colonial college libraries. Originally, all books were
imported. There was no funding to purchase materials to assist libraries’ collection until
John Harvard donated approximately 300 of his books to Harvard University. These
libraries were small and the majority of the books were donated. These libraries were

2

open for only a few hours per week, and there was one professor responsible for library
duties.
As post-secondary education became more prominent, the need for larger
libraries increased. Weiner (2005) pointed out that Johns Hopkins University was the
first university known for extending library hours for students. As a result, this library
had collections of resources and materials, and providing reference service to library
users which set the presidencies of library worth.
Due to library growth, one of the services now available in various libraries is the
users' access to electronic databases. Libraries provide many of online research sources
available to students. However, there is no evidence proving that students are efficiently
using libraries’ collection materials. There is no doubt that libraries allocate a large part
of its funding for electronic resources every year. The electronic information resources
cover the largest possible number of periodicals, reports, articles, and books in many
specialties. All of these resources are updated and more resources are added to libraries’
collection constantly and rapidly. All libraries provide the traditional sources of
information in the print form and electronic form which grants a wide coverage of
information for the libraries’ users.
The students can contact any of the electronic databases at any given moment.
Therefore, if the students are not able to be present in the library building, then they are
still able to grant access to library services. Today, the students are able to grant access in
hours- what once took weeks or months to obtain- can be accessed in a few short
minutes. This proves that students are using electronic databases more often and need
3

more access and knowledge of these services. As far as the area of teaching, library’s
resources help teachers to gather and update course information on a consistent basis
which better facilitates the learning process.
Background information on Sims Memorial Library
The purpose of this study is to examine the Sims Memorial library at
Southeastern Louisiana University in order to determine student perceptions of the
library. Sims library is located at Southeastern Louisiana University in Hammond,
Louisiana, USA. Sims Library was established by Linus A. Sims in January 1925. Sims
noticed as the university had grown in size and scope the library needed to be expanded
as well. Adams writes that “by the end of the 1926-27 academic year the library boasted
2,500 volumes” (Adams, 1999). The library grew so rapidly that “the library was
relocated to the two-story servants' quarters along with other facilities" (Adams, 1999).
Moreover, Weiner (2005) accounted that from 1856 to 1876 Harvard university
increased library collections by an average of 63% per year. Harvard was not alone,
universities across the United States increased; as a result, university’s curriculums
improve and increase its graduate programs. More importantly, Weiner quoted Hanson at
1989 stating that “By the end of the nineteenth century the typical small college library
could be characterized as containing 6,000 to 20,000 volumes comprised mainly of
donations. Emphasis was primarily on supporting the curriculum rather than research”
(Weiner, 2005).
The growth libraries have faced throughout the information resources has directly
affected Sims library. For example, Sims library provides multiple types of information
4

resources. In Sims library, students can search into databases either by subject or by
name. Subject guides are a good place to start when beginning to research specific topics.
The Library provides access to a variety of electronic books so students have a variety of
source contents. The electronic journal is used to help the students find online versions of
journals. Furthermore, Sims library provides the Library Catalogs from the library
website. Many reference sources like dictionaries, encyclopedias, and other reference
sources are now available online in full-text. Also, Sims library provides sound
recordings, whereas there are only a few Library databases which provide access to
sound recordings. Some databases even include graphics or images, such as photos,
paintings, or maps, which allows the students to have a vast amount of resources for
well- rounded research.
Deng (2014) pointed out that it is difficult to find a definite time reference
services emerged throughout libraries. In 1857, a librarian that worked at Columbia
College described the nature of his work, which involved helping students with their
research to use the library's collections. On another hand, in 1876 Samuel Swett Green’s
published a paper, “Personal Relations between Librarians and Readers” established
formalized reference services in libraries.
In addition to library services, Sims library provides reference services as well.
Reference services allow students to choose the right reference source. Libraries organize
information to allow users to retrieve information that they need. Librarians in reference
services assist users in this function. Almost all libraries provide search help or guidance
via reference services in different forms like telephone, face to face, email, or chat by
5

"Ask a Librarian" service that is available on the library website.
Sims library provides many reference sources, which helps users to find useful
resources related to their research topic, such as dictionaries, encyclopedias, almanacs,
atlases, etc. What is important is how the students perceive these sources. The role of
reference services in the library is to make information available to library customers.
Librarians, in reference service, have three primary forms. First, finding information to
answer specific questions. Second, helping customers to find information for themselves.
Lastly, teaching people how to use library resources and library research. The librarians
who work in reference services have to give clear instructions in the use of the library
resources. Also, the benefits of electronic searches are more efficient with the use of a
digital reference service. The digital reference service is an aspect of technological
developments in the field of Information Retrieval. Furthermore, it is the most important
service that is provided by the library to ensure the library resources benefits students.
Also, Sims library provides Interlibrary loan service (ILL) (see definition of terms
at the end of the chapter) to allow a user of Sims library to borrow books or receive
research materials that are not available on campus. The user makes a request online by
using the library website. This service gives students opportunities to expand their
research and reach beyond Sims library's collection resources.
Statement of the objectives
The purpose of this study is to ensure that the students understand the breadth of
the library collections. Students that are aware of library services can benefit from them,
thereby improving learning opportunities offered by the Sims library as well as
6

improving their academic performance. This study will help determine the effectiveness
of specialized library’s information resources and services, and the proper ways to
improve the rate at which students use them. By monitoring where the students typically
default searching for information on a particular topic and identifying the ways students
use the library’s information resources, this study will give Sims library an insight on
what measures are needed to benefit the students. Also, this study will provide effective
methods for promoting the usage of library’s information resources. Thus, this study will
promote reading, and support research.
Statement of the Problem
Although Sims library encourages the students to use the available information
resources, students do not always utilize the available resources. Seminars and library
orientation sessions enable the students to become information literate, but there is no
certainty that the students' level of information literacy is being enhanced. Despite the
excess of information available, students still do not fully utilize the library's information
resources.
Assumptions
The following assumptions were made about this study:


The students are using and know about library’s information resources.



The students know how to use library computers.



The students can navigate the library’s database.



The students know how to utilize the library reference services.



The students are familiar with library services.
7



The students regularly enter the library’s website to complete an academic course
work.

Definitions of Terms
The following terms are defined for the purpose of this study:
1. Academic Library: a library in an academic setting that offers scholarly books,
journals, and electronic resources for user learning.
2. Information literacy: is a set of capability that a person needs to locate, evaluate, and
use effectively the needed information.
3. A library Database: is a large electronic catalog or index of the organized material.
Library database is a collection of information in electronic format, which are
searchable and organized, and also scholarly literature.
4. Electronic resource:” is any information source that the library offers in an electronic
format. Also, library users can access information electronically by computing
networks” (Posey, 2009).
5. ILL Service: Interlibrary loan is a service whereby a library user of one library can
borrow books or receive materials and documents that are not available in a local
library owned by another library.
6. Information Sources: Information can come from virtually anywhere — media, blogs,
personal experiences, books, journal and magazine articles, expert opinions,
encyclopedias, and web pages.

8

7. Reference Services: According to ALA guidelines reference services are information
consultations in which library staff recommend, interpret, evaluate, and/or use
information resources to help others to meet particular information needs.
8. Library: a building or room containing a collection of books, journals and other
resources for library users to access a various collection of sources of information
and resources.
9. Library Services: services that are provided by library’s users in physical or digital
form.
10. Library Users: individuals who come to the library to use library services or access
information.
11. Web-Based Survey: a survey published on the Internet.

9

CHAPTER 2
REVIEW OF THE RELATED LITERATURE

This section will review the basic arguments in previous literature to give the
reader a basic view of the problems prior to offering the thesis as a solution. These past
studies will give the reader insight of the many factors that affect how students seek
information and then how it is promoted. The literature review is sub-divided into the
major concepts’ areas that are covered in this research.
Electronic Resources
Bashorun et al. (2011) explained that Nigeria paints an image of African countries
as being far behind in the use of electronic resources in their libraries. The authors claim
this, a well-demonstrated study on Ilorin University in Nigeria, represents a number of
factors. The most important factors are the lack of finances and awareness of large
students’ perception. The research is aimed at identifying the perception of students on
the impact that the electronic resources have in their educational achievement. Most of
the population in the University of Ilorin claimed that the use of the electronic resources
was still not pronounced in their libraries. In addition, the article suggests that electronic
resources can easily be accessed or retrieved in their libraries. Moreover, their responses
show that the retrieval and access of these resources were not very easy. In order to
remedy the situation adequate Information Communication Technology (ICT) training
10

amongst other recommendations should be embraced. One of the issues of this study is
that it conducted during a one-day workshop on the Ilorin campus, and very few
academic members were interviewed.
While Bashorun et al blamed the lack of finances for library electronic resources
and additional studies attempt to determine solutions. Crawford et al. (2004) performed a
longitudinal study that was aimed to determine whether library users know what
electronic information is, then determined the solutions to any problems that are faced in
this process. This study lacked reliability because the article failed to address that many
participants from Glasgow University lack the "know-how" of the electronic usage
services. Crawford et al suggest that in order for students' needs be met, constant
awareness should be created on the benefits of the use of these electronic resources by
students in the libraries at hand. The authors say this is a real outcry if the situation is
bound to change as displayed by a research carried out in Glasgow Caledonian
University proves. The findings of this article illustrated that more resources need to be
uploaded to fix the issue. If more resources are uploaded, then it will lead to the
sophistication of the library services, and as a result, a consequent improvement of the
learning conditions offered by our libraries. Therefore, the students are bound to register
improvements and high scores in their studies.
While the very little research was done overseas, Gakibayo et al. (2013) completed
a study in Africa, and unlike the other continents, lags behind in recent modernization.
This study carried out in Mbarara University was done to find out the extent of utilization
of the electronic information resources. Quantitative and qualitative methods were used
11

to assert whether this modern resource usage is widespread or remained local. Gakibayo
et al concluded that a very small percentage of the students had embraced this new
approach. The article suggested several limitations have to be tackled if the scenario is to
change. According to the article, the lack of adequate computers, in addition to the skills
required in order to operate them, stand to be a major challenge for the improvement of
these library services. Moreover, the slow Internet connectivity should be improved to
further develop these services. One of the causes of this issue is the students' lack of
perception of the importance of these electronic resources for their academic programs.
As a result of this study, the authors suggested the university introduce computer
training, especially in research finding and also made a compulsory course in
Information Literacy for all university students in all majors.
Yet, Herman (2001) who examined how universities are dealing with research in an
age of technology, suggested that more concern has been raised in an attempt to meet the
academic needs of the undergraduate students. Unfortunately, it was rarely considered or
examined in the setting part of an issue if it requires such a large population of
individuals like students, university staff, and faculty. Therefore, an attempt to meet the
needs of this wide group of people, the new resources used should be enhanced in order
to quench the educational thirst of these people. Herman’s study was done to determine
whether the new electronic resources met the needs of the university researchers. It
proved that these resources were still not up to standard, as expected by this elite group.
This means that there is a need to make sure that these resources, in the long run, will
serve all the educational interests of the university researchers, who highly depend on the
12

university research sources. Of the research that was done, Holley & Powell (2004)
found that 68% of the university’s population self-professed that the university’s
population were satisfied with the services offered by this new wave of modernization.
However, 92% still believe that more and quick improvement is necessary to make the
services more efficient to meet their educational needs. Furthermore, the study showed
18.5% of the students learned about electronic resources from librarians and 38.3% of the
students found out about the electronic resources from their professors. So, the librarians
of the university must attract the students to encourage them to use library electronic
resources. Therefore, this study fails to address how the electronic resources findings
suggest proper promotion of library resources.
Research examines the importance of library use of input versus the output of
library electronic resources and it reflects library promotions. Noh (2012) mentioned that
most of the countries in the Far East exhibit high levels of utilization of electronic
resources in their libraries, unlike those in United State. Noh’s study was recently
completed in Korea to access the performance of electronic resources in libraries. Noh
analyzed the findings to identify the congruence between the input and output of these
electronic resources in Korea’s modern libraries. The inputs refer to the e-resources and
the outputs refer to the quantified use of each resource- therefore academic production. A
number of the input electronic resources in question included the CD, ROM, DVD as
well as other micromaterials. Noh came to several conclusions. Among all of the
findings, Noh most importantly noted that, was only 88.20 % of the libraries in Korea
had embraced the use of these upcoming resources. However, this use had and still faces
13

many challenges in its implementation. The process has and continued to use many
electronic resources, something that places a huge financial strain on Korea’s libraries.
Despite this huge investment for libraries, libraries still fail to satisfy the users. This
leaves the librarians with a lot to consider. The author recommended that these libraries
enhance the use of these electronic resources in addition to allowing huge investments in
order to improve the input of electronic resources in libraries. However, this is difficult to
gauge with the access of free information.
Free vs. For-Fee Information
Noh’s work suggested access to free information could affect the use of library
resources. However, according to The OCLC website (2006) illustrated that a wide range
of college students trust an electronic source if students pay for the information. The
report on OCLC website explained that paying for information is trustworthy more than
free information. Also, the some students agree that the higher the price for information
means the higher quality of information. On the other hand, other students feel that there
is a plethora of information that is available for free. OCLC report showed any payment
for information is consider a scam. The issue is determining that how these concepts
affect how students seek information and then how the library can use that knowledge to
properly promote library resources.
Reference Services
Despite economic, technology, and how the access to free information resources
affects library resources it is necessary to examine reference services. Horn (2001)
examined the use of electronic reference services in the library and its utilization in
14

electronic commerce software for use by academic libraries.” Electronic commerce is the
ability to perform transactions involving the exchange, or use, of goods or services
between two or more parties using electronic tools and techniques”( Schutzer, 1996).
Electronic commerce software offers academic libraries the ability to expand reference
services. A good example is the improvements and increased use of electronic
referencing services that have fundamentally transformed access to services. Therefore,
all of these rigorous actions should be applied in addition to improving the reference
services in order to create a more conducive learning environment in our libraries.
Reference services will, in the long run, translate into effectiveness in our libraries and
improve the learning conditions for our students’ using these facilities.
Rehman (2011) investigated the user’s awareness and satisfaction with reference
services in the university library, in order to ensure that the library is providing proper
reference services. The study conducted on Pakistan libraries public universities shows
that the Reference Services are still not well perceived as satisfying their consumer
needs. Surprisingly, the library’s electronic reference services have not, so far, received
many appraisals from the world at large. Rehman demonstrated the urgent need to
renovate how the reference services of the library in universities are used. Rehman
further stated that if the services are improved, new Information and Communications
Technology (ICT)-based referencing methods should be embraced. The methods should
further illustrate high levels of customer care to ensure that the information used is
relevant.

15

Federated search tool
It is important to determine what search engine students like to use. Georgas
(2013) illustrated Google and the federated search tool are tools used by students to carry
out research in the library. The tools enable students to search content online especially
when doing assignments. The students, in doing their assignment, can use federated
search tools. The federated search tool is more efficient compared to the use of Google,
and most students prefer using it. It is very easy to use even with the new students in the
library. Students can use the federated search tool without the help of a librarian. A study
was conducted to compare the effectiveness of federated search tool to Google showed
that the federated search tool was more effective. The tool does not require a complicated
procedure. Most students also find the use of Google in the library as an effective
method. It is efficient to use, simple to use, and also very fast; especially when the net is
available. According to the study, the students find Google easier to use compared to the
federated tool. Research performed in schools to determine which tool was easiest to use
between the federated search tool and Google, results show that twenty-six students (81.2
percent) said Google is easier and six students (18.8 percent) said the federated search
tool is easier. Therefore, when comparing the two tools, it shows that most students
preferred using Google because it was faster. Although Google was simple and efficient
to use, it had shortcomings. Students complained that it gave irrelevant results, it failed to
provide a full citation to the source, and it was difficult to find books. Some students
reported that it was not an adequate tool to find scholarly sources and there were a lot of
ads; whereby some sites required the students to purchase books.
16

Library Tutorials
Students are required to use academic databases throughout their academic
careers in order to maximize their acquisition of knowledge. The use of library tutorials
is an effective method for learning how to do so.
Wyant (2013) showed that the use of videos greatly enhances students’
understanding of, particularly difficult concepts. Students can get elaborate answers to
their queries from video help. Using 217 students, 135 of whom used video help, and 82
of whom did not Wyant revealed that the students who viewed the video tutorials had an
average grade of 94% on the academic assignments that were assigned in student study,
whereas the students who did not view the video averaged 58%. The use of video
tutorials enabled students to research rapidly and complete assignments on time without
seeking assistance from the librarian.
Sachs et al. (2013) argued that online tutorials are most effective at training
students in research methodologies because they enable students to choose the best mode
of learning for their individual learning styles. The tutorial can use pictures for emphasis
or to increase students’ understanding and, more importantly, are seen as engaging,
interactive, and available at the moment of need. Studying the effectiveness of online
learning in the library among students of the millennial generation, they showed
improved participation and performance among students. The success of online learning
in the library resulted from four factors: the tutorial was appealing, it had less static text,
the subjects were short and to the point, and there was no excessive repetition. The
tutorials were interactive and offered hands-on exercises and ungraded self-tests.
17

Therefore, this process depicts the effectiveness of the library tutorials through the use of
online learning.
Bowles-Terry (2010) found that online video tutorials provide asynchronous library
assistance and students can view them on their own at any time of the day. The videos
can be viewed as often as necessary, and the student can study independently without
asking for direction. Video tutorials also facilitate an educational environment that can be
recommended to students through email to answer basic questions. The videos are
effective because they engage visual and auditory learners, students who learn through
observation and listening respectively.
Marketing and promoting
Studies in the recent past have shown that the world is quickly embracing the use of
electronic resources in their libraries. However, there is a need to increase the public
awareness of the use of these proficient materials. Castaldo (2008) suggested this can be
possible by simply creating an academic homepage and placing advertisements that can
help determine the response of these resources from society. Castaldo’s study gave a
good example, for instance, what can be from collecting data weekly for a prolonged
period of time from the Duke University page. Recently, advertisements were only well
received if the users were received similar to those in web pages, but the trend is
recently changing. Commercial libraries are prone to make more profits if the users
utilize this homepage properly due to increased awareness. Castaldo said the future
research of this study can be improved by researchers maintaining advertisements on the
library homepage. Then, the researchers continue monitoring those electronic resources
18

and keeping a record of the result. Also, the researcher can develop the idea of the
author from clicking on advertisements that exist on the library homepage by clicking
on the electronic resource.
Sharma & Bhardwaj (2009) illustrated libraries can accommodate the user’s needs
and provide various services by using market research techniques. Marketing provides
an effective way to assist academic libraries in ensuring that services delivered to library
users will continue to satisfy the user's needs. In a bid to improve the library services,
proper marketing and promotion of these services to its target audience is quite crucial.
Sharma & Bhardwaj demonstrated marketing for librarians. Also, the authors provided
practical solutions to implement a marketing strategy. These strategies will ensure good
services delivered to satisfy the user‘s needs. Before arriving at the appropriate
strategies one should understand the current needs. This leads to the subsequent
planning of service provision strategies. It is also advisable if the available services at
present should promote, as well as, enhance the efficient delivery of these services. The
authors suggested a useful guide for marketing the library services to the users. For
example, create a library web page, emails containing new library resources and tips,
use library wall space, attend academic lectures, and links to “Help” services.
Kennedy (2011) conducted a study aimed at finding out how collaborative
marketing is aiding in the use of e-resources. Kennedy’s purpose is to determine the
methods used in collaborative marketing and whether the methods are advantageous in
any way. Kennedy came to the conclusion that collaborative marketing increases the
user’s awareness on the use of electronic resources. This is made possible by the use of
19

connecting the libraries’ users to enhance the collaboration of both the traditional and
modern electronic resources used in library service methods. It should start with
conducting a benchmark of the several approaches that are necessary for the adoption.
The benchmark would help one to decide on the planned project that should be
embraced bearing in mind a number of factors. These factors include the existence of a
clearly affirmed goal and whether the goal is in tandem with the strategy at hand
amongst other features.
Kennedy (2011) on other article explained that despite the huge uproar from the
educational sector that the electronic resources are still not widespread in our libraries,
much effort should be taken by the libraries in all the learning institutions globally in
order to improve them. Kennedy, therefore, conducted a study to find out whether the
libraries are having any trouble marketing the use of these electronic resources.
Kennedy found out that the world is not quite adamant in revolutionizing their library
services. This is evident in the way institutions in several countries adopt various
strategies in order to incorporate the use of electronic resources in their libraries. A good
example is, by the way, the libraries conduct several surveys that are aimed at enhancing
the incorporation of these new methods that change this situation.
Proposed approach and main research
The research aims to determine student perceptions of library resources, services,
and the promotion of library resources. To ensure the research was as accurate as
possible it was completed in the course of one year. While conducting the research,
insight was gained to determine the perception of the library’s resources of many
20

students—graduate level and undergraduate level. It was noticed that the sources
examined during the research phase failed to address the lack of finances and awareness
as a major contributing factor. This research takes the results of previous researches into
consideration for Sims library’s information resources and focused this research on
reflecting how the perception of these factors impact information resources. The scope
then attempts to determine how Sims library’s resources can be better organized for
student efficiency. Also, these articles lack student involvement; therefore, there is a
need for the students to gather knowledge of how to access library’s resources. Gaining
background information and identifying the problems that face libraries are important
steps to attempt arriving at possible solutions according to what these authors suggests.
Some studies illustrate the importance of increasing the knowledge of students to use
information resources and how that will definitely increase the efficiency of library
services. Therefore, this concept is adopted in this research to examine information
literacy of the students.
For example, in the previous literature, the universities discussed in the above
sources, the budget was the major reason for the lack of internet and computers. While
this is not an issue for Sims library now, implementing how the budget could affect the
Sims library is necessary for the future. It is vital to realize some budget issues and how
the library should cover the needs of its users of the university whether the users are
students, instructors, or staff before the library provides services to users for international
use. This research examines the need for the student researchers in different fields to
determine their needs. While these articles focus on the university as a whole, this
21

research will first master the student's need, then consider the professor and faculty's
need for the future studies.
It is important that the university’s students are encouraged to use it. This will
improve library services because that is the only way to make students find the
information needed easily. Continuing research source utilization ensures the student will
be successful. Consideration is taken in mind to search for different ways to improve
library services. The previous studies did mention that the role of professor and librarians
at the university is vital to ensure that students are utilizing library resources, and the
professors and librarians are able to promote library’s resources. Therefore, this research
will find that the technology is the best way to do these tasks with efficiency. There are
some articles that suggested advertisement on the library's website to publicize library
information resources. But this idea of promotion is not provided for all fields of the
university; therefore, it is not essential in gathering information for library resources. The
concept of this research in promotion is that promoting library information resources can
present a clear image to the students as to what the library offers to the life of the
university community then validate its continued funding. With the promoting library’s
resources, the students will utilize the library’s resources, aiding in academic success for
the students and allowing the library to better serve the students.
Sims library provides a different varieties form of referencing services, which
includes the telephone, face to face, email your reference question or chat by "Ask a
Librarian" service that is available on the library website. This research will examine the
satisfaction of the students from this service and if the students like to use this service or
22

not. Also, Sims library provides ILL service, which is an acronym for the Southeastern
Interlibrary Loan System. This service allows the students to research and request
materials that are not available in Sims library campus for free. This questions the
importance of promoting library’s resources and how this will help students to utilize
these information resources.

23

CHAPTER 3
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
Research approach
To understand how students perceive library services and resources, a survey was
conducted. Simple random sampling was used for selecting the samples needed to assess
the concept of the study. Before the data could be collected, a panel of experts was pretested by the questionnaire, which was designed to enable students to fulfill the validity and
reliability requirements of the research. The study’s electronic survey was used and posted
by the Southeastern Louisiana University’s Braveheart server. The link was then distributed
to all the university students to complete regardless of whether they were undergraduate or
graduate students.
The population size
The target population for this study was all the university students. The source
population was the students who use the Sims library, but specifically, those have access
to the library located on Southeastern Louisiana University’s campus. The eligible
population was all undergraduate and graduate students. The study participants were those
who agreed to participate and responded to the questionnaire. In addition, the data collected
from the students who use the Sims library are often compared to the data for the total
university students.
24

The total target population consisted of approximately 13,000 undergraduate students and
1000 graduate students. In this research, the responding population was 313 students which
included 142 undergraduate students and 171graduate students.
Data Analysis
Quantitative data analysis tools were used to evaluate the data obtained from the
survey. In order to accomplish this task, the study must describe and summarize the data
obtained and identify the relationships between the variables while comparing the variables
that allow a base standard. It is then necessary to identify the difference between variable
and forecast outcomes.
Concerning the survey, in some questions, the percentages may not total 100
percent because the students can select all the answers that apply to that choice. For
example, Students may select one or more of the provided choices to answer some of the
questions. After collecting the data, different statistics software programs were used to
display the results. In addition, the study explains some of the statistical operations on the
data to show some statistical analysis and show comparisons and relations. For example,
data analysis was mainly done by use of qualitative and quantitative methods. The raw data
was checked for accuracy, completeness, and usefulness. The responses were checked for
legibility. Microsoft Excel was used to perform descriptive statistics. Tables and graphs
were used in the data analysis processes to show the trends of events and to compare two
or more variables of the research interest. SAS version 9.3 was used to perform analytic
statistics. Also, Chi-square test was used to find the relation between the variables. Franke
et al. (2012) defined Chi-square test as a “test that is used to examine independence across
25

two categorical variables or to assess how well a sample fits the distribution of a known
population. The chi-square test of independence determines whether two categorical
variables in a single sample are independent of or associated with each other”. Fisher's
Exact Test was used when one of the table cells have expected values less than five.
Students’ responses do not represent the entire perception of the university student, but
representative of a portion. The test would then be used to determine whether their status
and preferences are variables independent of each other.

26

CHAPTER 4
RESULT AND DISCUSSION
This section presents the results of the data analysis conducted in the current
study. The study’s purpose was to examine students’ perception on library’s information
resources and services. The results of this study are presented through data from survey
answers given by the students who use Sims library, and inferential statistical analysis of
the data was performed.
Demographic Data
In order to provide accurate demographic data, the student who use the library
were asked to answer a demographic question regarding their status, gender, and college
level in order. As shown in Figure 1, of the 313 respondents, 142 (45%) were
undergraduate students and 171 (55%) were graduate students.

Q1:What is your status?
200
150

171

142

100
50
0
undergraduate

graduate

Figure1 Percentages of undergraduate vs. graduate students surveyed
27

Figure 2 indicated that according to gender, 96 (31%) of the respondents were
male and 214 (69%) were female. In attempts to determine what college of study used the
library more, this graph is subdivided depending on the colleges that exist in the
university, which is five colleges.

Q2:What is your gender?

female

214

male

96

0

50

100

150

200

250

Figure 2 Distribution of students by Gender

Figure 3 shows the number and percentage of each discipline. According to the
statistic, the largest number of the students utilize the library are students of Arts,
Humanities, and Social Sciences, reflecting a total of 103 students. The second college
that uses the library is that the Nursing and Health Sciences making up a total of 87
students. The third college that uses the library is the students of science and technology.
According to the statistic, 60 students have participated in this survey belonged to
Science and Technology College. The forth students' college is 34 students of Education.
Finally, the least students use the library are 29 students of Business.

28

Q3:What is your college?
150
100

103

50

87

0
Arts, Humanities
and Social
Sciences

29

34

60

Business

Education

Science and
Technology

Nursing and
Health Sciences

Figure3 Distribution of students by discipline

Overall Perception
The students answer some questions regarding their perception of Sims library in order to
gauge the current student perception. The answers are depicted below:
Library Activities
The Survey’s respondents were asked how frequently use the Sims Library
(Daily, Weekly, Monthly, Several times/year, At least once/year, or Never).
Figure 4 shows the number and percentage of respondents who selected each option.

Q4:How often do you visit the library?
140
120
100
80
60
40
20
0

126

68
39
Daily

Weekly

Monthly

38
Several
times/year

Figure 4 Frequency of use Sims library
29

25
At least
once/year

18
Never

This question's was asked to determine if there are any library activities that make
the students visit Sims library frequently. As shown in Figure 5, the data suggest thirtyone percent of college students, which is equivalent 98 students, use a library to do
research. Twenty-one percent report coming to the library for printing and scanning
compared to 79 percent of total respondents. Twenty percent of students use the library
for homework or studying. Eight percent report coming library to do other activities
which are not listed in the question. On the other hand, only seven percent report using a
library to choose to find print books and other materials. The rest, sixteen present, is
divided between the libraries activates. For example, the students are using the library to
check email and/or Moodle, find online books and other materials, read print newspapers
and journals, read online newspapers and journals, and socialize with friends.

Q5:What is your primary purpose for visiting Sims Library today?
26

Other
5

Socialize with friends

12

Check email and/or Moodle

65

Printing, scanning

62

Study

11

Read online newspapers and…
1

Read print newspapers and journals

9

Find online books and other…

23

Find print books and other materials

98

Do research
0

20

40

60

Figure5 Percentage of the students doing activities at the library
30

80

100

Reference Services
Figure 6 illustrates students’ preferred methods of obtaining reference services at
Sims Library. In this question, the students have more than one choice from categories of
questions about the reference services. One hundred thirty students have not used any of
the reference services. Ninety-four students chose face-to-face, 80 students preferred to
use email, 50 students selected 24/7 chat reference, 27 students contacted librarians by
telephone and twenty-seven students used research consultation service.

Reference services

Q6:Which methods have you used to get Reference Services and
research help at Sims Library?
I haven’t used any of these
Face-to-Face
Research Consultation Service
Telephone
Text
Email
24/7 Chat Reference
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

frequency

Figure 6 Student reference services preferences

Library’s electronic resources
This question measures the frequency of using the library electronic resources (more than
once a day, 1-5 times a week, once a week, less than once a month). Figure 7 displays the
number and percentage of respondents who selected each option.
31

Q7:How often do you use the library's electronic information
resources?

frequency

less than ones a month
ones week
1-5 times a week

more than once a day
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

number of the students

Figure7 Percentage of students use library electronic resources

In Figure 8, the students were asked to indicate the awareness of the students
about all various types of electronic resources that Sims library provide. Students can
choose more than one answer to this question.
The college students surveyed shows high levels of use of some types of
electronic resources that Sims library provides. For example, seventy-six percent (238
students) use online databases that are available in Sims library and sixty-four percent
(200 students) familiar with library website. Forty-five present (140 students) aware of an
electronic magazine/journals, and forty-one percent (129 students) familiar with
electronic books in Sims library. Thirty-six percent (113 students) utilize an online
catalog. Finally, the least percentage are the fifty- two students that use Library
LibGuides and only ten students use electronic audiobooks.
Reasoning of the students to use the library’s electronic information resources
Figure 9 shows that the percentage of the students that choose the electronic
32

resource the most important area in research for their field was the highest among all
other choices. If accurate, then 167 percent choose based on recommended the electronic
resource by their professor and colleague. Fifty-one percent of college students chose
based on the course reading list. Followed closely by recommendation of a librarian and
reference from another source, at 45 and 41 percent respectively.

Q8: Which of the following library's electronic information resources
have you ever used from Sims Library? (Select all that apply.)
Electronic audiobooks
Electronic magazines/journals
Electronic books
Online catalog
Online databases
Library LibGuides
Library Web Site

0

50

100

150

200

250

Figure8 Percentage of students use different various type of library’s electronic resources

Q9:Why did you choose the electronic resource(s) you used?
(Select all that apply.)
Course reading list

51

Reference from another source

41

Recommended by a librarian

45

Recommended by a friend

19

Recommended by the…

167

Important research in my field

197
0

50

100

150

200

Figure 9 Reasons for how the students know about the library electronic resources
33

250

Through the survey, students were questioned in order to gauge the electronic
resources that the students typically use in order to begin an information search from the
following the five information sources: search engines, libraries, bookstores, online
libraries and online bookstores. As shown in Figure 10, search engines have the highest
favorability ratings of the five information sources. The survey findings show that 51
percent of college students search for information on a search engine, compared to 50
percent of total respondents’ searches. Twenty-eight percent of the students use an online
database which equals 88 students from different colleges. Library websites were selected
by 16 percent of students as the source used to begin an information search. Very few
students use email and topic-specific Web site with respective percentages of 2.25 and
3.22.

Q10:Where do you typically begin your search for information on
a particular topic?

Library Web site
Online database
Topic specific Web…
E-mail
Search Engine

0

Series1

50

Search Engine

E-mail

158

7

100
Topic specific
Web site
10

150
Online
database
88

200
Library Web
site
48

Figure10 Distribution of students by where students begin to search for information
34

The survey identifies the most common search engines used recently by the
students. Figure 11 illustrates that Google was used most frequently by 97 percent of total
respondents, which is 303 students. Yahoo! was used by 1.29 percent and MSN Search
was used by 1 percent, followed by MSN Search and Ask.com 1 and .32 respectively.

Q11:Which search engine do you use the most for your search on
a particular topic?
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
Series1

Google

Yahoo!

MSN Search

Ask.com

303

4

3

1

Figure 11 Show the preferable search engines used by students

Free vs. For-Fee Information
In this question, the students may select one or more of provided choices to
answer this question. As shown in figure 12, Forty-three percent of the students, which
are 134 students, have not paid for information or content from an electronic information
source. The students who have purchased a registration to a website (14 percent),
Electronic books (12 percent), Articles (12 percent), Answer to a question (9 percent),
Subscription (7 percent), and Audiobooks (3 percent).

35

Q12: Have you ever paid for information from an electronic
information source? What did you buy? (Select all that apply.)
non of them
Answer to a question
Electronic books
Subscription
Articles
Audiobooks
Registration to a Web site

134
29
39
20
38
9
45
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Figure12 Distribution of students pays for the information

Library Tutorials
Students were surveyed about their opinions regarding the librarian class
presentations and guides and tutorials on the library’s website in order to help them know
how to use different databases. As shown in Figure 13, 258 (85.15 %) students said "yes"
and 45 (14.85%) said "no."

Q13:Do you think online library tutorials on libraries' website
will help you to know how to search in different databases?
Yes, 85%

100%

No, 15%
0%
Yes

No

Figure 13 Student opinions regarding the usefulness of online library tutorials

Relations
Categorical variables are presented as percentages. Binary associations between
two categorical variables were tested using Chi-square tests or Fisher’s exact methods.
36

Two-sided p values are presented and p<0.05 was considered statistically significant. All
the analysis were performed using SAS 9.3 software.
Assume the 313 students are representative of all students in the library, graduate
students were more likely to visit the library than undergraduate students. There are 171
graduate students and 142 undergraduate students were surveyed in this study. For these
students, undergraduate students are more likely to visit the library daily compared to
graduate students. For those who used library daily, 11.8% were graduate students; for
students who used library weekly, monthly, several time/year, at least one/year, 50.4%,
82.1%, 81.6%, and 88% were in graduate school (Table 1). Generally, graduate students
use library less often than undergraduate students. The difference was significant
(p<0.001). Overall, less proportion of undergraduate students used the library compared
to graduate students. But, for students who used the library, undergraduate students
tended to use the library more often. According to this table, There is no gender
difference in the frequency of using the library (P=0.467).
As seen in Table2, graduate students were more likely to use the library to do
research (74.5%), find print books and other materials (60.9%), find online books and
other materials (66.7%), and read online newspapers and journals (90%); while
undergraduate students were more likely to use library to study (1-19.4%=80.6%),
printing and scanning (1-0.431=56.8%), check email and/or Moodle (91.7%), and
socialize with friends (80%). This difference is significant (<0.001). Compared to male
students, female students are more likely to use the library to do all the activities
mentioned above (p=0.02).
37

Table 1 Relation between status, gender, and frequency of visiting the library
Frequently of
visiting the library
Daily
Weekly
Monthly
Several time/year
At least once/year
Never

Number of students
68
126
39
38
25
18

% of graduate
students
11.8%
50.4%
82.1%
81.6%
88%
83.3%

% of female
students
72.1%
64.2%
74.3%
63.1%
80%
76.5%

Table 2 Relation between the purpose of visiting the library and status, gender, and
college
The purpose of
Number of students % of graduate
% of female
visiting the library
students
students
Do research
98
74.5%
72.2%
Find print books
and other materials 23
60.9%
78.3%
Find online books
and other
materials
9
66.7%
66.7%
Read print
newspapers and
journals
1
1%
1%
Read online
newspapers and
journals
11
90%
91%
Study
62
19.4%
55.7%
Printing, scanning
65
43.2%
75%
Check email and/or
Moodle
12
8.3%
66.7%
Socialize with
friends
5
20%
0%
Other
26
92.3%
69.2%

Students in Arts, humanities, and social sciences used library more frequently to
do research, students in business school were more likely to use library to study and print
38

and scan, students in education school were more likely to do research and print and scan,
students in science and technology were more likely to do research, study, and print and
scan, while students in nursing and health were more likely to do research. The difference
is significant (Table 3).

Table 3 Relation between purpose for visiting and colleges
Q5: What is your primary purpose for visiting Sims Library today?

Printing, Scanning

Socialize with friends

Other

1.94

0

3.88

18.4

18.45 0.97

0.97

Business

10.34

3.45

0

0

0

34.4

20.69 6.9

6.9

4.8
17.
2

Education
Science
and
Technolog
y

29.41

0

8.82

0

5.88

8.82

32.35 5.88

0

8.8

25.42

3.39

3.39

0

0

25.4

28.81 1.69

3.39

8.4

38.37

5.81

2.33

1.16

5.81

17.4

12.79 6.98

0

9.3

23

9

1

11

39

62

64

12

5

26

Total

Study

14.5

98

Check email and
Moodle

Read online
newspapers and
journals
print newspapers
Read
and journals

35.92

Total

Find online books and
other materials
Find print books and
other materials

Arts,
Humanitie
s and
social
sciences

Nursing
and Health
Sciences

Do research

Q3: What
is your
college?

3
1
1

As seen in Table 4, the reasons for choosing the electronic resources were
associated with the frequency of using the library electronic resources. Specifically,
frequent students were more likely to choose the electronic resources due to important
research in their field (p=0.0049).

Table 4 Relation between frequency of using the library electronic resources and the
reason to choose the library electronic resources
Q7: How often do you use the library electronic resources?
Q9: Why did you
choose the
electronic
resource(s) you
used?
Important research
in my field

More
than
1-5
once/da times/wee
y (n=32) k (n=99)

once/wee
k (n=63)

less than
once/wee
k (n=117)

74%

63%

51%

50%

51%

60%

52%

0.625
4

Chisq

7%

0.904
9

Fisher'
s Exact
Test

15%

0.826
8

Chisq
Chisq
Chisq

Recommended by
a friend
3%

Reference from
another source

Chisq

72%

0.004
9

Recommended by
the
professor/colleagu
e

Recommended by
a librarian

P

Test
Method

13%

7%

5%

16%

11%

19%

17%

10%

10%

0.277
5

13%

21%

17%

12%

0.284
7

Course reading list

40

Graduate students were more likely to use the library’s website, and online
database, while undergraduate students were more likely to use search engines (p<0.001).
There was no gender difference in searching methods preference (p=0.09). Searching
methods preference did not differ by students in different college (Table 5).

Table 5 Relation between student status, gender, college, and student start of information
search

Q10: Where do you
typically begin your
search for
information on a
particular topic?

% of graduate
Number of students students

% of female
students

Search Engine

158

42.4%

63%

E-mail

7

0%

72%

Topic specific web
site

10

50%

70%

Online database

88

74%

80%

Library Web site

48

67%

73%

Table 6 shows that Search engines (50.8%) was the place where most students
typically began their search for information on a particular topic, followed by the online
database (28.5%) and library website (15.2%). However, for those who started their
search using search engines, most are using the library’s electronic resources less than
once per month (43.95%), and for those who search from online database and library
websites, a large proportion used the library electronic resources 1-5 times per week.
41

Overall, students with different frequency of using the library electronic resources differ
in the pattern of beginning their research for information on a particular topic (p=0.0053).

Table6 Relation between frequency of using the library electronic resources and student
start of information search
Q7: How
often do you
use the
library
electronic
resources?

Q10: Where do you typically begin your search for information
on a particular topic?

E-mail
(n=7)

Topic
specific
website
(n=10)

Online
database
(n=88)

Library
Website
(n=47)

7.01%

42.86%

30%

6.82%

19.15%

1-5
times/week

28.03%

42.86%

10%

39.77%

34.04%

once/week

21.02%

14.29%

20%

19.32%

21.28%

0%

40%

34.09%

25.53%

Search
Engine
(n=157)

More than
once/day

less than
once/a month 43.95%
Overall P
value=0.0053

Students with different frequencies of using library facilities only differed in the
usage of online database and electronic magazines/journals. Generally, less frequent
students of library facilities were more likely to use online databases (p=0.0266), and
92% of those using library several times per year used online databases (Table 7). The
same pattern can be observed in the usage of electronic magazines/journals (p=0.0005).

42

Table 7 Relation between the library electronic information resources used and frequency
of visiting the library
Q8: Which of the
following library
electronic
information
resources have
you ever used
from Sims
Library?

Variable

Q4: Approximately, how often do you use the Sims Library?

Daily
(n=68
)

Weekl
y
(n=126
)

Monthl
y
(n=39)

Several
time/yea
r (n=38)

At least
once/yea
r (n=25)

Never
(n=18)

P

Test
Method

Library Web Site
Library LibGuides
Online databases

59% 65%
24% 12%
68% 74%

69%
18%
79%

63%
16%
92%

68%
28%
88%

56%
6%
61%

0.8436
0.1364
0.0266

Chisq
Chisq
Chisq

Online catalog

40% 34%
38% 47%

28%
49%

45%
39%

40%
32%

28%
11%

0.6103
0.0633

Chisq
Chisq

28% 40%

56%

53%

76%

50%

0.0005

Chisq

0%

0.3852
*

*Fisher'
s Exact
test

Electronic books
Electronic
magazines/journal
s
Electronic
audiobooks

4%

2%

8%

3%

4%

The reasons for choosing the electronic resources affected students’ habit of using
searching services. Specifically, if students choose the electronic resources due to
important research in their field, they were more likely to begin their search from an
online database and the library’s website (p<0.0001). Other reasons have little impact on
places where students began their search (Table 8).

43

Table 8 Relation between the reason to choose the electronic resource(s) and start of
information search
Q9: Why did you
choose the
electronic
resource(s) you
used?

Q10: Where do you typically begin your search for information
on a particular topic?
Search
Engine
(n=158)

Email
(n=7)

Topic
specific
website
(n=10)

Online
database
(n=88)

Library
Website
(n=48)

53%

71%

40%

77%

75%

56%

14%

70%

50%

50%

7%

0%

10%

3%

8%

11%

14%

20%

16%

23%

0.2957

Chisq

13%
15%

0%
0%

0%
10%

15%
24%

15%
13%

0.5816
0.1867

Chisq
Chisq

Recommended by
a friend
Recommended by
a librarian
Reference from
another source
Course reading list

Test
Method

Fisher'
s
Exact
<0.0001 Test
Fisher'
s
Exact
0.1693 Test
Fisher'
s
Exact
0.5378 Test

Important research
in my field
Recommended by
the
professor/colleague

P

Table 9 illustrates that the top 3 purposes of visiting the Sims Library were doing
research (31.5%), printing and scanning (20.9%), and studying (19.9%). Of them, those
visiting the library to do research were more likely to choose the electronic resources due
to important research in their field (71%) (p=0.002). They were also more likely to
choose the electronic resources due to a recommendation from friends (p=0.0026) and
references from another source (p=0.0404).
Overall, the reasons for choosing the electronic resources were associated with the
primary purposes of visiting the library.
44

Table 9 Relation between the reason to choose the electronic resource(s) and purpose for
visiting the library
Q5: What is your primary purpose for visiting Sims Library
today?
Printing, scanning (n=65)

Check email and/or Moodle
(n=12)

Socialize with friends (n=5)

Test Methods

Study (n=62)

P

Read online newspapers and
journals (n=11)

71
%

70
%

100
%

55
%

58
%

49
%

25
%

80
%

77%

0.002
2

Chisq

54
%

70
%

56%

64
%

48
%

57
%

50
%

40
%

42%

0.667
1

Chisq

6%

22
%

0%

0%

8%

0%

25
%

0%

0%

0.002
6

Chisq

19
%

26
%

0%

9%

6%

12
%

8%

20
%

19%

0.287
4

Chisq

21
%

4%

33%

0%

6%

14
%

0%

0%

12%

0.040
4

Chisq

21
%

17
%

44%

0%

15
%

12
%

17
%

20
%

8%

0.224
1

Chisq

Other (n=26)

Find online books and other
materials (n=9)

Course reading
list

Find print books and other
materials (n=23)

Important
research in my
field
Recommended
by the
professor/collea
gue
Recommended
by a friend
Recommended
by a librarian
Reference from
another source

Do research (n=98)

Q9: Why did
you choose the
electronic
resource(s) you
used?

Students’ habits of searching for information affect the methods that they used to
get reference services at Sims library. Specifically, those usually began a search using email and topic-specific website were more likely to utilize email to get electronic
reference services at Sims Library. In addition, Students who usually began their search

45

through search engines and emails were more likely to use text to get electronic reference
services and research help at Sims Library (Table 10).

Table 10 Relation between reference services and student start of information search
Q6: Which
methods
have you
used to get
reference
services at
the Library?

Variable
24/7 Chat
Reference
Email
Text
Telephone

Q10: Where do you typically begin your search for information on a
particular topic?

Topic
Search Especific Online
Library
Engine mail website database Website
(n=158) (n=7) (n=10) (n=88)
(n=48) P

Test
Method
Fisher's
0.4009 Exact Test
0.0005 Chisq
Fisher's
0.0103 Exact Test
Fisher's
0.144 Exact Test

16%
24%

0%
86%

0%
50%

19%
18%

15%
31%

6%

29%

0%

0%

4%

7%

0%

20%

14%

4%

0%

0%

14%

8%

14%

30%

36%

19%

Fisher's
0.4175 Exact Test
Fisher's
0.2526 Exact Test

0%

30%

45%

46%

Fisher's
0.1499 Exact Test

Research
Consultation
Service
7%
Face-toFace
30%
I haven’t
used any of
these
41%

For students who think the online tutorials on the libraries’ website will help to
know how to search in different databases, 31% used face-to-face service, 25% used
emails, 16% used 24/7 chat reference, 10% have used telephone service, 9% used
research consultation service, 4% used text to get electronic reference services and
46

research help, respectively. For those who do not think the online library tutorial on the
libraries’ website helpful, 31%, 29%, 16%, 4%, 7%, and 7% have used the above service,
respectively, to get electronic reference services and research help. There is no significant
difference in using any of the services between the two groups of students (Table 11).

Table 11 Relation between reference services and online library tutorials
Q6: Which
methods have you
used to get
electronic
reference services
and research help
at Sims Library?

Q13: Do you think the online tutorials on the libraries’
website will help you to know how to search in different
databases?

Yes (n=258)

NO (n=45)

P

16%
25%
4%
10%

16%
29%
7%
4%

0.9929
0.6009
0.394
0.2544

Face-to-Face

9%
31%

7%
31%

0.6193
0.9475

I haven’t used any
of these

40%

49%

0.2813

24/7 Chat
Reference
Email
Text
Telephone
Research
Consultation
Service

47

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION AND RECOMMENDATION
Conclusion
The results show that the undergraduate students tended to visit the library more
often than the graduate students. Graduate students were more likely to visit the library to
do research. Therefore, graduate students considering conducting research is an excellent
way to gain experiences and skills that will benefit them both academically and
professionally. The information found in the library resources can be used to assist the
graduate students in discovering some aspect that is interesting in their field, which can
prepare them for thesis writing. Today the library users can access many services and
resources from the library’s websites. Therefore, the students who are not frequently
visiting the library like to use the library online databases. They can access the library
online databases from their own computer by using the internet.
According to the result, Students in Arts, humanities, and social sciences used the
library more frequently to do research. It is possible that the students in this college
typically do more academic research, so they need to use the library resources. It could be
that the library provides a variety of resources related to that particular field. Also, it could
be their professors ask them and encourage them to use library resources on their
assignments. However, this research attempts to understand why that awareness is not
prevalent in the other colleges.
48

The results found that 89 students of the respondents were in the Nursing and
Health Sciences visit the library to do research. Which means that, the students in Nursing
and Health Sciences college understand that library resources ensure they have current and
updated material to increase their knowledge regularly. However, the students of Science
and Technology, Business, and Education visit the library to do other activities. According
to the statistic, the least amount of students that visit the library are students of Business
College. It could be because the library is far away from the business building on campus,
or that they do not know about the resources that available in the library. However, that
number reflects and a significant decrease among the Arts and Humanities and Nursing
compared to Business. Also, there is a possibility that their assignments do not require
them to use the library resources. This research is looking to understand the student's
awareness about library resources from a different field.
Graduate students were more likely to depend on the library website, and online
database while undergraduate students were more likely to depend on search engines to
provide the information. There are many reasons that can be true. Sometimes,
undergraduate students may have the misconceptions that the information from search
engines is more trustworthy more than the library information resources. It may possible
undergraduate students do not have enough searching experience to use library databases,
and they have difficulties in locating the resources that they need. Therefore, they use
Google because its ease-of-use. Kolowich (2011) illustrated that “College students tended
to overuse Google and misuse scholarly databases because they preferred simple database
searches to other methods of discovery, but generally exhibited ‘a lack of understanding of
49

search logic’ that often foiled their attempts to find good sources”. The library provides for
students a plethora of resources in a different field as opposed to Google’s limitations.
Therefore, the goal of this thesis is to find an effective solution way to overcome on these
serious limitations.
“The idea of a librarian as an academic expert who is available to talk about
assignments and hold their hands through the research process is, in fact, foreign to most
students”( Kolowich,2011). Email is one of a preferable method to get reference service at
Sims library. The result shows that the students like to use email to search for information
that is provided by the librarian, so they are able to share the resources with friends. Also,
they can retrieve the resources at any time they need it. Students can express themselves
better when they put their question down in writing. The result shows that Using email as
a reference service is better for students who have a lack of oral communication, and who
are not able to visit the library. This form of reference service will be the best choice for
them.
The data collected shows evidence that there is no relation between the preference
to use online library tutorial and the reference services. However, the results show that the
amount of usage was related to online library tutorials; therefore, graduate students
perceive that using the online library tutorials are helpful. Also, the study shows graduate
students were more likely to use library website and online database than undergraduate
students. As a result, students usually began researching using email and topic-specific
websites were more likely to utilize email to get reference services (p=0.0005). This means
that the students are very familiar with an email to share and obtain information. Also,
50

Students who usually began their search through a search engine and email were more
likely to use text librarian to get reference services (p= 0.0103).
According to Bowles-Terry et al. (2010), "those who were not interested in using
the tutorials said that they would most likely seek help from a librarian via chat, email, or
telephone before spending their time looking for online help, because they believed that
asking for help would be quicker and easier than finding instructional materials on their
own." If these results hold for users of the Sims Library, they indicate that the students of
Southeastern Louisiana University prefer to learn library skills during a time and place that
is appropriate for them. This means that the students who did not attend the Sims library
orientation class to learn library skills still can benefit from the online library tutorials that
are offered on the library’s website (for example, the tutorials teach the Boolean concept
of keyword searching, interpreting citation, using databases, and online catalog.)
Previous literature has found that federated search engines are more efficient
compared to the use of Google and most students prefer using it. Also, library tutorials and
references services have proven that to be effective aids to student scholarship regardless
of the method used in learning. Many studies have shown that library tutorials have
improved performance among most students; they teach students how to use the library's
search tool to find a particular resource or relevant resources on any topic. Based on these
findings, student perceives that these valuable tutorials support student understanding of
the concepts used in research such as Boolean operators. Also, with online tutorials, library
users can return to and review easily any library skills that they need.

51

Recommendation
Promote Reading and Supporting Research Model (PRSR Model)
The proposed model initiated after recognizing the difficulties that students face
while using the library website because of the lake of their abilities in information
literacy as indicated in the research result. PRSR Model is a Predictive intelligence
module that is packed with features that enable the student to access the library
material. The PRSR Model will remedy the disconnection between the students and their
lack of utilization of library resources. Instead of the student having to seek a method to
retrieve the information, the PRSR Model makes it so that the student only needs to log
into the website, and the library resources are then provided for them. This Model will
also assist the library to stay connected with the student’s individual needs with little to
no cost. Therefore, this research recommends the need to use technology to promote and
motivate the students to use library resources by designing a system that will simplify
and keep the students up to date with the library resources. The Model will support
students with a lack of information literacy and will support the student’s education. The
goal of the Model is to bind students with library resources in an easy way to improve
academic work, as well as, promote reading and supporting research.
Model Structure
The PRSR Model structural design consists of two main modules that enable it to
run efficiently. These two main modules, in figure 14, are namely PRSR user interface
and PRSR system. The user interface module is made up of the user interface which is
user-friendly which allows the student to access the library resources with ease. The
52

system module allows the student to find the relevant material that is available online
without visiting the library itself, or perhaps, access the material anywhere, at any time.
Also, the model provides the registration interfaces for the system users to enable the
registration of authorized users. The student will be required to register and get
authentication to be able to access the material from the library. Furthermore, the model
structure also constitutes the login forms which provides authentication to the valid users
of the system. The university students, who have student numbers known as W#, as well
as the password, have the authorization to use the system.

Figure 14 PRSR Assist diagram
53

Functionality of the Model
When a student enters the PRSR website, the student will be required to log in the
system by providing the required credentials which are the student number and the
password. After that, the data collected and entered will be analyzed by the PRSR
system. Here, there are two issues that may arise; the parameters being invalid or the
parameters being valid. Invalid parameters are usually caused by the user entering in a
wrong combination of either the student number or the password, and hence, access will
be denied. On the other hand, the parameters will be valid if the correct authentication
credentials are provided by the user. In this case, the data will be taken and passed in the
system. After that, the system will recognize all the courses that the student registered for
that semester alongside the name of the student. This can be seen in Figure 15; the
student, Ester logged into the system by providing the correct student number and
password, and hence, accessed the system. Her major was Computer Science, and the
courses registered included MATH 504, COMP 409/505, COMP 261. In this regard, the
resources will be different and based on that particular student’s major, as well as, the
courses registered. Then, the system will go ahead and start operating by processing
based on basic categories of the system using the intelligent engine, data mining, as well
as, the information analysis. Then, the system will retrieve the library resources based on
these basic categories. In the first category, the system will retrieve the library resources
according to the last searching topic in the library website. This means that the system
will retrieve the library resources concerning the last topic that the user has searched
using the search box on the library website. For example when Ester has access to the
54

library website and searched the topic "RDA," the system will know what Ester is
looking for by using the intelligent engine that it possesses and consequently will show
the following results: ”Introducing RDA a guide to the basics”, “RDA: resource and
description & access”, “Library of Congress Resource Description and Access (RDA)”.
In the second category, the system will provide all the important databases according to
the student’s major, which will help the student to focus on the databases that will
provide various information resources related to the student’s major. For example, ACM
Digital Library, Applied Science & Technology Source, Computer Source among others.
In the third category, the system will provide the new library resources according to the
student’s major, which keep the student updated on the new resources that are available
in the library concerning the student major. For example, Ester would find the
Encyclopedia of Computer Science (eBook). In the fourth category, the system will go
ahead and provide professors’ suggested theses resources. This category will help the
student to utilize and know about some library resources as the professors have a range of
experience and knowledge of the most useful books. For example, Dr. Alkadi suggested
these resources for course COMP 409, Cloud computing beckons scientists (Book).
The system and the library databases that hold a variety of the library materials will be
connected directly. This process will be performed by the intelligent engine, data mining,
as well as, the information analysis. After that, a list that recommends the library
information resources is provided through a process known as retrieval of information
providing the results in the end. Consequently, the user of the PRSR model will be able to
get the results from the system after the last step is completed whereby the information is
55

retrieved, hence providing the results to the student.

Figure 15 Example of the prospective model output

Future Work and Future Research
Implementing, testing, and analysis of results provided from the PRSR model will be
part of future research while its theoretical and technical design was based primarily on
56

its operation and functionality. Other than that, there will be some modifications that will
be done to the PRSR Model, such as, the addition of some features to increase the
performance, as well as, the efficiency of the model and make the student interact
frequently with the model. For example, the students can reserve a book through the
model. A student does not need to go to the library to reserve a book and will use the
model to reserve book(s) in the library without having the need to be physically present. .
This will consist of the other function of the model after it has been modified in the
future. The other modification would be to enable the students who have forgotten their
passwords be able to retrieve it without making it accessible to those who have not been
registered with the system. In addition to that, modifications will be done to the model to
enable students with disabilities, for instance, the blind or physically challenged, to be
able to access it as long as they are registered users.
Also, designing and creating attractive video tutorials by using effective tools can
improve library usage. Librarians need to update the tutorials frequently and make the
tutorials more useful. This can be accomplished by using recommended software to
design and record the video tutorials. In addition, using different languages will enable
international library users to better understand the search process.
Limitations and Delimitations of the Study
The survey was limited to the students of Southeastern Louisiana University. This
research used convenient sampling that does represent all the students in the library,
which may affect the findings of the study with time and circumstance. Additionally, it
was noticed that most of the graduate students that agreed to take the survey, were found
57

in areas that differed from the undergraduate students who participated in the survey.
Also, if the students answer incorrectly the data can be seen as inaccurate.

58

REFERENCES
Adams, K. (1999). Linus A. Sims Memorial Library: Southeastern Louisiana University.
Louisiana Libraries.
Bashorun, M., Abdulmumin, I. S. A. H., & Adisa, M. Y. (2011). User perception of
electronic resources in the University of Ilorin, Nigeria (UNILORIN). Journal of
Emerging Trends in Computing and Information Sciences, 2(11), 554-562.
Bowles-Terry, M. H. (2010). Best practices for online video tutorials in academic
libraries: A study of student preferences and understanding. Communications in
Information Literacy, 4(1), 17-27.
Castaldo, J. C. (2008). Marketing electronic resources from the academic library
homepage.
Crawford, J., De Vicente, A., & Clink, S. (2004). Use and awareness of Electronic
Information Services by students at Glasgow Caledonian University a longitudinal study.
Journal of librarianship and information science, 36(3), 101-117.
Deng, L. (2014). The Evolution of Library Reference Services: From General to Special,
1876–1920s. Libri, 64(3).
Franke, T., Ho, T., & Christie, C. (2012). The chi-square test: Often used and more often
misinterpreted. American Journal of Evaluation 33(3), 448-458.
Gakibayo, A., Ikoja-Odongo, J. R.,& Okello-Obura, C. (2013). Electronic information
resources utilization by students in Mbarara university library.
Georgas, H. (2013). Google vs. the Library: Student Preferences and Perceptions When
Doing Research Using Google and a Federated Search Tool. Portal: Libraries and the
Academy, 165-185.
Gibbs, D., Boettcher, J., Hollingsworth, J., & Slania, H. (2012). Assessing the Research
Needs of Graduate Students at Georgetown University. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 268-276.
Herman, E. (2001, November). End-users in academia: meeting the information needs
of university researchers in an electronic age. In Aslib proceedings (Vol. 53, No. 9, pp.
387-401). MCB UP Ltd.
Holley, R. P., & Powell, R. R. (2004). Student satisfaction with electronic library
resources at Wayne State University. Journal of access services, 2(1), 41-62.
59

Horn, J. (2001, March). The future is now: reference service for the electronic era.
In Crossing the divide: proceedings of the Tenth National Conference of the Association
of College and Research Libraries.
Kennedy, M. (2011). Collaborative marketing for electronic resources. Library Hi Tech
News, Vol. 28 Iss 6 pp. 22 - 24.
Kennedy, M. (2011). What are we really doing to market electronic resources?. Library
Management, 32(3), 144-158.
Kolowich, S. (2011). Study: College students rarely use librarians' expertise. Retrieved
January 8, 2016, from http://usatoday30.usatoday.com/news/education/story/2011-0822/Study-College-students-rarely-use-librarians-expertise/50094086/1
Noh, Y. (2012). A study measuring the performance of electronic resources in academic
libraries. In Aslib Proceedings (Vol. 64, No. 2, pp. 134-153). Emerald Group Publishing
Limited.
OCLC website. (2006). Perceptions of Libraries and Information Resources. Retrieved
October 2, 2015, from http://www.oclc.org/reports/2005perceptions.htm
Posey, J. A. (2009). Student Perceptions and Expectations of Library Services Quality
and User Satisfaction at Walters State Community College (Doctoral dissertation, East
Tennessee State University).
Rehman, S. U., Shafique, F., & Mahmood, K. (2011). A survey of user perception and
satisfaction with reference services in university libraries of Punjab. Library Philosophy
and Practice, (1), 31.
Sachs, D., Langan, K., Leatherman, C., & Walters, J. (2013). Assessing the effectiveness
of online information literacy tutorials for millennial undergraduates. Kalamazoo, Mi.:
Western Michigan University Libraries Faculty & Staff Publications, 327-351.
Schutzer, D. (1996). A Need for a Common Infrastructure. D-Lib Magazine.
Sharma, A. K., & Bhardwaj, S. (2009). Marketing and promotion of library services. In
International Conference on Academic Libraries.
Weiner, S. (2005). Academic Libraries in the United States: a Review of the Literature.
Library Philosophy and Practice, (Vol. 7, No. 2).
Wyant, N. (2013). The effectiveness of online video tutorials as supplemental library
instruction. Kansas Library Association College and University Libraries Section
Proceedings: 3(1), 39-4
60

