HISTORIANS’ EXPERIENCES USING DIGITIZED ARCHIVAL PHOTOGRAPHS AS
EVIDENCE

Alexandra M. Chassanoff

A dissertation submitted to the faculty of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in
partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the School
Information and Library Science.

Chapel Hill
2016

Approved by:
Christopher A. Lee
Sandra Hughes-Hassell
Matthew Kirschenbaum
Ryan Shaw
Helen Tibbo








ProQuest Number: 10251831





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10251831
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

©2016
Alexandra M. Chassanoff
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

ii

ABSTRACT
Alexandra M. Chassanoff: Historians’ Experiences Using Digitized Archival Photographs as
Evidence
(Under the direction of Christopher A. Lee)
Widespread digitization has presented scholars with unprecedented access to archival
sources. In particular, the availability of archival photographs through online collections has
been championed as an opportunity to fill in underrepresented histories absent from archival
collections. Yet the degree to which scholars are using digital visual sources, and how they are
using them, is relatively unexplored in the literature. In part, this can be attributed to the
difficulties of modeling visual information use; no empirical models currently link scholarly
interpretive practices to how scholars actually use visual materials.
This dissertation sought to address these gaps in the literature by examining the experiences
of one group – self-identified historians using digitized archival photographs as evidence in their
scholarly activities. This study uses an embedded case study approach to explore how and why
historians use images in the construction of their arguments. Fifteen participants were recruited
during the spring and summer of 2015. I conducted semi-structured interviews with each
participant, eliciting descriptions about their image practices and specific experiences related to
image use. I used thematic analysis and thematic synthesis to reveal salient aspects of historians’
experiences as they interpret and decide to use (or not use) materials. To strengthen and verify
the analysis, I used triangulation strategies at different stages in the study.
The results of this exploratory research can be used to inform designs for archival
description and access, and to provide guidance for historical image use. In particular, my
iii

findings disclose the various factors that matter to historians in their experiences interacting with
archival photographs in digital environments. Examples of image use are largely absent from the
historical literature; the case studies presented in this research help to illustrate the functional
ways historians currently use digitized photographs in both research and instructional capacities.
Each case also sheds light on the processes and practices historians employ as they construct
evidence from photographs and supplementary materials.
This research also makes important theoretical contributions to the LIS literature. While
there has been unquestionable growth in access to digital sources, few empirical studies have
examined scholarly interactions with digitized archival materials. Toward that end, this study
introduces a conceptual framework for exploring how and why historians use digitized
photographs. It presents a holistic methodology that focuses attention on information experiences
as spaces for meaning-making in digital environments. Attending to my participants'
experiences using photographs as historical evidence helped to reveal, in the words of Gregory
Bateson, “the difference that makes a difference.

iv

To my parents Judy and Arnie

v

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am immensely grateful to the fifteen participants who contributed their time and perspective
over the course of fifteen months to participate in this research study. Their particular insights
and lived experiences were essential components in telling this story.
This dissertation would not have been possible without the guidance, advice, and patience of my
advisor, Dr. Christopher (Cal) Lee. Cal continually kept an open mind as I talked through
various ideas and strategies, providing structure and endless suggestions for sculpting a
dissertation topic out of vague connections of interest. Simply put, Cal made me a better writer,
editor, and researcher. I am grateful for his support and guidance. I am also extraordinarily
lucky to have been able to assemble a superior group as my committee members: Matthew
Kirschenbaum, Sandra Hughes-Hassell, Ryan Shaw, and Helen Tibbo. Your careful attention
and feedback at different points in this process were essential contributions. Thank you to SILS
faculty member Diane Kelly for providing methodological guidance early-on. I’d also like to
thank my good friend and colleague, Kaitlin Costello, for endless support, timely feedback, and
simply “just getting it.”
Friends and loved ones, thank you for being there. I could not have done this without you.

vi

TABLE OF CONTENTS
LIST OF FIGURES……………………………………………………………………………....xi
LIST OF TABLES……………………………………………………………………………….xii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION……………………………...………………………………….1
1.1 Statement of the Problem………………………………………………………………….4
1.2 Purpose of the Study and Research Questions……….……………………………………5
CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW………………………….……………………………....7
2.1 Information Practices of Historian Scholars Using Primary Source Materials……..…….7
2.1.1

Research practices of humanities scholars……………………………………..….8

2.1.2

Information behavior of historians in archival settings………………………….10

2.1.3

Scholarly use of digital collections…………………………………………...….14

2.2 Describing Photographs in Archival Collections: History, Methods, and Implications…16
2.2.1

Institutions and photographic materials………………………………………….17

2.2.2

Descriptive approaches to photographic print materials…………………………18

2.2.3

Descriptive standards for digital image collections…………………………...…28

2.2.4

The problem with visual materials: Implications for archival access……………36

2.3 LIS Approaches to Studying Image Use…………………….………………….……..…39
2.3.1

Query analysis……………...…………………………………………………….40

2.3.2

Task-based analysis……………………………………………………………...42

2.3.3

Experiential analysis……….…………………………………………………….45
vii

2.4 Historians and the Use of Photographs as Evidence……………………….…………….50
2.4.1

Concepts of evidence in modern historiography………………………………...51

2.4.2

Historians and photographic use………………………………………………....60

2.4.3

How historians approach photographs as visual evidence…………………….…62

2.4.4. Methods for analyzing historical photographs…………………………………...67
2.4.5

Case studies: Historians using photographs as visual evidence………………….68

2.4.6

The current state of historical practice: Summary and implications………….….72

2.5 The Experience of Information: Methodological Approaches………..…………………73
2.5.1

Information as material practice: a short history………………………………...75

2.5.2

Information use in digital environments…………………………………………81

2.5.3

Theoretical approaches to understanding experiences in digital environments….84

2.5.3

Information use as emergent experience………………………………………....91

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY……………………………………………………………….95
3.1 Methodological Approach..……………………………………………………………...95
3.2 Rationale for Methodological Approach………..…………………………………….…96
3.3 Participants……………………………………………………………………………...101
3.4 Data Collection……...………………………………………………………………….104
3.5 Data Management………...…………………………………………………………….108
3.6 Data Analysis…………………………………………………………………...………109
3.7 Reliability and Validity….…………………………………………………..………….115
CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION………………………………………….……120
4.1 Summary of Cases………………...……………………………………………………120
4.2 Descriptive and Analytical Themes of Historians’ Experiences…………………...…..132

viii

4.3 Potential Image Use..…………………………………………………………………...135
4.3.1 Research practices in digital environments ……………………………………....135
4.3.2 Motivations in potential image use……………………………………………….139
4.3.3 Factors that matter in potential image use………………………………………..142
4.4 Evidential Image Use…...……………………………………………………………....149
4.4.1 Constructing modes of historical evidence……………………………………….151
4.4.2 Case vignettes…………………………………………………………………….152
4.5 A Conceptual Framework for Studying Historians’ Image Use…………………….….190
CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION………………………………………………………...…….….191
5.1 Significance of the Study………….………………..……………………………….….191
5.2 Limitations of the Study………………………………………………………………...193
5.3 Implications and Future Work……..…………………………….……………………...196
APPENDIX A: INTERVIEW RECRUITMENT POST…………........……………….……….203
APPENDIX B: INTERVIEW RECRUITMENT EMAIL…………..………………………….204
APPENDIX C: FACT SHEET………………………….………………………….……….…..205
APPENDIX D: VERBAL CONSENT SCRIPT……………………………………………..…207
APPENDIX E: SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW PROTOCOL………….……………….208
APPENDIX F: PHOTO-ELICITATION INTERVIEW PROTOCOL…………………...........210
BIBLIOGRAPHY…………………………………………………………….………...………212

ix

LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1.

Jorgensen’s twelve types of image attributes……………………………….........27

Figure 2.

Stages of analysis and interpretation…………………………………………....114

Figure 3.

Thematic analysis and synthesis of historians’ experiences…………………....132

Figure 4.

Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha..……………………………..154

Figure 5.

Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha, Looking West........................155

Figure 6.

Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha, Looking East………………156

Figure 7.

Debris at P.R.R. Stone Bridge………………………………………………….157

Figure 8.

Young Russian Jewess at Ellis Island……………………………………….….160

Figure 9.

Minnie Hauk…………………………………………………………………....162

Figure 10.

They Asked For Food and Got This……………….............................................164

Figure 11.

Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter…………………………………………………165

Figure 12.

Far Away Moses………………………………………………………………..167

Figure 13.

Japanese Captured in Raid………………………………………………….…168

Figure 14.

Griffin Children of West Alabama Land Use Project………………………….169

Figure 15.

High School Student Taylor Washington is Arrested……………………….….170

Figure 16.

Clip from power-point presentation……………………………….....................172

Figure 17.

Sailors dancing with each other aboard the U.S.S. Olympia…………………..173

Figure 18.

Our Vision of Chinatown mural………………………………………………...175

Figure 19.

Carl Akeley creating model of Bull Elephant……………………………….….176

Figure 20.

William Temple Hornaday……………………………………………………...177

Figure 21.

African-American Musicians………………………………………………...…178
x

Figure 22.

Camp of 31st Pennsylvania Infantry near Washington DC…………………….179

Figure 23.

Vase, or Dial Rocks, Red Buttes….…………………………………………….181

Figure 24

Front Office of Wright Company……………………………………………….182

Figure 25.

Dog Sled…………………………......…………………………………………….183

Figure 26.

Hawthorn Hill Living Room………………………………………….………...184

Figure 27.

Orville’s Reading Chair………………………………………………………...185

Figure 28.

Ferry on the Ocklawaha…………………………………………………...…...187

Figure 29.

Memphis and Charleston Depot…………………………………………...…...188

Figure 30.

A conceptual framework for studying historians’ image use…………….….…190

xi

LIST OF TABLES
Table 1.

Recruitment strategies……………………………………………………..........104

Table 2.

Participants by primary research area, sample teaching course, and degree…...106

Table 3.

Participants by title, department, and institutional affiliation………………......120

Table 4.

Analytical themes in potential image use….……………………………….…..134

Table 5.

Historical research practices in digital environments…………………………..135

Table 6.

Motivations in potential image use……………………………………...……...139

Table 7.

Factors that matter in potential image use.…….…………………...…….…….143

Table 8.

Perceived usefulness as a construct…………………………………………….146

Table 9.

Characterizing evidential image use……………………………………………151

xii

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
There have been widespread changes in access to primary source materials during the last
decade. Institutions around the world have active digitization programs, and they regularly
provide online access to digital materials. A 2012 survey of the Association of Research
Libraries’ (ARL) special collections and archives in the US and Canada found that 80% of
institutional directors agreed that digitized special collections are “critical to our current strategic
direction(s).”1 In particular, visual materials have grown dramatically in size. Since 1998,
special collections have seen a 300% mean increase in holdings of visual materials and a 76%
increase in use.2
Presumably, such changes in the information environment have impacted how scholars
interact with, and use, primary source materials. In the discipline of history, where scholars craft
arguments from examination of archival sources, increased access to materials through
digitization has been celebrated as the “democratization of historical research.”3 Postmodernists’
and poststructuralists’ critical examination of the historical canon as discourse helped orient
historians away from the study of significant figures and toward the “history of ordinary people

Nancy Maron and Sarah Pickle, Appraising Our Digital Investment: Sustainability of Digitized Special Collections
in ARL Libraries (Washington, DC: Association of Research Libraries, 2013): 11.
1

Jackie M. Dooley and Katherine Luce, Taking Our Pulse: The OCLC Research Survey of Special Collections and
Archives. (Dublin, Ohio: OCLC Research, 2010): 10, 37. In their report, Dooley and Luce define visual materials as
architectural materials, drawings, ephemera, paintings, photographs, postcards, prints, and slides/transparencies.
2

Cheryl Bolick, “Digital Archives: Democratizing the Doing of History,” The International Journal of
Social Education 21, no. 1(2006): 122.
3

1

and everyday life.”4 These shifts in focus toward new kinds of subjects and subject matter
encouraged the use of different types of source materials as historical evidence.5
Historians studying class, gender, and race regard photographic archives as critical
resources in establishing the so-called “new history.”6 Photographs in archives can provide
evidence to fill in under-developed, underrepresented or misrepresented cultural histories. In his
introduction to a special issue in the Journal of Pacific History from 2006 on photography and
history, Quanchi explains that “visual histories based on photographic evidence might reveal for
the first time, quite different stories, incidents, memories, attitudes and cross-cultural
relationships.”7 Writing in 1988 in the Radical History Review, Eric Margolis argues,
“Photographic evidence has the potential not just to illustrate but to illuminate; historical
processes, meanings, ideologies and conflicts can be gleaned from photographic analysis, just as
they are generated from the study of written texts.”8
Yet with few exceptions, historical scholarship has failed to seize upon the photograph.
Despite the so-called “visual turn,” Sarah Farmer explains, “Historians of the western experience
in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries still overwhelmingly depend on text-based archives.”9
Katharine Martinez, “Imaging the Past: Historians, Visual Images and the Contested Definition of History,” Visual
Resources 11, no. 1 (1995): 24.
4

Philipp Muller, “Understanding History: Hermeneutics and Source-Criticism in Historical Scholarship,” in
Reading Primary Sources: The Interpretation of Texts from 19th and 20 th-Century History, eds. Miriam Dobson and
Benjamin Ziemann (Abingdon, UK: Routledge, 2009), 23.
5

6

The term “new history” can be traced to the writings of James H. Robinson, a historian writing in the early 20 th
century. See: James H. Robinson, The New History: Essays Illustrating the Modern Historical Outlook (New York:
Macmillan, 1912).
Max Quanchi, “Visual Histories and Photographic Evidence,” The Journal of Pacific History 41, no.2 (2006): 165.
doi:10.1080/00223340600826052.
7

Eric Margolis, “Mining Photographs: Unearthing the Meanings of Historical Photos,” Radical History Review 40
(1988): 34.
8

Sarah Farmer, “Going Visual: Holocaust Representation and Method,” American Historical Review 115, no. 1
(2010): 116.
9

2

In a review of image use in historical journals from 2000-2009, Valerie Harris and Peter
Hepburn note that “use of images has remained at a relatively consistent level year to year.”10
Rather than considering photographs as documents capable of investigation and analysis,
historians have used them primarily as illustrations. According to Hayden White, historians have
not “exploited the possibilities of using images as a principal medium of discursive
representation, using verbal commentary only diacritically, that is to say, to direct attention to,
specify, and emphasize a meaning conveyable by visual means alone.”11
In the library and information science (LIS) discipline, empirical investigations of visual
information use have been similarly scarce. In fact, the phenomenon of visual information
(including visual methodologies) has received scant attention overall in LIS, though there is
indication that is changing.12 Joan Beaudoin explains:
Due to the visual nature of images, aspects surrounding use are markedly different than
those of textual materials. The library and information science community has only
recently begun to address visual information, and while there have been many successful
forays into discerning the phenomena surrounding image retrieval, research to date has
failed to adequately address image users’ needs and how or why images are being used. 13

Valerie Harris and Peter Hepburn, “Trends in Image Use by Historians and the Implications for Librarians and
Archivists,” College and Research Libraries 74, no. 3 (2013): 276.
10

11

Hayden White, “Historiography and Historiphoty,” The American Historical Review 93, no. 5 (1988): 1194.

See Jenna Hartel, and Leslie Thomson. “Visual Approaches and Photography for the Study of Immediate
Information Space.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 62, no. 11 (2011): 1–
11; Jamie Snyder, “Image-Enabled Discourse: Investigating the Creation of Visual Information as Communicative
Practice,” (PhD diss, Syracuse University, 2012).
12

Joan E. Beaudoin, “A Framework of Image Use among Archaeologists, Architects, Art Historians and Artists,”
Journal of Documentation 70, no. 1 (2013): 37.
13

3

1.1 Statement of the Problem
Digitization of primary sources presents both practical and hermeneutic challenges for
historians doing archival research in the 21st century. Navigating digital archival research
environments to find and use sources requires competent fluency at varying levels of the
interaction, including: interfaces, digitization quality, overall orientation to the collection, and
domain-specific heuristics.14 As spaces of knowledge production, digital archival research
environments must support interpretive and evaluative practices in the midst of numerous
factors.
However, limited work has been conducted in LIS to explore how individuals encounter
and make sense of digital information.15 Empirical research in digital environments tends to
focus on single components of the interaction as they relate to specific aspects of information
behavior, or to conceptualize information use as the successful fulfillment of stated information
needs. Yet user information needs can shift depending on emergent contextual factors.
Examining tasks that motivate image selection or identifying relevance criteria employed by
users can thus only offer a partial view into the user experience in the specific information space.
These perspectives do not attend to the influence that multiple ecological factors (e.g, interface,
work context, task, user, image quality) may have on user interactions with materials.

Elizabeth Yakel and Deborah Torres conceptualize some of these dimensions as forms of “archival intelligence,”
an advanced level of expertise in navigating and using archives. See: Elizabeth Yakel and Deborah Torres, “AI:
Archival Intelligence and User Expertise,” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 51–78.
14

Two notable exceptions are: Marcia Bates, “The Cascade of Interactions in the Digital Library Interface,”
Information Processing and Management 38, no. 3, 2003; Christopher A. Lee, “Digital Curation as Communication
Mediation,” in Handbook of Technical Communication, eds. Alexander Mehler, Laurent Romary, and Dafydd Gibbon
(Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2012), 507-530.
15

4

1.2 Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
The purpose of this research was to explore the experiences of historians using digitized
photographs as forms of evidence. I chose an embedded case study approach to examine how
and why historians are using digitized photographs in their scholarly activities. I defined two
units of analysis. The main unit of analysis was identified as: “a historian’s experiences using
digitized photographs as evidence.” An embedded unit of analysis, or subunit, was defined as “a
historian’s specific use of a digitized photograph as evidence in research or instruction.”
I employed three types of purposive sampling strategies to recruit fifteen self-identified
historians. I conducted a semi-structured interview lasting approximately 1.5 hours with each
participant. I used photo-elicitation interviewing and concurrent verbal probing techniques to
elicit participants’ descriptions of their experiences selecting, interpreting, evaluating, and using
images. I also gathered supplementary materials related to how each participant used images as
historical evidence in teaching and instructional capacities. Collected documents included
conference presentations, teaching syllabus, dissertation chapters, journal articles, and
monographs. I used thematic analysis to surface descriptive themes and thematic synthesis to
generate analytical themes within and across cases.
The central research question that guided this study is:
RQ1: What are the experiences of historians using digitized archival photographs as
evidence in their scholarly pursuits?
Two additional sub-research questions guided this study:
SubRQ1: How are historians using digitized archival photographs as evidence in
research and instructional activities?

5

SubRQ2: Why do historians choose to use (or not to use) digitized archival photographs
as evidence in scholarly pursuits?
A holistic approach exploring historians’ information experiences permitted me to see
how and why historians were using images as evidence in the construction of arguments. As a
framing device, the notion of information experiences proved useful for revealing various sociomaterial factors that matter to them as they decide to use (or not use) images. Attending to their
interactions showed what made their experiences meaningful, or “the difference that makes a
difference.”16

This expression is commonly attributed to Gregory Bateson, from his text Steps to an Ecology of Mind (Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1972). It is important to note here that the theoretical foundations of my research
approach suggest thinking about information as an event, rather than as a stimulus for the difference to which
Bateson refers.
16

6

CHAPTER 2: LITERATURE REVIEW
This literature review describes five topical areas related to my research questions. First, I
describe humanities scholars’ research practices, historians’ information behavior in archival
settings, and the scholarly impact of digital collections. Next, I trace the history of collecting and
describing photographic materials in archival institutions, including a discussion of current
descriptive standards for digital image collections. I also consider how varying levels of
description impact access to archival materials. In my third section, I focus specifically on LIS
approaches to the empirical study of image collection use. My fourth section describes concepts
of evidence in modern historiography, moving into an overview of how historians have theorized
the use of photographs. I also provide a discussion of three case studies that use photographs to
make scholarly arguments. Finally, I explore the socio-material complexities of understanding
visual information use in digital environments. I review a series of theoretical frameworks and
methodological approaches for conceptualizing information use in digital environments as an
emergent experience.
2.1 Information Practices of Historian Scholars Using Primary Source Materials
More than twenty years ago, in a user study on researchers in women’s history, Diane
Beattie lamented that archivists had done very little research on “how users actually locate
archival materials, and therefore have no way of measuring the usefulness of current descriptive
systems.”17 This continues to be the case today. Studies exploring the information behavior of

17

Diane Beattie, “An Archival User Study: Researchers in the Field of Women’s History,”Archivaria 29 (1989): 43.

7

historians in archives were undertaken nearly a decade ago,18 in the early stages of archival
digitization efforts. Empirical work that examines historians’ use of digitized primary source
materials is either limited to citation analysis19 or lumped into a wider discussion of how
humanities scholars use electronic resources.
This section reviews the literature in the following areas: (1) the larger context of
humanities scholars’ research practices, including information-seeking behavior; (2) how
historians search for and use primary source materials in archival environments; and (3)
assessing the scholarly impact of digital collections.
2.1.1 Research practices of humanities scholars
The development of effective scholarly infrastructures depends on understanding the
evolving information behaviors and research practices of scholars.20 Humanities scholars’ needs
may range from broad exploratory searches to in-depth examination and analysis of source
documents. In an influential study from 1982, Sue Stone calls for an exploration of how
humanities scholars use the information they acquire.21 In the current scholarly climate, such
questions become more pressing as we begin to understand and assess how digital tools and

Helen Tibbo, “Primarily History in America: How US Historians Search for Primary Materials at the Dawn of the
Digital Age,” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 9–50; Ian Anderson, “Are You Being Served? Historians
and the Search for Primary Sources,” Archivaria 58 (2004): 88-129; Wendy Duff and Catherine Johnson,
Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking Behavior of Historians in Archives,” Library Quarterly 72,
no. 4 (2002): 472–496; Wendy Duff, Barbara Craig, and Joan Cherry, “Finding and Using Archival Resources: A
Cross-Canada Survey of Historians Studying Canadian History,” Archivaria 58 (2004): 51-80.
18

Donghee Sinn, “Impact of Digital Archival Collections on Historical Research,” Journal of the American Society
for Information Science and Technology 63, no. 8 (2012): 1521-1537. Sinn evaluates the impact of digital archival
collection use by historians through the measurement of citations in academic history journals. While useful for
quantifying usage statistics, such an approach does not shed light on the information behavior of historians working
with digitized archival materials.
19

Christine Borgman, Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure and the Internet (Cambridge: MIT
Press, 2007), 262.
20

21

Sue Stone, “Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses,” Journal of Documentation 38, no. 4 (1982): 297.

8

technologies have impacted workflow and information behavior. What are the information needs
and uses of humanities scholars? How do needs and uses change when searching for and using
digital sources? What structures are needed to support and enable scholarly inquiry?
While the literature on humanities scholars’ research practices is rich and varied, there
are emergent themes that help shed light on their information needs and use. One highly touted
perspective is that humanities scholars work independently.22 Humanities scholars tend to
perform information-seeking tasks themselves rather than delegate to others, as such activities
are seen as paramount to their interpretative abilities.23
At the same time, a strong sense of collaboration among peers emerges from the
literature, particularly in the online realm. Scholarly Work in the Humanities and the Evolving
Information Environment, a 2002 report on changing humanities research practices, notes the
importance of the “grapevine” as “crucial for supplying references to recent books or articles that
might not yet be indexed or cited.”24 Access to online tools such as email, mailing lists, blogs,
and wikis can facilitate collaboration and communication among scholars.25 The presence of an
invisible college, or an informal network of colleagues, enables researchers with limited time to
“opt for those techniques that have the highest reward-cost ratio.”26

Stone, “Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses”; American Council of Learned Societies, Our
Cultural Commonwealth: The Report of the American Council of Learned Societies Commission on
Cyberinfrastructure for the Humanities and Social Sciences (New York: American Council of Learned Societies and
Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, 2006).
22

23

Stone, “Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses,” 294-295.

William Brockman, Laura Neumann, Carole Palmer, and Tonyia Tidline, Scholarly Work in the Humanities and
the Evolving Information Environment (Washington, DC: Digital Library Federation and Council on Library and
Information Resources, 2002), 11.
24

Carole Palmer and Laura Neumann, “The Information Work of Interdisciplinary Humanities Scholars:
Exploration and Translation,” Library Quarterly 72, no.1 (2002): 85-117.
25

Stephen Stoan, “Research and Information Retrieval among Academic Researchers,” Library Trends 39, no. 3
(Winter 1991): 248.
26

9

Research pursuits are characterized by divergent and unpredictable routes; methods
typically involve “tracing intellectual paths, ‘excavating’ textual references from documents, and
item-by-item review of artifacts held in relevant archival collections.”27 Consequently, browsing
is a particularly instrumental function in scholarly workflows. Scholars perform interpretation
through the critical practices of reading, browsing, and annotating. They produce “extensive
marginal notes, annotating photocopies or personal copies or attaching adhesive notes to a
text.”28
Humanities scholars tend to use a wide array of primary and secondary source
materials.29 Consulting related works (often called “footnote chaining”) is essential. Secondary
materials are often consulted for background information or to gain awareness of current
research in a field. A critical function of humanities scholarship involves selecting and
structuring together meaningful groups of materials to enable interpretation. Authenticity and
reliability of materials are the hallmark of trustworthy humanities research endeavors. Even
among the earliest user studies, humanist scholars express a strong preference for having access
to original documents.30
2.1.2 Information behavior of historians in archival settings
Historical research in archives is a multi-stage, iterative process. Historians may use a
“path-breaking,” broad approach to research wherein they propose new ways of looking at old
problems, or they may opt for a “micro-historic” narrow approach, in which they examine or

27

Neumann and Palmer, “The Information Work of Interdisciplinary Humanities Scholars,” 98.

28

Brockman, Neumann, Palmer, and Tidline, Scholarly Work in the Humanities, 7.

29

Karl Weintraub, “The Humanistic Scholar and the Library,” The Library Quarterly 50, no. 1 (1980): 22-39.

Carole Palmer, “Thematic Research Collections,” in A Companion to Digital Humanities (Oxford: Blackwell
Publishing, 2004), 348-65; Stone, “Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses,” 296.
30

10

document a specific community of interest or problem.31 Research activities can go on
concurrently and may span multiple research projects. Historians often begin their research in
archives by orienting themselves to collections; as they build on contextual knowledge and
acquire relevant material they further refine and develop their information needs.32 Charles
Cole’s investigation of forty-five history doctoral students formulating their theses finds two
essential components at work for students processing information: the picture and the jigsaw.
As Cole explains, “The jigsaw appears to be the Ph.D. history student's conceptual thesis and the
picture is the background ‘data’ from which the jigsaw emerges.”33 Cole’s research shows how
the cognitive aspects of information processing can impact knowledge formulation in historical
research.
Research practices within archival settings appear to be changing due to the impact of
modern digital technologies. In addition to the fact that many archives provide online access to
digitized versions of primary source materials, personal capture devices are now permitted in
many reading rooms. The use of digital cameras, flatbed scanners, and laptops enables historians
to personally document archival materials of interest. A recent survey investigating the changing
research practices of historians found widespread use of digital cameras and scanning equipment
to capture primary source materials, claiming it was “perhaps the single most significant shift in
research practices among historians, and one with as-yet largely unrecognized implications for

Donald Case, “The Collection and Use of Information by Some American Historians: A Study of Motives and
Methods,” Library Quarterly 61, no. 1 (1991): 71.
31

Wendy Duff and Catherine Johnson, “Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking Behavior of
Historians in Archives,” Library Quarterly 72, no. 4 (2002): 492.
32

Charles Cole, “Information Acquisition in History Ph.D. Students: Inferencing and the Formation of Knowledge
Structures,” Library Quarterly 68, no. 1 (1998): 42.
33

11

the work of historical research and its support.”34 Numerous publications on best practices for
digital capture activities over the last decade suggest that new kinds of workflows have begun to
emerge in archival settings.35
Historians typically consult a large number of institutions during the archival research
process.36 Archival institutions may include public or university libraries, academic special
collections/repositories, state or local historical societies, museums, and state or government
archives. Not surprisingly, the types of institutions historians consult may depend significantly
on their specific topics of historical research. In his citation analysis study on social historians,
Frederic Miller finds a low use of state and local archives, calling them “the most underutilized
resources in the nation’s archival system.”37 Meanwhile, Wendy Duff, Barbara Craig and Joan
Cherry, also looking at social historians, find a high use (90%) of provincial archives.38 Their
specific focus on Canadian history rather than an overall focus on social history topics may
explain the high use.
Similarly, the types of archival materials used by historians often relates to their topic of
research. Historians working on biographical research, for example, tend to use “collection-

Jennifer Rumer and Roger C. Schonfeld, Supporting the Changing Research Practices of Historians, Final Report
from ITHAKA S+R (2012), 11.
34

Kirklin Bateman, Sheila Brennan, Douglas Mudd, and Paula Petric, “Taking a Byte Out of the Archives: Making
Technology Work For You,” Perspectives: Newsletter of the American Historical Association 43, no. 1 (2005);
Richard J. Cox, “Machines in the Archives: Technology and the Coming Transformation of Archival Reference,”
First Monday 12, no. 11 (2007); Lisa Miller, Stephen K. Galbraith, and RLG Working Group, “Capture and
Release”: Digital Cameras in the Reading Room (Dublin, OH: OCLC Research, 2010).
35

Case, “The Collection and Use of Information by Some American Historians: A Study of Motives and Methods,”
74.
36

Frederic Miller, “Use, Appraisal, and Research: A Case Study of Social History,” The American Archivist 49, no.
4 (1981): 381.
37

Wendy Duff, Barbara Craig, and Joan Cherry, “Finding and Using Archival Resources: A Cross-Canada Survey
of Historians Studying Canadian History,” Archivaria, 58 (2004): 59.
38

12

oriented tools” like finding aids.39 In some cases, limited archival holdings on subjects may
force historians to use non-traditional types of sources. Diane Beattie’s study on Canadian
historians studying women’s history shows frequent use of photographs and oral history
recordings; she attributes this to the dearth of archival materials related to women’s history.40
The literature does not provide conclusive evidence on historians’ preferred search and
retrieval strategies in archival settings. When asked about the techniques most often used to
locate primary sources, historians describe the consultation of published finding aids,41
communication with an archivist,42 and following leads or citations found in printed books.43 In
part, the discrepancies could be attributed to different goals in each research study. For example,
Tibbo and Anderson are concerned with the impact of digital tools on historians’ search
behaviors. Thus, they categorize each search method as either print or electronic. Other
semantic differences complicate effective comparisons across studies. What historians might
consider to be the most useful methods for locating materials does not necessarily translate into
the most frequently used. In Beattie’s study, historians claim that they most frequently consult
archivists in their search for materials but cite finding aids to be the most useful in their search.44
Another complicating factor is a tendency in research studies to collapse the individual
tasks associated with information search, retrieval, and use into a single behavior (often,
39

Tibbo, “Primarily History in America,” 21.

40

Beattie, “An Archival User Study,” 42.

Margaret Stieg-Dalton and Laurie Charnigo, “Historians and Their Information Sources,” College and Research
Libraries 65, no. 4 (2004): 407; Wendy Duff, Barbara Craig, and Joan Cherry, “Historians Use of Archival Sources:
Promises and Pitfalls of the Digital Age,” The Public Historian 26, no. 2 (2004): 14.
41

42

Beattie, “An Archival User Study,” 43.

43

Anderson, “Are You Being Served?” 95; Tibbo, “Primarily History in America,” 20.

44

Beattie, “An Archival User Study,” 44.

13

“information-seeking”) that fails to account for multiple steps in the research process. A
historian may begin his or her search by talking to an archivist, who then may point him or her to
an electronic database where he or she might retrieve a source. Finally, many studies do not
account for the fact that the methods historians use to search for unknown materials may be quite
different from how they search for known materials. Duff’s characterization of a historian who
“orients” herself in archives would suggest that search behavior might differ according to
familiarity.45
2.1.3 Scholarly use of digitized collections
Overall, the emergence of digitized primary source collections is generally portrayed as
positive for humanities scholarship. Some of the major advantages of digital collections include:
the portability of digital formats, fast access, and better searching techniques.46 Access to
primary source materials is especially beneficial for scholars; preliminary browsing of digital
library collections can save time and money for scholars in judging the relevance of materials to
their research.47
At the same time, scholars also acknowledge challenges that can arise from working with
digitized primary source materials in online environments. The LAIRAH (Log Analysis of
Internet Resources in the Arts and Humanities) project, a fifteen-month inquiry into the factors
that determine use (and neglect) of digital materials in the arts and humanities, found that users
require a tremendous amount of information to discern both context and relevance. In the

45

Duff and Johnson, “Accidentally Found on Purpose,” 472–496.

Weiyin Hong, James Thong, Wai-man Wong, and Kar-yan Tam, “Determinants of User Acceptance of Digital
Libraries: An Empirical Examination of Individual Differences and System Characteristics,” Journal of
Management Information Systems 18, vol. 3 (2002): 99.
46

47

Jane Segal and Lisa Spiro, “The Impact of Digital Resources on Humanities Scholarship,” Rice University, 2007.

14

absence of a physical browsing space, the authors note it can be difficult to comprehend both the
coverage and extensiveness of the resource. They explain, “Scholars can browse a library shelf
or journal issues and quickly determine the approximate extent of the resources available, and
thus be sure that they do not miss anything important, but this is much more difficult in the case
of digital resources.”48
The general lack of empirical data about digital collection usage is problematic. One
study on digital resource use, conducted in 2006 at the University of California at Berkley,
reports, “The ‘build it and they will come’ approach has resulted in a widely acknowledged
supply-driven movement,” but it is not yet clear just how much scholars are using available
digital collections. The authors assert the importance of studying use and reuse, particularly to
assuage the fears of funding agencies that are “concerned about the low level of use of available
digital resources among the teaching faculty of our institutions.”49
The research that has been conducted on scholarly use of digital collections tends to focus
primarily on quantifying use through transaction log analysis or citation analysis, rather than
exploring scholarly use of, and satisfaction with, digital resources. While the former is helpful
for uncovering usage patterns, it is not appropriate for understanding experiential aspects of
information use. As Laura Sheble and Barbara Wildemuth point out, transaction logs “cannot tell
us anything about the users’ cognitive or affective responses during the system interaction.”50

Claire Warwick, Melissa Terras, Paul Huntington, and Nikoleta Pappa, “If You Build It Will They
Come? The LAIRAH Study: Quantifying the Use of Online Resources in the Arts and Humanities through
Statistical Analysis of User Log Data,” Literary and Linguistic Computing 23, no. 1 (2008): 99.
48

Diane Harley, Jonathan Henke, Shannon Lawrence, Ian Miller, Irene Perciali, and David Nasatir, Use and Users
of Digital Resources: A Focus on Undergraduate Education in the Humanities and Social Sciences (UC Berkeley:
Center for Studies in Higher Education, 2006): 2-1.http://escholarship.org/uc/item/8c43w24h.
49

Laura Sheble and Barbara Wildemuth, “Transaction Logs,” in Applications of Social Research Methods to Questions
in Information and Library Science, ed. Barbara Wildemuth (Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited, 2009), 174.
50

15

Citation analysis is only partially helpful as an indicator of information use; scholars may consult
a number of primary source materials in the course of their research but not necessarily cite
them.
Particular challenges lie in building effective infrastructure for historians to use digitized
archival materials. In order to provide a seamless experience for historical research,
infrastructure should support both historical practices and technological efforts. In their report
summarizing the history of computer-aided historical research, Onno Boonstra, Leen Breure and
Peter Doorn explain the importance and the intricacies of achieving this delicate balance:
Better infrastructure is needed in order to guarantee a transfer of results from the
methodological and technical level to the daily practice of historical research. On the
contrary, denying these challenges and opportunities will, in the long run, segregate the
study of history from the technical capabilities currently being developed in the
information society and will turn ‘the computer’ into an awkward tool with limited use
and usability for historians.51
How do the archivist and the historian, each possessing different domain expertise, effectively
work together? What role does the archivist play in constructing authentic digital environments?
How should historical materials be displayed and presented so that context is not lost? These are
pressing questions. Continued research on the evolving information needs of academic
historians can aid the construction of successful archival research environments.
2.2 Describing Photographs in Archival Collections: History, Methods and Implications
This section discusses the historical context, theoretical basis, and practical concerns
related to the description of and access to photographic materials in archival institutions. First, I
provide an overview of the collecting of photographic materials by American institutions. Next,
I briefly summarize the development of archival and library standards for cataloging visual

Onno Boonstra, Leen Breure and Peter Doorn, “Past, Present, and Future of Historical Information Science,”
Historical Social Research 29 (Amsterdam: Netherlands Institute for Scientific Information, 2004): 91.
51

16

materials, moving into a review of current metadata standards for describing photographs and
image collections overall. Finally, I explore how archivists propose describing photographs and
investigate critiques which claim that a failure to develop and implement appropriate descriptive
models prevents adequate access to, and use of, photographic materials.
2.2.1 Institutions and photographic materials
Institutions in the United States have long recognized the importance of acquiring and
collecting photographic materials as documentation. One of the earliest and most widespread
uses of photography in an institutional context was the capture and recording of war activities.
Writing in the American Archivist in 1958, Joe Thomas describes an 1860 U.S. expedition to
Japan that used daguerreotypes to document governmental activities wherein “an agency of the
United States Government in connection with the transaction of public business had consciously
created photographic records that were appropriate for preservation as evidence of its operations
or as the embodiment of valuable information.”52 In 1874, the photographic collection of noted
civil war photographer Matthew Brady was purchased by the United States Department of War.
In fact, the Comptroller went on to sanction the publication of the photographs as “official
records” of the war, claiming that “the photographic views of the war, showing battlefields,
military divisions, fortifications, etc. are among the most authentic and valuable records of the
rebellion.”53 Brady’s collection was transferred to the War Department’s library in 1888.
Cultural heritage institutions were also readily acknowledging the importance of
photographs as documentation. The Library of Congress (LOC) added photographs to the list of

52

Joe D. Thomas, “Photographic Archives,” The American Archivist 21, no.4 (1958): 420.

United States, David Fitzgerald, and A. W. Greely, List of the Photographs and Photographic Negatives Relating
to the War for the Union, Now in the War Department Library (Washington DC: Government Printing Office,
1897), 7. https://archive.org/details/listofphotograph00unit.
53

17

copyrighted items required for deposit in 1865.54 The Metropolitan Museum of Art reported a
nearly 14,000-item photograph collection in 1906 (with 12,000 items added that year).55 In
1914, due to increased public requests, the Circulation Department at the New York Public
Library began gathering materials for its “Picture Collection”; by the close of that year, the
collection amassed nearly 18,000 items.56 The U.S. National Archives began collecting
photographs from federal agencies shortly after its inception in 1934 and even housed a separate
division called Photographic Archives.57 In 1944, the LOC’s newly renamed Print and
Photographs Division acquired more than one-hundred thousand photographs and negatives as
part of the Farm Security Administration-Office of War Information collection, which
documented the life of American farmers between 1935 and 1943. The collection has gone on
to become one of the most iconic in American history.
2.2.2 Descriptive approaches to photographic print materials
Institutions establishing visual collections in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries had to develop their own standards for cataloging materials. An early and influential
publication which provided guidance is John Cotton Dana’s The Picture Collection, published in
1910. Dana oversaw the creation of the first so-called picture collection at the Denver Public
Library in 1888; he went on to become the chief librarian at the Newark Public Library in 1902.
The Picture Collection advised cataloging materials by alphabetized subject headings.

Renata V. Shaw, A Century of Photographs, 1846-1946 (Washington DC: The Library of Congress, 1980),
Introduction.
54

55

Charles Ammi Cutter, Library Journal 32 (New Jersey: R.R. Bowker Company, 1907), 235.

Anthony T. Troncale, “Worth Beyond Words: Romana Javitz and the New York Public Library's Picture
Collection,” New York Public Library Website. http://www.nypl.org/locations/tid/45/node/62019.
56

Barbara Lewis Burger, Guide to the Holdings of the Still Picture Branch of the National Archives and Records
Administration (Washington, DC: National Archives and Records Administration, 1990), Introduction section, para
3. http://www.archives.gov/research/guides/still-pictures-guide.html.
57

18

Our experience has led us always to the same conclusion; that no arrangement is as good
as an alphabetical one by subject because the pictures under this arrangement need no
catalog and are self-indexing. They are filed vertically, like cards in a catalog, and the
names of the subjects under which they are arranged are written near the tops of the
mounts. They can thus be easily consulted and pictures on any desired subject easily
found.”58
The book specifies nearly 2000 subject headings for use in classification. Dana goes on to note
that while he originally intended to use American Library Association subject headings, he
instead chose to base headings on “local conditions and observation of the use of the Picture
Collection by borrowers.”59
Card catalog subject access, however, presented a problem for finding materials: patron
requests had to match already-conceptualized subject headings. As Anthony Troncale explains,
Dana’s particular subject heading classifications presented barriers to access:
In his idiosyncratic filing system, for example, one would have to look under "F" for
"Forms of Land and Water" to find "Niagara Falls," a situation reflecting nineteenthcentury bibliographical practice and hierarchical mind-set. A reassessment of subject
headings would be needed to reflect the fast-changing styles and fashions of the machine
age and their new nomenclatures.60
The limitations of the subject classification approach were recognized by the New York Public
Library’s Romana Javitz, who began working at the Picture Collection in 1924. She employed a
myriad of creative approaches to improve subject access to visual materials. To overcome a
language barrier, she instituted a policy in 1931 requiring all patrons to draw or describe picture
requests on call slips. She also used Works Progress Administration (WPA) artist-trained
workers to provide subject descriptions for an ever-increasing number of visual items acquired

58

John Cotton Dana, The Picture Collection (Woodstock, Vermont: Elm Tree Press, 1910), 26.

59

Ibid, 28.

60

Troncale, “Worth Beyond Words,” para. 7.

19

by the Picture Collection. Javitz introduced the use of new schemes (based on regions, styles,
types and year) to provide even greater flexibility in access.61
The Minnesota Public Library adopted Dana’s approach for use in “Minneapolisiana,”
the historical photograph collection they created in 1940. The subject index approach provided
library visitors the ability to browse through a multitude of images. As Ruth Thompson, the
head of the Minnesota Historical Collection, pointed out: “Often patrons do not ask for a
specific picture, but need the inspiration which comes from looking over different folders on a
variety of subjects.”62
The Library of Congress began using subject categorization to organize photographic
collections in 1943, following the appointment of its first curator of photography. Photographs
were initially sorted according to subject categories and then grouped into lots – or “batches of
pictures which fall into logical groups by virtue of their creator or donor, the overall title of a
picture story, or the unifying subject matter.”63 The next ten years saw the acquisition of many
important collections, including photographic documentation of the Crimean War, Civil War,
and Nazi Germany. During the 1960s, the Library set forth new guidelines to distinguish
between artistic and documentary photographic collections; the former were arranged and
grouped as “Master Photographs.”64
The development of the Machine-Readable Cataloging (MARC) standard in the mid1960s at the LOC was a watershed moment for librarians and archivists. MARC enabled the

61

Ibid, paras. 13-18.

Ruth Thompson, “The Collection and Preservation of Local Historical Pictures in the Minneapolis Public
Library,” The American Archivist 9, no. 4 (1946): 223.
62

63

Shaw, 2.

64

Ibid, 3.

20

storage of machine-readable, exchangeable bibliographic information about institutional
holdings.65 A companion to MARC, the publication of The Anglo-American Cataloging Rules
(AACR) in 1967 provided guidance for institutions in creating and describing bibliographic
information in a standardized format. The second edition of the book, AACR2, was published in
1978 and served as the standard for use in describing library materials for nearly thirty-five
years. In March 2013, the Library of Congress introduced a new cataloging standard, the
Resource Description and Access Framework (RDA).66
The widespread adoption and use of MARC and AACR2 by librarians during the 1970s
also revealed limitations in their structures. Both AACR2 and MARC were originally designed
to accommodate book formats; meanwhile, institutions had been collecting many different types
of materials in varying formats. In 1978, an Independent Research Libraries Association (IRLA)
Ad-Hoc committee formed to evaluate how well the MARC format met the needs of catalog
users. In particular, the committee sought to investigate whether MARC accurately represented
audiovisual (AV) materials. On the one hand, the current MARC standard stipulated that subject
headings be as specific as possible to enable better access points. However, most users of AV
materials required the ability to search and use materials in a broad, interdisciplinary manner.67
The IRLA committee report thus proposed the addition of two auxiliary MARC fields, “genre”
and “publishing/physical characteristics” to better describe, and provide access to, specialized
materials. The committee also recommended the creation of a controlled vocabulary thesaurus
for indexing terms.

65

Walt Crawford, MARC for Library Use (Boston, MA: GK Hall, 1989), 1.

66

See W3C, “The Resource Description Framework Homepage,” http://www.w3.org/RDF/.

67

Paul Graham, “Current Developments in Audiovisual Cataloging.” Library Trends 34, no. 1 (1985): 59.

21

In 1980, the Thesaurus for Graphic Materials I (TGM 1) was created at the Library of
Congress to provide a controlled vocabulary for describing the subjects of pictorial works. TGM
1 originated from the work of the Prints and Photographs’ Division cataloger Elizabeth Betz
Parker, who culled together subject headings used to describe division holdings from the
previous fifty years.68 The subject terms are collection-driven and thus have grown significantly
since inception; new terms can be proposed through a submission process on the LOC’s website.
A companion volume, Thesaurus for Graphic Materials 2 (TGM 2), appeared in 1986. TGM2
aimed to enable additional access points to visual collections by providing fixed vocabulary
terms for describing both genre and physical format characteristics.69 In 2007, TGM1 and TGM2
were combined into a single thesaurus, Library of Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials
(LCTGM).
Betz Parker also developed Graphic Materials: Rules for Describing Original Items and
Historical Collections in 1982. The manual was created in an attempt to unite archival principles
with library cataloging approaches, for use in describing graphic materials in standardized
formats. In her introduction to the manual, Betz Parker explains the impetus behind the creation
of separate cataloging guidelines for such materials:
The concepts of “chief source of information” and “prescribed sources” used in
traditional book cataloging has been redefined here for original and historical graphic
materials because they often have little or no text to transcribe. The major reason for
documenting graphics is to provide the researcher with as complete an identification of
the material as possible. This is done by translating the visual information into a verbal
description of the material's physical nature and image content.70
Arden Alexander and Tracy Meehleib, “The Thesaurus for Graphic Materials: Its History, Use, and Future,”
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 31, no.3-4 (2001): 191.
68

For a helpful discussion of the implications and importance of describing the physical characteristics of archival
materials, see: Helena Zinkham, Patricia D. Cloud, and Hope Mayo, “Providing Access by Form of Material, Genre,
and Physical Characteristics: Benefits and Techniques,” The American Archivist 52 (Summer 1989): 315.
69

Elisabeth Betz-Parker, Graphic Materials: Rules for Describing Original Items and Historical Collections
(Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1982), 4-5.
70

22

Betz Parker goes on to acknowledge the equal importance of cataloging items at both the item
and the collection-level, noting that the latter is essential for understanding and preserving the
context of the former.
The Arts and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT) was also developed during the early 1980s,
from joint efforts in the library and art/architectural history communities. It has been maintained
by the Getty Research Institute since 1983, and currently contains more than 34,000 concepts
and 130,000 terms. Concepts are linked to related terms and arranged in a hierarchal fashion,
from general to specific. Seven facets are used to enable access points at multiple levels of
description: associated concepts, physical attributes, styles and periods, agents, activities,
materials, and objects.71 In her comparison between LCGTM and AAT, Greenberg notes the
latter is a “very specialized source with terminology specifically for the built environment,
furnishings and equipment, and visual and verbal communication” while the former provides
greater use for a broader audience.72
During the mid to late 1980s, a number of theoretical approaches for describing visual
materials emerged from the LIS community in an attempt to counter problems with access. Sara
Shatford-Layne’s work at the Library of Congress represents one of the first attempts to put forth
a framework to deal with the inherent complexities of visual materials. Drawing on the work of
art historian Erwin Panofksy, as well as approaches first articulated by Ranganathan’s Colon
Classification, and later on at the Bibliotheque Nationale de France (BnF), Shatford-Layne‘s

For an in-depth exploration of AAT’s seven facets, see: Michael Joseph, “Information Technology and Access to
Visual Images in Printed Books,” Visual Resources 11, no.1 (1995): 78-80.
71

Jane Greenberg, “Intellectual Control of Visual Archives: A Comparison between the Art and Architecture
Thesaurus and the Library of Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials,” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly
16, no. 1 (1993): 94.
72

23

framework identifies and classifies the kinds of subjects used to describe pictorial works. She
writes:
The different facets for the classification of the subjects of pictures may be defined
initially as containing the answers to a series of questions asking Who? What? When?
and Where? Each of these basic facets may then be subdivided into aspects based on Of
in the specific sense, Of in the generic sense, and About.73
Importantly, Shatford-Layne’s approach enables both a specific and generic approach to subject
classification of pictures. For example, a photograph of the Sears Tower can be described both
as a specific object of interest (“The Sears Tower”) and in terms of its generic ofness
(“Skyscraper”). Such distinctions are critical in describing visual materials, which can be
perceived at multiple levels of description and thus should accommodate varying entry points for
access.
As an example of how this plays out in descriptive practice, consider the LOC’s Herblock
Collection, which contains editorial cartoon drawings by Washington Post cartoonist Herbert L.
Block. The collection consists of 14,000 original ink and graphite drawings. One item from the
collection, “Well, everything helps,” has two vastly different format descriptions: “Editorial
cartoons--1930-1940” and “Ink drawings--1930-1940.” 74 The former addresses the content of
the item while the latter addresses the medium. Enabling both levels of access through
description is important because they serve different functions depending on information needs.
Art historians, for example, may want to look explicitly at materials of a certain format or
medium. Social or cultural historians, however, may want to use to these materials as sources

Sara Shatford-Layne, “Analyzing the Subject of a Picture: A Theoretical Approach,” Cataloging & Classification
Quarterly 6, no. 3 (March 1986): 48.
73

Herbert Block, “Well, Everything Helps,” cartoon, Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Online Catalog,
1930 or 1931, http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/00652175.
74

24

for examining editorial representations in mainstream media, to better understand popular
sentiment at the time.
Shatford-Layne’s framework also distinguishes between subject analysis of a medium
(e.g., how to describe a painting) and subject analysis of the reproduction of that medium (e.g.,
how to describe a photograph of that painting). She introduces the concept of the Represented
Work as a means for addressing these conceptual differences. A Represented Work is “a
particular kind of subject that a picture can have, but that a text cannot. A picture is Of a tangible
object in a way that a text, composed of words, can never be.”75 Shatford-Layne goes on to
critique traditional cataloging practices, which she claims confuse reproductions with original
works in catalog descriptions of materials.
The work of Karen Markey during the mid to late 1980s represents another attempt to
theoretically address the complexities of visual material description through the establishment of
baseline attributes.76 Markey claims that the increasing availability of MARC data is beneficial
for expanding access points. Like Shatford-Layne, Markey invokes Panofsky’s three levels of
meaning to suggest enhanced descriptions for additional points of subject access to visual
materials.77 Rather than limit description to secondary subject matter (based on the norm, due to
traditional design constraints of the card cataloging system), Markey suggests that through the
use of MARC data and the training of catalogers, primary subject matter can also be described
easily and efficiently to expand access.

75

Shatford-Layne, “Analyzing the Subject of a Picture,” 51.

Karen Markey, Subject Access to Visual Resources Collections (Greenwood Press: The University of Michigan,
1986); Karen Markey, “Access to Iconographical Research Collections,” Library Trends 37, no. 2 (1988).
76

The art historian Erwin Panofsky formulates three different kinds of “meaning” which can be experienced in a
work of art: primary matter (objects, events, forms); secondary matter (types, themes, concepts); and intrinsic
meaning (cultural symptoms, symbols, essential tendencies). See: Erwin Panofsky, Meaning in the Visual Arts
(Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1955), 40-41.
77

25

A conceptual framework proposed in the mid-1990s by Corrine Jorgensen examines the
types of attributes participants used to describe images while performing three different types of
tasks.78 The primary focus of her research is to identify useful indexing attributes for end users
of image retrieval systems. Her analysis concludes that twelve different types of attributes can
be used to describe images (see Figure 1). She then categorizes each of the twelve attributes into
three categories: perceptual, interpretive, and reactive. One of Jorgensen’s most interesting
conclusions is that respondents tend to describe images within a specific context - what she terms
“a story” using attributes such as “activity” and “setting.”79

Corinne Jorgensen, “Image Attributes: An Investigation” (PhD diss., Syracuse University, 1995); Corinne
Jorgensen, “Attributes of Images in Describing Tasks,” Information Processing & Management 34, no. 2/3 (1998).
78

79

Jorgensen, “Attributes of Images,” 168.

26

Perceptual Attributes

Interpretative Attributes

Reactive Attributes

1.Objects
- Objects
- Text
- Body part
- Clothing

7. People-related attributes
- Relationship
- Social status
- Emotion

12. Viewer response
- Personal reaction
- Conjecture
- Drawing
- Uncertainty

2.People
- People

3.Color
- Color
- Color value

4.Visual elements
- Composition
- Focal point
- Motion
- Orientation
- Perspective
- Shape
- Texture
- Visual composition
5.Location
- Location – general
- Location – specific
6.Description
- Description
- Number

8. Art-historical information
- Artist
- Format
- Medium
- Representation
- Style
- Technique
- Time Reference
- Type
- Number
9. Abstract concepts
- Abstract
- Atmosphere
- State
- Symbolic Aspects
- Theme
10. Content/Story
- Activity
- Category
- Event
- Sitting
- Time Aspect

11. External relation
- Comparison
- Similarity
- Reference

Figure 1. Jorgensen’s twelve types of image attributes

27

2.2.3 Descriptive standards for digital image collections
The growth of digital library projects during the 1990s introduced massive amounts of
electronic information for consumption. One of the most pressing needs facing digital libraries
was how best to enable resource discovery in this vast landscape. Indeed, a 1995 workshop on
digital libraries held by the newly inaugurated Information Infrastructure Technology and
Applications (IITA) named “resource discovery” to be one of its critical research items. 80 In the
Strawman Report from the workshop, Hector Garcia-Molina explains, “The challenge is to
characterize the information contents (e.g., meta-information) and service capabilities of libraries
in a compact and meaningful way.”81 The capture of meta-information, or “metadata” emerged
as the primary mechanism for managing digital objects. Metadata acts as a surrogate for digital
objects by describing their properties as discrete elements. It can be defined as “data about data
that supports the discovery, use, authentication, and administration of information objects.”82
Metadata schemas provide appropriate organizational structures for elements, helping to define
and standardize attributes to describe, and enable access to, materials.
The development and use of metadata schemas enables digital libraries to describe digital
objects and exchange information about holdings. One of the first widely used metadata
schemas adopted for use in digital libraries was the Dublin Core, originating out of an

The IITA was a subset of the National Information Infrastructure (NII), a nationwide initiative in the early 1990s
to support networked infrastructure. One of the IITA’s goals was to develop the underlying technology for the NII’s
efforts. For a brief history of the IITA and its relationship to digital library efforts, see: Stephen M. Griffin,
“NSF/DARPA/NASA Digital Libraries Initiative: A Program Manager’s Perspective,” D-Lib Magazine,
July/August 1998, http://www.dlib.org/dlib/july98/07griffin.html.
80

Hector Garcia-Molina, “Digital Libraries Research Agenda Report: A Strawman Report for the IITA Digital
Libraries Workshop,” para. 5, http://dbpubs.stanford.edu:8091/diglib/pub/reports/iita-dlw/appendix2.html.
81

Jane Greenberg, “A Quantitative Categorical Analysis of Metadata Elements in Image-Applicable Metadata
Schemas,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 52, no. 11 (2001): 918.
82

28

invitational workshop held in 1995 in Dublin, Ohio. It consists of fifteen core elements deemed
essential for basic resource discovery. The Dublin Core standard consists of two levels: qualified
or unqualified. Qualified Dublin Core uses qualifiers to more precisely describe elements. For
example, the element “date” can be further refined to indicate the type of date (for example, “last
modified” or “last published”). Unqualified (or simple) Dublin Core expresses each element
without further refinement.83 All elements are optional and repeatable, making it a simple,
flexible, and extensible schema.
The appropriateness of using the Dublin Core for scholarly image access was explored at
an Image Metadata Workshop in 1996. The two-day workshop concluded that text and images
had essentially the same discovery requirements for researchers. The group reached consensus
that the Dublin Core “affords a foundation for the development of a simple resource description
model to support network-based discovery of images.”84 Modifications were made to the
original schema; for example, the element “description” was separated out from the element
“subject” because image specialists felt that the two presented conceptual differences when
describing images.
At the same time, the group also recognized several limitations with using the Dublin
Core for image collections. The inherent complexities in describing images that had
relationships with multiple surrogates were seen as one challenge. Another concern was the
Dublin Core’s emphasis on discovery, which is only one component of scholarly image use. The
group concluded that for metadata to truly support the scholarly research process, different types

The Dublin Core Usage Guide provides guidance and information on the Dublin Core element set. See:
http://wiki.dublincore.org/index.php/User_Guide.
83

Stuart Weibel and Eric Miller, “Image Description on the Internet: A Summary of the CNI/OCLC Image
Metadata Workshop,” D-Lib Magazine, 1997, para. 2, http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january97/oclc/01weibel.html.
84

29

of element sets for different functions would need to be developed. Finally, it was
acknowledged that the schema did not record significant details about the image digitization
process. In their summary of the discussions at the workshop, Weibel and Miller write:
“Characteristics of original image capture, while less critical for the casual user, may be of
overwhelming importance to the archival or research significance of the image or collection.
This sort of information is also, for the most part, irrecoverable if not recorded at the time of
capture.”85
Despite these limitations, the schema was hailed as a first step toward establishing
baseline metadata elements for the discovery of electronic resources. In fact, analysis on
metadata schema usage in digital collections suggests that the Dublin Core has been widely
adopted in libraries and archives. In 2007, Ma surveyed 123 American Research Libraries
(ARL) members and found that 78% reported using the Dublin Core to manage digital objects.86
Following MARC and Encoded Archival Description (EAD), it was the third most widely used
schema. More recently, Park and Tosaka surveyed librarians and catalogers and found that 66%
of institutions used either the qualified or non-qualified version of the Dublin Core.87 While the
high use of the Dublin Core in cultural heritage institutions is well documented, the extent to
which the schema is used specifically to describe images is unknown.
The Visual Resources Association Core (VRA Core) is a descriptive metadata standard
designed specifically for visual materials. It was “initially developed to fill an urgent, perceived

85

Ibid, para. 15.

Jin Ma, “Metadata in ARL Libraries: A Survey of Metadata Practices,” Journal of Library Metadata 9, no. 1-2
(2007): 5.
86

Jung-Ran Park and Yuji Tosaka, “Metadata Creation Practices in Digital Repositories and Collections: Schemata,
Selection Criteria, and Interoperability,” Information Technology & Libraries 29, no. 3 (2010): 108.
87

30

need for a documentation standard to guide the cataloging of image collections.”88 To formulate
the first version of core elements, the VRA surveyed the data elements used in visual resource
records in more than sixty institutions. VRA Core 1.0 was released in 1996 and contained
twenty-one elements grouped into three different categories of description: object, creator, and
subject.
While the VRA Core established the necessary data structures, it did not offer data input
guidelines for describing content. An initial assessment of the standard took place in the Vision
Project, which examined more than one thousand VRA core records created by catalogers at
more than thirty-three institutions. The evaluation results were problematic; as Kessler explains:
“There was confusion in the interpretation of the intent of the elements and there was glaring
inconsistency in the accumulated data values.”89 The project concluded that a data content
standard was needed to guide the successful implementation of VRA Core in institutions.
Efforts to produce such a standard culminated in 2006, with the publication of Cataloging
Cultural Objects: A Guide to Describing Cultural Objects and their Works (CCO). The CCO
operates similarly to AACR2 in that it informs how cataloging records should be created and
populated.90 The key difference is that CCO provides guidelines specifically for visual materials
for cultural heritage institutions.
The current version of the standard, known as VRA Core 4, describes materials at three
different conceptual levels: “work,” “image,” and “collection.” Unlike the Dublin Core, the

Visual Resources Association. Core Categories for Visual Resources, Version 4.0, 2007,
http://www.vraweb.org/projects/vracore4/index.html.
88

89

Ben Kessler, "Encoding Works and Images: The Story behind VRA Core 4.0," VRA Bulletin (2007): 24.

To learn more about CCO, see: Visual Resources Association, “Cataloging Cultural Objects,”
http://cco.vrafoundation.org/.
90

31

VRA Core structure allows for relationships between single entities (unique events or objects
constitute a “work”) and representations of those entities (described as “images). The flexibility
of this approach proves useful for describing the complex relationships among works of art and
their surrogates. The VRA Core documentation describes an image thusly:
An image is a visual representation of a work in either whole or part. The representation
serves to provide access to the work when the work itself cannot be experienced
firsthand. In image collections, such representations typically are found in the form of
slides, photographs, and/or digital files.91
The most recent version of Core (v.4) introduced an extensible markup language (XML) schema
to enable data exchange and interoperability with other data standards. There are currently
eighteen elements and twenty-three sub-elements that can be used to describe visual materials.
During the mid-1990s, archivists began developing Encoded Archival Description
(EAD), which provides access to machine-readable archival finding aids.92 EAD was conceived
and formulated in accordance with the principles adopted by the International Council on
Archives’ for descriptive standards, known as the General International Standard Archival
Description, Second Edition (ISAD(G)).93 As ISAD(G) states:
The purpose of archival description is to identify and explain the context and content of
archival material in order to promote its accessibility. This is achieved by creating
accurate and appropriate representations and by organizing them in accordance with
predetermined models. Description-related processes may begin at or before records
creation and continue throughout the life of the records. These processes make it possible
to institute the intellectual controls necessary for reliable, authentic, meaningful and
accessible descriptive records to be carried forward through time.94

91

VRA Core 4.0 Introduction, Library of Congress, 4. http://www.loc.gov/standards/vracore/VRA_Core4_Intro.pdf.

For a complete history of EAD, see: Library of Congress, “Development of the Encoded Archival Description
DTD.” www.loc.gov/ead/eaddev.htmlhttp://www.loc.gov/ead/eaddev.html.
92

The ISAD(G) Standards Document can be found here: http://www.icacds.org.uk/eng/ISAD(G).pdf. The ISAD(G)
is currently implemented in the United States as Describing Archives: A Content Standard (DACS).
93

94

Ibid, 7.

32

EAD is made up of three high-level elements: (1) the header, which contains bibliographic and
descriptive information about the archival finding aid; (2) front matter, which contains
publication information about the finding aid; (3) archival description, which describes the
content and context of the collection. EAD preserves the hierarchal nature of archival
description and inheritance for collections, while also enabling access to digitized objects in
collections when possible.
The Library of Congress began testing implementation of EAD finding aids in 1996. The
pilot test included visual materials from the Print and Photographs Division, for the National
Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) collection. After initial testing,
the division concluded that EAD was suitable for providing access to photographic and pictorial
materials; in fact, some items that were not in existing paper finding aids such as collection
summaries were being added to EAD finding aids to provide more contextual information.95
EAD also enables access directly to material through the use of the <daogrp> element, which
links to collections of digitized items.
At the same time, there was growing recognition by librarians and archivists that essential
digital object attributes were not captured by descriptive metadata alone. The technical and
administrative processes involved in the creation, ongoing maintenance, and long-term
preservation of digital objects needed to be recorded. The Digital Library Federation
spearheaded the Making of America II (MOA2) project in 1997 with five of its member
institutions to propose standards for a national digital library. One goal of the project was to
explore how to capture and record new types of metadata (termed “administrative” and
“structural”) deemed necessary for managing digital objects. The project resulted in the
Mary A. Lacy and Anne Mitchell. “EAD Testing and Implementation at the Library of Congress,” The American
Archivist 60, no. 4 (1997): 431.
95

33

formulation of the MOA2 Document Type Definition (DTD), which supported encoding
descriptive, structural, and administrative metadata. Though the MOA2 DTD had several
limitations and deficiencies, it helped lay the foundation for the development of an essential
structural template for digital libraries – the Metadata Encoding & Transmission Standard
(METS) which was published in 2001.96 METS is a framework for managing complex digital
objects in a digital library setting. It provides a hierarchal structure for packaging contextual,
administrative, technical, and descriptive information about digital objects, including
relationships with both external and internal content. In METS-packaged XML files,
photographs and other visual materials can be represented through encoding in the XML
document itself, through pointers to external sources, or through both. The current METS
schema, now in its ninth iteration, is hosted at the Library of Congress.
In addition to structural, administrative, and descriptive metadata, preservation metadata
emerged as a key concept in digital preservation activities.97 The development of the
Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies (PREMIS) schema in 2005 provided a
comprehensive structure for capturing and recording attributes deemed essential for long-term
preservation and access. For visual materials, PREMIS metadata can be used to record critical
events about the digitization process, which can help alleviate concerns over the provenance,
authenticity and integrity of the original image. For example, suppose an institution digitizes a
photograph to be ingested in an archival-quality tagged image file format (TIFF) format.

For a complete history of the origins and implementation of METS, see: Jerome McDonough, “METS:
Standardized Encoding for Digital Library Objects,” International Journal on Digital Libraries 6, no.2 (2006): 148158, http://hdl.handle.net/2142/177.
96

For a complete history of preservation metadata, see: OCLC/RLG Working Group on Preservation Metadata,
“Preservation Metadata for Digital Objects: A Review of the State of the Art,” January 31, 2001,
https://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/activities/pmwg/presmeta_wp.pdf.
97

34

PREMIS can record extensive information about the original capture environment, including the
digitization software, operating system, and digitizing “agent.” It also can track and display
information regarding an image’s copyright.98
Though there are many metadata elements across schemas that can be used for managing
digital objects in image collections, only one schema has been specifically designed for digital
still images. Metadata for Images in an XML Schema (MIX) emerged in 2006 out of a
collaborative effort between the Library of Congress and the National Information Standards
Organization (NISO). MIX captures and records technical metadata for digital still images using
four different types of metadata: digital object information, image information, image capture,
and image assessment. The MIX schema contains specific details about the digitization process,
such as the equipment used, resulting compression information, and image quality metrics. It
also allows for the description of the analog source material type along with its original
dimensions. Metadata extraction tools including the JSTOR/Harvard Object Validation
Environment (JHOVE) and Digital Record Object Identification (DROID) can be used to output
MIX technical metadata after reading source files.
The Metadata Object Description Schema (MODS) was developed by the Library of
Congress’ Network Development and MARC Standards Office in 2001 to provide a schema and
guidelines for resource discovery. It contains a rich set of elements for describing both digital
objects and digital collections. It allows for the use of any controlled vocabularies, including
Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH) and TGM. The creation of a MODS record for a
digitized photograph in an archival digital collection might contain information about the

The PREMIS Data Dictionary specifies how to construct semantic units in PREMIS. It also provides examples
about how to encode different object types using the schema, including digitized photographs. See: PREMIS
Editorial Committee, PREMIS Data Dictionary for Preservation Metadata, version 2.0 (March 2008),
http://www.loc.gov/standards/premis/v2/premis-dd-2-0.pdf.
98

35

original photographer, subject descriptions based on the photographic content, the item’s current
repository location, and any digitization processes relating to the source object. 99
Despite the existence of numerous metadata schemas, it is not clear how institutions are
using them to describe their digital image collections. To date, there have been no surveys
conducted which summarize and/or compare metadata schema usage across image collections.
Additional research on metadata schema usage would complement efforts to standardize image
description. Such investigations could also aid in uncovering potential metadata quality problems
in image collections.
2.2.4 The problem with visual materials: Implications for archival access
Archivists have long acknowledged that visual materials such as photographs can provide
rich, valuable, and unique cultural information. Yet collecting institutions have been notably
slow to adapt and model descriptive standards specific to visual materials. Moreover, the
archival literature has paid limited attention to the problem of visual material description and
access. The few exceptions suggest that archivists should aim to develop visual literacy skills to
improve description efforts. Though writing primarily about photograph appraisal, William
Leary advises that archivists processing visual materials should be both “students of history” and
“student[s] of the history of photography.”100 Elisabeth Kaplan and Jeffrey Mifflin advocate for
archivists to familiarize themselves with visual communication methods and borrow aesthetic
approaches from photography, film, and video to formalize literacies.101 In Photographs:

The MODS User Guidelines provides examples for different material types, such as this entry for a digitized
photograph which was an original 35MM slide digitized as a TIFF in 2003:
http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/v3/mods-userguide-examples.html#digitized_photograph.
99

William H. Leary, The Archival Appraisal of Photographs: A RAMP Study with Guidelines (Paris: United
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, 1985): Section 2.5.2.
100

Elisabeth Kaplan and Jeffrey Mifflin, “‘Mind and Sight’: Visual Literacy and the Archivist,” Archival Issues 21,
no. 2 (1996): 96.
101

36

Archival Care and Management, Helen Zinkham’s chapter entitled “Reading and Research
Photographs” provides an in-depth explanation of how archivists might describe photographic
materials. She instructs archivists to study both photographs and negatives carefully, noting any
written information on the materials themselves or on their containers. She describes potential
reference sources such as pictorial histories, histories of photography, and photography
dictionaries, directories, and databases that might help identify relevant details.102
There are inherent complexities in describing and providing access to visual materials for
archives. Joan Schwartz argues that by “embracing a textual model of recorded information and
by adopting a bibliographic model of image classification, archives continue to fixate on the
factual content rather than the functional origins of visual images.”103 For Schwartz, the
continued use of descriptive standards and models developed for text-based materials ultimately
complicates access to photographic materials. Jane Greenberg agrees that current descriptive
standards place constraints on access to visual materials, particularly across domains.104 She
analyzes metadata element usage from four common metadata schemas: (VRA Core, EAD, the
Dublin Core, and Record Export for Art and Cultural Heritage (REACH)) and identifies four
types of functional metadata classes: discovery, use, authentication, and administration. Rather
than rely on domain-specific metadata schemas, Greenberg argues that one can better exploit
access to images through the development of metadata schemas based on function rather than
domain. She asks: “Why not permit the photographic archival image documenting the

Helena Zinkham, “Reading and Researching Photographs,” in Photographs: Archival Care and Management, ed.
Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler and Diane Vogt-O’Connor (Chicago: The Society of American Archivists, 2006), 59-77.
102

Joan M. Schwartz, “Coming to Terms with Photographs: Descriptive Standards, Linguistic ‘Othering,’ and the
Margins of Archivy,” Archivaria 54 (2002): 143.
103

Jane Greenberg, “A Quantitative Categorical Analysis of Metadata Elements in Image-Applicable Metadata
Schemas.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 52, no. 11 (2001): 917–924.
104

37

construction of the Brooklyn Bridge to be accessible as an art image with aesthetic qualities and
as a visual resource portraying state-of-the-art bridge engineering using wire cables during the
latter half of the 19th century?”105 In other words, metadata schema design should support
functions across domains (such as discovery of images, regardless of disciplinary background)
rather than focusing on designs to meet the needs of only one domain.
Given the relationship between archival description and access, the archival profession
could benefit from a better understanding of the nature, purpose, and use of photographic
materials in archives. What do users need from image collections in order to make sense and
establish meaning? How do they experience visual information in the digital realm? Paul
Conway and Ricardo Punzalan sum up the challenges: “Archivists, grappling with photography’s
idiosyncrasies as a medium, find it difficult to articulate photographic meaning, and have been
uncomfortable about its place in the archives in relation to other holdings. This uneasiness has
profoundly constrained our ability to handle photographs, in both practice and theory.”106
As documents living in an archive, photographs are inextricably tied to their
contemporaneous structures and cultural norms of the day. Such is the curse of visual materials
which must be interpreted at some level to be described; how one interprets a photograph forty
years from now may in fact differ quite dramatically from the ways in which it is interpreted and
described today. In his important exposition, Tim Schlack uses archival literature from the
1970s forward to show changing conceptions of the archival photograph, moving from image as

105

Ibid, 921.

106

Paul Conway and Ricardo Punzalan, “Fields of Vision: Toward a New Theory of Visual Literacy for Digitized
Archival Photographs,” Archivaria 71 (2011): 68.

38

evidential historical fact to the more recent status of image as representation.107 The archivists’
burden is that in each of these contested spaces, a photograph’s description must endure. As
Schlack writes, “Working with photographs then is a process of substantiating the most valid
narrative that a photograph collection can evoke and transcribing it into the academic discourse
of our time.”108 For archivists, the great obstacle remains how to effectively situate the
photograph, whose meaning and interpretation is only ever temporally fixed, in archival spaces
that exist in perpetuity.
2.3 LIS Approaches to Studying Image Use
There is a noticeable absence in the LIS literature of qualitative examinations of
information use in image collections. The empirical work on image collection use tends to focus
on the following themes: identifying information needs to improve image retrieval, analysis of
user queries submitted to retrieval systems, and examination of transaction logs or citations to
quantify usage statistics. Few studies examine aspects of the user experience interacting with
images. What are the qualitatively different ways in which users interact with visual information
in the digital realm? In this section, I will briefly review the LIS literature on use of image
collections. How has use in image collections been studied? First, I will review studies which
use query analysis as the basis for understanding information needs in image retrieval systems.
Next I will explore task-based approaches to image collection use. Finally, I will review the
literature that examines experiential aspects of use in image collections.

Tim Schlack, “Framing Photographs, Denying Archives: The Difficulty of Focusing on Archival Photographs,”
Archival Science 8, no. 2 (2008): 85–101.
107

108

Ibid, 96.

39

2.3.1 Query analysis
Linda Armitage and Peter G.B. Enser collected and analyzed approximately eighteenhundred queries for image-related materials submitted to seven libraries.109 Queries were then
categorized into facets derived using the Panofsky-Shatford image analysis matrix. The authors
conclude that image classification schemas can be adopted and implemented by libraries to
support more effective visual information retrieval. However, they point out that particular
attributes may not always be represented at the correct level of specificity to satisfy user needs.
For example, they describe the difficulties in accurately classifying queries which describe
geographic locations that are non-specific (e.g., “London scenes”) or singular topics that may
include many types of representational formats (e.g., paintings, photographs, or films featuring a
famous person).
Karen Collins also studied user queries in two photographic archives to assess whether
information systems for visual materials (including current indexing techniques) were meeting
the information needs of users.110 Her results reveal that subject terms are used more often than
other classes of attributes and that patrons infrequently search for images based on visual
requirements (e.g., color versus black and white). Another significant finding is that a very small
number of patrons (four percent, or seven out of 187 participants) queried images by image
creator. In fact, despite the perceived importance and stronghold of provenance as an archival
access point, all of the images were sought individually rather than in the context of a collection.
Noting this discrepancy, Collins writes: “While maintaining the context in which images were

Linda H. Armitage and Peter G.B. Enser, “Analysis of User Need in Image Archives,” Journal of Information
Science 23, no. 4 (1997): 287–299.
109

Karen Collins, “Providing Subject Access to Images: A Study of User Queries,” The American Archivist 61, no.
1 (1998): 36–55.
110

40

created or used is necessary to preserve their evidential value, it is clear that few patrons are
presently using images as primary source documents. A study of how patrons use images, and
the implications for archives, would be interesting and useful.”111
Chung and Yoon used the Yahoo Answers database as their corpus to investigate imagebased queries.112 They examined 474 image-seeking related questions submitted to the site, such
as the following: “Where can I find wallpaper of FIFA Club World Cup Finals Barcelona
picture?” The authors attempted to classify each question into one of the following seven types
of use: illustration, information processing, information dissemination, learning, generation of
ideas, aesthetic value, and emotive and persuasive use.113 192 queries were each sorted into an
image use classification; the most prominent use was illustration (40%).114 Contextual
information was found to be very important in deciding whether to use an image. For example,
textual information such as image captions and associated text should be indexed when possible.
User interfaces should also be expanded to accommodate richer descriptions of images. Chung
and Yoon explain:
As the findings of this study suggest that there are needs for both concept-based and
content-based indexing approaches, therefore image retrieval systems, especially image
search engines on the web, need to embrace two aspects of image needs. Practically, in
order to imply both concept and content-based approaches into search engines, both
indexing and user interface issues might be resolved concurrently.115

111

Ibid, 52

EunKyung Chung and JungWon Yoon, “Image Needs in the Context of Image Use: An Exploratory Study,”
Journal of Information Science 37, no. 2 (2011): 163–177.
112

These seven classes were adapted from the following: L.R. Conniss, A.J. Ashford and M.E. Graham, Information
Seeking Behavior in Image Retrieval: Visor I Final Report: Library and Information Commission Research Report
95 (Newcastle Upon Tyne: Institute for Image Data Research, 2000).
113

114

EunKyung Chung and JungWon Yoon, “Image Needs in the Context of Image Use,” 169.

115

Ibid, 175.

41

The researchers recommend that future studies employ a holistic perspective to investigate why
and how users seek images.
Using the Library of Congress’ American Memory Collection as their corpus, Youngok
Choi and Edie Rasmussen investigated both the search queries submitted by graduate students
and faculty and broad categorizations of queries in participants’ stated information needs.116
Thirty-eight search requests were analyzed and categorized according to the specificity of their
description.117 The most frequently assigned query type (twenty-three, or 60%) was general or
nameable needs expressed in key words.118 Participants were also asked to rate the relevance of
textual attributes describing images. Date, title, and subject descriptors were found to be the
most important factors for participants.
2.3.2 Task-based analysis
Raya Fidel sought to investigate the extent to which tasks influence image retrieval. 119
Using the twelve classes of image attributes identified by Jorgensen, she analyzed and classified
100 queries submitted to a stock photography agency.120 Fidel notes semantic differences
between user queries that were motivated by informational purposes (such as an icon for a

Youngok Choi and Edie M. Rasmussen, “Searching for Images: The Analysis of Users’ Queries for Image
Retrieval in American History,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 54, no. 6
(2003): 498–511.
116

The authors adopted their categories from Susan Batley’s 1988 work. They used four information need
categories: (1) specific needs naming person, event, or activity; (2) general or namable needs expressed in key
words; (3) abstract needs involving abstract concepts; (4) subjective needs dependent on interpretation. See: Susan
Batley, “Visual Information Retrieval: Browsing Strategies in Pictorial Databases,” in Online Information 88.
Proceedings of the Twelfth International Online Information Meeting (Oxford, Learned Information LTD., 1988),
373–381.
117

118

Choi and Rasmussen, “Searching for Images,” 504.

Raya Fidel, “The Image Retrieval Task: Implications for the Design and Evaluation of Image Databases,” New
Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 3, no. 1 (1997): 181–199.
119

120

See Figure 1 for Jorgensen’s list of attributes.

42

handicapped entrance) versus images sought as representations (such as a colorful picture).121
These conceptual differences in query construction suggested to Fidel that the nature of the
retrieval task might impact search behavior. To account for possible differences in behavior,
Fidel developed two polar construct categories to perform further analysis: Data Poles and
Object Poles. Data Poles could be used to describe retrieval tasks in which relevance criteria are
most likely known ahead of time. For example, a user searching for a picture of a Chevy Malibu
will attempt to retrieve a specific image that meets his or her already-stated criteria. The user
will be able to confirm the relevance of an image based on the specifics of his or her information
need (which explicitly states the “data” needed to find relevant images). At the other end of the
spectrum, Object Poles will likely describe retrieval tasks in which the user still needs to evaluate
post-retrieval whether that search result has met his/her information need. Fidel describes Object
Pole retrieval tasks as ones in which “users are more likely to have difficulties expressing
relevance criteria ahead of time, but more likely to recognize these criteria when they ‘see’
them.”122 Though Fidel provides no further empirical explorations into the matter, her research
highlights at a theoretical level the conceptual differences in image search behavior (and possible
subsequent use) when users have specific information needs in mind for their retrieval tasks. In
her discussion, she suggests further research should be undertaken to see how traditional textbased retrieval measures like precision and recall could be adapted for the complexities of visual
information search tasks.

These two examples were used by Fidel to describe the difference between what she terms “data objects” and
“information objects.”
121

122

Ibid, 191.

43

Lori McCay-Peets and Elaine Toms also focused on task-based work contexts,
interviewing thirty journalists and historians to better understand motivations in using images. 123
Building on Fidel’s previous work, McCay-Peets and Toms were interested in classifying
whether participants used images as “illustration” or “information.” Participants were asked to
recall incidents when they needed to use an image for work and then asked to identify at which
point in their work process they used the image. They were shown a list of twelve attributes
related to image description, which were also categorized as either “descriptive” or “conceptual”
types of attributes. Participants were then asked to identify the attributes which would satisfy
potential needs for image use. The following work task stages were examined: Idea generation,
Preparation, Elaboration, Analysis/Writing, and Dissemination. The majority of participants
(80%), reported image use that researchers categorized as “illustration.”124 On average,
participants in both the “illustration” and “information” categories identified three key attributes
for their image needs, with both groups ranking “people/animal/object” as the most important
attribute. One of the most interesting findings emerging from this study is a clear demonstration
that image needs change depending on participants’ workflow stages. The researchers give the
following example:
One participant noted that while he needed to obtain an image for illustrative purposes
early in his work task process (Preparation stage) for an article he was writing, it was
because he wanted to make sure he had enough time to acquire it before publication. The
image was not really used until the Dissemination stage when the image was made ready
for publication.125

Lori Mccay-Peet and Elaine Toms, “Image Use within the Work Task Model: Images as Information and
Illustration,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 60, no. 12 (2009): 2416–2429.
123

Though the researchers define the terms “illustration” and “information,” they do not describe how they
determined and classified image use as one or the other.
124

125

Ibid, 2425.

44

McCay-Peets and Toms recommend that image needs be further delineated to effectively
distinguish motivations between image acquisition (physically acquiring the item) and image use
(purposefully using the item). They also call for more user studies examining the relationship
between image selection and work tasks, so that information retrieval models can better
accommodate user information needs.
Markkula and Sormunen examined the practices of journalists working in a digital photo
newspaper archive in Finland.126 They were able to identify types of relevance criteria employed
by journalists in their selection of images. Topicality was considered an initial indicator of
relevance - image captions were used to effectively authenticate whether images were
appropriately topical illustrations. Other criteria used to assess images included contextual and
aesthetic attributes. The technical quality of the photograph was always mentioned by journalists
as a factor in determining relevancy. It is important to note that the researchers concluded that
examining user queries from image searches revealed very little about user behavior to
investigators; instead, observation sessions from the newsroom provided a more illuminating
context for image needs and uses.127
2.3.3 Experiential analysis
A pilot study conducted by Wendy Duff, Emily Monks-Leeson, and Alan Galey is one of
the few empirical examples from the archival literature which seeks to investigate the
experiences of individuals interacting with archival documents.128 Importantly, the authors focus

Marjo Markkula and Eero Sormumen, “Searching for Photos - Journalists' Practices in Pictorial IR,” Challenge of
Image Retrieval Workshop (University of Northumbria at Newcastle, Newcastle upon Tyne, 1998): 1-13.
126

127

.

Ibid, 4

Wendy Duff, Emily Monks-Leeson, and Alan Galey, “Contexts Built and Found: A Pilot Study on the Process of
Archival Meaning-making,” Archival Science 12, no. 1 (2012): 69–92.
128

45

on the process of how users interpret archival materials, rather than how they find or search in
the archives. The authors observed three distinct stages of behavior taking place: (1) making
guesses and hunches about archival record content; (2) conception of materials using a
predetermined framework; and (3) identification of relevant concepts among archival records.129
The authors also found that domain knowledge had a critical impact on the process of meaningmaking in the archives. Users browsed archival records more purposefully and could make
connections among records when they were able to draw from existing conceptual frameworks.
In 2010, Kathleen Fear examined the perceived usefulness of the Dublin Core metadata
elements for users working with digital image collections.130 Her sample population consisted of
seventy-eight individuals, largely undergraduate students, who each participated in three separate
evaluative activities as part of the research study. Fifty students filled out a questionnaire,
including two evaluation tasks. Eighteen students participated in two different focus group
sections, and ten students completed a search/usability session.
One of Fear’s most interesting findings is that users considered the primary source of
information to be the image itself, rather than any accompanying metadata or related contextual
details. Image contents can be quickly and easily evaluated to determine whether to continue
searching. The second most frequently mentioned factor considered important to participants is
the size of an image (both in terms of image resolution and dimensions). Participants also want
assurance that images come from reliable environments; nineteen people indicated that
information about where an image originated and/or who posted it are relevant factors.

129

Ibid, 80.

Kathleen Fear, “User Understanding of Metadata in Digital Image Collections: Or, What Exactly Do You Mean
by ‘Coverage’?” The American Archivist 73, no.2 (2010): 26–60.
130

46

Although the stated purpose of her study was to examine search behavior, Fear’s research
also offers rich, nuanced descriptions of user interactions with images in the context of an online
collection. In the usability session, for example, participants were asked to perform two search
tasks and then to comment on any factors that influenced their decision to select (or not select)
an image for use. Fear describes wanting to ascertain the following about the user experience:
Did they understand all the elements on the page and their content? Which elements did
they use and which did they ignore? What information that was not included would they
like to have seen, and, conversely, what provided information did they think could have
been excluded?131
Such accounts provide valuable insight into the factors that may impact user experience and
satisfaction with finding and using digital resources. They also highlight the complexities of
interacting with visual information. In fact, participants frequently mention visual components
(e.g., the presentation and display of information, zoom capacities for images, mouse-overs)
when describing desired functionalities.132
Acknowledging the dearth of empirical investigations into visual information use, Joan
Beaudoin investigated four types of user groups who use images in their professional work:
archaeologists, architects, art historians, and artists.133 She conducted surveys and semistructured interviews with four recruited participants from each group. Each group was asked
questions relating to: (1) how they used images in the course of work processes and (2) why they
used images as part of the products they created. Beaudoin then analyzed and coded participant
responses to thematically compare functional reasons given for image use.

131

Ibid, 39.

132

Ibid, 49.

Beaudoin, “A Framework of Image Use.” One complicating factor to note is the author’s broad use of the term
“image” to mean anything from a digital mock-up on a screen to a picture of a painting.
133

47

Knowledge development as a motivating factor for image use was the single category
shared across all four user groups. Images also served as conceptual models for two groups of
users, architects and artists, with continuous refinement throughout the creative process.
Architect 6, for example, describes the process of solidifying design concepts using visual
methods:
It will start out with one of the partners doing a sketch… a hand-drawing… really quick.
‘Build this.’ And we translate that into a 3-D model and then print it out and show it to
him. ‘Is this it?’ ‘No, no, no, no,’ and then he will sketch back over the image we have
just printed out. It is very much a back and forth, iterative process.134
Architects and artists also mentioned their use of images as sources of inspiration, generally in
the beginning stages of their creative process; this is not surprising given that both user groups
created visual materials as part of their work. Beaudoin credits architects as having the most
diverse image needs among the user groups represented. On the other side of the spectrum,
archaeologists and art historians tend to use images in their output – for presentations and
teaching materials. Only one art historian explicitly addressed using images for research.
Beaudoin points out that participants in academia were the least able to offer compelling
evidence for how they use images to increase knowledge.
Many of the participants mention the “informational” components in images they use.
Given the preponderance of image use motivated by knowledge development among research
participants, this may not be surprising. For example, half of the artists mention using images
explicitly for the information they contained.135 Still, the idea that images can be read and

134

Ibid, 24-25.

135

Ibid, 19.

48

understood as visual information suggests an important conceptual shift in the paradigm of
image use and information.
Paul Conway and Ricardo Punzalan explore the crucial role of meaning making in
interactions with digitized visual materials among archive users.136 The authors introduce
“Fields of Vision,” a first attempt in the archival literature to model how users interact with
digitized images in the context of their use. Conway and Punzalan conducted in-depth interviews
and surveys with seven participants who could be summarized as expert, non-academic users of
photographic materials. Using grounded theory analysis, the researchers identify three different
modes of inquiry in which participants use digitized images. In the Discovering mode,
participants “obtain visual information from individual digitized images that has not been seen or
noted previously.” 137 For example, Participant 7 had a baseball history project in which he used
photographs to identify unknown major league baseball players. The second mode identified by
Conway and Punzalan is Storytelling, wherein participants assemble images to create narratives.
An example is Participant 3, who selected images for use in research based on their ability to
evoke compelling storylines. The final mode is Landscaping, in which the participant draws on
external factors to contextualize the photograph in use. In this mode of inquiry, “digitized
photographs may serve primarily as mnemonic devices, as illustrations for a primarily textual
narrative, or as a lens on events and activities that took place beyond the view of the camera
itself.”138 Participant 2 used the Landscaping mode, for example, to investigate the socio-

Paul Conway and Ricardo Punzalan, “Fields of Vision: Toward a New Theory of Visual Literacy for Digitized
Archival Photographs,” Archivaria 71 (2011): 63–97.
136

137

Ibid, 77.

138

Ibid, 85.

49

political context in which Russian ethnographic photo albums are created. In describing her
selection and use of one particular photograph of a horse bazaar, she explains:
I’m selecting images that convey culturally particular aspects that the Russians seem to
be honing in on; horse bazaars are ancient in Central Asia. But this one is also political
because the Russians were very interested in keeping up their cavalry. So they might be
conveying not just an ancient industrial commercial practice of central Asians but also
that they’re deeply invested in controlling the land.139
While modes may intersect during the course of activities (e.g., a participant can use both
Storytelling and Discovering mode), each mode has distinctive qualities that define the
interaction. Four participants used two different modes, and the remaining three used one. It is
important to note that Conway and Punzalan characterize participant modes based on narratives
relayed by participants rather than through direct observations of interactions.
2.4 Historians and the Use of Photographs as Evidence
Despite the enormous growth in access to primary source materials, the use of visual
materials in the discipline of history remains in its infancy. In a 2010 essay, Sarah Farmer
argues that, “Historians of the western experience in the 19th and 20th-centuries still
overwhelmingly depend on text-based archives, although interdisciplinary research projects,
conferences, and publications in the last ten years indicate a ‘visual turn’ in the scholarship.”140
More recently, in a review of image use in historical journals from 2000-2009, Harris and
Hepburn note that “use of images has remained at a relatively consistent level year to year.”141
Why are historians remiss to use photographs as primary historical sources?

139

Ibid, 90.

Sarah Farmer, “Going Visual: Holocaust Representation and Method,” American Historical Review 115, no. 1
(2010): 116. It is important to note that Farmer’s characterization of a “visual turn” is regarding academic
scholarship overall rather than specifically the discipline of history. In her examples, she cites cultural
studies/media studies texts to indicate the visual turn.
140

Valerie Harris and Peter Hepburn, “Trends in Image Use by Historians and the Implications for Librarians and
Archivists,” College and Research Libraries 74, no. 3 (2013): 276.
141

50

Drawing on literature primarily from the historical discipline, this section will explore
issues and conceptual challenges associated with historians’ scholarly use of photographs as
visual evidence.142 The first section will offer an overview on how concepts of evidence emerged
in modern historiography. How is evidence constituted? What role does it play in establishing
historical narrative? What techniques and methods do historians use to evaluate primary source
documents as evidence? How has postmodernism and the so-called “new history” influenced
conceptions of evidence? The second section will investigate how historians approach the use of
photographs as visual evidence. What are the conceptual challenges and obstacles in using
photographs as the basis for historical understanding? What affordances do photographs and
visual materials overall offer to historians? In an attempt to demonstrate methods and present
historical models, case studies on how historians have used photographs as visual evidence will
be explored.
2.4.1 Concepts of evidence in modern historiography
The use of source materials as evidence forms the foundation of modern historiography.
Methodological shifts in the first half of the 19th-century, in part due to the writings of the
German historians Leopold Von Ranke and Friedrich Schlozer, resulted in historical practices
that emphasized the formulation of empirical evidence.143 The processes by which source
materials became evidence, enabling historians to make assertions and support historical
arguments, thereby became of increasing interest to historians. The need to establish criteria to

Rather than present a review of all the literature in the discipline of history, I limited my literature search to
academic journals in an attempt to: (1) gain a sense of the state of the art and (2) investigate historians’ conceptions
about their use of visual materials as primary sources.
142

Kasper Eskildsen, “Leopold Ranke’s Archival Turn: Location and Evidence in Modern Historiography,” Modern
Intellectual History 5, no. 3 (2008): 425-453. doi:10.1017/S1479244308001753.
143

51

validate the accuracy, reliability, and authenticity of source materials was seen as paramount to
historical practices.
In an early publication devoted entirely to the subject of historical evidence, the Reverend
HB George describes the process by which evidence is formulated:
It only becomes evidence if, and so far as, it is used as the basis for an inference. The
inference may be of any kind, from the simplest and most direct, to something remote: it
may be cogent or merely suggesting a presumption or it may be entirely baseless.
Whatever the value or the nature of the inference, the statement which gives occasion for
it is, to the mind of the hearer, evidence.144
For George, the act of making inferences from statements is the establishment of evidence;
importantly, such acts do not translate evidence directly into truth. Rather, the historian’s role is
to sift through source materials and make cumulative speculations.145 Similarly, William Henry
Simcox describes the construction of evidence as a “double process” emerging from “a weighing
and a sifting.”146 This recognition in turn sets up a framework by which source materials can be
understood and evaluated as the basis for historical argument.
Historiographical literature in the 19th-century also emphasized that historians should be
able to produce the material basis for their claims. In Sir George Cornewall Lewis’ 1855 treatise
on the credibility of the history of Rome, he argues, "It is not enough for a historian to claim the
possession of a retrospective second-sight, which is denied to the rest of the world; of a
mysterious doctrine revealed only to the uninitiated. Unless he can prove as well as guess; unless
he can produce evidence of the fact, after he has intuitively perceived its existence, his historical

144

H.B. George, Historical Evidence (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989), 14.

145

Ibid, 28.

William Henry Simcox, Principles of Historical Evidence Considered in Their Bearing on the History of Remote
Times (Oxford: T. & G. Shrimpton, 1868), 2-3.
146

52

system cannot be received.”147 Depending on one’s perspective, source materials serve doubly
in this capacity: as evidential proof for historical claims and as the building blocks from which
historical arguments are crafted. The perception emerged that historical interpretation could only
be as accurate as source materials. As Johnson explains, a historian “may hit upon a true
statement of the facts, but he can rise no higher than the source from which he draws his
information.”148
Historians should gather as much information from varying source materials as possible.
They must consider the specific conditions in which a historical source was produced, taking
care to avoid assuming its reliability.149 Johnson outlines the extensive steps he would take in
gathering disparate source materials were he tasked with writing about a particular historical
event (in this case, the assassination of Major General Lee in Egypt). For instance, he mentions
making sure to take eyewitness testimony from both “natives and foreigners,” as well as
members of the government.150 He also mentions that he would visit the scene of the murder in
an attempt to map out the positions of the parties involved. Admittedly, such actions are not
always possible; nevertheless, Johnson’s recommended practices gives insight into the
importance that some 19th-century historians placed on assembling varying source materials.

George Cornewall Lewis, An Inquiry Into the Credibility of the Early Roman History (London: J.W. Parker and
Son, 1855), 15.
147

148

Allen Johnson, The Historian and Historical Evidence (New York: C. Scribner's Sons, 1926), 2.

Martha C. Howell and Walter Prevenier, From Reliable Sources: An Introduction to Historical Methods (Ithaca,
N.Y: Cornell University Press, 2001), 19.
149

150

Johnson, The Historian and Historical Evidence, 3.

53

Types of sources
Historians describe the type of sources used in historical scholarship in a variety of ways.
Source materials can be lumped into broad categorizations; for example, George describes
sources as either direct historical statements, such as written documents, or indirect sources,
contextual information which possess “none of the characteristics of documentary evidence.”151
Johnson is equally vague broad in his depiction, differentiating between “records” and
“remains.”152 Both kinds of sources are forms of testimony based on direct and indirect
observation. It is the job of the historian, Johnson argues, to collect and collate sources and to use
them appropriately in historical interpretation.
Other historians are more detailed in their source typologies. Simcox describes four
forms of direct evidence: oral tradition, which can be evaluated in tandem with written records;
monument inscriptions, which illustrate or authenticate stories from other sources; fragmentary
literature, such as the Old Testament scriptures; and historical compilations, which combine
many different sources.153 While Howell and Prevenier only distinguish two categories of
sources, written and non-written, they describe in detail the types of materials that constitute
those categories. Moreover, they recognize the emergence of new types of source materials, and
thus new methodologies, due to widespread technological changes.154

151

George, Historical Evidence, 28.

152

Johnson, The Historian and Historical Evidence, 4.

153

Simcox, Principles of Historical Evidence, 17-19.

154

Howell and Prevenier, From Reliable Sources, 30.

54

Establishing trustworthy sources
The types of source materials historians employ undoubtedly impact their historical
interpretation. Some materials are recognized as more trustworthy while others are considered
less reputable. Recorded observations of an event, for example, often do not hold the same
weight for many historians as eyewitness testimony does. The literature has addressed these
nuances in two ways: (1) to outline acceptable historical practices and (2) to discuss methods and
techniques for assessing the credibility of sources.
19th-century historiography takes an abstract approach to the nature of trustworthy
historical practice. In some cases, this comes in the form of outlining specific character traits for
historians. In his 1830’s manuscript “On the Character of Historical Science,” Leopald Von
Ranke describes the historian as needing to show “a pure love of truth” and a “universal interest”
in all aspects of society. Historians must be impartial, observational, logical, and able to look at
the “conception of the totality” surrounding events or people.155 In other writings, particular
documents are contrasted to show how they offer more credible approaches to historical inquiry.
Such demonstrations do not translate into instructive historical practices; for example, Forsyth
argues that the New Testament is a more credible account than the legends of the Saints based on
the number of eyewitnesses and the fact that it explains “the origin of a religion that has lasted
eighteen centuries.”156 Nevertheless, they do offer valuable insight into conceptions of authentic
historical practices in the 19th century.

Leopold von Ranke, “On the Character of Historical Science,” in The Theory and Practice of History, ed. Georg
G. Iggers, Konrad von Moltke, Wilhelm Humboldt and Leopold von Ranke (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973), 1415.
155

William Forsyth, The Rules of Evidence As Applicable to the Credibility of History (London: Robert Hardwicke,
1874), 9.
156

55

The methods through which historians validate the credibility of their evidence range
from common sense approaches to detailed technical analysis. In the case of eyewitness
testimony, George argues that historians must evaluate the witnesses’ ability to know the truth,
capacity for accuracy, and trustworthiness.157 Simcox recommends looking at other statements
made by the witness to help establish credibility.158 Johnson describes the importance of
evaluating the external characteristics of source materials: dating materials, provenance, and
authorship. He explains, “The appraisal of historical material involves, first of all, determination
of the time when it was fabricated, written, or printed, and of the place where it originated; then,
the more difficult determination of its authorship.”159
Other methodological approaches call for the comparison of differing accounts of the
same event. Tasked with examining how Rome’s early history was written, Lewis explains his
approach:
We shall first endeavor to ascertain the general character of the sources from which the
extant narrative of the early centuries of Rome have been derived, and to discover how it
came to assume the form in which it has been delivered to modern times. When this part
of our task has been accomplished, it will be necessary to proceed one step further, and to
examine the extant narrative, in order to try how far its internal character and
composition, and its external attestation, agree. It has been truly remarked that a critical
inquiry into the credibility of the early Roman history can scarcely be separated from a
positive exposition of the facts out of which that history is formed.160
By looking at conflicting versions and applying tests of credibility, historians should conceivably
be able to assess which perspective is the most valid. Interestingly, these approaches all

157

George, Historical Evidence, 31.

158

Simcox, Principles of Historical Evidence, 39.

159

Johnson, The Historian and Historical Evidence, 51.

160

Lewis, An Inquiry into the Credibility of the Early Roman History, 16.

56

presuppose the existence of an objective truth from which historians can measure or judge
statements based on their accuracy.
Evidence and the new history
During the 20th century, historiographical perspectives underwent a radical shift. The
emergence of a paradigmatic approach known as “the new history” could be seen as a “direct
reaction” to the Rankean approaches which dominated 19th-century historiographical writings.161
The positivist bent of the Rankean paradigm was predicated on the notion that historical truth
could be obtained from carefully evaluated sources and used to construct narrative; the new
history called into question the formulation and usefulness of such approaches. It favored the
expansion of historical methodologies, types of source materials, and objects of study. Perhaps
most importantly, there was greater acknowledgement that historians themselves were
instrumental in shaping historical understanding. In his 1933 presidential address to the
American Historical Association, Charles Beard describes the role of the historian: “Facts,
multitudinous and beyond calculation, are known, but they do not select themselves or force
themselves automatically into any fixed scheme of arrangement in the mind of the historian.
They are selected and ordered by him as he thinks.”162
Bolstered by the influence of modernism and structuralism, historical scholarship
encountered “a crisis in representation.”163 Once positioned rather innocuously, the historical
document was now instead seen as a mediated object of representation. There were also
significant shifts in the practices used to craft historical arguments. According to Lawrence
Peter Burke, New Perspectives on Historical Writing (University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press,
1992), 2-3.
161

162

Charles A. Beard, “Written History as an Act of Faith,” The American Historical Review 39, no. 2 (1934): 220.

Robert Berkhofer, Beyond the Great Story: History as Text and Discourse (Cambridge: Harvard University
Press, 1997), 3.
163

57

Stone, the new history favored the use of analytic frameworks rather than the narrative
tendencies used previously.164 Such changes in perspective and practice had profound
implications for notions of historical understanding and conceptions of evidence in historical
argument.
In his foundational text Narration and Knowledge, Arthur Danto argues that we cannot
disengage historical understanding from its temporal dimensions. It is only through the
distancing enabled by the experience of seeing history-as-actuality that one can in turn
adequately perceive history-as-record. In other words, one can only understand the past as such
by experiencing it in the present. He explains:
This is certainly a difficult notion to analyze, partly at least because – if I may protract
the metaphor which does not quite permit one to say what one wishes – it is only by
‘looking through the curtain and beyond’ that we can see the fabric. Less metaphorically,
just to apprehend something as evidence is already to have gone beyond the state of
merely making statements about it: to count something as evidence is already to be
making a statement about something else, namely, that for which it is taken as evidence.
And taking E as evidence for O is to see E differently from the way we would if we had
no notion at all about O. Thus, just to see something as evidence is already to be ‘looking
through the fabric and beyond.’165
While Danto was a philosopher of history rather than a historian, his writings reflect the
changing perspectives on historical thinking and understanding that emerged during the 20th
century.
Robert Berkhofer takes Danto’s points one step further. In Beyond the Great Story,
Berkhofer argues that common historical practice (what he terms “normal history”) relies on the
ideological use of information which has been already historicized as fact. In the course of
accepted methods for normal historical practice, historians derive facts from sources that are

164

Lawrence Stone, The Past and the Present Revisited (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987), 21.

165

Arthur Danto, Narration and Knowledge (New York: Columbia University Press, 2007), 89.

58

considered capable of representing the past. “To consider historical sources as evidence of the
past, historians predicate that they remain from past real events and behaviors and bear such a
relationship to those past realities that the historian can reconstruct those past events and
behaviors from them.”166 In the normal history paradigm, the historian uses sources as evidence
to construct narratives for what Berkhofer calls “The Great Story” of history.
A key component in understanding the “normal history” paradigm is how evidence
figures into the historical process. In the normal history method, evidence is isolated, evaluated
as fact, and then synthesized. This stands in contrast to a meta-history or rhetorical approach
which positions the text as the “vehicle for representing the past as history.”167 The latter
approach illuminates how the “referential facts” that historians use to craft historical arguments
are themselves already historicized. In other words, as Keith Jenkins explains in his reading of
Berkhofer’s argument, the process of facts being used as historical constructs means they have
already become representations rather than (mere) references. He writes that “the effect normal
historians try to achieve in their representations is the fusion of the structures of interpretation
and factuality to try and prove that the structure of interpretation is the structure of factuality,
instead of showing how the representation is structured ‘to look like total factuality.’”168 Thus,
normal historical practice, which prescribes the synthesis of facts through interpretation, is
always already incapable of treating those facts as anything but objectively truthful.
Berkhofer argues that by demystifying the practices of normal history, we can expose
how historical discourse functions as a mode of historical representation. By separating out the

166

Berkhofer, Beyond the Great Story, 29-30.

167

Ibid, 70.

168

Keith Jenkins, The Postmodern History Reader (London: Routledge, 1997), 19.

59

analysis of text, discourse, and story, historians can begin to decode the ideological structures
that present and legitimize the practices of normal history. Such practices can then be
superseded by new forms of historical representations, which can use contextualist approaches to
move beyond the Great Story.
Despite the recognition that historians employ ideologies in their interpretations, there are
few empirical works examining how historians construct evidence. One exception is Samuel
Wineburg’s dissertation work on historical problem-solving and understanding.169 Wineburg
attempts to model the cognitive processes that underlie acts of historical reading and
interpretation. He identifies three kinds of heuristics used by historians that characterize
historical understanding. First, historians use corroboration – or the act of comparing
documents with one another. As an example of a measure of corroboration, Wineburg refers to
the number of times historians looked back at previous documents to verify or double-check
facts. A second heuristic is sourcing-or the act of looking at the source or attribution of the
document. A third heuristic is contextualization – or “the act of situating a document in a
concrete temporal and spatial context.”170 According to Wineburg’s findings, historians employ
all three of these heuristics in the act of constructing historical arguments.
2.4.2 Historians and photographic use
Modern historiographical approaches recognize the importance of evaluating primary
source materials as historical evidence. While the source-criticism techniques popularized by
Ranke in the nineteenth century helped lay the groundwork for methodological approaches

Samuel Wineburg, “Historical Problem-Solving: A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation of
Documentary Evidence” (PhD diss., Stanford University, 1990).
169

Samuel Wineburg, “Historical Problem Solving: A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation of
Documentary and Pictorial Evidence.” Journal of Educational Psychology 83, no. 1 (1991): 77.
170

60

which incorporated critical examination of primary sources as texts, the so-called “new history”
or “cultural turn” of the 1960s held important ramifications for existing conceptions of both
historical argument and evidence.171 Postmodernists’ and poststructuralists’ critical examination
of discourse and the legitimizing social structures of the historical canon expanded the research
agenda. In the discipline of history, the influence of postmodernism helped orient historians
away from the study of significant figures and towards the “history of ordinary people and
everyday life.”172 These shifts in focus toward new kinds of subjects and subject matter
encouraged the use of different types of source materials as historical evidence.
In particular, photographic archives presented a host of opportunities for historians
studying class, gender, and race. Insights provided by photographic evidence could allow
historians to fill in under-developed, underrepresented or misrepresented cultural histories. In his
introduction to a special issue in the Journal of Pacific History on photography and history,
Quanchi explains that “visual histories based on photographic evidence might reveal for the first
time, quite different stories, incidents, memories, attitudes and cross-cultural relationships.”173
Yet with few exceptions, historical scholarship has failed to seize upon the photograph.
According to White, historians have not “exploited the possibilities of using images as a
principal medium of discursive representation, using verbal commentary only diacritically, that
is to say, to direct attention to, specify, and emphasize a meaning conveyable by visual means

Philipp Muller, “Understanding History: Hermeneutics and Source-Criticism in Historical Scholarship,” in
Reading Primary Sources: The Interpretation of Texts from 19 th and 20th-Century History, ed. Miriam Dobson and
Benjamin Ziemann (Abingdon, Routledge, 2009), 23.
171

Katharine Martinez, “Imaging the Past: Historians, Visual Images and the Contested Definition of History,”
Visual Resources 11, no. 1 (1995): 24.
172

Max Quanchi, “Visual Histories and Photographic Evidence,” The Journal of Pacific History 41, no.2 (2006):
165. doi:0.1080/00223340600826052.
173

61

alone.”174 Rather than considering photographs as documents capable of investigation and
analysis, historians have used them primarily as illustrations. Writing in 1995, Martinez
summarizes the current state of image usage by academic historians:
In the world of academia, few historians consult images in their research, and when
images appear in scholarly history publications in most cases the images play a secondary
role to textual research materials in supporting an argument. Furthermore, the placement
of images within illustrated scholarly history books, the quality of the reproductions, and
the captions in most cases suggest that images may have been an afterthought, added
hurriedly at the last minute to improve the attractiveness of the book once it left the
publisher's hands. Why are academic historians so uncomfortable using visual images as
evidence?175
While empirical research on image use by historians is only beginning to emerge, anecdotal
evidence suggests that not much has changed nearly two decades later. Januarius claims that
historians still are not using images in their research, an argument made all the more
confounding given the increased access to digital images through both digitization and personal
digital camera use.176 In my own survey of leading academic history journals, I found very little
mention of possible methods and approaches and very few actual employing them in historical
argument. What are the conceptual challenges and obstacles in using photographs as the basis
for historical understanding? Why are historians remiss to use photographs as visual evidence?
2.4.3 How historians approach photographs as visual evidence
Historians’ epistemological assumptions play a significant role in how they interpret
source materials.177 In his article “Evidence Revisited: Interpreting Historical Materials in Sport

174

Hayden White, “Historiography and Historiphoty,” The American Historical Review 93, no. 5 (1988): 1194.

175

Martinez, “Imaging the Past,” 22.

Joeri Januarius, “Picturing the Everyday Life of Limburg Miners: Photographs as a Historical Source,”
International Review of Social History 53, no.2 (2008): 294. doi:10.1017/S0020859008003453.
176

177

Peter Stearns and Jan Lewis, An Emotional History of the U.S. (New York: NYU Press, 1998), 1.

62

History,” Douglas Booth outlines three epistemological approaches and how historians might
apply them in the study of historical visual materials. Reconstructionists see photographs as
prima facie evidence or visual facts.178 Constructionists, on the other hand, think about the
historical circumstances in which the photograph was produced, using theory to position the
understanding of materials as evidence. For example, constructionists might describe the
manner in which a photograph was received by drawing on theoretical frameworks.
Deconstructionists also frame their interpretations in theory, but see photographs and their
reception as mediated. For deconstructionists, it is the influence of cultural and social
subjectivities that make photographs “ambiguous texts rather than accurate records of ‘the
truth.’”179
In lieu of offering prescriptive approaches to dealing with visual materials, historians
have grappled with the problems of interpreting and evaluating visual forms. Such concerns
mirror traditional historiographical concern with the accuracy and validity of source materials.
In an American Historical Review forum, Hayden White considers new possibilities in how
historians can represent truthfulness and accuracy using visual materials. In what he terms,
“historiophoty” - or the representation of historical phenomena through visual discourse – White
argues for the use of visual materials as demonstrations for types of historical processes. As
White explains, “The veracity of the representation hinges on the question of the likelihood of
this type of cause-and-effect.”180 White’s emphasis on typification allows him to explore the

Douglas Booth, “Evidence Revisited: Interpreting Historical Materials in Sport History,” Rethinking History 9,
no.4 (2005): 475. doi:10.1080/13642520500307990.
178

John Bale, “Capturing ‘The African’ Body? Visual Images and ‘Imaginative Sports,’” Journal of Sport History
25, no. 2 (1998): 235-236.
179

180

Hayden White, “Historiography and Historiphoty,” 1193.

63

possibilities and benefits of new kinds of characterizations in historical representations, while at
the same bringing into question the validity of traditional methods of representation and analysis.
Julia Adeney Thomas claims that the complex nature of perception (what she calls the
“evidence of sight”) prohibits historians’ from ever accurately using photographs to interpret the
past.181 She describes two concepts, recognition and excavation, as the two principle approaches
used by historians in dealing with photographic materials. Recognition is a cognitive mode of
perception used to position historians’ own perceptions of the past, while excavation seeks to
recognize the discursive functions bound up in the processes of knowledge production and
interpretation.
In her argument, Thomas describes three primary contrasts between the two methods of
use. The first difference involves how the act of likeness functions in recognition, as opposed to
how contiguity functions in excavation. Recognition, for instance, relies on similarity and
difference in photographs to enable the non-discursive perception of likeness, which in turn
establishes something in the past. Excavation, on the other hand, contextualizes the photograph
within a discursive system, using its material presence to recover the historical system which
produced it.
The second difference between the two interpretive processes involves whether one
chooses to substitute or reconstruct. To recognize is to substitute through the condition of
likeness. In other words, one can point to a photograph and claim that it is "my mother" or "the
Civil War," an event or thing that has transpired. We recognize the existence of the photograph
as substitute for something else. Similarly, it is only through the excavation of the discursive
systems which produced a thing that one can understand how and why that thing exists. As

181

Julia Adeney Thomas, “The Evidence of Sight,” History and Theory 48 (2009): 151-168.

64

Thomas explains, "This system, the regularities governing the photograph's emergence as a
meaningful object, may exist at some distance from us, an important distance when we look at
photographs as historical evidence.”182
The third contrast is in the interaction with the photograph itself. In the process of
recognition, a relationship between two temporalities is cemented. The past and the present
intersect in the act of "seeing" the photograph. Excavation preserves the past from the present,
through the acknowledgement of the existence of separate discursive formations. In this
conception of excavation, the photograph may show the particularities of a past that are distinct
from the material presence of the photograph in the “here and now.”
Thomas claims that most historians employ one of these two approaches in their
treatment of historical photographs. However, she argues that both approaches diminish the
ability of photographs to act as evidence. For Thomas, recognition is problematic because it
anchors understanding in the already known. We can learn nothing new from the photograph
itself and can ask it no new questions. By perceiving it within the frame of likeness (through the
process of difference and similarity), we are already viewing it within established territories.
Thus, she concludes, “My understanding will always be limited to what I already know and feel;
from this approach I cannot achieve a new, articulated, critical grasp of the meaning of the
past.”183 It is through the strategy of recognition, Thomas argues, that historians are fooled into
thinking they can embrace past realities through the interpretation of photographs.
Excavation as a strategy posits the photograph in an equally complex place for the
historian. This approach relies on explicating the context surrounding the production and

182

Ibid, 154.

183

Ibid, 158.

65

consumption, of the photograph. Thomas shows the technique in her analysis of an image of two
Japanese street children from 1946. Researching a popular image used by historians to signify
the “reality” of postwar Japan, Thomas uncovers a debate in an amateur photography magazine
from the same time period that calls into question the realities shown in the photograph’s
depiction. Thomas argues that such an approach is ultimately more capable of showing the past
as it really was, to borrow from Ranke’s famous dictum.
Elizabeth Edwards advocates using a material culture framework for understanding the
function of photographs in discourse.184 A trained historian, Edwards also draws prominently
from visual anthropology and cultural studies in crafting her theoretical approach. She describes
two forms of materiality that can be found in photographs. Both the physical construction of the
photograph (the type of print, the use of specific toning) and the form in which it is presented
(albums, mounts) reveal intentions and specificities that are, she argues, seldom random.185 If
one thinks about photographs as cultural artifacts, then one can begin to see their performative
aspects and participation in discourse. As Edwards argues, “Understanding the saliency of these
entwined practices for those involved is a way of exploring the potential of photographs as
historical evidence, and is also a means to investigate the forms through which historical
imagination might be made possible and be experienced.”186 As a means for examining what is
often obscured by history’s intense obsession with metanarratives, photographs can provide a
material basis from which to examine historical and social processes at work.

Elizabeth Edwards and Janice Hart, Photographs Objects Histories: On the Materiality of Images (New York:
Routledge, 2004); Elizabeth Edwards, “Photography and the Material Performance of the Past,” History and Theory
48, no.4 (2009): 130-150.
184

185

Edwards, Photographs Objects Histories, 3.

186

Edwards, “Photography and the Material Performance of the Past,” 131.

66

2.4.4 Methods for analyzing historical photographs
While discussions of theoretical frameworks abound, the academic historical literature
rarely demonstrates empirical methods for analyzing historical photographs. An exception can
be found in critiques of pedagogical settings. Louis Masur argues that history textbooks treat
images indifferently, rarely given the proper context or reproduction necessary to be taken
seriously as historical sources.187 He uses one particular photograph, of a slave named Gordon
with severe lashings on his back, to demonstrate how the image can be read historically. He
compares the photograph with a wood engraving of the same portrait, asking the viewer to
consider the differences between the two. For example, (how) does the difference in format
impact their reception? The image was circulated in Harpers Weekly, a publication with a known
white, middle-class, educated readership, on July 4th, 1863 with the caption “A Typical Slave.”
The captions only appeared in certain reproductions of the image. Does its inclusion suggest
evidence about the anti-slavery leanings of the readership? All of these bits of information
provide additional context, allowing the viewer to “comprehend this image as history and to read
it without losing sight of Gordon.”188
Allen and Felton argue that photographs present opportunities for engaging students in
new ways.189 They recommend a series of chronological steps that teachers should employ when
introducing photographs as historical evidence. First, they advocate presenting photographs with
as much context (including the time period) as possible to help orient students. Teachers should
ask students narrowly-focused questions about what information the photograph conveys in an
Louis Masur, “Pictures Have Now Become a Necessity”: The Use of Images in American History Textbooks,”
The Journal of American History 84, no.4 (1998):1409–1424.
187

188

Ibid, 1419.

Rodney Allen and Randall Felton, “Photographs as Historical Documents,” OAH Magazine of History 5, no.3
(1991): 7–12.
189

67

effort to elicit hunches or hypotheses. Third, students should collectively describe all the entities
(people, objects) in the photograph. Students should also offer observations that attempt to show
contrasts or similarities to the present day. Teachers should probe students to make inferences
from their observations, using them as data points. Finally, teachers and students should consult
their textbooks and other materials to “confirm hunches.” Such instructional approaches, the
authors argue, help develop and foster necessary competencies in an increasingly mediadominated age. They prove beneficial for students needing to engage critically with visual
materials.
2.4.5 Case studies: Historians using photographs as visual evidence
Histories of photography have revealed that photographs were often used as tools in
varying social and cultural contexts. Terence Ranger examines one particular African township,
Bulawayo, during the 1930s-1960s to show the extent to which photographs served as social
capital in the community.190 In particular, the romantic pursuits of township men were bolstered
by the act of being photographed; according to one male interviewee, “I used to send some of my
photographs to a number of girls in my home rural area. Some just accepted my love proposals
after receiving my very nice photographs. So photographs were an important tool in my love
proposals.”191 Perhaps more interestingly for social historians is the change in photographic
subject matter that happened in the African press. Ranger relates this to the larger societal
changes that saw women getting more education and becoming more independent, resulting in
what he terms “a readiness to be seen.”192

Terence Ranger, “Pictures Must Prevail: Sex and the Social History of African Photography in Bulawayo, 19301960,” Visual History 27 (2001): 261-266.
190

191

Ibid, 264.

192

Ibid, 265.

68

In Nicole Hudgins’ study of family photographic collections from the late 19th and early
20th century in two European towns, she shows how photographs served a unique function for
working class families.193 She cites the singular example of working class boys in Manchester
England who celebrated newly acquired or recently completed apprenticeships by obtaining
studio portraits. In another example, Hudgins looks at a family portrait from Lille, France taken
by a father of his young children. The photograph depicts a playful scene, with the youngest
daughter laughing at the camera while her sister and brother draw cartoonish figures on a barn
behind them. Such images, argues Hudgins, work to debunk the “common view of the northern
French family, wherein the bread-winning father was perennially absent and uninvolved with the
children.”194 Hudgins concludes that the accessibility of snapshot photography and the resulting
proliferation of family portraiture taken across all classes made the medium of photography the
“instrument of a modern, democratized family consciousness.”195
By combining historical accounts with family photographs, Hudgins formulates new
claims about the embrace of individuality by working class families. She uses the marriage
portrait and related archival materials of two Lancashire cotton mill workers, Joseph and Jane
Robinson, as examples to argue against the conception popularized by cultural historians that
working class families always sought to emulate the bourgeois. Instead, Hudgins postulates that
“the Robinsons’ simple clothes (hand-made at home, according to archival notes), relaxed pose,
and easy expressions give no evidence of such photographic behavior.”196

Nicole Hudgins, “A Historical Approach to Family Photography: Class and Individuality in Manchester and Lille,
1850-1914,” Journal of Social History 43, no. 3 (2010): 559-586. doi:10.1353/jsh.0.0298.
193

194

Ibid, 571.

195

Ibid, 582.

196

Ibid, 567-568.

69

Historians have also seen how photographs were used to legitimize and perpetuate certain
cultural ideals through visual representation. In “Capturing the African Body? Visual Images
and Imaginative Sports” the sports historian John Bale shows how stereotypes of African
“Otherness” were cultivated and enforced in visual culture. He analyzes various photographs of
Rwandan Tutsis performing the sporting task known as gusimbuka, or high jump, during the first
half of the twentieth century. He argues that such visual representation of the Tutsi body in
photographs was used to signify differences in power between Europeans and Africans. Bale
explains:
In the photographs considered here, the European tended to be placed in a posed, central
position, framed not only by the edge of the picture but also by the rectangle of the high
jump equipment (seemingly emerging from the portals of Africa) with clear evidence of
the African Other (spectators) in the background. There is a visual hierarchy (which
symbolizes the world system) in which the Europeans are at the center with the Africans
occupying various degrees of peripherality, simulating a map of the colonial world
system.197
Bale’s direct reading of the Tutsi body as represented in the photographic image proves a rarity
among academic historians who are less likely than other disciplines (for example, art history or
anthropology) to interpret photographs in literal terms. Bale’s analysis reveals how photographs
of this act always positioned the Tutsi body in one of three modes of representation:
appropriation, idealization, and surveillance.198
Photographs can also prove useful in understanding social and cultural conditions. In
“Picturing the Everyday Lives of Limburg Miners: Photographs as Historical Source,” Joeri
Januarius examines two photographs from two different mining families to explore domesticity
in Belgium’s garden cities. Taken in the 1950s in the province of Limburg, the photographs

197

Bale, “Capturing the African Body,” 243.

198

Ibid, 247.

70

capture two different perspectives on the everyday. The first photograph, a still shot from a
promotional film on the work and homes lives of miners, depicts a relaxed family in the midst of
various activities in their dining room. The second photograph, also taken in a dining room
shows only the wife of a miner and was taken by a family member. According to Januarius’
literal reading of the materials, the first photograph can be read as both a “eulogy” to family
values and evidence of the family’s well-being and comfort level. The relaxed atmosphere shown
coupled with the interior decorations combine to create the notion of “a respectable standard of
living to which a labourer could reasonably aspire when he began to work for the mine.”199 In the
second photograph, the furnishings in the dining room testify at a simple level to domestic scenes
from everyday life. Januarius argues that a close examination of the objects in the room reveals
particularities about the family’s domestic life. For example, the placement of objects on top of
lace cloths shows a striking “diligence and devotion” while the woman’s engagement in
domestic work “reveals clues about the changing meaning of space in relation to the presence or
otherwise of a member of a family.200 While Januarius acknowledges that the two photographs
themselves are not enough material to put forth a historical claim, he suggests that the compiling
of series of photographs over time could amount to substantial visible evidence for
understanding the material culture and practices of everyday life in Belgium’s garden cities.
In his photo exposition on modern-day Venice, Jonathan Walker uses the production and
display of photographs in a published journal article to present a historicized vision of the city.201
The pairing of particular images on a double page spread, the layout of the pages themselves, and

199

Januarius, “Picturing the Everyday Lives of Miners,” 308.

200

Ibid, 311.

Jonathan Walker, “Let Us Burn the Gondolas: Venice as a Modern City,” Rethinking History 15, no.1 (2011): 3741. doi:10.1080/13642529.2011.546128.
201

71

the choice of fonts all exemplify Walker’s desire to portray, in his own words, both the timeless,
postmodern Venice often represented with its less acknowledged backstage shadow. As he
points out, Venice was the first city to be “packaged and prepared for consumption in the form of
visual souvenirs.”202 He understands the production of such visual forms as a means to constrain
perceptions that the city was, in actuality, anti-modernist.
Walker’s approach is unique on several fronts. First, he offers a historical argument in a
visual form. Secondly, he uses salt printing and other obsolete technologies to create the
photographs used in crafting his argument. He claims to use such techniques because they
“stand for a particular historical moment.”203 Indeed, his approach is driven by a desire to
confront the modernist vision of the city as timeless spectacle. However, it also reflects the
photograph’s ability to act in dual capacities, made visible by tracing and interpreting its material
practices. His essay simultaneously offers a reflection of a particular past and an active critique
of its representation.
2.4.6 The current state of historical practice: Summary and implications
The understanding that historical discourse itself is a constructed representation – aptly
reflected in David Lowenthal’s invocation of the phrase “the past is a foreign country” – has
important ramifications for historical methods and the use of evidence. In fact, the process of
how historians construct narratives from their source materials remains largely unexplained in
methodological texts.204 Moreover, the technological changes that have so largely influenced
modes of knowledge production have in turn shifted the form and construct of source materials

202

Ibid, 8.

203

Ibid, 56.

204

Berkhofer, “Beyond the Great Story,” 29.

72

and “evidence.” More attention needs to be paid toward current historical processes to enable
the adaptation of methodologies that both use and reflect such changes. What particular
challenges does digitization present to historians and how do these challenges impact the
capacity of digital primary sources to act as evidence? Such gaps in knowledge become even
more pressing with the acknowledgement that historians cannot write good history from bad
evidence but can write bad history from good evidence.205
Perhaps most notably, there is little mention of visual approaches to historical sources in
both the pedagogical literature and in academic historical literature. The absence of visual
methodologies and frameworks presents obstacles to historians seeking models for analysis.
Moreover, historians need to learn visual literacy skills in order to evaluate and interpret visual
materials accurately. In the current state of the field, historians often lack the necessary tools and
understanding to effectively treat photographs as historical sources of visual evidence.
2.5 The Experience of Information: Methodological Approaches
“…the text is experienced only as an activity, a production” – Roland Barthes, 1971
While the information practices of historian scholars have been well-documented (see
2.1), the study of how historians evaluate and use primary source materials in the course of their
research activities is under-investigated. In the LIS literature, information use is often examined
through quantitative measures of access to resources (e.g., transaction logs, web analytics) or
qualitative analysis of scholarly preferences for resource access (e.g., are scholars getting

205

David Henige, Historical Evidence and Argument (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 2005), 7.

73

materials through print or electronic methods206,207). One limitation of these approaches is that
information use is understood solely as resource access – in other words, as the successful
outcome of an activity after determining to “do something further” with that resource. Such
approaches tell us little about how scholars encounter and “make sense” of primary source
materials in their interactions. The experience of these interactions presumably influences how
they make decisions about further information use.
In the print world, textual studies helped orient scholars toward the material qualities of
literary texts. Both the production and consumption of literary discourse relies on engagement
with what Jerome McGann calls the “minute particulars” of the experience.208 Yet how does one
read and experience the “text” of a digital object? Johanna Drucker suggests that in the digital
realm, an object’s textuality can be deciphered by attending to its informational qualities. She
writes, “To understand what portion of the actual message and meaning a text communicates is
challenged, intensified, or lost in this electronic environment, we must ask the basic question
‘What constitutes the information of a text?’”209 This is one of the guiding questions underlying
my dissertation research. For historians interacting with digital archival photographs – how is
See Helen Tibbo, “Primarily History in America: How US Historians Search for Primary Materials at the Dawn
of the Digital Age,” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 9–50; Ian Anderson, “Are You Being Served ?
Historians and the Search for Primary Sources,” Archivaria 58 (2004): 88-129; Margaret Stieg-Dalton and Laurie
Charnigo, “Historians and Their Information Sources,” College and Research Libraries 65 no. 4 (2004): 407;
Wendy Duff, Barbara Craig, and Joan Cherry, “Historians Use of Archival Sources: Promises and Pitfalls of the
Digital Age,” The Public Historian 26, no. 2 (2004): 14.
206

This tendency could be attributed to the historical theoretical fixation with electronic environments as separate
places. For a primer on the meaning and implications of formalizing cyberspace as a separate place from the
everyday world, see Julie E. Cohen, “Cyberspace As/And Space,” Columbia Law Journal 107, no. 1 (2007): 210–
256.
207

In a chapter entitled “Shall These Bones Live?” Jerome McGann describes how relations among various entities
constitute the social mileaux of literary works and their interpretation. See: Jerome McGann, The Beauty of
Inflections: Literary Investigations in Historical Method and Theory (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985).
208

Johanna Drucker, “Intimations of Immateriality: Graphical Form, Textual Sense, and the Electronic
Environment” in Reimagining Textuality: Textual Studies in the Late Age of Print, ed. Elizabeth Bergmann Loizeaux
and Neil Fraistat (Madison: University of Wisconsin, Press), 152.
209

74

visual information constituted in their experiences? What material practices provoke historians to
“make sense” of visual materials in their interactions? How do these practices impact their
decision to use (or not to use) digitized photographs?
This section will conceptualize information as a phenomenon that emerges in specific
contexts of use. I contend that we cannot understand what information is without understanding
how information does. First, I explore how information has been conceived in the LIS literature,
with particular attention to its material practices. I situate these conceptions within a larger
critique about information use models and digital environments. Finally, I review theoretical
approaches and frameworks which embrace experiential, embodied approaches toward exploring
interactions with visual information. By studying the experiences of historians interpreting and
evaluating digitized photographs, I argue that we can learn more about the factors that make
those experiences meaningful.
2.5.1 Information as material practice: A short history
In the library and information science (LIS) community, the qualities of what make
something “information” have been underexplored.210 The discipline tends to defer to a larger
framework concerned with behavior around information, rather than defining concepts,
attributes, or material properties of information. Problem-oriented empirical work is at the heart
of the discipline’s research focus, with an emphasis on operationalized investigations of
behaviors surrounding the management of information.
Notable exceptions include the work done by early French documentalist Suzanne Briet,
who was one of the first theoreticians in the field of information science to directly reference

For a conceptual analysis of the term “information” in the discipline of library and information science, see:
Jonathan Furner, "Information studies without information," Library Trends 52, no. 3 (2004): 427-446.
210

75

objects as forms of information. Writing in the 1930’s, Briet describes four distinct levels at
which “documentary objects” participate in the activity of information: they can instruct,
explore, diffuse, or organize. For example, an academic journal is a documentary object which
uses facts to instruct. Documentary techniques center on two tendencies:
The first is toward an always increasingly abstract and algebraic schematization of
documentary elements (catalogs, codes, perforations, classifications through
conventionally agreed upon marks). The second is toward a massive extension of
“substitutes for lived experiences” (photos, films, television, audio records, radio
broadcasting). What words fail to communicate, image and sound try to deliver to all.
Documentation, thus understood, is a powerful means for the collectivization of
knowledge and ideas.211
In this way, objects are imbibed with a sense of agency for performing activities which “make
known.” Briet defines a document as “any concrete or symbolic indexical sign, preserved or
recorded toward the ends of representing, of reconstituting, or of proving a physical or
intellectual phenomenon.”212 Documentation is thus one form of evidence existing in relationship
to other forms of evidence, motivated by an intention to make something known.213
Arguably the theory of information that has had the strongest influence on the discipline
is Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver’s model of mathematical communication, also known as
Information Theory.214 Originally published in 1948, Shannon and Weaver’s engineering model

Suzanne Briet, What is Documentation?, ed. Ronald E. Day and Laurent Martinet (Lanham, MD: Scarecrow
Press, 2006), 31.
211

212

Ibid, 10.

There are two different translations of Briet’s definition of a document. In the 1997 article “What is a
‘Document’?” Michael Buckland cites Briet’s definition of a document as beginning with “any physical or symbolic
sign…” Interestingly, he goes on to cite a discussion with Ronald Day, who translated the only English version of
Briet’s full text and provided a markedly different translation. Buckland mentions that Day suggests Briet’s use of
the word “indexical” demonstrates her belief that objects achieve documentary status when “placed in an organized,
meaningful relationship with other evidence.” For the full discussion, see: Michael Buckland, “What Is A
‘Document’?” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 48, no. 9 (1997): 806.
213

In 1984, Professor Pranas Zunde compiled a “selected” bibliography of 440 publications that reference the
application of information theory to information science. See: Pranas Zunde, “Selected Bibliography on Information
214

76

is primarily concerned with effective message transmission across an information channel and
factors that may impact reception (such as channel capacity, noisiness, or degrees of
uncertainty). The model is explicit about not incorporating meaning into a definition of
information, instead claiming that the “semantic aspects of communication are irrelevant to the
engineering problem.”215
In his investigation of information theory, the British scientist Donald MacKay offers a
useful definition of information which benefits the current discussion. MacKay argues that
Shannon’s famous mathematical model of communication, adapted heavily by system theorists
during the 1950s and beyond, is primarily concerned with the efficiency of information transfer
between two points, rather than the meaning of the message transferred.216 MacKay rightly
recognizes the semantic components of information-making as part of the information transfer
process: “The mechanical energy of a message must be sufficient to do the mechanical job that
eventually resets the brain-levels; but the selective job, of determining which levels shall move,
depends on the form of the message, and on the state of your brain before you hear it.”217 For
MacKay, perceiving a message is made possible by an internal state of conditional readiness.
Importantly, he argues that while all stimuli are capable of being received, only those which
evoke a matching response are perceived. This distinction is critical to understanding how
perception itself is embodied in the activity of information-making, or, as MacKay puts it, the

Theory Applications to Information Science and Related Subject Areas,” Information Processing and Management
20, no.3 (1984):417-497.
Claude E. Shannon, “The Mathematical Theory of Communication,” The Bell System Technical Journal 27
(1948): 379-423, 623-56.
215

For more discussion on Donald MacKay’s semantic information theory, see: John Soloski, “Meaning and
Information: A Perspective on Donald M. MacKay,” Journal of Communication Inquiry 2, no. 2 (1977): 51-59.
216

217

Donald MacKay, Information, Mechanism and Meaning (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1969), 24.

77

“activity of knowing is an activity of internal adaptive response.”218 Perhaps most importantly, it
highlights the dynamic nature of meaning as it is encapsulated in information transferred.
During the 1980s and 1990, Michael Buckland was the preeminent information scientist
writing on the ambiguity of the term “information.” Given the right set of conditions, Buckland
argues that any “thing” can be perceived as informative or evidential. Invoking Briet’s earlier
assertion that a captured antelope in a zoo becomes a document, he writes:
On this view objects are not ordinarily documents but become so if they are processed for
informational purposes. A wild antelope would not be a document, but a captured
specimen of a newly discovered species that was being studied, described, and exhibited
in a zoo would not only have become a document, but the “catalogued antelope is a
primary document and other documents are secondary and derived.”219
Rather than limit ourselves simply to documents, Buckland suggests expanding what he calls the
“species of information” to include objects and events so that we can better understand the
concepts underlying them. According to Buckland, “Pursuing the notion of information as
evidence, as things from which one becomes informed, we can examine more specifically what
sorts of things this might include.”220 In other words, by redirecting our attention to what makes
various things “informative” we can observe how situations and context affect the process of
making meaning.
Robert S. Taylor proposes that the value of information can best be understood in the
context of use, through the development of user-driven models and approaches.221 Taylor puts
forth a conceptual framework for an “information use environment” which describes “the set of

218

Ibid, 61.

Michael Buckland, “Information as Thing,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 42, no. 5
(1991): 355.
219

220

Ibid, 353.

Robert Taylor, Value-added Processes in Information Systems (New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation,
1986), 14.
221

78

those elements that (a) affect the flow and use of information messages into, within, and out of
any defined entity; and (b) determine the criteria by which the value of information messages
will be judged.”222 For Taylor, information is thus always situated contextually in both its
production and consumption. It cannot be quantified systematically, but rather assessed through
an understanding of the meaning attached to the value established in the context of use. Taylor
explains, “Data become information when we establish relationships among data. That is
information is not just more labels. It is the structure and relations among data, and most
important, the rules and conditions used to establish those relations.”223
A similar philosophical orientation underlies the work of Birger Hjorland, who argues in
favor of socio-cognitive approaches to information. Hjorland regards information as an emergent
phenomenon, arising in specific contexts and trigged by specific mechanisms. He introduces the
concept of domain analysis, which stipulates that the meaning of a term can only be understood
within the context (or domain) in which it appears. Hjorland uses gold as an example to
demonstrate how a single thing can have a variety of meanings depending on the context in
which it is interpreted. Chemists might define gold as having certain properties and attributes
that differ from how economists would define it.224 Thus, the production of information can only
be understood by examining the discourse of the communities and organizational structures in
which it is generated.
Paul Solomon suggests that the study of information use should shift towards
investigating the processes of how something becomes information – what he terms “information
Robert Taylor, “Information Use Environments,” in Progress in Communication Sciences Vol. 10, ed. Brenda
Dervin and M.J. Voight (Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corp, 1991), 218.
222

223

Taylor, Value-added Processes, 7-8.

Birger Hjorland and Hanne Albrechtson, “Toward a New Horizon in Information Science,” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology 46, no.6 (1995): 413.
224

79

discovery.” Solomon characterizes information to be a socio-technical construction, drawing
attention to “engagement, reflection, learning, and action” as dimensions important to
understanding when and how information discovery happens.225 According to Solomon, an
evidence-based understanding of information in context is critical to building effective
sociotechnical systems that support information needs and uses.
In their book Interacting with Information, Ann Blandford and Simon Attfield point out
that in spite of living in the middle of an information age, “information is only useful when it is
interpreted by people and applied in the context of their goals and activities.”226 For Blandford
and Attfield, it is the mediating factors (often invisible) in both digital and physical environments
that present challenges for supporting information work. Indeed, evolving information needs –
what the authors term “an information journey” – are complex sites of activity:
There are many aspects of the situation, including the physical situation in which
interaction takes place, the ecology of resources to which individuals have access, the
social structures within which people interact with information, the individual knowledge
and skills people bring, and temporal aspects, through which the above can dynamically
evolve and change.227
The authors refer to these sites as spaces of situated information interactions. Information
interactions take place within contexts that are “physical, social, and activity-centered” and can
overlap situationally.228 The value in studying spaces of information interactions becomes clear
when considering how often we encounter and use information across spatio-temporal
dimensions, in a variety of contexts.

Paul Solomon, “Discovering Information in Context,” Annual Review of Information Science and Technology 36,
no.1 (2005): 229.
225

Ann Blandford and Simon John Attfield, Interacting with Information (San Rafael, California: Morgan &
Claypool, 2010), 2.
226

227

Ibid, preface.

228

Ibid, 2.

80

Diane Nahl proposes that affective dimensions play a central role in information
behavior. She introduces a framework for a “unified theory of information” which charts
information reception and use as constant interactional processes at both micro-level and macrolevels of activities. Nahl argues that “functioning in an information setting requires alternating
between steps of reception and steps of use in a continuous dynamic flow.”229 Information
reception processes consist of noticing, appraising, and then evaluating information; the process
of information use begins once there is an intention or motivation related to that information.
Once information becomes “value-attached”, the process of information reception is completed
and the “use process of engaging the system can begin.”230
2.5.2 Information use in digital environments
Current theoretical frameworks in information use derive much from the application of
Shannon and Weaver’s model to information behavior research. One problematic result has been
a flattened conception of information as a “substance that is transported between the sender and
the receiver.”231 This so-called “process-oriented” approach characterizes information as an
objective entity in an external reality.232 Transmission occurs without specific attention to
semantic factors that may hinder or impact reception. Jonathan Furner explains the problem with
such a conception:

Diane Nahl, “The Centrality of the Affective in Information Behavior,” in Information and Emotion: The
Emergent Affective Paradigm in Information Behavior Research and Theory, ed. Diane Nahl and Dania Bilal
(Medford, New Jersey: American Society for Information Science and Technology, 2007), 9.
229

Diane Nahl, “Social-Biological Information Technology: An Integrated Conceptual Framework,” Journal of the
American Society for Information and Technology 58, no. 13 (2007): 2028.
230

Jens-Erik Mai, “The Quality and Qualities of Information,” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology 64, no.4 (2013): 676.
231

Rafael Capurro, “Some Critical Comments on Three Leading Paradigms of Information Science Section, Para.1,”
Foundations of Information Science: Review and Perspectives.
232

81

The conduit metaphor seems to serve only to reify the controversial idea that information
is something that can somehow “flow” from one place to another. Such flow would be
possible only if messages were inherent properties of signals, rather than separate entities
assigned to signals by humans.233
The end result is that there is very little qualitative understanding about the material practices
that make something information.
In the digital realm, information use has largely been interpreted in terms of successful
transmission. Information use in digital environments is most often analyzed through usage
statistics (log analysis, web analytic tools) which treat access as a proxy for use, or through
citation analysis which tracks the frequency with which an object or collection is referenced in
literature. Both of these approaches frame information use solely as the outcome of the process
of transfer without qualitative attention to what it means to actually use materials in the context
of the collection.234 What counts as “information use” here is simply access – the user finds an
object using a specific information channel to retrieve their source.235 Yet what makes the
interaction meaningful? By focusing on the information channel as the marker of information
use, the user’s material interactions with an object in the information space has been obscured.
The rupture between object and information channel becomes the most evident in digital
information environments. Unlike analog media, one cannot look at a digital object in an

233

Jonathan Furner, "Information Studies Without Information,"12.

Molly Bragg’s 2011 survey on how libraries were measuring use of digitized primary source materials confirms
this tendency. She writes, “Participants raised the point that although the usage statistics provide an idea of how
often an item was viewed they do not say anything about how the patron used the resource.” See: Molly Bragg,
“‘There is Always More That Can Be Done’: A Survey Investigating Libraries' Measurement of Digitized Primary
Source Use,” (MA thesis, University of North Carolina Chapel Hill, 2011).
234

Amanda Spink and Charles Cole argue that in some information behavior research, “information use” is
misconstrued. Rather than investigating “user’s use of sources of information,” studies are actually “asking about
the user’s use of accessing channels to information sources.” See: Amanda Spink and Charles Cole, “Human
Information Behavior: Integrating Diverse Approaches and Information Use,” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 57, no. 1 (2006): 28.
235

82

interface and see its underlying material properties as it is stored on a physical carrier (e.g. hard
drive). In his analysis of new media, Mark Hansen explains the severity of this disjuncture:
Arguably for the first time in history, the technical infrastructure of media is no longer
homologous with its surface appearance. As distinct from phonography, where the
grooves of a record graphically reproduce the frequency ranges of humanly perceivable
sound, and from film, where the inscription of light on a sensitive surface reproduces
what is visible to human eye, properly computational media involve no direct correlation
between technical storage and human sense perception. What we see on the computer
screen (or other interface) and hear on the digital player is not related by visible or sonic
analogy to the data that is processed in the computer or digital device. Indeed, as the
work of some digital media artists has shown, the same digital data can be output in
different registers, yielding very different media experiences.236
Whereas Marshall McLuhan theorized that content was united with form in the medium,
Hansen’s analysis shows that the technical logic of infrastructure (and its material practices) is
now distinctly separate from the content it governs. Following on Hansen’s example, consider
how the physical attributes visible on a vinyl record reflect what is (humanly) audible to the ear.
A bass-heavy vinyl record, for example, will have wider grooves in the vinyl because the signal
needs more space to move. The groove on a record correlates to its material capacities. One can
look at a record and observe, through visible inscriptions on the medium, its functional
qualities.237
In digital environments, one is no longer able to perceive an object’s material attributes
simply by looking at the medium itself. Consider the following example. A photograph of a
1928 Ford Model A Phaeton automobile has been digitized (Object A). Perhaps the digitizer
wants to brighten the photograph ever so slightly, so she creates another version of the image

Mark B. N. Hansen, “New Media,” in Critical Terms for Media Studies, ed. W.J.T. Mitchell and Mark B.N.
Hansen (Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 2010), 178-179.
236

According to a biography of Thomas Edison, the inventor of the phonograph claimed he could “tell a soprano
from Basso Baritone or Tenor & each from another also every instrument in the orchestra when played alone by
looking at record thru a microscope.” Paul Israel, Edison: A Life of Invention (New York: John Wiley, 1998), 436437.
237

83

with adjusted color tones (Object B). If historians interact with the photograph in an online
archival collection, it is unlikely that they will be able to ascertain simply by looking at the image
in their web browsers that it has been altered. Only through the use of additional tools (e.g.,
photo editing software, metadata extractors, hex editors) would they be able to surface the RGB
values accounting for the difference in color.
This is one of the central challenges in understanding interactions in digital information
spaces – we cannot “look” through an interface at a digital object and perceive its underlying
material qualities. Accordingly, as the technical inscriptions which characterize a digital object
change, so may the interpretation. A representation in the digital realm is just always that – an
amalgamation of algorithms fusing content and form to produce a distinct space of interaction.
Nearly forty years ago, the sociologist John McHale wrote:
We are faced…with the emergence of a new and powerful fusion of technological
capabilities which not only potentially amplifies our capabilities to deal with our social
and physical environment transactions but which by its function as screen, channel and
multiplexer of information actually reshapes the information content and perception of
society – in ways that our conventional wisdom and traditional institutional means may
not be able to foresee, comprehend or effectively control.238
It is within this constituted information space, born out of technological fusion, that we must
begin our interrogation.
2.5.3 Theoretical approaches to studying use in digital environments
Studying how historians experience photographs in online archival research
environments necessitates grappling with the uneasy convergence of form, content, interaction,
and meaning-making. In the process of digitization, an object changes form and structure in the
translation. Accompanying these permutations in character are traces of activity documenting the
digital object’s lifecycle, encapsulating both the object and related provenance information in the
238

John McHale, The Changing Information Environment (Boulder: Westview Press, 1976), 16-17.

84

same representational space.239 The degree to which digitization changes the experience of
interactions with primary source materials has received limited empirical attention.240
Born-digital objects also present complexities for access, interpretation and use. For
archives acquiring born-digital materials, modifying existing workflow practices to
accommodate processing needs presents technical, administrative, and intellectual challenges.
Very little is known about the types of metadata users will require in order to make sense of their
interactions with born-digital objects. Currently, few digital archives provide item-level access to
born-digital materials, though this is likely to change.
Performative materiality
The notion that digital objects are constituted by a kind of materiality is not itself new;
neither is the claim that materiality is an emergent property born out of interactions among
entities. In her book Writing Machines, N. Katherine Hayles writes, “In the broadest sense,
materiality emerges from the dynamic interplay between the richness of a physically robust
world and human intelligence as it crafts this physicality to create meaning.’’241. What remains
underexplored, however, is that interplay as it happens– individual experiences of interactions
within digital information space and how those interactions constitute the experience of the thing
itself under study. Heidegger famously asserted that “a hammer’s being reveals itself by its
handiness; handiness is discovered in the act of hammering.”242 Yet how does one study this

For a brief treatise on the enduring essences of digital life, see Bruno Latour, “Beware your Imagination Leaves
Traces,” Times Higher Education Literary Supplement, April 6, 2007.
239

Some notable exceptions include: Bradley Taylor, “The Effect of Surrogation on Viewer Response to
Expressional Qualities in Works of Art,” (PhD diss., University of Michigan, 2001); Margaret L. Hedstrom,
Christopher A Lee, Judith S Olson, and Clifford A Lampe, “‘The Old Version Flickers More’: Digital Preservation
from the User’s Perspective,” The American Archivist 69 (2006): 159–187.
240

241

N. Katherine Hayles, Writing Machines (Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002), 33.

242

Martin Heidegger, Being and Time (Albany: SUNY Press, 1973), 65.

85

enactment? Particularly in the context of the digital environment, where numerous clicks and
visits to websites offer only partial understanding of information behavior?
Johanna Drucker has proposed that we employ a performative model as a means of
understanding meaning-making in digital objects at play.243 For Drucker, mechanistic models of
digital materiality do not take into account the qualities of what she terms “digital flux” – an
ecosystem which is constituted by “contingent fields, flows, and relations.”244 These
relationships and transactions function as probability conditions which may (or may not) provoke
a space in which information as a process of meaning-making can emerge.
Drucker suggests we focus on the interface as a critical point of intervention. As a
mediating factor, interface design should reimagine itself as a space of interpretation with
uncertainty and abstractness as data points. She advocates for a shift away from homogenous
digital information spaces constituted by “things and entities” toward an “event space of
interpretative activity.”245 Drucker hints at the idea that perception is one of the factors impacting
the process of meaning-making, but stops short of formalizing its role in the process. In her
invocation of constructivist epistemology, she reminds us that meaning and interpretation always
emerge from a confluence of mediating factors. What she does not attempt in her analysis is an
in-depth characterization of the thing (or things) that are provoked – in other words, a more
specific grounding of what and how those material conditions constitute interactions which
produce meaning in the digital information space.

Johanna Drucker, “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface,” Digital Humanities
Quarterly 7, no.1 (2013).
243

244

Ibid, 12.

245

Ibid, 17.

86

Phenomenography
Phenomenography is a qualitative research approach emerging from the interpretivist
paradigm. It was originally developed in Sweden during the 1970s by a group of researchers in
the Department of Education at Goteborg University, led by Ference Marton, as they conducted
research on variations in student learning. The term was coined in 1979 and appeared in
publication for the first time in 1981.246
Phenomenography is concerned with the “description, analysis, and understanding of
experiences.”247 In particular, phenomenonographic research aims to reveal the qualitatively
subjectively different ways that people experience various phenomenon. A distinctive feature is
an orientation towards “second-order perspectives,” which emphasize how participants describe
their experiences in the world. In contrast, first-order perspectives are concerned with exploring
existing mental models to explain behavior. Importantly, phenomenography is considered to be
a relational approach which posits that “the way in which the subject experiences the object
forms a relation between the two.”248 Capturing the various ways in which people experience
meaning is the central aim of phenomenographical research. There are two components to the
experiences of a phenomenon: referential (what is being experienced) and structural (how an
individual thinks about the experience).249

Ference Marton, “Phenomenography - Describing Conceptions of the World Around Us,” Instructional Science
10 (1981): 177-198.
246

247

Ibid, 177.

Louise Limberg, “Phenomenography: A Relational Approach to Research on Information Needs, Seeking, and
Use,” The New Review of Information Behaviour Research 4, no.1 (2003): 54.
248

Marian Smith, “Young People: A Phenomenographic Investigation into the Ways They Experience Information”
(PhD diss., Loughborough University, 2010): 80.
249

87

Christine Bruce used phenomenography to reveal variations in the ways information is
perceived. In her study of information literacy among higher educators, she uncovered three
different conceptualizations of information (as objective and part of the external environment,
subjective and internal to the individual, or transformational) among descriptive categories. 250
The nuances of her research findings offer critical insight into how variances in a phenomenon of
interest (in this case, information literacy) can be influenced by differences in underlying
conceptualizations.
Phenomenographic research also helps to reveal the social contexts in which human
concepts are formed, addressing a “decisive weakness of the cognitive view of LIS.”251 In his
critique of the cognitive perspective, Birger Hjorland argues that people are expected to “react to
something in a specific, mechanical way without considering the culturally determined meanings
and without considering the different goals and values of the meanings of the documents.”252
Experience is not a fixed cognitive structure or mental map that can be empirically observed.
Accordingly, phenomenographers seek to show how there are qualitatively different “ways
people experience, conceive, perceive and understand various phenomena in, and aspects of, the
world around them.”253
Digital hermeneutics
Another conceptual framework for exploring how digital environments impact
interpretation and meaning-making is digital hermeneutics. Rafael Capurro defines digital

250

Christine Bruce, The Seven Faces of Information Literacy (Adelaide: Auslib Press, 1997).

251

Limberg, “Phenomenonography,” 53.

Birger Hjørland, “Domain Analysis in Information Science: Eleven Approaches – Traditional as Well as
Innovative,” Journal of Documentation 58, no. 4 (2002): 431.
252

253

Marton, “Phenomenography: A Research Approach to Investigating Different Understandings,” 31.

88

hermeneutics as “the study of social systems of interpretation and social construction of meaning
based on the Internet.”254 With a nod towards Don Ihde’s formulation of “material
hermeneutics”255 Capurro argues that the rise of the internet and other networked technologies
have transformed our spatio-temporal experience such that an ontological hermeneutic shift is
required. In this new realm of networked existence, “things are (understood) as far as we are
able to digitize them.”256 Meaning-making and communication processes emerge as embodied
practices within an ever-changing set of relationships, uses, and contexts. Digital hermeneutics
is thus an attempt at theorizing processes of interpretation in digital information space, where
“all receivers of mass media messages into potential messengers beyond the one-to-one
technology of the telephone.”257
Media archaeology
Media archaeology also offers a useful theoretical frame for exploring interactions in
digital information spaces. The German media archaeologist Wolfgang Ernst explains that
“media archaeologically, the medium primarily means measurement.”258 For Ernst, a media
archaeological approach helps reveal aspects of media that are only ever observable from an
algorithmic perspective – what he calls their “nondiscursive infrastructure.”259 His approach

Rafael Capurro, “Digital Hermeneutics: An Outline.” AI & Society 25, no.1 (2009): 35–42, doi:10.1007/s00146009-0255-9.
254

According to Ihde, material hermeneutics “is a technique whereby things – materialities – are given a voice.”
See: Doh Ihde, “More Material Heremenutics,” Yearbook of the Institute for Advanced Study on Science,
Technology and Society (Graz: Profil Verlag, 2004), 341-50.
255

256

Capurro, Digital Hermeneutics, 38.

257

Ibid, 39.

Wolfgang Ernst, “Distory,” in Digital Memory and the Archive, ed. Jussi Parikka (Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota Press, 2013), 165.
258

Wolfgang Ernst, “Media Archaeography,” in Digital Memory and the Archive, ed. Jussi Parikka (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 2013), 57-58.
259

89

purposively privileges the “recording of the story” rather than any narrative tendencies because
“machines do not tell stories, they count.”260 Thus, Ernst’s focus on the underlying technical
processes of media (signal processing, operations, executing, and synchronization) offers an
epistemological alternative to historiographical cultural time.261
A media archaeological approach positions the digital artifact and its attendant properties
as always already emergent activated in/by the process of being calculated. In Ernst’s media
archaeological framework, artifacts are activated from undead to alive when their signal is
received. He gives the example of the Volksempfanger, a German radio receiver built during the
1930s, which is able to receive radio programs today because “the stable technological
infrastructure of broadcasting media is still in operation.”262 It is the successful transaction of
radio signals received by existing infrastructure which in turn activates an information space – or
what Ernst calls a “micro-temporal space.”
The media archaeological perspective helps us to interrogate how technological capacity
influences the space(s) of interaction. For Ernst and other media archaeologists, the importance
of this space is that it reveals the underlying technicalities of media as constituted in specific
mathematical moments. Insofar as each representation of a digital artifact occupies a distinct
space for interpretation, it is the interactions within these spaces that perform and co-constitute
processes of information. Importantly, Ernst does not refer to the materiality of artifacts as being
mathematical – only the time-critical processes which constitute their coming into being.

Wolfgang Ernst, “Media Archaeology as Method of Re/Search in Parallel Lines” (lecture notes, transmediale.12
“In/compatible” Symposium, Berlin, Germany, February 5, 2012), https://www.medienwissenschaft.huberlin.de/de/medienwissenschaft/medientheorien/ernst-in-english/pdf/transmedial12kurz.pdf.
260

For critiques on the problems with traditional narrative historiography, see: Robert Berkhofer, Beyond The Great
Story; Hayden White, Metahistory; Arthur Danto, Narration and Knowledge.
262
Ernst, “Media Archaeography, 56-57.
261

90

In digital information environments, the capacities of the medium are still intensely
correlated with the activity of perception. The difference is that humans cannot observe or
perceive digital signals solely through our sensorimotor capacities. Thus, we are dependent on a
variety of multimodal tools and approaches to interrogate the interactions that constitute digital
representations. Unlike a vinyl record, one cannot look at a digital photograph and actively
perceive its underlying techno-material basis simply by looking at it. A media archaeological
gaze enables us to gain access to this seemingly invisible material substrate. Ernst explains:
Although a Greek vase can be interpreted by simply being looked at, a radio or computer
does not reveal its essence by monumentally being there but only when being processed
by electromagnetic waves or calculating processes. If a radio from a museum collection
is reactivated to play broadcast channels of the present, this changes its status: it is not a
historical object anymore but actively generates sensual and informational presences.263
By attending to the non-cultural, non-semantic transactions of media in operation, Ernst proposes
that we can better investigate technical differences.
2.5.4 Information use as emergent experience
This chapter argues that the study of information use in digital environments would
greatly benefit from the application of theoretical approaches that emphasize the experience of
the phenomenon. In particular, I suggest that the concept of information in digital objects
emerges in specific moments of use, dependent on contextual factors. As such, the importance
of investigating how a digital object is received and subsequently used depends necessarily on
investigating an individual’s experience with that object.
Drucker’s notion of “performative materiality” suggests that knowledge creation is the
result of a series of provocations and probabilities. Yet what do these provocations look like?
What are the sets of material conditions at work? While Drucker does suggest designing flexible

263

Wolfgang Ernst, “Media Archaeography,” 57-58.

91

interfaces to accommodate fluid interpretations, she stops short of outlining what an
interrogation into these spaces might look like. An investigation into those conditions might
include attempts to record specific environmental factors in a setting in which a historian
interacted with a digital photograph, or perhaps an in-depth discussion with the historian about
his/her disciplinary background. These investigations would certainly prove fruitful for
providing a rich account of ecological factors of influence, by revealing the material practices
that contribute to the provocations of information as it is performed.
Similarly, media archaeology provides a useful theoretical basis for understanding how
technical specificities of media impact experience. In particular, media archaeological
approaches emphasize focusing on the operational processes that help constitute interactions.
Thus, media archaeology prioritizes and privileges the machine perspective in understanding our
experiences with media. A media archaeological approach would prove useful as a conceptual
basis for encouraging historians to consider new ways of writing histories that “show” rather
than “describe” (in Ernst’s terms). Such an approach might be of particular interest for historians
concerned with the narrative tendencies at work in the creation of history as “the Great Story” (as
discussed by Berkhofer, White, and Danto). An example of a media archaeological approach in
operational terms might involve presenting a historian with a digitized photograph both with and
without additional EXIF metadata, noting the qualitative differences in how they experienced the
object.
Finally, digital hermeneutics provides a useful conceptual framework for understanding
practices and processes of interpretation in digital environments. One self-proclaimed example
of digital hermeneutics is the Agora Project, which uses semantic event-modelling to embellish
access to online cultural heritage objects. In particular, the project aims to facilitate rich

92

interpretation of collection objects through associations with related contextual materials. The
project team developed a Simple Event Model (SEM)264 for collection objects that consisted of
four types of event properties: actor, place, time, and type.265 In a paper detailing project use
cases, the authors show how their model can be used to enhance historical understanding. They
describe a specific collection object, a painting of a soldier from the “KNIL” (a division in the
Royal Netherlands East Indies Army) stealing a chicken. Using the Agora SEM, a relationship is
created between the collection record for the painting and the actor property “KNIL.” Users can
choose to explore associated pictures or events using the actor property, in effect constructing a
“biographical narrative.” Thus, multiple pathways for the user are generated through the
application of the SEM to the bulk of collection materials. According to Capurro, a flexible
design approach is characteristic of digital hermeneutics, which “can look at the whole (“totum”)
from different perspectives but not at the same time (“non totaliter’’). Whereas scholarship in the
digital humanities has helped to conceptualize new ways of thinking about big data and
networks, digital hermeneutics suggests that knowledge discovery and interpretation in the 21st
century are constituted happenings built from interactions and relationships in the networked
environment.
Each of these theoretical approaches provides ample fodder for thinking about
information experiences in digital environments. Digital media constitute conditions which
require: activation (according to Ernst), provocation (according to Drucker), or new methods for
understanding (according to Capurro). These philosophical and epistemological assumptions
For an overview of the SEM, see: Willem van Hage, Veronique Malaise, Roxane Segers, Laura Hollink, and Guus
Schreiber, “Design and Use of the Simple Event Model (SEM),” Web Semantics: Science, Services and Agents on the
World Wide Web 9 (2011): 128-136.
264

Chiel van den Akker, Susan Legene, Marieke Van Erp, Lora Aroyo, Roxane Segers, Lourens Van der Meij, et.
al., “Digital Hermeneutics: Agora and the Online Understanding of Cultural Heritage,” ACM Web Science
Conference (Koblenz, Germany, June 14–17, 2011).
265

93

have provided guidance for the design of this research study. In digital environments, the
emergence of an information space produced from the interaction between content and form can
become a frame for our inspection. In locating the material traces that contribute to the process
of something becoming information, I argue that we can reveal essential characteristics and
attributes about information experiences in digital environments.

94

CHAPTER 3: METHODOLOGY
How scholars interact with visual materials is an under-researched area across disciplines,
due in part to the inherent complexities in explicating processes of visual understanding. Images
are polysemic by nature: meaning is dependent on the viewer and the same image may have
multiple interpretations at the same time.266 In empirical research, visual materials are most
often used as stimulus to elicit further analysis and understanding.267 While methods for
interpreting and analyzing visual data are increasing in both frequency of use and
methodological rigor, the empirical study of scholarly practices related to interpretation and
analysis of visual data is severely lacking.
3.1 Methodological Approach
The purpose of this case study was to explore how and why historians are using digitized
archival photographs in their scholarly pursuits. The main unit of analysis was identified as: “a
historian’s experiences using digitized photographs as evidence.” An embedded unit of analysis,
or subunit, was defined as “a historian’s specific use of a digitized photograph as evidence in
research or instruction.” I collected, analyzed, and triangulated multiple sources of data to
provide a holistic description of historians’ experiences using digitized photographs as forms of
evidence. According to Yin, a case study is an “empirical inquiry that investigates a

In his essay “Rhetoric of the Image,” Roland Barthes notes how images imply a “floating chain of signifieds,”
some of which are attended to, while others are ignored. See: Roland Barthes and Stephen Heath, Image Music Text
(New York: Hill and Wang, 1977), 39.
266

For a good overview, see: Douglas Harper, “Talking about Pictures: A Case for Photo Elicitation,” Visual Studies
17 (2002): 1.
267

95

contemporary phenomenon within its real-life context, especially when the boundaries between
phenomenon and context are not clearly evident.”268
Data collection consisted of semi-structured, in-depth interviews with self-identified
historians who have used digitized photographs in scholarly activities. Artifacts related to each
participant’s prior use of photographs as forms of evidence were collected for analysis. The use
of multiple types of data including examples of historians’ specific use helped to facilitate a
complete picture of my phenomenon of interest (i.e. historians’ experiences using digitized
photographs as forms of evidence). During both data collection and analysis, I took memos as a
strategy to “trace the thinking of the researcher and help guide a final conceptualization that
answers research questions (or related ones) and offers a theory as an explanation for the
answers.”269
3.2 Rationale for Methodological Approach
In this research, I was interested in exploring how and why historians are using digitized
photographs as forms of evidence. My goal was to provide an in-depth, holistic understanding of
a complex interaction space made up of, but not limited to: digital surrogates of archival objects,
user perceptions and attitudes, environmental constraints, and historical training and
orientation.270 Two theoretical propositions about information and information use informed this
research:

Robert Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods 2nd edition (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing, 1994),
13.
268

W. Newton Suter, Introduction to Educational Research: A Critical Thinking Approach (Thousand Oaks,
California: SAGE Publications, 2006), 346.
269

While Human Computer Interaction (HCI) provides some empirical basis for exploring the role that the interface
plays in meaning-making, Jensen and Sogaard argue that the discipline currently lacks theoretical approaches that
explore “the dynamicity of the construction of meaning during interaction.” Mikkel Jensen and Mads Søgaard.
"Refocusing the Contextual Turn: The Forgotten Construction of Meaning at the Interface," in Proceedings of the
Third Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction (New York: ACM, 2004), 187.
270

96

1) Information is a phenomenon that emerges in specific contexts.
2) Information use is always situated within contextual, ecological, and social practices. As
such, we cannot understand the “how” of information use without attending to the
practices which constitute the experience.
These propositions are born out of the literature reviewed, and supported by the theoretical
approaches discussed in section 2.5.
An embedded case study was selected as the most appropriate methodology for this
research. Case studies are well-suited approaches for studying contemporary research
phenomenon that seek to explore “how” and “why” research questions.271 Embedded case study
design encourages the use of a “multiplicity of evidence” to explore “different salient aspects” of
a case.272 Embedded case studies are particularly useful for research which seeks to reveal
“nested” contextual elements in experiences. For example, in her dissertation examining
successful Spanish program instructions in three Midwestern high schools, Theiler used an
embedded multiple case study approach to understand how different contextual factors
influenced student learning experiences.273 The ability to investigate phenomenon of interest at
multiple levels, as well as across and between relationships, is one of the hallmarks of the
embedded case study design.274 An embedded case study design allows me simultaneously to: (a)
provide a rich account of a complex interaction space of individual experiences; and (b) situate
those experiences within a broader understanding of how historians’ information practices and
needs relate to their use of digitized photographs.

271

Yin, 9.

Roland Scholz and Olaf Tietjie, “Types of Case Studies,” in Embedded Case Study Methods, ed. Roland Scholz
and Olaf Tietjie (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2002), 10.
272

Janine M. Theiler, "A Shared Story of Successful Spanish Learning: An Embedded Multiple Case Study" (PhD
Diss., University of Nebraska Lincoln, 2012).
273

274

Yin, 42.

97

Case studies are well-suited to exploratory research. As Choemprayong and Wildemuth
observe, “Case studies are often used in exploratory studies to define phenomena worth studying
further.”275 According to the LIS literature reviewed in section 2.3, there are few qualitative
examinations of image use in digital environments. Existing empirical research tends to focus on
descriptive or quantitative summaries of image use based on either transaction log analysis (e.g.,
the number of times an image in a collection has been accessed; analysis of retrieval queries by
user) or to assess how well specific metadata elements facilitate image use. A case study design
was deemed appropriate to my topic of investigation given the likelihood of complex data
collection and mixture of analytic approaches. Case study methodologies also benefit from the
formulation and application of theoretical propositions, which played a crucial role in the
development of my research inquiry. Theoretical propositions are seen as useful for orienting
analytic strategies in case study research.276
The methodological foundation for this research comes from phenomenology.277 My
research questions were anchored in a phenomenological perspective which stipulates that
experiences form the basis for how meaning is constituted. Phenomenological approaches
enable researchers to “describe, understand and interpret the meanings of experiences.”278
Phenomenology originated from the work of German professor of philosophy Edmund Husserl
Songphan Choemprayong and Barbara Wildemuth., “Case Studies,” in Applications of Social Research Methods
to Questions in Information and Library Science, ed. Barbara Wildemuth (Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited,
2009), 52.
275

276

Yin, 130.

It is important to note that phenomenology can be used both as a method and a methodology. My dissertation
research employs the latter approach, seeking to uncover how a phenomenon of interest is experienced through an
investigation of “inter-subjectively constructed meanings.” See: T.D. Wilson, “Alfred Schutz, Phenomenology and
Research Methodology for Information Behaviour Research,” New Review of Information Behaviour Research 3
(2002): 71-82.
277

Michael Bloor and Fiona Wood, “Phenomenological Methods,” in Keywords in Qualitative Methods (London:
Sage Publications, 2006), 129.
278

98

in the late 19th century and early 20th century. Its aim was to provide new methodologies in
philosophy for the analysis and description of various types of “pure experiences.”279
Phenomenological approaches prioritize understanding the role that perception plays in
constituting meaning, a perspective that meshed well with my research focus on visual
phenomena.280 The phenomenological perspective seeks to understand “how persons construct
meaning” through examinations of their experiences with phenomenon of interest.281 According
to Husserlian phenomenology, perception is a mode of experience which can enact, or bring
forth, meaning through human consciousness and intentionality.282 Thus, attempts to understand
processes of meaning-making should attend to perceptions as experience. Dourish explains that
with the phenomenological perspective, “Perception begins with what is experienced, rather than
beginning with what is expected; the model is to ‘see and understand’ rather than ‘understand
and see.’”283
In this research I adopted an interpretivist stance, which proposes that meaning-making is
a socially constructed practice, constituted by, and situated within, specific contexts.
Interpretivist researchers “attempt to understand phenomena by accessing the meanings that

Husserl justified this orientation thusly: “Since the region of being to be pointed out is none other than that we
refer to on essential grounds as “pure experiences,” “pure consciousness” with its pure “correlates of consciousness”
(=contents or noemata), and on the other side its “pure I,” we observe that it is from the I, the consciousness, the
experience as given to us from the natural standpoint, that we take our start.” See: Barry Smith, Cambridge
Companion to Husserl (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 335.
279

As visual phenomenon, photographs can be interpreted in numerous ways. For a helpful theoretical orientation
on the practices of using photographs as research objects, see: John Collier and Malcolm Collier, Visual
Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1986).
280

281

Wilson, 193.

Farber’s reading of Husserl suggests that perceptions are possibilities that are given as “empty intentions”; it is
when our “interest is awakened”, when we have a “consciousness that reaches out” that describes the intentionality
of perception. See: Marvin Farber, The Aims of Phenomenology (New York: Harper & Row, 1966), 114.
282

Paul Dourish, Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2001), 21.
283

99

participants assign to these. They are aware that their data gathered are their own constructions
of other people’s constructions of their perceptions of the world.”284 An important aspect of
interpretivist research involves recognizing the role that the researcher plays in the research
process. According to Walsham, interpretive researchers are either “outside observers” –
identified as researchers who maintain distance from the object(s) of study in the field; or
“involved researchers” – meaning participant observers or action researchers who gain insider
perspectives by joining the individual(s) or organization(s) being studied.285
Interpretivist approaches are particularly beneficial for research aiming to better
understand emergent factors in information needs and use. Myers and Avison argue, “Attention
would shift from identifying the user's essential, foundational and enduring set of information
needs, to identifying how different information availability enabled the juxtaposition of quantity
and quality, the shifting back and forth from numbers and calculation to persons and values.”286
Interpretive designs can provide a rich, comprehensive understanding of subjective dimensions
impacting information systems use. Building on Habermas’ theory of communicative action,
Mingers argues that mixed methods approaches to information use help to reveal perspectives on
participants’ experiences in material, social, and personal worlds.287 Ma points out that mixed

Marcus Keutel and Werner Mellis, “An In-Depth Interpretive Case Study in Requirements Engineering Research:
Experiences and Recommendations,” (University of Cologne, 2011), 3.
284

Geoff Walsham, “Interpretive Case Studies in IS Research: Nature and Method,” European Journal of
Information Systems 4 (1995): 77.
285

Michael Myers and David Avison, “Information System Use as a Hermeneutic Process,” in Qualitative Research
in Information Systems, ed. Michael Myers and David Avison (London: Sage Publications, 2002), 237.
286

John Mingers, “Combining IS Research Methods: Towards a Pluralist Methodology,” Information Systems
Research 12, no.3 (2001): 240–59.
287

100

method approaches in studies of information are especially “useful for analyzing various
contexts for information activities.”288
Investigating how scholars experience visual materials can be helpful for revealing the
emergent qualities and attributes that make that experience meaningful for participants. McIntyre
and Smith explain:
Photographs, symbols, and words in themselves and apart from the meanings and
interpretations given them by persons or other creatures possessing mentality, are only so
many marks on paper. Their intentionality – their ‘representing,’ or being ‘of’ or ‘about’
things other than themselves –is therefore not a character they have intrinsically, insofar
as they are merely the physical objects that they are, but is derivative from their relation
to intentional mental states.289
Following this argument, visual representations become something through the relationships and
meanings we inscribe unto them. Shifting toward analysis of experiences of things, then, can
help us understand how things become meaningful.290
3.3 Participants
The research population for this study included all English-speaking, self-identified
historians.291 A mix of purposive sampling approaches were used. Purposive sampling is a
deliberately non-random method for recruiting individuals. It can provide “information-rich

Lai Ma, “Some Philosophical Considerations in Using Mixed Methods in Library and Information Science
Research,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 63, no. 9 (2012): 1865.
288

Ronald McIntyre and David Woodruff Smith, “Theory of Intentionality,” in Husserl’s Phenomenology: A
Textbook, eds. J.N. Mohanty and William R. McKenna (Washington, D.C.: Center for Advanced Research in
Phenomenology and University Press of America, 1989), 148-149.
289

In Logical Investigations, the phenomenologist Edmund Husserl referred to this philosophy as “back to the
‘things themselves.’”
290

This is a conscious decision made by the researcher to extend participation beyond a previous pilot study, which
limited participation to academic faculty historians at U.S. institutions. Additionally, none of the four archival
collections whom I contacted in the early stages of this research were capturing individual scholarly use of digital
images.
291

101

cases” to enable in-depth study of a particular phenomenon.292 Three avenues were used to
recruit potential research participants: (1) professional mailing lists, online forums and Twitter;
(2) individuals at five local institutions; and (3) individuals recommended to me through
colleagues and other recruited participants. I observed the general principles recommended by
Corbin and Strauss regarding a grounded theory approach to data saturation.293
All recruitment invitations specified that to qualify for inclusion in this study, historians
must have previous experience using digitized archival photographs in scholarly activities.
Scholarly pursuits could include teaching, publications, presentations, or research projects. Initial
recruitment invitations were posted online or emailed to potential participants, depending on the
targeting strategy.294 Recruitment strategies happened simultaneously, though the third strategy
(snowball sampling) continued throughout data collection and analysis. Each strategy is
discussed in greater detail below.
1) Professional Mailing Lists, Online Forums, and Twitter Recruitment: A recruitment post
was sent to the members of ten electronic mailing lists that are part of the Humanities and
Social Sciences Net Online (H-NET), a large online discussion network. Thematic lists
focusing on a wide-range of historical sub-disciplines were selected.295 The decision to
post to professional mailing lists was a conscious effort to broaden the sample population

According to Patton, information rich cases “are those from which one can learn a great deal about issues of
central importance to the research.” See: Michael Quinn Patton, Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods, 3rd
ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2002), 230 .
292

According to Corbin and Strauss, data saturation in grounded theory occurs when categories are sufficiently welldeveloped to formulate and explain theoretical assumptions. Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss, Basics of Qualitative
Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing Grounded Theory, 2nd ed. (Newbury Park, CA: Sage
Publications, 2008), 139-140.
293

294

Recruitment invitations differed depending on sampling strategy.

The following mail lists were selected: H-AFRO AM, H-Amstdy, H-Memory, H-POL, H-Public, H-South, HSurvey, H-US1918-45, H-USA, H-Women.
295

102

beyond recruitment of only historians at academic institutions. A recruitment post was
also listed on the websites of the Organization of American Historians (OAH)296 and the
American Studies Association (ASA) Visual Culture Caucus297, and distributed through
my personal Twitter account.298 The recruitment post invited self-identified historians
that have used digitized archival photographs in scholarly pursuits to contact me if they
were willing to participate in my doctoral research.299
2) Identified individuals at local institutions. Potential participants at five area institutions
were also invited to participate in this study.300 I created an initial list of historians along
with their contact information and thematic research area(s) using faculty web pages at
each institution. I then ranked each individual according to the likelihood that they fit the
inclusion criteria for this study. For example, historians who specified an interest in
digital history were ranked as “1”. Once the ranking was complete, I emailed a
recruitment invitation to individuals assigned to either “1” or “2” categories. 301
3) Identified individuals at other institutions. I anticipated recruiting at least four individuals
through snowball sampling. Over the last year of developing my research proposal, I was
given the names and contact information for six historians who actively use digitized

During a previous study undertaken by the researcher, a description of the study and a recruitment invitation was
posted on the OAH website http://www.oah.org/.
296

297

http://www.theasa.net/caucus_visual/

298

http://www.twitter.com/amchass

299

See Appendix A for Interview Recruitment Post.

The five institutions were: The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, The University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, Duke University, North Carolina Central University, and North Carolina State University. These
institutions were chosen because they are all offer graduate-level degrees in history and are located within a sixtymile driving radius of the researcher.
300

301

See Appendix B for Interview Recruitment Email.

103

photographs. I also expected to gather additional names and contacts through
recommendations from other participants.

TARGETING STRATEGY

SAMPLING TECHNIQUE

EXPECTED PARTICIPANTS

Mailing lists, online forums, Twitter

Criterion; homogenous

10

Identified individuals at local
institutions
Identified individuals at other
institutions

Convenience; criterion;
snowball
Snowball; criterion

5
5

Table 1. Recruitment strategies

3.4 Data Collection
Once individuals agreed to participate, a fact sheet to obtain consent was sent and an
interview time was arranged.302 For each participant, I created both a manila folder and a
computer folder with each participant’s name. I also created a spreadsheet with participant IDs
and basic demographic information. As part of their recruitment, participants were instructed to
pre-select two digitized photographs they have previously used in instructional teaching and
research endeavors. I advised participants that their chosen photographs would be used as
prompts for eliciting descriptions about their specific experiences related to image use. The
decision to have participants select images they had already used was made in accordance with
the theoretical assumptions of this study, which stated that information use is always situated and
contextual. Thus, in order to understand their experiences, it followed that I should use specific
examples of use to explore how and why they have used images in their scholarly activities.
Participants were instructed to email me their pre-selected photographs (preferably in
URL form, though attachments were accepted) no later than one week before the scheduled
interview. I also asked them to provide supplementary materials related to their use of images

302

See Appendix C for Fact Sheet.

104

(e.g., publications in which they have used digitized photographs, syllabus in which they have
instructed students on evaluating visual materials). To ensure that participants qualified for
study inclusion, I reviewed each of their selections within twenty-four hours of receipt. Three of
my participants had to rescind participation after it was discovered that they had only used
illustrations or archival photographs in print. Though I had initially conceived of creating
customized web pages called Photograph Scenarios for each participant containing links to their
pre-selected photographs, nearly all of my participants opted to discuss their selected
photographs via their original online location. While this approach worked adequately for this
study, it must be noted that URL locations for items can frequently change and often do not
provide permanent links.
Interview sessions took place with recruited participants at a setting of their choice,
provided it was equipped with internet access (see Table 2). The majority of interviews were
conducted through Skype. Most sessions lasted between 1 and 1.5 hours and were digitally
recorded using Amalto Call Recorder for Skype. Interviews were then transcribed verbatim. At
the beginning of each session, I introduced myself, the purpose of the study, and verified
participant consent.303 In the first part of the interview, participants were asked to answer
demographic information and answer questions about their image use practices.304 In the second
part of the interview, participants were instructed to open a web browser to the location of their
pre-selected photographs. I used techniques from photo elicitation interviewing (PEI)305 and

303

See Appendix D for Verbal Consent Script.

304

See Appendix E for Semi-Structured Interview Protocol.

PEI originated from the work of anthropologist John Collier in his 1957 study on the acculturation process of a
migrant population in England. See: John Collier Jr., “Photography in Anthropology: A Report on Two
Experiments,” American Anthropologist 59 (1957): 843–59.
305

105

concurrent verbal probes306 to elicit descriptions from participants about their experiences using
digitized photographs as forms of evidence. The PEI portion of the protocol contained 15 prescripted interview questions along with several verbal probes.307

PARTICIPANT

PRIMARY RESEARCH AREA(S)

Andrew Nelson

20 -century African American history

Daegan Miller

19th-century American alternative
green culture

Edward Roach
Edward Salo
Zachary Hilpert

Technology and the Gilded Age
Historical preservation and U.S.,
1900-1945
Urban history

Jeannette Gabriel
Jennifer Black

African-Americans and labor history
19th-century American visual culture

Jerome Krase

Urban neighborhoods

Jonathan Grunert
Kate SampsellWillmann
Kristen Turner
Lisa Jackson
Patricia
McCormack
Stephen Gold

Science and technology studies
20th-century intellectual history

Wendy Clark

19th-century environmental History in
the South

th

Opera, gender, race
Early 20th-century gender
Aboriginal studies
International migration

SAMPLE COURSE

“Intro to American
History”
“The Ecology of Vision:
A History of Looking at
the American
Landscape”
N/A
“Intro to Historic
Preservation”
“Focused Inquiry 1”
N/A
“University Writing
Seminar: Images of
America”
“The Peopling of New
York: A Visual Virtual
Approach”
“US History Survey 1”
“US History since 1865”
“Women and Music”
N/A
“Historical Perspectives
in Native Studies”
“Race, Politics, and
Social Structure”
“US History from 1877present”

DEGREE

PhD, American
Studies
PhD, History

MA, History
PhD, Public
History
PhD, American
Studies
MA, History
PhD, American
History and
Visual Studies
PhD, Sociology
MA, History
PhD, History
PhD, Music
MA, History
PhD,
Anthropology
PhD, Sociology
PhD, History

Table 2. Participants by primary research area, sample teaching course, and degree

I followed similar protocol to approaches outlined in the PEI literature, which advocates
for the use of photographs (or other visual prompts) to guide the interview process. In PEI, “the

Verbal probing is an interviewing technique which offers a “focused and productive approach” to eliciting
cognitive responses. See: Gordon Willis, Cognitive Interviewing: A Tool for Improving Survey Design (Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2005), 50. Verbal probing was initially developed and used in survey methodology
assessment, as a supplement to Think Aloud Protocol (TAP).
306

307

See Appendix F for Photo-Elicitation Interview Protocol.

106

researcher assumes that the images, the meaning(s) we attribute to them, the emotions they
arouse in the observer, and the information they elicit generate insights that do not necessarily or
exclusively correspond to those obtained in verbal inquiry.”308 Concurrent verbal probing, a
technique outlined largely in the context of Willis’ Cognitive Interviewing procedures, was used
to augment participant discourse where appropriate. According to Willis, concurrent verbal
probing as a technique involves: “a) the interviewer asking the question, b) the subject answering
the question, c) the interviewer asking a probe question, d) the subject answering the probe
question, and e) possibly, further cycles of (c-d).”309 Different types of verbal probes (e.g.,
“interpretation/comprehension probes”) can be used to elicit further description on topics of
interest. While the think-aloud protocol (TAP) is often used as a technique for explicating
cognitive information processes, the classical model put forth by Herbert Simon and Allen
Newell recommends avoidance of probing participants during the protocol. Since visual
materials are intrinsically mediated forms, I anticipated that it might be difficult to generate
meaningful discussion without the use of probing.310 Therefore, concurrent verbal probing was
considered a more appropriate technique than TAP to use in PEI.
At the close of each interview session, I thanked participants for their time and
encouraged them to contact me with any questions. I also asked about their willingness to be

308

Elisa Bignante, “The Use of Photo-Elicitation in Field Research,” EchoGeo 11 (2010): 2.

Gordon Willis, “Cognitive Interviewing: A ‘How to’ Guide,” 1999 Meeting of the American Statistical
Association (Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute, 1999), 7.
309

In Samuel Wineburg’s classic study of historians’ problem-solving, historians were asked to think aloud while
assessing three pictures depicting the Battle of Lexington. He writes, “For historians, the picture evaluation task
was an exercise in exploring the limits of historical knowledge. The end result was more a suggestion than an
answer, more a forced choice from flawed alternatives than a committed decision executed with resolve.” Samuel
Wineburg, “Historical Problem Solving: A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation of Documentary
and Pictorial Evidence,” Journal of Educational Psychology 83, no.1 (1991):76. Since the aim of my research is to
better understand how historians evaluate and assess digitized materials, the use of verbal probes will be an essential
aspect in generating participant discourse around materials.
310

107

contacted for any follow ups, in case further clarification was needed. Following each interview,
I collected any supplementary documents they could provide related to examples of their image
use (e.g., syllabi, class materials, publications, presentations, etc.).
3.5 Data Management
At the onset of my research, I developed an organizational approach to data management
planning for two main organizational aspects: data storage and data organization. Both
strategies were equally important to the research process. Keeping my documentation wellorganized and safely stored would also help ensure that it remained accessible.
Data storage referred to how I planned on keeping data stored locally. I decided to
primarily organize my materials using a hierarchal folder structure on my windows laptop. I
created a folder called dissertation that had three sub-folders: analysis, data collection, and
proposal. I used the analysis folder to store all of my memos related to coding decisions, along
with a master spreadsheet of thematic categories used to code my data. The data collection
folder contained a master recruitment spreadsheet and individual folders for each study
participant. The proposal folder held all of the documents related to my dissertation proposal
including the two interview protocols used and recruitment materials used in the study. It also
contained administrative-related documents, such as the drafts of my Institutional Review Board
(IRB) documents.
Data organization focused on how I could best organize and provide access to the
sources used as evidence in my dissertation. My case study design suggested to me that I could
treat each participant’s collected materials as a single case. Within the data collection folder
structure, I created a single folder for each participant which contained an interview transcript
(word document), the original file recorded from the Skype interview call (.mp3 format), and the

108

de-identified audio file used by the transcriptionist (.mp3 format). I also had to manage
secondary source materials, such as the studies I used in the literature review portion of my
dissertation. I initially deposited all documents (primarily pdfs) in a single folder on my hard
drive called readings. I used Mendeley, a citation management software, to organize and
annotate materials.
The second type of source material I had to manage were references about the sources I
was referencing in my dissertation. For example, the thematic codes I was going to be assigning
to transcripts had to be linked to a codebook with definitions and examples for use in inter-coder
reliability tests. I also had to prepare to manage tags used to identify themes from the secondary
source literature I collected and annotated. I was also able to use Mendeley tags to identify
potential themes of interest, derived from my literature review. An article on historians’
information-seeking in digital environments might have three tags: “information-seeking”,
“digital environments”, and “historians.” Tagging was useful because it enabled me to find
additional themes that I might have missed in my primarily data-driven coding approach.
3.6 Data Analysis
In case studies, data from multiple sources are typically integrated in the analytic stage of
research. As Baxter and Jack explain: “Each data source is one piece of the ‘puzzle,’ with each
piece contributing to the researcher’s understanding of the whole phenomenon. This convergence
adds strength to the findings as the various strands of data are braided together to promote a
greater understanding of the case.”311 The case study researcher must strive to analyze each case
as a whole, rather than analyzing just the individual pieces of the case.

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack, “Qualitative Case Study Methodology: Study Design and Implementation for
Novice Researchers,” The Qualitative Report 13, no. 4 (2008): 554.
311

109

Stake defines a case as being a “specific, complex, functioning thing.”312 In embedded case
studies, more than one unit of analysis can be used to explore a research phenomenon at multiple
levels and perspectives. For the purposes of this research, two units of analysis were used. The
main unit of analysis was identified as: “a historian’s experiences using digitized photographs as
evidence.” An embedded unit of analysis, or subunit, was defined as “a historian’s specific use
of a digitized photograph as evidence in research or instruction.” Embedded case studies
present particular challenges for novice researchers. Yin points out that one of the major pitfalls
of embedded case study design is a failure to return to the main unit of analysis.313 Therefore, it
was important that I adopt analytic procedures that enabled the analysis of materials both within
cases and across cases.
1) Collecting different types of data. Four types of data were collected for each case:
transcripts from the semi-structured interviews; photographs from the photo-elicitation
portion of the interview; transcripts from the photo-elicitation portion of the interview;
and supplementary documents (e.g., syllabi, class materials, publications, presentations,
etc.) provided by participants showing how they have used images.
2) Choosing initial method for analysis. Thematic analysis was chosen as an appropriate
analytic method to analyze both textual and visual materials. Thematic analysis can be
defined as “a method of identifying, analyzing and reporting patterns (themes) within
data.”314 It is often considered a technique of content analysis. In this study, a hybrid

312

Robert E. Stake, The Art of Case Study Research (Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 1995), 2.

Robert Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods 2nd Edition (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publishing,
1994), 44.
313

Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke, “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology,” Qualitative Research in
Psychology 3, no.2 (2006): 79.
314

110

approach to thematic analysis was adopted, following the example of Fereday and Eimear
Muir-Cochrane.315
3) Developing the code manual featuring categories and a coding scheme. The coding
manual was developed iteratively through a mixed deductive-inductive approach. Each
code entry contained a code label, definition of the theme, and description of how to
know when the theme occurs. In the initial, pre-defined stage of analysis, I created a
broad list of a priori categories derived from the literature review, my research questions,
and the theoretical propositions of the study. Examples of potential broad categories I
used included: “materiality”, “experiences”, “evidence.” I then read through interview
transcripts for each case, highlighting descriptions related to these categories. In the
emergent stage of data analysis, I did a second-read through of transcripts to look for
“important moments.”316 While there are numerous categories that could be anticipated,
the goal of this portion was to allow for patterns and themes to emerge from the data.
The constant comparative method was used to generate new categories as they emerged,
and then to combine/revise previous categories.317 I also used memos to document
decisions made about categorization. According to Zhang and Wildemuth, “To improve
the credibility of qualitative content analysis, researchers not only need to design data

315

Jennifer Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane, “Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis: A Hybrid
Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development,” International Journal of Qualitative
Methods 5, no.1 (2006): 1–11. Their approach integrates inductive-deductive coding with theme development,
allowing codes to emerge from the data while also supplying theoretical propositions to bind analysis for each case.
According to Fereday and Eimear Muir-Cochrane, the process of inductive coding involves “recognizing (seeing)
an important moment and encoding it (seeing it as something) prior to a process of interpretation.” See: Fereday and
Eimear Muir-Cochrane, 4.
316

The constant comparative method is a grounded theory technique for developing inductive coding categories.
See: Barry Glaser and Anselm Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research
(New York: Aldine, 1967).
317

111

collection strategies that are able to adequately solicit the representations, but also to
design transparent processes for coding and drawing conclusions from the raw data.”318
4) Testing the reliability of codes. After an initial coding scheme was developed, I recruited
a colleague to help validate my coding scheme. Two interview transcripts were provided
to the colleague, along with the coding manual. We reviewed the coding manual and
discussed definitions, examples, and classification rules. My colleague then proceeded to
code both transcripts. Upon completion, I compared versions of our coded transcripts,
noting any discrepancies between coding which were then clarified in the manual. A
final coding scheme was developed following modifications.
5) Integrating data sources within each case. In case study research, sources of data are
typically integrated or “mixed together” during the data analysis procedure. In this
research, sources of data in a variety of formats and contexts were used. As an example,
I needed to integrate the semi-structured interview portion with the PEI portion of the
interview for interpretation and analysis. Additionally, documents related to participant’s
prior image use (e.g., syllabus, teaching presentations) also needed to be integrated into
each case. The goal was to assemble all participant materials and begin to formulate and
approach the collection as the building of each case.
6) Summarizing data and identifying additional themes. In this step, key points for each case
were outlined through a review of the transcripts, document, and memos. Each summary
(see section 4.1) reflects my initial processing of the information for each case, providing
“the opportunity to sense and take note of potential themes in the raw data.”319

318

Zhang and Wildemuth, 313.

319

Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 7.

112

7) Conceptually clustering themes into categories. I then used the coded themes to “make
sense” of the data across the different themes, with an eye towards Patton’s
recommendation of developing categories that achieve both internal homogeneity and
external heterogeneity.320 What kinds of patterns emerged in each case? How did they
inform my understanding of the larger research phenomenon? In this stage of the process,
“discrete bits of information come together to make a more economical whole that,
analytically speaking, is more than the sum of its parts.”321
8) Synthesizing descriptive themes across cases. Following the work of Thomas and
Harden, I used thematic synthesis as a strategy to generate analytical themes that
integrated findings across each case. 322 This enabled me to return back to the main unit
of analysis in this study, historians’ overall experiences using digitized photographs as
evidence. Through an iterative process of analysis and interpretation of descriptive
themes, I identified six analytical themes that characterized historians’ experiences.
Cycling through this process enabled me to revise analytical themes until they were
“sufficiently abstract.”323 Tying together historians’ examples of use with the descriptive
themes and categories that surfaced from my thematic analysis helped to triangulate my
interpretation and analysis (see Figure 2).

Patton defines internal homogeneity as “the extent to which the data that belong in a certain category hold
together or ‘dovetail’ in a meaningful way” while external homogeneity is “the extent to which differences among
categories are bold and clear.” See: Patton, Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods, 465.
320

Matthew Miles, A. Michael Huberman, and Johnny Saldana, Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook,
3rd Ed. (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2013), 290.
321

James Thomas and Angela Harden, “Methods for the Thematic Synthesis of Qualitative Research in Systematic
Reviews.” BMC Medical Research Methodology 8, no.45 (2008).
322

323

Ibid, 7.

113

Thematic
analysis

Descriptive
themes

Thematic
synthesis

Analytical
themes

Figure 2. Stages of analysis and interpretation

9) Distinguishing between potential use and evidential use. At this stage in my analysis and
interpretation, I began to consider how my six analytical themes functioned conceptually
within the broader scope of information use behavior. In particular, I noted how my
analytical themes took place during two spheres, what I’m calling potential image use
and evidential image use. The activities, practices, and processes that take place within
both spheres are not necessarily linear or sequential and can occur multiple times
throughout image selection and image use. Distinguishing between these two spheres
helped me to capture the dimensions that spurred actual use of materials, while also
exploring factors that motivated historians in potential image use.
10)

Reporting on findings through cases. Findings were then anchored in the data through
case reporting. I aimed to strike a balance between thickly describing study procedures
and findings, and making interpretive connections from the findings. The literature
reviewed in Chapter 2 also provided useful context for situating interpretation.
According to Patton, in reporting findings researchers should provide “sufficient
description to allow the reader to understand the basis for an interpretation, and
sufficient interpretation to allow the reader to understand the description.”324

324

Patton, 503-504.

114

3.7 Reliability and Validity
Establishing trustworthiness is a common concern for researchers seeking to ensure the
reliability and validity of their interpretive research. Lincoln and Guba identify four types of
criteria which can characterize trustworthiness in interpretive research: transferability,
dependability, confirmability, and credibility.325 I will briefly discuss each of these criteria,
along with how I ensured compliance in my research methodology.
Transferability refers to the degree to which research findings can be generalized and
made applicable across a variety of contexts - what the authors term as “fittingness.”326 Lincoln
and Guba suggest that the researcher’s use of thick description is one technique for achieving
transferability; by capturing rich details about the research setting, sample, and data collection
procedures, the researcher provides information regarding the transferability of findings to other
contexts. I made every effort to be transparent by providing detailed discussions of research
procedures, and used memos as a strategy for documenting decision-making throughout
quantitative and qualitative phases of data collection and analysis.
Dependability describes the extent to which the research design is repeatable (though not
necessarily expected to generate the same findings) as a “prototype model.”327 One means for
addressing dependability is the use of multiple methods, which can increase both the credibility
and dependability of the study.328 This case study triangulated multiple sources of data (e.g.,
interview transcripts, participant-selected digitized photographs, documents related to prior

325

Yvonne Lincoln and Egon Guba, Naturalistic Inquiry (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1985), 289-331.

326

Ibid, 124.

Andrew K. Shenton, “Strategies for Ensuring Trustworthiness in Qualitative Research Projects,” Education for
Information 22 (2004), 71.
327

Egon Guba, “Criteria for Assessing the Trustworthiness of Naturalistic Inquiries,” Educational Communication
and Technology 29, no.2 (1981): 75-91.
328

115

image use), multiple data collection techniques (verbal probing, photo-elicitation, semistructured interviews), and multiple stages of interpretation and analysis (thematic analysis,
thematic synthesis). In particular, the use of PEI offered a complementary approach to semistructured interviews.329
The non-directive nature of both PEI and semi-structured interviewing suggested that
careful formulation and pilot testing of the protocol would be essential to ensure robust
participation from my participants. PEI research also presents ample possibilities for derailment
into stream-of-consciousness interview accounts. According to Bignante, PEI researchers “must
constantly strive to strike the right balance between the desire to let informants express
themselves freely, being open to unexpectedly interesting insights that arise during the course of
the research, and rigor in ensuring research objectives are addressed and discussion is re-directed
to the subject of inquiry.”330 In accordance with the stated goals of the study, a conscious effort
was made during each interview to direct attention towards participant descriptions of their
experiences using photographs. Another technique to aid in the establishment of dependability is
the use of an audit trail to document research procedures. As mentioned previously, I used a
thick description approach to documenting decisions and relevant processes throughout data
collection and analysis.
Confirmability refers to the extent that research findings reflect respondents rather than
researcher bias. What were the researcher’s design decisions and how might that have impacted
collection and analysis? How did the researcher develop coding schemes used in analysis? The
use of memos throughout data collection and analysis served to document my decisions

Francesco Lapenta, “The Image as a Form of Sociological Data: A Methodological Approach to the Analysis of
Photo-Elicited Interviews,” (PhD diss., University of London, 2004), 74.
329

330

Bignante, 11.

116

regarding design, sample, collection, and analysis.331 Memos reflected my commitment to
reflexive analysis, which encouraged continual reflection on roles and perceived biases
throughout the course of my research procedures.332 An important initial step in my research
process involved the explication of my philosophical and epistemological groundings for this
research (see section 3.2 for elaboration), acknowledging the role that potential bias has in
research design and procedure.
In terms of methodology, reflexive approaches in interpretive research favor “methods in
which informants took a greater part in contributing to the uncovering and creation of
meaning.”333 My research design was informed by an interpretive, phenomenological
perspective, aimed at drawing out participant’s descriptions of their situated, contextual
experiences using digital photographs – a participant-generated thick description. One aim of
this research was to “make visible”334 the process of meaning-making for historians – itself a
reflexive goal.335
It is important to acknowledge how bias has been introduced into this research design and
study. The semi-structured interviews used participant-selected photograph scenarios as prompts
for eliciting descriptions. This suggests potential bias on at least three levels. First, using
photographs for the primary purpose of eliciting descriptions may have introduced a level of
331

Guba, 87.

332

According to Finlay: “Reflexive analysis in research encompasses continual evaluation of subjective responses,
intersubjective dynamics and the research process itself. It involves a shift in our understanding of data collection
from something objective that is accomplished through detailed scrutiny of ‘what I know and how I know it’ to
recognizing how we actively construct our knowledge.” See: Linda Finlay, “‘Outing’ the Researcher: The
Provenance, Process, and Practice of Reflexivity,” Qualitative Health Research 12, no.4 (2002).
Marcus Banks, “Analyzing Images” in The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data Analysis, ed. Uwe Flick
(London: SAGE Publications, 2014), 401.
333

334

Banks suggests that visual methods can “make visible…something that could not be seen before.” Ibid, 403-404.

117

artificiality into the research setting. Second, participants were asked to comment extensively on
decisions and thought processes that have already been made (i.e. their decision to use a
photograph in teaching or research). Third, the order in which the photographs were viewed
could have potentially influenced participant interpretation. Similar to photographic essays, the
resulting experience for participants “may privilege the phenomenological mode, conveying an
experience from the interviewees’ and researcher’s perspectives, or privilege the narrative mode
by telling a story from the interviewees’ perspectives.”336 In order to address these potential
biases, I organized and integrated explicit discussion and analysis of the photographs used by
participants into the case study, including visual representations where possible.
Credibility describes the believability or “truth” of the researcher’s findings. According
to Suter, “Maximum confidence in the believability of conclusions comes from support provided
by participants’ agreement, analysis of multiple sources of data, others’ interpretations, and
prediction based on relevant theoretical models (i.e., a predicted pattern matches an actual
pattern).”337 How is credibility established? One method is for researchers to orient themselves
towards their research population through prolonged engagement.338 With regards to my
research population, I am confident that my engagement over the last four years through a pilot
study, informal conversations, and extensive literature reviews gave me insight and
understanding into my population of interest. As an evolving area of research, the literature
studying the use of digital resources is limited. However, I have been committed to remaining

Marcus Banks, “Presenting Research Results” in Visual Methods in Social Research, ed. Marcus Banks (London:
SAGE Publications, 2001), 146.
336

337

Suter, Educational Research, 363.

338

Guba, 84-85.

118

abreast of new developments in the field and integrating new (or newly discovered) relevant
studies into my literature review over the course of this research.
Another strategy for establishing credibility is to provide illustrated quotations from
participants, alongside interpretive themes and categories. As a form of interpretive rigor, this
strategy can show how “overarching themes are supported by excerpts from the raw data to
ensure that data interpretation remains directly linked to the words of the participants.”339 In my
analysis and reporting, I looked for “thick description” quotations from participant interviews.
In particular, my interpretation and discussion of participants’ examples of evidential use relied
extensively on extracting direct quotations from supplementary materials (e.g., their dissertation,
course power-point presentations, course syllabi) provided to me by participants.
A third strategy is triangulation, or “a process of using multiple perception to clarify
meaning, verifying the repeatability of an observation or interpretation.”340 In this research, two
types of triangulation helped to establish the credibility of my findings. I used data
triangulation, which can be described as the combining of data from different sources. I
collected and used a wide variety of data sources, including: interview transcripts, documents
related to participants’ research and instructional output, and archival photographs, among other
items. I also used methodological triangulation, which describes the combination of data from
different methods. For example, my interview data was generated from a combined approach of
semi-structured interviewing and photo-elicitation interviewing with verbal probing. I also used
thematic analysis and thematic synthesis in my analysis and interpretation stages.

339

Fereday and Muir-Cochrane, 3.

Robert E. Stake, “Qualitative Case Studies,” in The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, ed. Norman
Denzin and Yvonna Lincoln (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2000), 443.
340

119

CHAPTER 4: FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
In this chapter, I introduce the findings from my research and situate them within a larger
discussion of information use. First, I give a brief biographical summary of my fifteen
participants. Next, I describe themes identified during thematic analysis and synthesis. I also
discuss two separate spheres where different themes of experience take place, potential image
use and evidential image use. Finally, I introduce a conceptual framework that can be used for
studying how and why historians use digitized archival photographs as forms of evidence.
4.1 Summary of Cases
Below is a brief summary of the fifteen participants included in this study by name, title,
department, and affiliation at the time of the study (see Table 3).

NAME

TITLE

DEPARTMENT

AFFILIATION

Andrew Nelson
Daegan Miller
Edward Roach

Doctoral student
Postdoctoral fellow
Public historian

American Studies
Center for Humanities
N/A

University of Maryland at College Park
University of Wisconsin-Madison
Dayton Aviation Heritage National
Historical Park
Arkansas State University
Virginia Commonwealth University
University of Iowa
Misericordia University
Brooklyn College
Virginia Tech

Edward Salo
Zachary Hilpert
Jeannette Gabriel
Jennifer Black
Jerome Krase
Jonathan Grunert

Assistant professor
Faculty instructor
Doctoral student
Assistant professor
Professor emeritus
Doctoral student

Kate SampsellWillmann
Kristen Turner

Adjunct professor

History
Focused Inquiry
Education
History
Sociology
Science and
Technology Studies
History

Doctoral student

Music

Lisa Jackson
Patricia
McCormack
Stephen Gold
Wendy Clark

Master’s student
Professor emerita

History
Native Studies

University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill
San Francisco State University
University of Alberta

Professor
Doctoral student

Sociology
History

Michigan State University
University of Memphis

Olympic College

Table 3. Participants by title, department, and institutional affiliation

120

Andrew Nelson
At the time of our interview, Andrew Nelson was a PhD Candidate at the University of
Maryland in American Studies. Nelson’s dissertation is entitled, “With sight and sound: Black
photographic and musical expression in rural Alabama, 1900-1930.” His project uses a
collection of eight hundred photographs of African-American individuals in Fayette County
Alabama. He decided on this project topic after encountering what he terms “a body of images”
in the early 20th century in which people were posing for photographs with musical instruments.
He used digitized archival photographs primarily to flesh out this phenomenon throughout the
United States.
According to his dissertation abstract, Nelson’s study explores “how pictures and songs
were used in concert to reiterate particular themes and convey pointed counterhegemonic and
race-conscious messages.” He used two initial criteria in his image searching: (1) pictures of
musicians; and (2) certain types of poses. Google image search provided him with the ability to
quickly hone his image searching as well as to connect him with independent scholars with
blogs. For example, he mentioned tracking down a photograph that had originally appeared on
the cover of a folk album that he had previously seen in a book about West Virginia fiddle
music. He was then able to “circumvent the traditional archive” by obtaining a digital scan of
the photograph from the author directly.
Daegan Miller
Dr. Daegan T. Miller received his PhD in History from Cornell University in 2013. At the
time of our interview, Miller was completing a postdoctoral fellowship at the Center for
Humanities and Institute for Research in the Humanities at the University of Wisconsin Madison.
His dissertation explores the construction of alternative landscapes in the 19th-century U.S. He

121

uses photographs to show how landscapes were “made or envisioned.” His interest in using
photographs as evidence can be traced back to encountering the work of 19th-century landscape
photographer AJ Russell. He explains, “They just sort of spoke to me, they grabbed me instantly.
And I came across them first in print, but then online. And I was just sort of…totally enthralled
by them.”
In his dissertation research, he primarily used the archival collections from the New York
Public Library, the American Antiquarian Society, and Yale’s Beinecke Library. Prior to
visiting each archive in person, he consulted the online collections to locate images of interest.
He then emailed archivists to request access to images in person. In general, he finds Google
image searching and the Library of Congress site to be very helpful for image searching. In his
teaching, he aims to help students become more fluent in visual literacy through the use of
images as primary sources. For example, he might instruct students to make an argument about
the brutality of the Civil War using photographs.
Edward Roach
Edward Roach works as a historian at the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical
Park. He received his master’s degree in public history. Roach recently completed a book
entitled The Wright Company: From Invention to Industry which examines the early years of the
Wright Brothers’ airplane company. Nearly all of the photographs in the book originated from
digitized photographs, drawing largely on collections at the Library of Congress and Wright
State University. While Roach does not teach in an academic setting, he instructs a number of
interpretive programs for visiting guests to the Historical Park.
He has used digitized photographs (including captions) from these collections in a
number of ways, including to: provide historical verification; identify individuals in the

122

company; and date other photographs based on similar physical characteristics. He finds the
content of the image itself to be the most useful. Some of the other factors that matter to him
focus on the provenance of the photograph: knowing where it came from, when it was created,
what the archive knows about it, and who to contact at the archive. In particular, Roach praises
the ability to zoom in on high-quality digitized photographs to ascertain historical details,
explaining that “you can do a lot more with them once you have the scan then you can with that
tiny tiny little print.”
Edward Salo
Edward Salo is an Assistant Professor in History at Arkansas State University. He
studies historical preservation and the US 1900-1945. Prior to joining as a faculty member, he
was a consulting historian for a cultural resources management firm. In that capacity, he used
cultural heritage sites like the Florida Memory State Library and Archives collection as reference
for ascertaining historical context. He will use Google or Wikipedia in the early stages of
research projects, but says “I know I’m not going to hang my hat on that.”
His dissertation explores how ferry transportation impacted development in the South
Carolina low country. After being unable to find adequate source material for South Carolina, he
began looking at photographs and drawings from other nearby states to understand how
technology at ferry sites evolved. For example, he found a 1902 photograph of a rope ferry
operating in Ocklawaha, Florida by searching online at the Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs catalog. He was able to use that image in his dissertation to say “this is what a rope
ferry looked like.” Salo also seems to recognize the inherent complexities in using digitized
photographs as historical evidence. On the one hand, he uses digitized photographs as referential

123

sources for reconstructing “how something was.” At the same time, he recognizes that he can
also use photographs to show what the creator of the image thought was important at that time.
Zachary Hilpert
Dr. Zachary Hilpert is a faculty member in the Department of Focused Inquiry,
University College at Virginia Commonwealth University. He received his PhD in American
Studies, focusing on American history, digital culture, and urban studies. His dissertation
examined images of disasters in American cities, spanning the beginning of the Civil War in
1861 through the San Francisco earthquake and fires in 1906. He makes the argument that
image makers helped to shape (or reshape) the story of a disaster to both fit and mold the
perceptions of the event at the time.
In his research endeavors, he came across “history books” – or assemblages of primarily
visual materials from certain events gathered together without a linear narrative. He explains,
“So you’d see photographs of the destruction, drawings of people kind of in the midst of the
disaster, and then text kind of coupled with those images of varying degrees of actual
relationship to the images.” These collections for Hilpert helped demonstrate how certain
populations became exoticized as “others” in relation to the disaster at hand. For example, after
the Johnstown Flood in January 1889 in Pennsylvania, anti-immigrant rhetoric directed at
Hungarians, who made up a portion of the migrant labor force, ran rampant in media coverage.
Hilpert argues that such images were the product of “people’s fears of the city in the latter half of
the 19th century.”
Jeanette Gabriel
Jeannette Gabriel is a PhD candidate in Social Studies Education at the University of
Iowa, and a fellow at the Obermann Center for Advanced Studies. Prior to her doctoral work,

124

she taught history as an adjunct professor at the City University of New York for ten years. She
then joined the Smithsonian as part of the Teaching American History program, a grand-funded
initiative through the Department of Education. In that capacity, she developed a curricula for
American teachers about how to teach images.
Her research projects examine the unemployed worker’s movement in the 1930s. She is
particularly interested in how the public perceived the movement. While her emphasis has
always been in African-American and labor history, her predominant focus as a history educator
is on constructing a body of images that demonstrate what she calls “racial tensions” throughout
American history. In her approach to historical work, Gabriel mentions an explicit intention to
use photographs as primary sources of evidence “because historians only use them as
supplementary to their records.”
Jennifer Black
Dr. Jennifer Black is an Assistant Professor of History and Government at Misericordia
University in Dallas, Pennsylvania. She focuses on American visual culture and her most recent
book project examines 19th-century advertising and early conceptions of branding. She considers
herself a specialist in “all things visual” in the 19th century. She has been teaching historyrelated courses since 2004, such as both halves of a US History Survey and a university writing
seminar.
Black uses various types of digitized images in her research and teaching, including
photographs, drawings, prints, lithographs, and engravings. In searching for images, she uses the
same techniques in online searching as she does in archival settings. She typically uses online
archives to do her “pre-research,” locating images of interest prior to an in-person visit. When
conducting research, she prefers engaging directly with the physical object rather than a digital

125

surrogate so she can better ascertain material features such as tin-type, collodion plate, etc. For
teaching purposes, she often uses a digital image as a surrogate because “I don’t need to look at
it that closely.” She currently teaches a university writing seminar on American visual culture,
aiming to instruct students in how to look “critically at images as historical sources.”
Jerome Krase
Jerome (Jerry) Krase is a Professor Emeritus at Brooklyn College and has been teaching
in the Sociology department there since 1969. His primary area of research is urban
neighborhoods, and his methodological approach might best be termed visual sociology. Krase
generally attributes his image use to be “looking for things that will illustrate a point I’m making
through some other way.” Krase had amassed his own archive of photographic images, a
combination of him taking photographs as well as saving copies of relevant materials. During
our conversation, he expressed frustration at the disciplinary boundaries that might prevent
archivists, for example, from attending American Historical Association meetings. For Krase,
such cross-pollination would be especially helpful towards making archives more organized and
searchable according to historians needs. He explains that “frequently, what I find, is that the
places where the archive exists, they’re not done the way I’m thinking about them.”
Krase favors the use of images in his teaching and presentations “to literally say
something or to tell a story that doesn’t require text.” Over the course of his academic career, he
has held a particular interest in trying to understand what it is that people see when they look at
photographs. His arguments consider the role that perception plays in how we understand the
city landscape. “With my work on minority neighborhoods and stigmatized places and
stigmatized people has a great deal to do with images that people have in their minds about what
minority neighborhoods look like.”

126

Jonathan Grunert
When we first spoke, Jonathan Grunert was a doctoral candidate in Science and
Technology Studies at Virginia Tech. He received his master’s degree in History and was
interested in applying a historical approach to how science and technology interact. His
dissertation project examines taxidermy practices in late 19th-century and early-20th-century
Natural History museums. He uses photographs to demonstrate methodological differences in
taxidermy approaches as a “way of seeing how taxidermy is being made.”
Grunert primarily uses materials from the Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago,
the American Museum of Natural History in New York City, and the Smithsonian’s National
Museum of Natural History in Washington, DC. His approach to finding images for this project
has been to first start broadly with the search term “taxidermy” and then find “some of key actors
that show up those pictures.” He particularly likes searching archives by subject headings
because he can click through to other related content. If he finds an interesting image, he will
download it immediately to Google Drive and record an entry for the image in a corresponding
spreadsheet.
Kate Sampsell-Willmann
Dr. Kate Sampsell-Willmann is a professor at the American University of Central Asia
in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan. She is an intellectual historian of the 20th century, specializing in visual
culture. She began writing her dissertation in 1998, when the Library of Congress was just
beginning to provide dial up access to materials in their collection. The Farm Security
Administration Collection was one of the first she used. In reference to that collection, she notes
appreciating an earlier model of digital collections where “they put everything” rather than

127

curating content, because “that’s really what you need to do in order to make a collection
valuable to historians.”
Sampsell-Willman points out that there are noticeable absences in the online digital
archive that reflect historical political biases. She gives the example of being unable to locate
digitized photographs of minorities in convict leash-and-chain gangs in the late 19th century,
despite knowing they exist in the archive and may even be digitized. She suggests this is an
intentional absence due to the biases of state legislatures, who have political rationales for
limiting materials made available to historians outside the region.
In 2009, Sampsell-Willman published the book Lewis Hine as Social Critic, which
explores the life and work of the social documentary photographer. Using Hine’s photographs as
text, Sampsell-Willman draws attention explicitly to the story-telling aspects of his work.
Sampsell-Willman currently conducts faculty development seminars on how to use images in
teaching and writing, and how to teach students to read and write from an image. Cultivating
historians’ visual literacy skills is a particular concern for her. She regularly encounters
mislabeled information, poor search interfaces, and difficulty aligning search keywords to
results. She attributes this in part to postmodernism, which she says has “disconnected the
document from its author.”
Kristen Turner
At the time of our interview, Kristen Turner had just submitted her dissertation as a
doctoral candidate in Musicology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. She has
been teaching as an adjunct faculty member in Music History at North Carolina State University
since 2003. Her primary research interests center on opera, American music, and gender. Her

128

dissertation examines the popularity and performances of European Grand operas in the United
States at the turn of the 20th century.
Turner uses an array of visual sources to show how class, race, and gender figured
prominently into American reception, production, and marketing of opera. One of the kinds of
photographic images she collects and uses in her research is carte de visites, the 2 ¼ by 4 inch
portraits popularized in 19th-century photography studios. During her dissertation research, she
frequently consulted the New York Public Library’s online collection of digitized carte de
visites, as well as the George Eastman House and the Harry Ransom Center. As she conducts
her research, she will often bookmark different sites of interest for future work. She also
frequently downloads and collects images of interest.
Lisa Jackson
When we conducted our interview, Lisa Jackson was a Master’s candidate in History at
San Francisco State University. She was preparing to enter the History PhD program at the
University of California at Santa Cruz. Her research interests center on gender in the inter-war
period from a global perspective. Her master’s thesis examined the gendered social culture of
the California Communist Party during the 1930s. She credits photographic evidence as helping
to transform her research from the more general “I’m interested in their social life” to “I’m
interested in the way that they portray themselves in their social life.” Jackson came to her
research topic after encountering a number of images that seemed to reproduce the same type of
representation: Communist men with bandages or black eyes after confrontations with police or
vigilantes.

129

Patricia McCormack
Dr. Patricia McCormack is a Professor Emeritus in the Faculty of Native Studies at the
University of Alberta and has been teaching since 1994. Trained as an anthropologist,
McCormack’s research focuses on the ethno-historical implications of the fur trade on
Aboriginal peoples in northern Canada, southern Alberta, and Scotland. Prior to her faculty
position, she worked as a curator at the Royal Museum of Alberta.
McCormack describes herself as very visually oriented and mentions using photographs
to “get my students to see things that I know they won’t have seen in their kind of ordinary,
regular lives.” She began to use images (illustrations and photographs primarily) in her research
on the evolution of Aboriginal sled culture, after finding virtually no written sources on the topic.
In her exploration of how sled technology in this particular time and place has changed, she has
been able to identify numerous visual sources that counteract popular representations. She
explains, “So now that I’m starting to work with these images I see all sorts of things that I didn’t
start to see…I see images in books that are drawings and I can see how inaccurate they are. In
other words, whoever did the final image didn’t know much about it and they did it the way they
thought it would look.”
Stephen Gold
Dr. Stephen Gold is a Professor and Associate Chair in the department of Sociology at
Michigan State University. He has been teaching sociology for over thirty years and his primary
areas of research center on international migration. He has taught a variety of undergraduate and
graduate courses on a range of content, mostly focusing on race, ethnicity, and immigration. He
has been an avid photographer since high school and attributes his frequent use of photographs
as originating in his own practice.

130

In his 2010 book The Store in the Hood, Gold uses a number of digitized archival
photographs (some of which had not been accessed publicly prior to their digitization) to
investigate conflict between immigrant entrepreneurs and their customer base. In one chapter,
Gold uses juxtaposition of, and original captions from, different photographs to make the
argument that the 1940s Japanese interment in part stemmed from xenophobic anger in earlier
decades over the success of Japanese entrepreneurships. Gold explains, “The particular
threatening of small business, that it’s not so much about war or Pearl Harbor, it’s about ‘We
don’t like these people making a decent living in our country,’ kind of. They’re not one of us.”
As a sociologist by training, Gold tends to compare group behavior to situate his historical
arguments.
Wendy Clark
Wendy Clark is a PhD candidate in the department of History at the University of
Memphis. She is an environmental historian of the American South in the 19th century, and tends
to teach survey courses on US History prior to 1877. Her dissertation examined how one
particular community in Memphis – Catfish Bay - interacted with the Mississippi River from
1820 until 1880.
Clark describes her research process as beginning with Worldcat and focusing
specifically on archival materials. She prefers not to use Google image searching because “it is
not very clear where they get their images from.” Authority is a term she mentions often in
relation to her use and evaluation of photographs. As part of her dissertation research, she used
photographs pieced together with maps and other textual sources to ascertain the probable
location of Catfish Bay.

131

4.2 Descriptive and Analytical Themes of Historians’ Experiences
One aim of this research was to investigate qualitative aspects of historians’ experiences
using photographs, to reveal the factors that matter to them in their image selection. At the same
time, I wanted to analyze actual examples of use to understand the various ways in which historians
were using digitized photographs to make arguments. Using thematic analysis and thematic
synthesis, I identified seventeen descriptive themes and six analytical themes (see Figure 3).
Taken together, they can be used to conceptualize aspects of historians’ experiences using digitized
photographs as evidence.

Figure 3. Thematic analysis and synthesis of historians’ experiences

132

The first analytical theme I identified is research practices in digital environments, where
respondents describe themes related to how they conduct research in digital environments. They
might mention functional aspects of the research process, such as the search terms they use or the
digital tools they consult. A second analytical theme concerns their motivations for selecting
images; several participants mention that photographs can evoke powerful reactions from
viewers. Other motivations to select images include the ability of photographs to “show things
the way they were.” Participants also mention a variety of different factors that matter to them
as they interact with digitized photographs. For instance, are they able to download images
easily? How expensive is the cost of reproduction?
In analyzing examples of image use 341, I was able to identify how my participants use
different strategies to position photographs as forms of evidence. For example, one participant
developed his central thesis after noticing the frequency with which he encountered photographs
of families from the turn of the century posing with musical instruments. He explains how and
why he used photographs from digital collections as a strategy in making his argument.
But to really bring home the points that I was making, I started bringing in other images
that were taking elsewhere. Otherwise, I would be portraying this as something that was
just happening in Alabama, which of course it wasn't. And so my use of digital images
really comes into play- Well, I have two thoughts on that. One is looking for similar
pictures across the United States, which I wouldn't have been able to do without being
able to access digital archives. And this is probably useful, although it's pretty lame and
boring, but I did a lot of Google image searches. And spent a lot of time sort of honing
how I did that and to come up with a lot of images like the one I sent you of those
musicians in Kansas.
My participants also use rhetorical techniques in their arguments to support their use of
photographs as evidence. Rhetorical techniques range from ascribing intentionality to

As exploratory research, the aim of this study was to uncover some of the factors underlying practices and
processes in historians’ use of digitized photographs. Therefore, a full historiographical account of historians’
construction of evidence is outside the scope of this research. Instead, this study investigates evidential use as
discursive practice and suggests aspects of the experience that can be used in future research.
341

133

photographic subjects based on the way they represent themselves visually, to making claims
about how the general public might interpret an image. The final analytical theme I identified is
different kinds of evidence, or the descriptive themes my participants use in identifying
photographs as being representative of or about something. For example, one participant uses
photographs as representative evidence of what a 19th-century dog sled actually looks like.
Another participant uses photographs as documentary proof of racist perceptions in the 20th
century.
4.3 Potential Image Use
One goal of this research was to discover dimensions of historians’ experiences that
influence them in their image use practices. I noticed how certain themes related to image
selection seemed to be an important aspect of historians’ experiences. Conceptualizing a
separate sphere of activities related to potential image use helped me to surface themes related to
historians’ interpretive and evaluative processes during image selection (see Table 4).

ANALYTICAL THEMES

CODING EXAMPLE

Research practices in digital environments

“And I contacted a man who had a great digital
scan of this image and the rights to it and he was
nice enough to let me use it, sent me permission
and things like that.

Motivations

"But I'd always try to find good touristy photos
to show some good 60s and 70s touristy photos
or whatever, just to make it livelier."

Factors that matter

“It's important to know where it's from and when
it was created and what the archive knows about
it, which certainly guides me, and it's important
to know where it is so that I can know who to
contact to get the high-quality image.”

Table 4. Analytical themes in potential image use

134

4.3.1 Research practices in digital environments
As discussed in the literature reviewed in section 2.3, image use is intricately tied to
research practices. Lori McCay-Peets argues that image use is often “tightly integrated with the
work task that triggered it, such as finding an image to explain a concept in a presentation, or
adding visual appeal to an article.” At the same time, the literature reviewed in section 2.1
suggests that historical research practices are currently in flux, due in large part to technological
advancements. The extent to which such changes are impacting research practices is not wellunderstood and only beginning to be explored.
My participants describe five themes related to their research practices in digital
environments (see Table 5). Each theme is discussed in greater detail below with illustrative
examples from different cases.

THEMES

#PARTICIPANTS

Browsing
Starting with images
Orienting
Amassing personal collections
Different entry points for access

Table 5. Research practices in digital environments

15
6
6
5
10

Browsing. All fifteen participants mention that they engage in browsing in their research
or instructional pursuits. They described two different kinds of browsing. The first form, what I
am calling “whittle-then-browse,” refers to when my participants initially limit their search
results, and then cycle through images to try to locate material. Sampsell-Willman explains that,
“I wouldn't do keyword searches, because I know that keyword searches are going to limit what I
find. And if I'm looking for everything, you know what I mean, if I don't know what I'm going
to find yet, then I don't want to limit what I see.” The second form of browsing is primarily
exploratory and tends to be motivated by searching for generic, representational images. When
135

Black is browsing in this mode, she says that she “might have been looking for shop signs in
New York, and so any image that had shop signs in it would be okay.”
Starting with images. Six participants began their research projects with an intention to
use photographs. Some participants elaborated that this was deliberately in opposition to how
historians typically use images – as supplementary illustration in support of an existing
argument. The extent to which this practice is markedly different from research practices in
physical archives is not known. However, the historiographical literature reviewed in 2.4
suggests that photographs are most often used as illustration rather than as primary sources of
evidence.
In her research, Jeanette Gabriel describes how photographs are “the foremost piece of
evidence that would then be corroborated by written record[s].” She uses images “as a starting
point to investigate what had happened in that historical moment.” Andrew Nelson concurs:
“I’m not writing history and then using images to illustrate what I’m writing. It’s the other way
around. So I’m starting with the images, and I’m thinking ‘okay, what if we start by sort of
thinking about these historical questions with the pictures and then see where that takes us?”
Similarly, Zachary Hilpert went into his research project just being “fascinated with the images”
and then looking to see “what story would develop out of it.”
Orienting. Six participants mention that photographs orient them early on in their
research process in two distinct ways. First, accessing images online helps them determine
whether or not to visit a repository in-person. Second, participants may download images they
simply find interesting at an early stage of research, presumably for use at a later point. For
example, Kristen Turner explains why she might download photographs in the exploratory
research stage.

136

My experience is that there are sort of two types of research that I was doing. One was
just the sort of, who are these people- I'm researching an area of musicology that is
relatively untouched- so I didn't know who any of these people were. I mean, I really had
to get the lay of the land. So, I did not know, initially, who was going to be important
and who wasn't in my research. So, there was that sort of- and that went on for a very
long time, even when I thought I was doing more specialized research, it turned out to beand then, there was. . . Now I'm working on the Emma Juch chapter, right? And so I
would collect all the images I could find of Emma Juch, who's an opera singer, but I
wouldn't necessarily realize until later, “Oh, this is the interesting image,” you know, you
see what I'm saying? So in both cases, both whether I was doing some more general kind
of orientation research, or if I thought I was doing something more specialized, I usually
didn't realize right away which images were going to stick out.
Amassing personal collections. In addition to the growing number of materials digitized
and made accessible by libraries and archives, my participants are beginning to amass their own
collections of materials in digital form. In large part, this can be attributed to the ease with
which digital objects can be personally acquired and stored on personal computers.342 Five
participants mention collecting digital materials for research and/or instruction through three
methods: 1) the use of portable digital cameras in archival reading rooms and in the public
sphere; 2) downloadable digitized online sources; and 3) home scanning equipment.
Different entry points for accessing materials. Digitization has undoubtedly influenced
how and where historians are accessing photographic materials. Ten respondents describe
locating images outside of the digital archive. The formerly bounded nature of visiting an
archival repository, interacting with an archivist, and receiving boxes of photographs to browse
through has been transformed into an experience with vastly different dimensions. Historians can
now view and assess digitized photographs on their own time and in various locations.

The practice of acquiring and managing digital objects for personal use has come to be known broadly as
personal digital archiving, in which “individuals manage or keep track of their digital files, where they store them,
and how these files are described and organized.” See: Gabriela Redwine, Personal Digital Archiving, DPC
Technology Watch Report 15-01, 2015, http://dx.doi.org/10.7207/twr15-01.
342

137

Eight respondents mentioned that they regularly use Google image search to locate items
of interest, though most noted they would then pursue a version of that image held by an archival
repository. In her work with educators, Gabriel encourages teachers to use archives for image
searching so that contextual elements are not lost “because history teachers are just picking up
stuff from Google and taking it out of blogs.” Jennifer Black points to the Library of Congress
as a model archival interface for providing links for items back to their collection.
Historians are also using digitized materials put online by individual collectors or hobbyenthusiasts. Five respondents located digitized photographs from amateur collections for use in
their research or instruction. This trend was noted by Melissa Terras in 2010, who writes,
“Enthusiastic digitisation by amateurs, a phenomenon previously ignored by information
professionals, is providing a rich source of online cultural heritage content which often
documents areas not covered via traditional institutions.” 343
At the same time, images that are dislocated from archival context, such as those found
on blogs or crowd-sourced sites like Wikipedia, introduce additional challenges for historians
who are used to relying on the archival repository for authentication and sourcing of materials.
One participant discovered first-hand the complexities that can arise from locating an image
online. In a Power-Point Presentation for a class, she used what she thought was a digitized
photograph of Anna Held, a performer from the early 20th-century. She initially found the
photograph via Google Image Search, on a blog dedicated to vintage photographs of women at
the turn of the 20th-century. The original photograph, digitized as part of the Macauley Theatre
Collection at the University of Louisville Photographic Archives, tells a different story.

Melissa Terras, “Digital Curiosities: Resource Creation via Amateur Digitization,” Literary and Linguistic
Computing 25, no.4 (2010): 436.
343

138

According to its title, the woman pictured in the photograph is actually one of Anna Held’s
fencing girls.344
4.3.2 Motivations in potential image use
My participants report being motivated to potentially use images by three main themes
(see Table 6). Affect-related themes, such as the ability of images to provoke reactions, play a
significant role in motivating participants. Another motivating theme concerns the ability of
images to act as historical reference in showing “the way things were.” A third motivating theme
that drives my participants is a desire to fill in absences for under-represented populations and/or
stories.

THEMES
Affect-related
Historical reference
Filling in absences

Table 6. Motivations in potential image use

#PARTICIPANTS
9
10
4

Affect-related. As is often the case with visual experiences, there are elusive qualities
that motivate my participants to select (or not select) images. As noted by Barbara Orbach,
photographs “can convey a mood or the sheer visual impact of a situation in a way that few other
types of documents can.”345 Nine participants describe affect-related dimensions as motivating
factors for image selection. For example, three participants point out how they might use
photographs because of a “certain something” that caught their eye. Salo explains how in
developing course materials, photographs “make it more exciting for students.” For Gabriel, the
anticipated impact of certain historical images became central to her instructional training with
teachers:

344

See: http://digital.library.louisville.edu/cdm/ref/collection/macauley/id/1377

Barbara Orbach, “So That Others May See So That Others May See: Tools for Cataloging Still Images.”
Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 11, no.3-4 (1990): 164.
345

139

So a lot of what I was doing, in terms of training teachers, was trying to convince them to
teach controversial issues that they didn’t really want to teach. And teachers have a lot of
autonomy, you know, they close the classroom door. Race is not a mandated topic in
American history. You can skim over African-American history and teach very little. So I
was seeking buy-in, and I felt that maybe the images would foster empathy.
Nelson notes how the uniqueness or unusualness of an image might drive him to use it in
teaching. He says, “Images that I think often times grab people’s attention are ones that are very
different from ones they see on a daily basis.” In his description of image selection practices,
Daegan Miller notes, “I look for anything that catches my eye. And I don’t always know what
I’m looking for, but I’m looking for anything interesting and unusual.” Lisa Jackson concurs
with this sentiment, saying “if it says something to me – if it has an interesting take on gender
representation is pretty much the first thing I’m looking for.” In this way, photographs can act as
provocations for historians, prompting them to pursue deeper exploration.
In some cases, emotional responses to photographs can help translate historical concepts
for students. Kristen Turner is a musicologist who uses photographs to teach about the musical
history of Jim Crow and minstrel shows. She describes how photographs engage her students in
ways that listening to music often cannot.
You know, if we're listening to music from minstrel shows, they're very, very racist,
horrifically racist, but college students are always really in tune to- they don't understand
the racist images- or the racist language- they don't always understand that “Jim Crow” is
a racist thing, or whatever. But you see the image of Jim Crow, that's really obvious.
And then when you hear it, and so then I can say, “Well, this image, you can see how
racist this is, this is easy to understand.” But in the music, they get sort of caught up in
how can music be racist, and how can you have musical markers for racism, and how is
this language racist?
Historical reference. Ten participants consult digitized photographs for verification,
documentation, or corroboration. However, there are distinctions in how they approach
photographs as sources of historical reference. Six participants mention that photographs are

140

helpful for contextualizing their understanding of a specific time and place. For example, in her
research on late 19th-century advertising and early conceptions of branding, Black describes the
potential usefulness of photographs to help flesh out “what things looked like then.” She
explains how historical streetscapes offer a valuable perspective to her project because they show
“what the shop front looked like, to know what the point of sale looked like.” Similarly, Wendy
Clark describes how finding historical streetscapes of Memphis helped ground her research
geographically, offering her “some kind of a real image of what was going on” at the time.
Four respondents note that photographs can serve as reference in contemporary use, by
providing essential historical details about specific time periods and habitats. Edward Roach, a
public historian at the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park, uses digitized archival
photographs originally taken at the home of Orville and Wilbur Wright in 1948 to recreate
historically accurate details about the home, including furnishings and layout. Similarly, in his
work as a consulting historian on historic preservation for a cultural resources management firm,
Edward Salo uses visual materials such as historical photographs to justify his restoration
recommendations. He explains:
I try to use a lot of historic images if I can, to illustrate what buildings used to look like.
Especially where we're studying areas where you can do some of those streetscapes to
show how. One example was the town we live in here, Jonesboro, Arkansas. We were
doing a walking tour of downtown, and I had found some images from our local public
library that were from the 1920s. And I just printed them out, just so I could show them.
I wasn't sure, you know it said “Main Street, south view, circa 1923,” you know I wasn't
going for any specific buildings, just kind of an overview. And you could see power
lines, telephone poles and everything, right along one of the sides of the street. And a lot
of times preservationists are like, “We can't have this, it clogs up the view,” and I'm like,
“Here it is back in '23, and there's power lines right down the middle.” And you know, a
lot of times, that's what preservationists would be attacking, and if you look now, there
weren't any poles in the downtown at all, because most of the stuff has gone underground.
So I was like, “So. . .” A lot of times we need to look at these historic photos to actually
know what it actually looked like and not just our idea of what it looked like.

141

Filling in absences. Participants also point to the ability of photographs to potentially fill
in absences found in the historical record. As the literature in section 2.4 notes, there is growing
acknowledgment that multicultural perspectives are missing from the so-called “Great Story” of
history. Four participants mention being motivated by a desire to help fill in under-represented
histories. For example, Gabriel describes how in her teaching and research, she has attempted to
use photographs that “documented sort of unseen moments in American history, that were not in
the historical record, and then use that as a starting point to investigate what had happened in the
historical moment.” Her master’s thesis examines the underrepresented story of AfricanAmerican women participating in the St. Louis nut processor’s strike in the 1930s.
So I knew that this strike had happened, but to find the images really drew me in deeper.
Because the way African-American women were able to go out on strike, is they aligned
themselves with the unemployed councils, which were black women in the
neighborhood. And white women in the neighborhood. So, they got white women to
come to their picket lines. So when the white women saw the strike going on, they saw
white women out on the picket line and joined the picket line. And it was images of that
that really drew me into the fact that there was a whole, much more extraordinary history
linked to the power of images, that hadn’t been told before.
Gabriel also spent nine years traveling around the country as a participant in Teaching American
History, a federal grant program through the Smithsonian designed to fill in the gaps of
knowledge of American history teachers.
4.3.3 Factors that matter in potential image use
Presumably, a number of factors influence how and why historians decide to select and
use images. According to Maxwell, historians who use digital libraries to conduct historical
research have “disciplinary idiosyncrasies that colour their interactions with digital sources.”346 I

Alexander Maxwell, “Digital Archives and History Research: Feedback from an End-User.” Library Review 59,
no. 1 (2010):24-39.
346

142

identified five themes that mattered to my participants in their interactions with digitized archival
photographs (see Table 7).

THEMES
Materiality
Ability to obtain digital surrogates
Trustworthiness
Perceived usefulness

Table 7. Factors that matter in potential image use

#PARTICIPANTS
6
7
9
11

Materiality. My participants noted distinctions between their interactions with digital
surrogates and their analog counterparts. Overall, six respondents state a particular preference
for digital or analog formats (four prefer digital; two prefer analog). Some of the affordances that
respondents mention as beneficial for interactions with digital surrogates include the ability to
see greater details than would be possible in an analog counterpart. Despite what SampsellWillman refers to as the “wow factor” of holding an archival photograph, she still prefers a
digitized surrogate:
I would say that it’s actually better on the screen, largely because…there’s a skewing
of the details. There’s more details on the screen then there is in the photograph.
Because, unless you get really close or you have a really good eye, or you’re allowed to
touch the photograph, you’re not going to be able to see everything that’s there. Which
means that the people who originally saw the photograph – you’re actually seeing the
level at which the photographer saw. Which I think is better. Better than…I mean, of
course the original photograph is beautiful as an object.
For Hilpert, interacting with a high-quality surrogate of an early 20th-century photograph mimics
what he anticipates as the experience “that probably somebody who was holding the physical
copy could have had a hundred and thirty years ago.”
At the same time, two participants describe their preferences for interacting with an
analog photograph after initially viewing it digitally. Miller ruminates on seeing an image
digitally that piqued his interest, leading him to follow with in-person examination:
And I was like, oh that looks cool and mysterious, that sort of speaks to me somehow, I
want to make sure I look at the real thing when I get there. So I don’t want to say that the
143

digital was not helpful, or that it misled me or anything. It actually led me to the physical
image. But yeah, I’m thankful I got to hold the hard copy in my hand.
Also, as Black points out, often times the digital surrogate may not provide enough information
about an image, particularly for scholars interested in material aspects of a photograph’s
production rather than its viewing consumption.
Ability to obtain digital surrogates. There are also practical factors that matter to my
participants as they consider further use of images. Seven respondents describe the reproduction
process as a potential obstacle for them. One specific concern they share is the cost of obtaining
and/or reproducing a digital surrogate. Turner describes how she decides to select images for use
in publication:
Eastman will give me permission at a very high cost. But, the editors of the volume, I
don't know what their, what they need to do with their publisher, right? Like…are they
going to have any restrictions on how many images can be printed in the book, that kind
of thing…so, I don't know anything about that, yet. And I sort of just, I did what my
advisor said, which was to send it all in like, “of course you're going to do this,” and then,
you know, find out later if I have to make a choice, like, “oh, we'll let you do one,” or
something like that. So this would be the one that I would definitely use if I had to make
a choice, though.
Cost also factors into the ability to obtain surrogates. If the image hasn’t been digitized the
ability to pay for digitization and use (if necessary) can be prohibitive for my participants.
Additional obstacles include confusion or difficulty with obtaining copyright
permissions. Some institutions are more transparent and straightforward about their process.
Hilpert explains:
One of the things that is nice about the Library of Congress website is use. So if I were
to, for example, use this image in an article that I were going to send out, getting
permission to use this image is incredibly simple because it's owned by the Library of
Congress. If it's another kind of private institution or something, then there's a lot more
agreements that have to be made, and rights questions that you have to ask, but being that
it's from the Library of Congress and its owned by the US government, they make it
available for use, basically for free. So that's certainly useful.

144

Despite potential difficulties in obtaining reproductions, participants stress the overwhelming
value of access to digitized surrogates. Online archives provide the opportunity to locate images
easily, without necessarily having to visit an archival repository. This can help scholars narrow
their image selection considerably, making the complex aspects of reproduction more
manageable. Nelson describes how online archives helped him to find useful images for his
dissertation:
I didn't have the time or money to plan a trip to Kansas. I wouldn't have even known I
wanted to go to Kansas until this was digitized and put online. It really struck me, when I
got to the end of my dissertation and was giving permissions to all the archives I used
that, you know, I'm calling people in Kansas, in Utah, Wisconsin, all of these
[unintelligible] historical societies all over the country to get permissions just for one
photo. So that to me, really, is a testament to the accessibility that has come with
digitization of images.
Trustworthiness. Respondents need to be able to trust sources in order to use them
further. The reputation of an institution, as well as the simple fact that an image originated from
an archival institution, plays an important role in establishing trust for nine participants. Salo
describes how he tries to stay as close as possible in his research process to “reputable
repositories, be they national archives or a state archive, or a good University.” The notion of
the archive as a harbinger of truth repeatedly surfaces in respondents’ descriptions; Black states,
“I generally tend to take what the archive tells me as truth.” Certain archival institutions might
carry more weight for my respondents, though this might be attributed to comfort based on
previous experiences. Turner explains:
Well, I have to say if it's New York Public Library, I trust it. You know, obviously an
image that's on some random website that's come off of Google image, I would be more
careful with using. But if it's a University website, you know, University library, New
York Public Library, something like that, the Historical Society of D.C., then I pretty
much trust that what's there is what's correct. So I would say I don't usually second-guess
those sources, because I trust the repository.

145

Additionally, personal relationships with archivists can also contribute to trustworthiness. Clark
mentions being more willing to use a photograph in her scholarship because she knows the
archivist who helped to digitize it, as well as the original donor’s family.
Perceived usefulness. The LIS literature examining visual material use suggests that one
construct which can be used to examine potential use of materials is perceived usefulness.347 In
this study, perceived usefulness as a construct helped to unify the varying techno-social
dimensions that cut across participants’ experiences in digital research environments (see Table
8).

THEME
Provenance
Contextual elements
Artefactual qualities
Functionality / usability
Quality of digital surrogate

POTENTIALLY RELEVANT CHARACTERISTICS #PARTICIPANTS
Title, photographer, location of original item
Subject headings, keywords, captions
Medium, size, format
Ability to zoom, ability to download
Resolution, ability to be projected

Table 8. Perceived usefulness as a construct

7
4
5
7
6

Provenance plays a critical role in how my participants evaluate images as evidence.348
Identification of the original photographer, title, and related captions are all important sources of
information. Conversely, learning that the original photographer is unknown is also useful. For
Roach, knowing an item’s provenance is directly related to potential use. He explains, “It's
important to know where it's from and when it was created and what the archive knows about it,
which certainly guides me, and it's important to know where it is so that I can know who to
contact to get the high-quality image.”

347

For in-depth examinations of perceived usefulness of visual materials in LIS, see: Kathleen Fear, “User
Understanding of Metadata in Digital Image Collections: Or, What Exactly Do You Mean by ‘Coverage’?” The
American Archivist 73, no.2 (2010): 26–60; Ying Zhang and Yuelin Li, “A User-Centered Functional Metadata
Evaluation of Moving Image Collections,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology
59, no. 8 (2008): 1331–46, doi:10.1002/asi.20839.
In their glossary of archival records and terminology, The Society of American Archivists defines provenance as
“information regarding the origins, custody, and ownership of an item or collection.” See:
http://www2.archivists.org/glossary/terms/p/provenance#.V0tJHPkrK00
348

146

Interestingly, participants seem to feel more authoritative about using surrogates when
they know the original archival location because “if I need to find the physical copy, I can.”
Information about the photograph’s origin also makes my participants more comfortable with
using photographs in their teaching. Miller points out how provenance plays an important role in
his decision to select photographs for use in instruction:
And then the other factor is - is it easy to track down the citation- the photographer, when
it was made, where it's being held, so that a) I can practice “good citation practices” for
my students, but also b) if they're interested, they can go find the image themselves. And
a lot of my assignments- with most of my classes, I'll offer an assignment that says “Use
these images as primary sources. Make an argument about the brutality of the Civil
War,” or something like that. Whatever the case may be. But I want to make sure to give
them the information they need to find the images online for themselves, or in the library,
or wherever.
Contextual information, such as related keywords and subject headings, influences
participants. In his study of historical taxidermy practices, Grunert points out how keywords are
useful for locating figures of interest:
I've started out by looking at just taxidermy, and using that to get the broadest range that I
can find. But, of course, that one keyword doesn't help with everything. So, once I've
used taxidermy, I've been looking at some of the key actors that show up in these
pictures, and then looking them up by name, then. So, still doing subject searching, but
looking at it through the lens of Carl Akeley or William Hornaday, or whoever I might
find.
Photographic captions can also be used to provide historical snapshots of a particular time
period. For example, Stephen Gold describes how a photographic caption functioned as
contextual evidence in his larger argument about community perceptions and social norms.
And so I found, in the FSA archives, a photograph of a Greek ice cream store owner that
was taken in the late 30s or early 40s, and the caption explicitly said that he was a US
Veteran. So, I took this as- you know, this idea of Greeks were not patriotic enough, and
they were just making money from their businesses and not fighting in the military- had
shaped this caption of a photograph from the FSA, you know, twenty years later. So, that
kind of thing. So, I didn't intentionally use it to make that argument, but once I connected
those things together, I was able to use that, and use the caption of the photograph as
empirical evidence.”
147

Of course, respondents recognize that assigning relevant keywords and subject headings has
significant influence on how findable materials are in the first place. Jackson points out:
One of the stumbling blocks is really the keyword search, with visual images. How many
words, how do you figure out what words are going to be relevant for a photograph, for
researchers? Because sometimes it’s kind of hard to imagine what other people might
find in this image, when it’s not your particular research, you know?
Artefactual qualities about the original source material also influence respondents’ perceptions
of usefulness. Five participants mention the importance that descriptive characteristics play in
deciding how and whether to use an image. Factors such as the original medium, size, or format
play a significant role in evaluation. For example, Nelson describes how material aspects
influence his interpretation:
What the edges tell me is that it’s a glass plate negative – something that would interest
me would be did they scan the negative, or was it a print made from the negative, and did
they scan that?....I think it was a print made from the negative that they scanned, just
because you can see how the paper’s kind of rolled on the right hand side. But yeah, I
love the sort of material aspects of it as well and in a lot of ways think of a negative like
this…as not just a photograph but also an object.
It can be useful to consult the original source material in person as well. Roach describes how
glass plate negatives (from which historic prints were made and later digitized) offer important
historical distinctions.
Though one thing that has mattered, especially with some of the negatives over the years,
was that the Wrights stored them in their old bike shop in Dayton, and there was a huge
flood in Dayton in 1913, and the negatives were under water. So some photographs that
you see from these glass plate negatives, if you see prints that were made before the
flood, they look like fine, normal prints. If you see the same negative after the flood, it's
splotchy and damaged.
A fourth area that influences my participants’ perceived usefulness is the functionality of
an image. Factors such as the ability to download different versions of photographs or being able
to zoom in to see greater details are important considerations in image selection. Salo

148

summarizes some of his favorite functional aspects about the American Memory Collection, at
the Library of Congress:
I really like the different ways you can download things from their website, just
depending on what kind of graphic needs and how you’re going to utilize them.
Sometimes you just want to get the low-res thing just for comparing, or you want to go
with a large .tiff kind of thing for a presentation.
Finally, the quality of the digitized surrogate plays a role in perceived usefulness for my
participants. Some considerations are practical; Miller wonders whether a digitized photograph
will project appropriately in the classroom. Notions about quality can also be akin to scholars
determining if they can accurately perceive specific details in photographs. Turner points out
how even “online sometimes, the images just don’t come across very well…you can’t see the
sort of detail you want.” Jonathan Grunert concurs, explaining how “resolution of image matters
a whole lot, especially when I'm trying to find some things that I might want to use in a
presentation.”
By the same token, participants recognize that the use of digitized surrogates helps to
preserve fragile materials. Jackson describes her appreciation of the “rogue scholar” who took it
upon themselves to digitize frail historical materials residing at the Labor Archives and Research
Center. She notes how her experience was vastly improved working with digital surrogates.
They have hard copies of a lot of the newspapers at LARC, but they're falling apart.
There's great interest in 1934, in particular, and so every time you open up the book, it's
just, bits and pieces are falling out all the time, so it's really nice that people are taking it
upon themselves to do this, it's a lot better than microfilm.
4.4 Evidential Image Use
The use of photographs in research dates back to the first decades of the twentieth
century. Anthropologists began using photographs as ethnographic media, a practice which
helped solidify and demonstrate their capacity to serve as cogent research materials. Writing in

149

1959, the anthropologist John Collier Jr. asked the following of photographs: “Why could we not
consider the photograph a cultural map that could be read with equal clarity by the knowing
informant? Could this process allow us to analyze the contents of photographs – and therefore of
situations – that we had not previously understood?” 349
In this section, I discuss specific examples of how and why my participants use digitized
photographs as evidence in research and instructional capacities. The following research
question guided this stage of analysis and interpretation.
Sub-RQ1: How are historians using digitized archival photographs as evidence in their
research and instructional activities?
In this portion of my analysis, I used photo-elicitation interview transcripts and research products
(e.g., journal articles, conference power-point presentations) to understand evidential use.
I identified three analytical themes that take place during evidential image use. My
participants employ strategies (e.g., juxtaposing images with text) to lay out their arguments, use
rhetorical techniques (e.g., corroboration) to situate their historical argument, and assign kinds of
evidence (e.g., racist perceptions in 19th century America) to images to make their argument (see
Table 9). Taken together, these interactions culminate in what I’m calling “modes of historical
evidence.” Integrating participants’ actual examples of use with the descriptive themes surfaced
in my initial thematic analysis helped to triangulate my findings.

John Collier Jr., “Photography in Anthropology: A Report on Two Experiments,” American Anthropologist 59
(1957): 843–59.
349

150

ANALYTICAL THEME

EXAMPLE

Strategies

Display contrasting portrayals from similar time periods

Rhetorical techniques

“And there's a scene, the scene there, you know, very nice
simple street, no people on it at all. And that's to make a
point, too, because when a black person appears on a
street it changes the perception of the place. These are all
visual arguments.”

Kinds of evidence

“So, I took this as- you know, this idea of Greeks were not
patriotic enough, and they were just making money from
their businesses and not fighting in the military- had shaped
this caption of a photograph from the FSA, you know, twenty
years later.”
Table 9. Characterizing evidential image use

4.4.1 Constructing modes of historical evidence
How do images become evidence? In her Notes on Photography, Susan Sontag describes
the various ways in which photographs can be utilized as forms of evidence – how they can
“incriminate” as well as “justify.” The dual nature of photographs, what Marcus Banks refers to
as “to be and to represent”, complicates attempts to understand characteristics of information
use.350 Nearly thirty years ago, the librarian Sara Shatford-Layne proposed that indexing
approaches for describing visual materials needed to account for the fact that they can be
simulatenously “Of” and “About.” She writes, “What an image is Of is perhaps more likely to be
concrete and objective, while what an image is About may be more likely to be abstract and
subjective.”351
In their construction of evidence, historians can choose to invoke photographs at either
the “Of” or the “About” levels; both have implications for how images are used in their

350

Banks, The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data Analysis, 394.

Sara Shatford-Layne, “Some Issues in the Indexing of Images,” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 45, no. 8 (1994): 584.
351

151

arguments. Interpretive readings at the “About” level likely produce descriptions in the realm of
“symbolic readings and abstract concepts.” In contrast, interpreting photographs at the “Of” level
will likely result in descriptions of “people, places, objects, conditions, and actions that have a
physical manifestation.”352 The historian who interprets a photograph as being representative Of
something (e.g., racist perceptions in the 19th-century) will likely have a different path towards
how they use the photograph in the construction of their argument, than the historian interpreting
a photograph as being About racist perceptions in the 19th-century.
Indeed, as the literature in 2.4 suggests, historians inherently apply their own ideologies
to perceptions of evidence in the construction of historical arguments. As Berkhofer explains,
“The problem with historical facts, as with histories themselves, is that they are constructions
and interpretations of the past. Evidence is not fact until given meaning in accordance with some
framework or perspective.”353 Analyzing examples of use through the discursive strategies of
thematic analysis and synthesis allowed me to chart respondents’ construction of their own
“Great Story” – what I’m calling modes of historical evidence. Through a combination different
strategies and rhetorical techniques, historians position photographs as being representative of
different kinds of evidence.
4.4.2 Case vignettes
Below, I present different case vignettes that describe how and why my participants
chose to use digitized photographs as forms of evidence in their instruction and/or research
activities. Each vignette seeks to illustrate in greater detail how each participants uses images in
their construction of different modes of historical evidence.

352

Shatford-Layne, “Analyzing the Subject of a Picture,” 45.

353

Berkhofer, 53.

152

Using photographs as historical evidence of the photographer’s vision
There is widespread acknowledgement that photographers play a role in both the
production and consumption of photographs (choice of subject matter, framing, positioning).
Writing in her 1977, Susan Sontag asserts, “Even when photographers are most concerned with
mirroring reality, they are still haunted by tacit imperatives of taste and conscience.”354 In his
research argument, Miller focuses on a stereographic triptych taken by Eadweard Muybridge at
the Thousand Mile Tree, a marker for the thousandth mile of track laid west on the
Transcontinental Railroad.
Miller uses these three photographs along with historical texts to contextualize his
argument that in shooting these images, Muybridge was intentionally creating a narrative of
historical drama. While there are numerous details in each image, he points out how in the first
image (see Figure 4), if you zoom in enough you can see that propped against a black box is a
hatchet with a tomahawk.

354

Susan Sontag, On Photography (New York: Farrar,Straus and Giroux, 1977), 6.

153

Figure 4. Eadweard Muybridge, Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha.
http://www.oac.cdlib.org/ark:/13030/tf8x0nb9c6/?order=1

For Miller, that the tomahawk indicates a “gesturing to American Indian times or that this was
once American Indian land.” By focusing on a particular detail, Miller lays the framework for his
historical argument.
Miller describes the scene in the second photograph (see Figure 5) as barely inhabited,
“except for the character who, squinting just barely reveals, is dressed in a long duster and a very
wide-brimmed cowboy’s hat.”355 Miller reads him as a “sort of hearty Western pioneer.”

Daegan Miller, “Witness Tree: Landscape and Dissent in the Nineteenth Century United States” (PhD Diss.,
Cornell University, 2013): 265.
355

154

Figure 5. Eadweard Muybridge, Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha, Looking West,
http://digitalcollections.nypl.org/items/510d47e0-17c3-a3d9-e040-e00a18064a99

Both photographs, if taken together, suggest “a narrative of conquest, of an absent Indian
presence metonymically signaled by that tomahawk succeeded by the view of the western
pioneer, hardy and upright, emerging out of the distance to stake his claim.”356

356

Ibid, 266.

155

Viewing the third photograph is what motivated Miller to make a deeper historical
connection out of this three-part series (see Figure 6). He reads the hunched figure in the
photographs as being meant to represent the mythical Wandering Jew, serving as a reminder to
viewers about the nature of atrocities and “the unnaturalness of violence.”357 For Miller, the
depiction of this figure suggests that Muybridge is commenting on “the shade of past injustices
that refused to stay dead and buried.”

Figure 6. Eadweard Muybridge, Thousand Mile Tree, 1000 Miles West of Omaha, Looking East.
https://calisphere.org/item/ark:/13030/tf8v19p556/

In his dissertation, Hilpert explores images of disaster dating from the Civil War to the
San Francisco Fire of 1906. Using visual documentation ranging from postcards to photographs,
Hilpert argues that images (and image makers) helped shape disaster narratives that reinforced

357

Ibid, 269.

156

American Exceptionalism at the height of industrialization. Hilpert describes the rationale for
his image use:
One of the things I was trying to do with this dissertation was get away from the notion
that – or at least an alternative view – of these images that came from disasters as just
illustration, as they were typically used. You know, they were part of the story of how
people understood what took place. And so I wanted to look at them, and even the map
that this photograph is pasted to, as kind of a primary source of evidence.
A central event that Hilpert focuses on the Johnstown flood of 1889. He uses a series of
digitized eight-by-ten photographs taken by E. Walter Histed (see Figure 7) to argue that images
of the flood were used to turn the event into a “palatable spectacle” permeated by
“sensationalistic images of struggle and ruin.”358

Figure 7. Ernest W. Histed, Debris at P.R.R.Stone Bridge, 1889.
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/2002707085
Zachary Hilpert, “Ruins Reframed: The Commodification of American Urban Disasters, 1861-1906,” (PhD diss.,
College of William and Mary, 2014): 110-111.
358

157

Hilpert looks at contextual elements such as photographic captions and related event
documentation to structure his argument. For example, he points to the brevity and succinctness
of Histed’s captions as being indicative of spectacle. “Johnstown Flood, May 31st, 1889. Loss
from 10,000 to 12,000 lives.”359 Additionally, Hilpert points out how photographers, journalists,
and illustrators were there as soon as the following day to take “pictures like this of scenes that
they knew that people were really hungry to see for themselves.” For Hilpert, these kinds of
images were circulated to fuel “a particular desire on the part of a largely white, native-born
consumer class to share in a collective grieving process, one that initially recalled the comforts
found in the communal suffering of the Civil War…”360 Hilpert also points to the popularity of
so-called “history books” – collections of images with “no real sense of linear narrative” that
surfaced usually within days or weeks after disasters. He argues that these kinds of images
represent “a product of people’s fears of the city in the latter half of the 19th century.” They
visualize the threats and nightmarish landscape presented by the industrial era.
Sampsell-Willmann’s research on the social documentary photographer Lewis Hine
suggests that his work represented allegories of his own progressive thinking. Hine is best known
for documenting child labor in the first half of the twentieth century; he quit his job as a
schoolteacher and became a photographer for the National Child Labor Committee. According
to Sampsell-Willmann, part of Hine’s motivation for taking photographs of child laborers came
from his staunch opposition to their exploitation. She argues that Hine took these photographs to
help counter popular misgivings that children were in factories to visit their parents rather than to
work. For Sampsell-Willmann, there is a certain degree of intentionality in what Hine chose to

359

Ibid, 20. The actual death toll from the Johnstown flood was 2,209.

360

Ibid, 1.

158

capture (and leave out) in framing his images. Hine called his images “Hineographs” and often
provided captions and extensive notes to accompany them.
Everything that is in a Hineograph is in there because Hine wanted it, and everything that
is missing is absent because Hine left it out. One can, and should, draw conclusions about
Hine’s intent from the inclusion or exclusion of an adult, a piece of machinery, or a
living/working space in a particular image.361
Though his work was relatively unknown at the time of his death, Hine is now widely credited as
having helped establish standards for workers that effectively cut the number of child laborers in
half by 1920.
Sampsell-Willmann suggests that Hine represented his subjects in a manner that matched
his own social conscience. In one of the chapters in her book Lewis Hine as Social Critic,
Sampsell-Willmann uses images Hine took of newly arrived immigrants to Ellis Island to make
her argument. She focuses on one particular image of a Russian immigrant (see Figure 8).

Kate Sampsell-Willman. “Using Lewis Hine's Child Labor Photographs, Part 2: The Miners,” The Journal of the
Gilded Age and Progressive Era Online http://www.jgape.org/node/123 (2010).
361

159

Figure 8. Lewis Hine, Young Russian Jewess at Ellis Island, 1905.
http://digitalcollections.nypl.org/items/510d47d9-4e85-a3d9-e040-e00a18064a99

For Sampsell-Willmann, the anonymous caption is an explicit choice by Hine to identify her as
an immigrant rather than to personalize her. Noting the saturation of anti-immigration sentiment
among early 20th century New Yorkers, Sampsell-Willmann argues that Hine purposefully
counteracts anti-immigrant assumptions of “othering” in his representation.
By captioning the portrait within a type, Hine addressed the assumptions around him. By
allowing her to compose herself for the camera, Hine defeated the “othering” objectivity
of social science and offered a new vision of immigration and cultural plurality, one that
would become ruling in the 1930s. There the photographer-as-viewer definitely changed
the observation. By representing her as a child, tired, yes, but neither powerless nor
160

threatening, Hine rebuked the nativists; she was a danger to no one. By photographing
her at eye level, looking directly into the camera, she was no longer the cowed refugee;
he recognized her individual dignity and strength. By typifying the young woman, Hine
acknowledged the current standards of measure used to judge and categorize
immigration. Simultaneously he defeated them with his perception of the characteristics
that makes each person unique. Perhaps she was not a “typical Russian Jewess” but
rather “that particular Russian Jewess.” 362
Thus, to make her argument Sampsell-Willmann draws on perceived social norms from the time
period to contextualize how Hine’s work functions as anti-nativist.
Using photographs as evidence of subject’s self-representation
Another mode of historical evidence employed by historians attributes a certain amount
of intentionality to photographic subjects, claiming that subjects consciously represent
themselves in a certain manner. In her dissertation examining opera and gender representations
in the United States, Kristen Turner uses a carte de visite of the opera singer Minnie Hauk to
argue that she purposefully represented herself as “exotic” in publicity images for her
performance in the opera Carmen (see Figure 9).

362

Kate Sampsell-Whillmann, Lewis Hine as Social Critic (Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2009), 29-30.

161

Figure 9. Napoleon Sarony, Minnie Hauk, ca.1880.
https://www.flickr.com/photos/george_eastman_house/2720790494/

According to Turner, most women participating in American operatic performances during this
time period owned their own costumes and were involved in their production. She explains: “I
162

know she would have had a lot to do with how that costume looked. And so she wants Carmen to
look this way.”
Turner points out particular details about Hauk’s representation of Carmen that make her
portrayal unusual in comparison to how other women have portrayed her. The fact that Hauk is
showing her ankles and her bare arms as well as being dressed in elaborate jewelry and
embroidery signifies her intention to “exoticize” Carmen “in a sexual manner.” In her
dissertation, Turner uses quotations from American critical writing at the time period to help
situate the particular historical context. For example, according to The North American
publication, Hauk’s portrayal was “objectionable to the cultivated taste, which looks upon the
opera as catering first to refinement, and not at all to realism.”363
Jackson also uses this mode in her research on how communists represented themselves
in the media. Her master’s thesis examines the social lives and gendered constructions of
members of the Workers World Communist Party in California.

363

Kristen Turner, “Opera in English: Class and culture, 1878-1910” (PhD Diss.), 2015, 367.

163

Figure 10. “They Asked for Food and Got This!” Western Worker 2, no.5 (30 January 1933).
https://www.marxists.org/history/usa/pubs/westernworker/1933/v2n05-jan-30-1933.pdf

She explains how photographs like Figure 10 transformed the aims of her research.
I really started out to do a social history of the party. I was much more fascinated by their
social lives. And then, the more I delved in the photographic evidence…I got fascinated
by the way they portrayed themselves in newspapers, and then once I started reading
some of the reports about their sicknesses, and you know…once the entire LA staff was
either sick or in jail – so there was a lot of discussion about needing to get people
there….and then I started getting interested in this dichotomy of the way they represented
themselves in the press, and the way they were actually living. So a lot of it was a
combination of a photographic evidence, putting themselves out there as these manly
guys who were brawling and getting whipped by the cops, but still out there on the front
lines, and the very manly, masculine, muscular images they put in political cartoons. So
yeah, it did transform my research from this kind of general “I’m interested in their social
life” to “I’m interested in the way that they portray themselves.” And they’re portraying
themselves.

164

Using photographs as evidence of the representations of social norms
In this study, archival photographs are used to demonstrate representations of historical
social norms. In his teaching, Miller uses digitized archival photographs in “American History
to the Civil War Era” to argue that public perceptions of death changed during the Civil War. In
his PowerPoint presentation for his introductory course, Miller juxtaposes contrasting images of
death from the time period to make his argument.
Miller references a painting showing George Washington on his death bed surrounded by
friends and family in a portrait by Junius Brutus Stearns from 1851. He contrasts this image with
a photograph taken by Alexander Gardner in 1863 (see Figure 11).

Figure 11. Alexander Gardner, Home of a Rebel Sharpshooter, 1863.
https://www.loc.gov/resource/cwpb.04337/

165

Juxtaposing both images together shows how perceptions about the culture of death changed in
the space of the Civil War. Miller explains his reading of both images in positioning his
argument:
Washington's surrounded by his friends, his family. His wife is in mourning. He's clean,
he's ready to meet his maker. He's going to say his last words, they're going to be
famous. But once you get to the Civil War. . . You know, this is an image- if the
Washington image is an image of the “good death,” the idealized good death- this is an
image of a wasteful death, of a bad death. This guy is very clearly not clean, he's not
prepared to meet his maker. He's not surrounded by his friends and wife and daughters
and all that sort of stuff. And so one of the arguments I try to use this image to make is
that what happens when death starts occurring on sort of a mass, industrialized scale that
was literally new? At least in terms of warfare, I guess there was the Black Death and
things like that, but in terms of warfare in the US. How did it change the way we think
about living and dying in and of itself? And so I tried to make this argument about a
change in the culture of death, and kind of a fear and something of a nihilism. That death
becomes horrible, and something we want to avoid. And it's going to be lonely, it's going
to be painful, and the best case scenario is that someone then drags your corpse
somewhere and takes a picture of you.
In his teaching about the 1893 World’s Columbian Exposition (or World’s Fair, as it is
commonly known), Hilpert uses photographs as evidence to demonstrate representations of
cultural otherness. The focal point of the exhibition was the White City, a nearly 633 acre
development which was “intended to display the grandeur of the American urban future.”364
For Hilpert, a single photograph (see Figure 12) depicts how foreigners were
intentionally positioned on the Midway Plaisance to serve as contrast to potential inhabitants of
the White City.365 He explains:
Faraway Moses was brought over from Turkey to kind of stand-in for all Turkish people,
and be kind of on display on the midway. So you’ve got the White City on one side,
which is the “here’s how great everything is in the United States and all the wonderful
inventions and innovations that we’ve accomplished, and all the art we’ve created, and by
the way, everything is white except for one building dedicated to African Americans” and
See: Eric Gordon, The Urban Spectator: American Concept Cities from Kodak to Google (Hanover, NH:
Dartmouth College Press, 2010): 21-22.
364

According to Gordon, the Midway Plaisance was “a collection of ‘exotic’ cultures from around the world’ that
‘functioned as an important counterpoint to the majesty of the White City.” P. 33
365

166

then you’ve got….the midway where you have…all these different nationalities and
cultures kind of represented by people that they went and recruited and brought over and
set up in kind of like a Disney-fied version of their culture. And so this guy, and I assume
the woman standing with him…kind of served as living cultural ambassadors, I suppose.
But all of this with the idea that you’re supposed to contrast this incredible architectural
achievement of the white city with these supposedly kind of primitive-seeming other
cultures on the midway. And the way that they’ve kind of designed the buildings, the way
they’ve laid it out, was “here’s where you can kind of go to a zoo of other cultures,” in a
way. So this image, and a lot of other ones kind of stood in for – I was using them and
comparing them with images of the white city.

Figure 12. Far Away Moses with woman in Middle Eastern dress at World's Columbian Exposition, Chicago,
Illinois, ca.1893. http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/92505426/

The ability of photographs to signify social norms is also part of their power when used
to engage historical thinking. Gold frequently uses photographs as historical documentation in
his work on ethnic communities. He uses the photograph below (see Figure 13) to teach his
167

students about racism against Japanese Americans during World War Two. Gold explains that
the power of the image lies in its ability to engage his audience.

Figure 13. Japanese Captured in Raid, 1942.
http://photos.lapl.org/carlweb/jsp/DoSearch?&index=tw/&databaseID=968&count=10&tag=245&terms=Japanese%
20captured%20in%20raid

He describes how he interprets this photograph:
You know, as a teaching photo, I think the idea of race and the state being used to bear
down on these rather- you know, you feel bad, these little older men being roughed up by
these intimidating police- and I think it re-contextualized the idea of Pearl Harbor and the
Japanese as being this threatening alien presence and so forth, even though these people
were living in the US and they weren't allowed to become citizens. But their kids were,
and the kids were interned, too. And just the idea that people who are in business are- if
they're not the right kind of people- they're seen as threatening, and society will crack
down upon them. And so, you know, racism and the power of the state. And the
particular threatening of small business, that it's not so much about war or Pearl Harbor,
168

it's about “we don't like these people making a decent living in our country,” kind of.
They're not one of us.
Nelson uses the photograph below (see Figure 14) teaching his Introduction to American
Studies class as an example of race as a social construction.

Figure 14. Carl Mydans, “Griffith Children of West Alabama Land Use Demonstration Project,” June 1936.
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/fsa1998020268/PP/

The caption (and full title) of the photograph reads: “‘Griffin children’ of west Alabama land use
demonstration project near Greensboro, Alabama. They are all third or fourth generation
resulting from, it is believed, a white woman and a Negro. They are mostly white and refused to
be placed with the Negroes, but the whites will not have them. Note carefully the close-up of the
four children; all are from the same family and yet differ greatly in appearance.” He chose this

169

photograph to depict the social construction of race because “it brought to life something that I
was teaching in the classroom” in a way that really “drove that home for students.”
In addition to serving as historical evidence, photographs can reveal contemporary social
norms regarding race, gender, and class. In her instructional work with teachers, Gabriel uses
photographs to challenge and/or evoke certain perceptions from her viewing audience. For
example, Gabriel uses a digitized photograph that shows the arrest of Civil Rights activist Taylor
Washington (see Figure 15).

Figure 15. Danny Lyons, Atlanta, Georgia. High school student Taylor Washington is Arrested at Lebs
Delicatessen. His eighth arrest, 1963. http://collections.artsmia.org/art/45340.

170

Taken in 1963 by photographer Danny Lyons, it was featured at the time on the cover of
Pravda366 as Cold War propaganda to demonstrate the “lack of democracy and equal
participation in American society.” Gabriel talks about how she uses the image in her instruction
to demonstrate how racist assumptions about African-American men can be triggered in the
classroom.
So then I began to sort of try to play with the image a little more, and try to confront this
issue of historical consciousness, and ask teachers, “If your students didn’t know that this
was about the Civil Rights movement, what would they say? If you just showed them this
image, with no commentary?” And a lot of the teachers felt that their students would
think that he’s like, a drug dealer. And so to me, that began to highlight the whole way
that black men have been criminalized, and that we don’t allow them to have other roles
in society.
Gabriel’s use of photographs shows their ability to serve in dual capacities; as a source of
historical documentation and as the site of projected interpretation.
Black uses visual materials such as maps, photographs, paintings, and advertisements in
her freshman writing seminar on American Visual Culture “as a window to understanding
historical events, places, and people.” In a similar manner to Gabriel, Black tries to provoke
contemporary assumptions using historical photographs. In a power-point presentation for a
class lecture, Black juxtaposes several photographs taken by the female photographer Francis
Benjamin Johnston, who originally documented solider life aboard the USS Olympia during the
Spanish-American War (see Figure 16)

366

Pravda is a magazine made in the former Soviet Union.

171

Figure 16. Jennifer Black, Wars and Racial Others: Feminism and Suffering,”
Presentation, Misericordia University, 2014.

Following the argument of historian Laura Wexler in her book Tender Violence, Black suggests
that the presence of a woman aboard the ship helped to pacify and counteract circulating rumors
that American sailors had raped and killed civilians in Manilla. According to Wexler’s
argument, photographs capturing activities like soldiers practicing ballroom dancing with each
other (see Figure 17) helped to paint a very domestic vision of the military.

172

Figure 17. Francis Benjamin Johnston, Sailors Dancing with Each Other Aboard the USS Olympia, 1899.
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/resource/cph.3a47711/?co=fbj

Black recounts Wexler’s argument in explaining that these photographs were released at “a very
specific time when rumors about these atrocities are starting to surface in the American press.”
However, in her seminar, Black uses Johnston’s photographs primarily to provoke her students
to make assumptions about the soldiers during their viewing experience. She explains:
So we’ve already had this discussion about what is proper, middle-class activity for white
men, and what is proper middle-class activity for white women, at this point. And the
students appreciate seeing what they think is an image of homosexuality….and we have a
whole discussion about how our 21st century perspective is inadequate for understanding
what’s happening in this image and how we need to put ourselves in the context of the
19th century to really appreciate and understand the impact that this image would have
had. Because from a 21st century perspective, there’s “weird gay sailors who are dancing
together.”
Krase is an active photographer who uses his own images to counter stereotypical
assumptions about specific communities, particularly ethnic enclaves. He maintains an online
photographic archive featuring digitized images he took of “ethnic neighborhoods” all over the

173

world.367 He foregrounds his analysis in the notion that place (and our interpretations of it)
figures prominently into our daily experiences.
In his book Seeing Cities Change, Krase uses photographs to explore how urban
vernacular landscapes are constructed and consumed. He analyzes photographs from sixteen
Chinatowns across the world to identify common visual features of what he terms “idealized
ethnic urban spaces.”368 Krase discusses the ways in which inhabitants of Chinatown “inscribe
their neighborhood spaces” as an important component of agency. He explains:
One way by which Chinese assert themselves is through artistic and cultural activities.
Sometimes they take place inside buildings and other structures such as cultural centers,
schools, theaters, art galleries, and museums. In other cases they take place in plain view
on the streets, in front yards, and on the walls of the neighborhood.369
Krase uses different images (such as Figure 18) to demonstrate the latter case. In his
presentation, he juxtaposes this image with other photographs of Chinatowns in other cities from
2001-2007.

367

Jerome Krase and Timothy Shortell, Gallery. http://www.brooklynsoc.org/blog/gallery3/

368

Jerome Krase, Seeing Cities Change: Local Culture and Class (Farnham: Ashgate, 2012): 99.

369

Ibid, 100.

174

Figure 18. Jerome Krase, Our Vision of Chinatown Mural, Philadelphia, 2005.
http://www.brooklynsoc.org/blog/gallery3/index.php/krase012/06476514

Historians use photographs as evidence of historical documentation.
A common mode of historical evidence is the use of digitized photographs as historical
documentation, or evidence of “the way things were.” The testamentary power of the
photograph has been written about poignantly by Roland Barthes. He explains, “The photograph
does not necessarily say what is no longer, but only and for certain what has been.”370 As
spatiotemporal bounded forms of documentation, historical photographs can help verify,
disprove or clarify particular details for historians. For example, Grunert uses photographs from
the turn of the century to examine the different methodologies taken by two taxidermists, Carl
Akeley and William Hornaday. Although both men had similar training and apprenticeships,
they used quite different techniques in their practice. Gruner describes how in one photograph

370

Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida, New York: Hill and Wang (1981): 85.

175

(see Figure 19), Carl Akeley is “sculpting the elephant. He’s got clay on top of the frame, and
he’s sculpting it to make the ridges and the muscles, and to make the folds in the skin.”

Figure 19. Carl Akeley creating model of Bull Elephant for Elephant Group,1914.
http://images.library.amnh.org/photos/ptm/catalog/desc/179522/

However, Grunert points to another photograph (see Figure 20) that shows how Hornaday is
“using string to wrap around the tiger.” Grunert was able to use taxidermy manuals from the time
period in addition to these digitized photographs to get a sense of what “contemporary”
methodologies looked like.

176

Figure 20. William Temple Hornaday, ca.1880. http://siarchives.si.edu/collections/siris_sic_9666

While juxtaposition of images can be helpful for showing contrasting types of historical
documentation, it can also be a useful strategy for uncovering similarities. For Nelson, the
frequency with which he came across posed photographs (see Figure 21) helped to fuel his larger
argument about photographic and musical expression in early 20th century African-American
communities.
But to really bring home the points that I was making, I started bringing in other images
that were taking elsewhere. Otherwise, I would be portraying this as something that was
just happening in Alabama, which of course it wasn't. And so my use of digital images
really comes into play- Well, I have two thoughts on that. One is looking for similar
pictures across the United States, which I wouldn't have been able to do without being
able to access digital archives. And this is probably useful, although it's pretty lame and
boring, but I did a lot of Google image searches. And spent a lot of time sort of honing
how I did that and to come up with a lot of images like the one I sent you of those
musicians in Kansas.

177

Figure 21. Alfred Lawrence, African-American Musicians, ca.1890-1912.
http://www.kansasmemory.org/item/220205

Though his research focused on one particular rural community in Alabama, Nelson uses
photographs like this in concert with other images from across the United States to argue that
posing with musical instruments was a common expressional practice in American community
life. He explains:
So, in this case, I see these musical instruments in the photograph as showing the
understanding of American culture, writ large, and also because it’s truly a family
portrait, as expressions of domesticity and family that are in a lot ways brought to life by
the appearance of these instruments that placed such a vital role in middle class American
culture. Plus it’s also very much related to music and the fact that this is the time when
music was made in the home. More than ever. So with these musical instruments, you’re
really bringing your home outside and making it a part of this picture.

178

Nelson directly credits digital archives as being responsible for his ability to establish the
commonality of such expressions across the United States.
Clark uses digitized photographs as evidence of “commonplace perspectives” during the
Civil War. She teaches a lesson unit entitled “Civil War Expectations” which depicts scenes
from a union camp during the Civil War (see Figure 22).

Figure 22. Camp of 31st Pennsylvania Infantry near Washington, D.C., 1862.
http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/98507952

Based on specific details in the photograph, she argues it represents a typical snapshot of
everyday life during the Civil War.
And it’s such an intriguing image, to me. Particularly because it says a lot about war and
it says an awful lot about who was present during the Civil War, on the battlefront. We
179

see these children, and we see women, you know, this women laundress…and the
soldiers, just this staged photograph says a lot about what it was like on the front, and
that’s certainly something I want students to understand. The war is not just about
soldiers, it’s about more than that.
Clark aims to incorporate images into much of her teaching. In her classes, she often assigns
homework that asks students to analyze images using the photographic analysis worksheet from
the National Archives.371 According to Clark, photographs such as Figure 22 are especially
helpful for helping to characterize the artefactual qualities of physical photographs. She explains
that students are “not used to thinking of a photograph as a physical thing. And what I like is this
looks like a physical object. You can see the Kodak on the margins, and its catty-corners, and
you see the little color-bands on the bottom.”
Material aspects can contribute in different ways to historians’ abilities to make historical
claims. Examining photographs as physical objects can prompt serendipitous discoveries that
might not be discernible in their digital counterpart. For example, it wasn’t until Miller used a
magnifying glass on a photograph (see Figure 23) that he discovered critical details in the image
that helped formulate his research argument.

Photo Analysis Worksheet. National Archives Website.
Retrieved from: http://www.archives.gov/education/lessons/worksheets/photo.html
371

180

Figure 23. A.J. Russell, Vase or Dial Rocks, Red Buttes, ca.1864-1869.
http://brbl-dl.library.yale.edu/vufind/Record/3529455

He explains:
So, there are a number of things that I never would have seen, I think….you know, the
physical image has a whole affect to it that you don’t get from a glowing screen, I think.
Especially these 19th century glass plate collodion-albumen prints. When I got to the
Beinecke, I was looking at an AJ Russell image called “Dial Rock” or “At the Foot of
Dial Rock” and it’s this weird photo where in the center of the frame there’s this weird
like, eroded sandstone monolith kind of deal. And there’s a guy on the right hand of the
monolith with his back to the audience, and he’s got a rifle, but he mimics the sort of
cocking and aiming. And it’s a weird image, it’s a tense image, and all the sort of drama
happens on the right hand of the frame, where the guy is looking off-frame with his gun,
getting ready to shoot. But on the left hand side of the frame, sort of hidden in the
shadows – I only actually saw this when I got one of those magnifying loops to look
really deeply – there’s a human ribcage and bleached pelvis, sort of, on the left hand side.
And it sounds like a really small detail, but actually – when you start to dig into the
scholarship about what 19th century landscape photographers were doing – that detail of
the guy who looks like he’s about to fight for his life, and on the other side of the frame is
181

a bleached human skeleton, it actually becomes a really significant detail that can help
change the story that we tell about 19th century landscape photographers. And I just
wouldn’t have seen it – I’ve seen it, now that I know it’s there, I can look at the digital
image from the Beinecke, and zoom and zoom in to see it, but I never would have seen it
if I was just looking at a 2inch by 3inch digital version.
In contrast, digitized photographs can provide clarity that might not have been discernible
in the print version of a photograph. For example, Roach explains how a high quality version of
one particular photograph (see Figure 24) changed and enhanced his historical argument.

Figure 24. Front Office of Wright Company, 1911.
http://corescholar.libraries.wright.edu/special_ms1_photographs/1445/

He explains that having the ability to zoom in on the calendar in the background enabled him to
date other related materials to December 1911. He was also able to make probable guesses about
the identities of the women in the photograph, with the help of supporting textual materials.

182

Historians use photographs to fill in under-represented histories.
Another mode of historical evidence used by participants is filling in underrepresented
histories or provide critical missing details. McCormack’s research examines how dog sled
technologies evolved in 19th and 20th centuries in the western Subarctic in Canada. She uses
archival prints digitized by the Hudson Bay Company Archives (see Figure 25) as evidence
about how dog sleds were constructed, a topic which she says is largely absent from written
descriptions at the time period.

Figure 25. Dog Sled, Richard Harrington, 1947.
Courtesy of Hudson's Bay Company Archives, Provincial Archives of Manitoba, HBCA 1987/363-D-19A/10

She explains:
One of the things that happens with these sleds is that they start out as toboggans and
over time they get wrappers and then eventually they get a backboard which is that part
that goes on the back when you’ve seen pictures where people stand on the back driving
dogs. I’ve been really interested in the evolution of that backboard and the archival
picture I sent you is from the Hudson Bay Company and it shows you the dog sled being
183

driven by, I think, five dogs and the backboard, so it was …it’s almost impossible to find
these things described in the literature…people take this stuff for granted, that’s where I
find photographs particularly useful and then it also helps me think about timing.
Interestingly, discovering digitized archival photographs like these has led McCormack to
conclude that popular 19th century sketches and illustrations of dog sleds were mostly inaccurate.
Roach, a public historian working at the Dayton Aviation National Park, uses digitized
photographs dating from 1948 in his work renovating and reconstructing Hawthorn Hill, the
former home of the Wright Brothers (see Figure 26).

Figure 26. Hawthorn Hill Living Room, 1948.
https://www.nps.gov/parkhistory/online_books/daav/hawthorn_hill_hfr.pdf

Roach notes the importance and utility of digitized photographs, which offer “really our only
source to understand, perhaps, how Orville lived in the space and to discuss his life in the house
with visitors.” His team used different interior photographs as primary sources to produce a

184

historic furnishings report recommending how to model each room so that it resembled its 1948
appearance.372
As part of their visitor tours, Hawthorn Hill incorporates enlarged versions of historical
photographs at various locations within the house. For example, an enlarged image of Orville
Wright’s chair (see Figure 27), which he modified following an airplane crash in 1908 to
accommodate sciatica, is shown alongside the chair itself. Roach asserts that seeing in greater
detail how Wright tinkered with his chair to make it more comfortable can help visitors “make a
better intellectual connection” to the exhibit.

Figure 27. Orville’s reading chair, February 16, 1948. NCR Archive at Dayton History

Roach was also able to use digitized photographs to fill in historical details for his book
The Wright Brothers, The Wright Company: From Invention to Industry. He used photographic
captions to help identify people working at the Wright Company. He explains:
The company’s papers are scattershot really. You can’t always depend on them to tell
you what’s going on or who’s working for the company. There are no employee lists left,

Mary Grassick, Hawthorn Hill: A Furnishings History and Recommended Plan, Harpers Ferry, WV: Media
Services, National Park Service (2007). https://www.nps.gov/parkhistory/online_books/daav/print_shop_hfr.pdf.
372

185

in the papers. There are no pay registries or anything like that. So to the extent that I
could identify the people it was from the photo captions.
In cases where historians are not able to locate exact matches for their topic of research,
they may seek related images that are similar in location, time period and/or photographic
content. Two of my participants used photographs from nearby geographical locations as
historical documentation to investigate the evolution of a particular kind of technology. For
example, Salo had difficulty locating certain relevant materials in his dissertation examining the
evolution of ferry boats in the South Carolina low country. Since many ferries were constructed
by individuals (what Salo terms “vernacular work”), he was unable to find architectural plans for
how they were constructed. He knew certain types of ferries existed because of historical
records but he was unable to find visual representations. In particular, he was searching for
information about the rope-and-pull ferry (known as the rope ferry). He explains in his
dissertation that “as with many topics related to ferries, one has to look at unconventional
sources for information about the rope ferry…”373
Salo expanded his search to include depictions of ferries in nearby states, thinking that
ferries from the same time period might share similar construction. He eventually found a
photograph that depicts a rope bridge ferry boat on the Ocklawaha River in Florida (see Figure
28).

Edward Salo, “Crossing the Rivers of the State: The Role of the Ferry in the Development of South Carolina,
circa 1680-1920s,” (PhD diss., Middle Tennessee State University, 2009): 149.
373

186

Figure 28.William Henry Jackson, Ferry on the Ocklawaha, 1902.
https://www.loc.gov/item/det1994004870/PP/

He describes how he found the image using the online American Memory Collection from the
Library of Congress:
Yeah I got to the point where I was just using the main photo collections, and I was just
looking at ferry boats. I would go through South Carolina, North Carolina, Georgia,
Florida, you know I was just trying to stay in that little region. And then when I was done
with one state, I would go on to the next, you know? So yeah, it was completely a
hunting and pecking kind of thing to find them.
Salo uses this image in his dissertation as a representation of what a rope bridge ferry operating
in South Carolina from that time period might have looked like.
Historians also use digitized photographs for gathering information about the presence or
absence of certain markers. As part of her research, for example, Clark wanted to find an
approximate physical location of a Tennessee community called Catfish Bay. She only had one
only historical reference to aid her, an 1873 history of Memphis which made mention that this
particular community was located north of the Memphis and Charleston railroad depot. Once
187

Clark found a particular photograph (see Figure 29), she was able to use it in conjunction with
other visual sources to make the assertion that: (1) this depot existed and (2) that it was the depot
mentioned in reference to Catfish Bay.

Figure 29. Memphis and Charleston Depot, ca.1880.
http://memphislibrary.contentdm.oclc.org/cdm/singleitem/collection/p13039coll5/id/907/rec/1

She explains her process below:
And I was looking for the location of Catfish Bay and it mentioned that it was near
this particular depot. And so I had the map, and again it was really unclear how the depot
was oriented on this map. So, what I was able to do then – once I found this image – was
I was able to look at this in comparison to the map and see if I could find any landmarks.
I didn’t necessarily find any landmarks, but I feel like I’m getting closer to the location.
And I may never actually find the exact location, but at least I have more clarity that there
really was a depot. Evidence that there’s a depot.
Clark also uses Figure 30 to make assertions about the time period. For example, she points out
that the absence of cotton in the image is quite unusual. This absence, combined with the
image’s emphasis on passenger carriages, suggests to Clark the possibility that this was a
promotional photograph used to signify a “transition to the railroad as a transporter of people
instead of goods.”

188

4.5 A Conceptual Framework for Studying Historians’ Image Use
A central challenge in designing and conducting this research study was the absence of
conceptual models or frameworks to address my overall research questions. In particular, I was
not able to find specific methdologies for eliciting descriptions from individuals as they
interpretted and evaluated visual materials in digital environments. Photo-elicitation
interviewing techniques proved useful as stimulus for generating descriptions of experiences, but
significant aspects of the interaction were likely lost in translation. Additionally, the
historiographical literature provided few examples regarding how historians interpret, evaluate,
and decide to use (analog or digital) photographs as forms of evidence.
Toward that end, this study introduces an exploratory, conceptual framework that can be
used for studying historians’ scholarly image use as a multi-faceted occurrence (see Figure 31).
The framework focuses attention on the six analytical themes that take place at two different
junctures in historians’ experiences: potential image use and evidential image use.
Distinguishing between these two spheres proved to be a helpful strategy for addressing the
complexities of information use in digital research environments, which are continuously
mediated by a confluence of techno-social and spatiotemporal factors. Rather than focusing on
image use as the sole outcome, this framework permits exploration of activities, practices, and
processes that happen as historians decide to use (or not to use) materials further. It presents a
conceptual approach for attending to interactions in digital research environments, enabling a
holistic understanding of criteria that historians employ around their image selection and use.

189

A CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK FOR STUDYING
HISTORIANS’ IMAGE USE

EVIDENTIAL IMAGE USE

Research practices in
digital environments

Strategies

E.g., browsing

E.g., juxtaposition

Motivations for
selecting photographs

Rhetorical techniques
E.g., corroboration

E.g., affect-related

Types of evidence

Factors that matter

E.g., existing cultural norms

E.g., reproducibility of image

Figure 30. A conceptual framework for studying historians’ image use

190

MODES OF HISTORICAL EVIDENCE

POTENTIAL IMAGE USE

CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION
This dissertation examines historians’ experiences using digitized photographs as
evidence, to reveal the factors that matter to them in their decision to use (or not to use)
materials. Using thematic analysis, I was able to surface descriptive themes that characterized
historians’ experiences in digital research environments. Since the focus of my study was about
historians’ use of digitized photographs, my findings are tailored toward interactions in digital
environments.
In this chapter, I situate my findings within the existing literature and discuss
implications and future work. First, I discuss the significance of this study in relation to the
extant literature, comparing and contrasting my findings within a discussion of how they
contribute to the literature. Next, I describe some of the limitations of this study and suggest
future empirical endeavors. Finally, I discuss practical implications for archival professionals
seeking to provide access to digitized photographs.
5.1 Significance of the Study
In this dissertation, I examine self-identified historians’ experiences to reveal the factors
and qualities that matter to them in their interactions in digital environments as they decide to use
(or not use) digitized photographs. This study contributes to the extant literature in three
significant ways.
First, it addresses absences in both the historiographical and archival literature regarding
how and why historians use digitized materials as evidence in their scholarship. Few empirical
studies have explored the historical process of constructing evidence from primary source
191

materials. The findings in this research helped to identify the practices and processes underlying
the construction and use of photographs as forms of evidence. My respondents employed
strategies and rhetorical techniques alongside their own interpretation of digitized photographs.
The case vignettes presented in section 4.4.2 illustrate a broadening of Wineburg’s notion of
historical thinking374, showing how my participants’ own interpretive ideologies influence how
they construct historical arguments. My findings also suggest that there are contextual,
ecological, and social factors related to their interactions that influence their potential use of
materials. In studying the overall experiences of my participants in digital environments, I was
able to assess the significance of those interactions.
Second, this research presents exemplary models for two sets of disciplinary scholars.
The vignettes provide descriptive summaries that may be useful for historians interested in
analyzing and using photographs as visual evidence. At the same time, information
professionals can also use the case vignettes as the basis for empirical studies aiming to
understand potential and evidential use of archival materials as forms of evidence.
This research also contributes to the larger literature on information use, particularly
related to visual materials. It highlights the benefits of considering potential use as a separate
stage of research in which potential interactions in digital environments influence selection
activities. It also introduces the notion of “perceived usefulness” that can be used as a construct
for granular perspectives on sociotechnical constraints and affordances characterizing scholarly
interactions. Lastly, it explores how and why historians use digitized photographs in
constructing modes of historical evidence.

See: Samuel Wineburg, “Historical Problem-Solving: A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation
of Documentary Evidence” (PhD diss., Stanford University, 1990); Samuel Wineburg, “Historical Problem Solving:
A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation of Documentary and Pictorial Evidence.” Journal of
Educational Psychology 83, no. 1 (1991): 77.
374

192

5.2 Limitations of the Study
There are numerous limitations in this study. One limitation concerns the relatively small
sample size (n=15). There are no strict guidelines regarding sample size in qualitative case
study research; instead, the emphasis is on the information-richness of cases. Toward that end, I
used purposeful sampling to target information-rich cases and observed the principles of data
saturation in my data collection. Patton points out that in case study research, “in-depth
information from a small number of people can be very valuable, especially if the cases are
information-rich.”375
Another limitation in this research concerns the interdisciplinary nature of my sample
population, making it impossible to generalize my findings. Despite using the umbrella term of
“historian,” the majority of my study participants are not currently teaching in academic history
departments (see Table 2). It was necessary to expand my sample population for a number of
reasons. Initially, it was difficult to locate individual historians working in academic history
departments that were using digitized photographs to make historical arguments. Through
informal conversions conducted in the early stages of my research, I learned that institutions
were not yet formally tracking scholarly use of their digital collections which prevented
identification of potential recruits.376 My particular focus on studying scholars using photographs
from these collections (as opposed to all visual materials) proved to be an additional challenge.

375

Patton, 184.

Throughout 2010-2014, I had conversations about current practices measuring digital collection use with the
following individuals: Laura Clark Brown from the Southern Historical Collection at the University of North
Carolina Chapel Hill; J. Stephen Catlett from the Textiles Teachers & Troops LSTA Project at the University of
North Carolina Greensboro; Stephen Fletcher from the North Carolina Collection Photographic Archives at the
University of North Carolina Chapel Hill; Barbara Natanson from the Print and Photographs Division at the Library
of Congress; and Ashley Reed from the William Blake Archive at the University of North Carolina Chapel Hill.
376

193

In the pilot study I conducted in 2011, my sample population consisted of academic
historians working in the United States.377 The goal of that research was to explore historians’
current research practices in the midst of technological changes. My findings prompted new
questions about historical practices in digital environments. In particular, I concluded that future
research should explore the “factors and qualities that influence historians’ interactions with
primary source materials.”378
This dissertation research aimed to build on these findings by exploring historians’
interactions with, and use of, one group of primary source materials – digitized archival
photographs. Since I was most interested in how and why historians use digitized images as
forms of evidence, expanding my sample population to encompass self-identified historians
doing historical work allowed me to gather important aspects of those interactions while
providing me with an adequate number of participants for case study research. Arguably, the
rise of interdisciplinary fields such as the digital humanities suggests that maintaining
disciplinary boundaries in today’s academic climate may be less relevant than before. Indeed, I
found great value in addressing the broad practices of individuals doing historical work with
photographs, recognizing that my sample had unique qualifications and training. In fact, though
most of my participants were not currently teaching in academic history departments, eight had
received their doctorate from “traditional” history departments.
Another limitation concerns the overall lack of generalizability in case study research.
Accordingly, my findings in this study cannot be treated as a representative sample from a
population. For example, it would be inappropriate to infer that my findings describe how and

Alexandra Chassanoff, “Historians and the Use of Primary Source Materials in the Digital Age,” The American
Archivist 76, no.2 (2013):458-480.
377

378

Ibid, 472.

194

why all historians use digitized photographs as evidence. As such, the conceptual framework
presented in 4.5 is best interpreted as a set of descriptive and analytical themes that can be used
as a baseline for exploring historians’ image use. According to Bryman, “case studies should be
evaluated in terms of the adequacy of the theoretical inferences that can be generated. The aim is
not to infer findings from a sample to a population, but to engender patterns and linkages of
theoretical importance.”379 As a precaution, Yin recommends returning to a study’s main
theoretical propositions to generalize findings.380 In this research, two main theoretical
propositions guided my investigation.
1) Information is a phenomenon that emerges in specific contexts.
2) Information use is always situated within contextual, ecological, and social practices. As
such, we cannot understand the “how” of information use without attending to the
practices which constitute the experience.
Both of these propositions guided my analysis and interpretation of themes within and across
cases.
A third limitation relates to my data collection procedures. The goal of my research was
to explore interactions underlying historians’ experiences using digitized photographs. However,
since my sample population consisted of historians who had already used photographs as
historical evidence, their experiences were necessarily relayed retrospectively during photoelicitation interviewing. Thus, their original interaction is not represented in this study. I
attempted to address this limitation by asking participants, whenever possible, to pull up the
original website during the photo-elicitation portion of the interview.
A final limitation in this study concerns implicit researcher bias in translating the specific
examples of historians’ use into different modes of historical evidence. I do not have training in

379

Alan Bryman, Research Methods and Organization Studies, London: Unwin Hyman (1989): 173.

380

Yin, Case Study Research, 10.

195

historiography or visual studies; I established and distinguished different modes based on
discursive analysis and inductive reasoning. As noted earlier, the interdisciplinary nature of my
sample means I cannot generalize these modes more broadly to historical practices.
5.3 Implications and Future Work
The circulation and use of digitized primary source materials has grown significantly in
the 21st century. Archival professionals must engage with these changes in digital scholarship at
multiple levels, from acknowledging new scenarios for access to thinking about creative methods
for encapsulating the provenance of images. This dissertation research addresses a noted gap in
the literature, exploring how one particular group of scholars – self-identified historians using
digitized archival photographs – interpret and use materials as evidence in their scholarly
activities.
How can archival information management systems best accommodate historians’
evolving information needs amidst such changes? A particular challenge lies with the difficulty
in describing visual materials for further use; photographs can have many interpretations. Such
range in interpretive possibilities has important ramifications for archival description and access.
Shatford-Layne neatly summarizes the challenge: “If images may be defined as referents for the
sense of the words used to describe them, it seems clear that we cannot expect images to
translate neatly and simply into words.” What is to be done?
The results of this research suggest that distinct material practices remain critical to
historians’ image selection and use. For example, despite potentially finding an image via
Google Image Search, my respondents stress the importance of downloading photographs from
websites affiliated with archival institutions, to help ensure trustworthiness of materials. Within
their environmental interactions, functional aspects such as their ability to download images at
different resolutions also play a significant role in determining further use. Respondents indicate
196

that they want as much original descriptive information (for example, the handwritten captions
on the back of photographs) to be made accessible as possible. They also suggest that providing
additional description about the digitization environment, including the documentation of
archival decision-making related to the overall collection, would be beneficial.
At the same time, archives should also present flexible and fluid options for access and
use of archival photographs. An explicit goal for design should be the development of archival
environments that embrace and support fluid interactions. In particular, performative approaches
to interface design, such as those suggested by Johanna Drucker, can orient archives towards
constructing access systems that more closely represent “an event-space of interpretive
activity.”381 Rather than designing for specific access points or improving information retrieval
strategies, archival professionals should consider image use in digital environments as a multifaceted, multi-layered experience in which meaning is constructed (or not) through a series of
complex mediations.
Indeed, recasting information use as information experiences can shed light on what makes
interactions meaningful for scholars in digital environments, in ways that traditional measurements
of information use fall short. Indeed, the fact that my respondents are regularly using digital
sources is not (yet) widely reflected in either the historiographical or LIS literature. Numerous
explanations for this discrepancy point to the need for developing better methods for capturing
use. For example, recent LIS empirical research on historians’ information use focuses on journals
and does not include monographs.382 Citation analysis, a frequently used measurement source, may

381

Drucker, "Performative Materiality."

In analyzing trends in historians’ image use, Harris and Hepburn examined articles from prominent historical
journals to track use. They found no discernible growth or decrease in image use. However, historians’ primary
research output remains the production of monographs. See: Harris and Hepburn, "Trends in Image Use."

382

197

not provide a representative understanding about historians’ use of digital materials; some
historians may consult materials to structure their argument, but leave them out of publication due
to copyright or quality concerns. Moreover, citation practices for digitized materials in archives
are still evolving. There are no standardized recommendations for citing digitized items across
citation styles, making citation analysis difficult. The Web of Science, a frequently used tool in
citation analysis, does not allow citation searches by material type. Therefore, the number of times
a digitized photograph has been cited in research materials is not easily obtained without
implementing additional scripting. Further exploration and understanding of reproduction issues,
a critical part of the use equation in digital environments, is still needed.
Historians continue to employ non-linear, non-sequential practices when conducting
research in digital environments. However, in contrast to previous work in LIS studying
historians’ practices, this research identified two distinct spheres, potential image use and
evidential image use, that can be used to characterize how and why historians decide to use (or
not use) images. Isolating these activities, processes, and practices into separate spheres allowed
me to explore dimensions that matter in their experiences.
In general, historians perceive the digitization of materials as beneficial. The more
information that a repository provides online, the better. Kate Sampsell-Willmann says: “You
know, having everything, having all the captions and having everything means you don’t
actually have to visit the repository. We can do it from a distance.” However, one concern
shared by respondents is the impact of encountering digitized photographs apart from their
originating archival collections.

198

Indeed, this research found a potential shift in where historians are locating photographs
for use in their scholarly activities. Only one participant mentioned finding aids at all, while
eight participants used Google image search. The emergence of different kinds of digital
collections (amateur/hobbyist online collections and personal digital archives amassed by
researchers) suggests that the institutional archive may no longer be the starting point for image
search. While trust in source material remains a central concern for historians, whether and how
they evaluate photographs located exclusively through Google image searches has not yet been
explored. Standardizing practices around the embedding of metadata into digitized photographs
as well as tracking use throughout the lifecycle of digital images remain two crucial areas of
future research.
Although the study sample was not designed to be representative of all historians, the
findings in this study do suggest that historians may be more comfortable using photographs as
primary sources than previously anticipated. A significant number (thirteen) use digitized
photographs as the primary source of evidence in crafting their argument– in contrast to many
claims made in the literature. Several participants in this study mention using photographs as
their initial starting point, building and constructing evidence. For example, Gabriel describes
her philosophical approach in using images for teaching:
So I, as a historian, use the image to tie into the broader methodological agenda of what
I’m trying to teach. So the image is deeply integrated into the rest of the conversation. So
the image is not supplementary evidence, it’s integral to what the main purpose of the
lesson is.
In constructing different modes of historical evidence, historians draw on their own
perspectives and ideologies. One interesting point that became clear to me is that, in their
process of interpreting and using photographs as evidence, historians presume a perspectival
orientation that enables them to effectively construct their argument. For example, a historian
199

might use a photograph as representational of 1960s’ cultural norms. In constructing their mode
of evidence, this historian might claim that the original photographer intentionally captured
cultural norms, or they might claim that the photograph itself is capable of representing cultural
norms. In both instances, a certain perspective orients the historian in how they approach image
use. Nearly all of the historians in this study used photographs to construct arguments that
serviced a cast of spectators (e.g., photographic subjects, the public perceiving the photograph at
the time it was taken), each of whom were involved in either the production and/or consumption
of the photograph.
While the advent of digitization has introduced new possibilities, the extent to which
specific scholarly practices have fundamentally changed has been underexplored. Future
research seeking to understand how, and whether, these differences have influenced
interpretative practices would prove useful. For example, one study could compare and contrast
how historians perform essential practices like source criticism in print and digital environments.
The participants in my research suggest that historians and archivists should work
together to better anticipate information needs of image users. Krase explains:
So, what tends to happen in our academic world is that people stay amongst themselves,
right? So it would make sense for people who are going to be doing, or already doing
these sorts of things [cataloging and organizing visual materials], to be going to the
American Historical Association meetings, go to the American Studies Association,
this one and that one, etc. And to at least peruse the journals, etc., to see how the images
are being used. Because if they get a sense of how they're being used, they might have a
better sense of how they can be organized for searches.
Sampsell-Willman concurs, albeit with the goal of enriching the process of photographic analysis
through “a concerted effort among historians and art historians to research, catalogue, analyze,
and explain the relevant intellectual biographical details that will allow a deeper understanding

200

of the individual photographer to emerge.383
It seems that historians and archivists would benefit intellectually from working together
closely, to share information with each other about work practices. Participants in my research
seemed interested in learning more about the appraisal and processing decisions archivists make.
Learning more about how historians evaluate visual sources could certainly benefit archival
practitioners (and was the overarching goal of this study). A recently developed methodological
approach is digital historiography, which Joshua Sternfeld defines as the “interdisciplinary study
of the interaction of digital technology with historical practice.”384 For Sternfeld, the convergence
of traditional historiographic principles with archival theory provides a useful, common
methodological foundation for archivists and historians working with digital archival materials, or
what he terms “digital historical representations.” Digital historiography asks practitioners from
both fields to consider what mediating factors help transform digital historical representations into
sources of historical evidence.
My findings also suggest that image use can be motivated by affective factors such as
empathy. Though emotion is a relatively recent research area of interest in LIS, exploring links
between affect and information behavior in digital environments is an exciting area for future
work. For example, research studies exploring the differences in affective responses to digital
and print photographs would prove particularly interesting in further developing understandings
of interpretation and meaning-making in digital environments.
Making meaning from archival photographs is a complex process, regardless of their digital
or analog status.

383

Writing in 1988, Margolis asserts, “In fact, the meaning of a particular

Kate Sampsell-Whillmann, Lewis Hine as a Social Critic, 9.

Joshua Sternfeld, “Archival Theory and Digital Historiography: Selection, Search, and Metadata as Archival
Processes for Assessing Historical Contexutalization,” The American Archivist 74 (2011): 544.

384

201

photograph typically is generated as much by the context in which it is found – site, collection,
date, photographer, caption – as by the image itself.”385 Margolis highlights the importance of
studying spaces of interaction as critical places where meaning-making happens. In particular,
conceptualizing the performative space of information experience(s) provides a useful framing
device for interrogating meaningful interactions in digital environments.
In this research study, mediating factors from different social, contextual, and ecological
domains impact how and why historians use digitized archival photographs as evidence.
Influential factors range from how scholars first notice and appraise materials down to the kinds
of obstacles that prevent them from using materials further. The value in studying information
experiences with digital materials is that it can reveal at the moment of interaction how information
is constituted by the interaction and performed rather than focusing on defining what information
is. The latter is well-trodden territory, but orienting toward the former is critical for developing
new understandings of, and literacies for, how we interpret and use information in hybrid research
environments.

385

Margolis, Radical History Review, 36.

202

APPENDIX A: INTERVIEW RECRUITMENT POST
Date ____________
Dear Colleagues,
Are you a (self-identified) historian? Have you used digitized versions of archival photographs in
your teaching activities, publications, presentations, or related research pursuits? If so, please
consider participating in an interview session as part of my doctoral research.
The interview should take approximately one hour and can be conducted in person, over the
telephone, or using Skype. Your responses to these questions will be kept confidential. There is
no compensation for participating in this study; however, I am confident that your participation
will contribute significantly to this emerging area of research.
If you are willing to participate, please send an email to: achass@email.unc.edu to confirm your
interest. I am happy to answer any questions for you as well.
Again, thank you so much for considering participating in this research.
Sincerely,
Alexandra Chassanoff
Please note: This study has been approved by the University Institutional Review Board (#150566).

203

APPENDIX B: INTERVIEW RECRUITMENT EMAIL
Date ____________
Dear ___________________,
I am a doctoral student conducting my dissertation research on how historians are using digitized
photographs as forms of evidence. I am writing to ask you to participate in an interview session
with me to discuss how and why you have used images in your research.
Few empirical studies have explored historians’ use of visual materials as forms of evidence. As
a historian who has used images in your scholarship, you are in an ideal position to provide
valuable first-hand perspectives on your experiences.
The interview should take approximately one hour and can be conducted in person, over the
telephone, or using Skype. Your responses to these questions will be kept confidential. There is
no compensation for participating in this study; however, I am confident that your participation
will contribute significantly to this emerging area of research.
If you are interested and able to participate, please email me confirmation of your interest no later
than ____. I am happy to answer any questions for you as well.
Again, thank you very much for considering participating in this research.
Sincerely,
Alexandra Chassanoff
Please note: This study has been approved by the University Institutional Review Board (#150566).

204

APPENDIX C: FACT SHEET
University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill
Consent to Participate in a Research Study
Adult Participants
Social Behavior Form
IRB Study # 15-0566
Title of Study: Historians and the Use of Digitized Photographs as Evidence
Principal Investigator: Alexandra Chassanoff, Doctoral Student
UNC-Chapel Hill Department: Information and Library Science
UNC-Chapel Hill Phone Number: (919) 962-1345
Faculty Advisor: Cal Lee
Faculty Email Address: callee@ils.unc.edu
Study Contact Telephone Number: xxxxxxxxxxx
Study Contact Email: xxxxxxxxxxxxx
What are some general things you should know about research studies?
You are being asked to take part in a research study. To join the study is voluntary. You may
refuse to join, or you may withdraw your consent to be in the study, for any reason, without
penalty. Research studies are designed to obtain new knowledge. This new information may
help people in the future. You may not receive any direct benefit from being in the research
study. There also may be risks to being in research studies.
Details about this study are discussed below. It is important that you understand this information
so that you can make an informed choice about being in this research study. Please keep a copy
of this information sheet. You should ask the researchers named above, any questions you have
about this study at any time.
What is the purpose of this study?
This research study intends to explore the information practices of historians using digitized
photographs in their research endeavors. In particular, I am interested in understanding how
historians interpret, evaluate, and use digitized photographs as forms of visual evidence.
Are there any reasons you should be in this study?
You should participate in this study if you are a self-identified historian who has used digitized
archival photographs in teaching activities, publications, presentations, or related research
pursuits.
How many people will take part in this study?
If you decide to be in this study, you will be one of approximately 15-20 people in this research
study.
How long will your part in this study last?
You will be asked to participate in one interview session, lasting approximately 1-1.5 hours. At
the close of the interview, you will be asked if you are willing to participate in a short follow-up
205

interview to further explore or clarify themes and issues raised in the original interview or from
supplementary documents.
What will happen if you take part in the study?
At the beginning of each interview session, I will introduce myself, the purpose of the study, and
obtain verbal consent. You will be asked to answer demographic information and a short
questionnaire about your image use practices (see Questionnaire). In the second part of the
interview session, I will present you with two digitized photographs that you selected for use in
this interview. I will then ask you a series of questions relating to how you interpret, evaluate,
and have used each photograph in scholarly activities (see PEI protocol). You do not have to
answer any questions that you do not wish to answer, for any reason. With your permission,
these interviews will be recorded for transcription. The recordings will be deleted after the
transcriptions are created.
What are the possible benefits from being in this study?
Research is designed to benefit society by gaining new knowledge. Your participation is
important to help us understand historians’ experiences with digitized photographs as forms of
evidence. While you may not benefit personally from being in this research study, you will be
contributing to empirical research that seeks to better understand evolving information practices
so that scholarly infrastructure can better support changing needs and habits.
What are the possible risks or discomforts involved from being in this study?
There are no risks anticipated should you participate in this study.
How will your privacy be protected?
Your name or other identifying information will be used in the presentation of this research to
others and disclosed in the material that is published.
Will you receive anything for being in this study?
There is no financial benefit for your participation. The cost to participate is your time, and for
that we are very appreciative.
Will it cost you anything to be in this study?
There are no costs for being in the study.
What if you have questions about this study?
You have the right to ask, and have answered, any questions you may have about this research. If
you have questions, or concerns, you should contact me at (617) 501-3669 or by email at
achass@email.unc.edu. You may also contact my advisor, Dr. Cal Lee at (919) 962-7024 or by
email at callee@ils.unc.edu
What if you have questions about your rights as a research participant?
All research on human volunteers is reviewed by a committee that works to protect your rights
and welfare. If you have questions or concerns about your rights as a research subject, or if you
would like to obtain information or offer input, you may contact the Institutional Review Board
at 919-966-3113 or by email to IRB_subjects@unc.edu.
206

APPENDIX D: VERBAL CONSENT SCRIPT
The purpose of this research is to explore the experiences of historians using digitized
photographs as forms of evidence in scholarship. Approximately 15-20 self-identified historians
will be enrolled in this study. You will be asked to participate in an interview which should take
between 60 and 90 minutes. Supplementary artifacts (course syllabus, conference presentations)
will also be collected. At the close of the interview, you will be asked if you are willing to
participate in a short follow-up interview to further explore or clarify themes and issues raised in
our original interview or from supplementary documents.
There are no risks anticipated should you participate in this study. However, your name and
other identifying information will be used in the presentation of this research to others and
disclosed in the material that is published.
This study will be recorded for the purposes of transcription. This recording will be destroyed as
soon as the transcription of this interview takes place. Do you consent to being recorded during
this conversation? (If the person says yes, proceed. If they say no, ask: “Do you consent to notetaking during the interview?” If they say yes, proceed. If they say no, thank them for their time
and explain that they are not eligible.)

207

APPENDIX E: SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW PROTOCOL
A. Demographic Information
1. What is your current title?
______________________________
2. Gender:
____ Male
____ Female
____ I prefer not to answer
3. Age:
___ 25-35
___ 36-45
___ 46-55
___ 56-65
___ Over 65
___ I prefer not to answer
4. Number of years teaching history at a college or university: ______
5. Number of years teaching history at your current institution: _____
6. Primary courses you teach:
7. Primary area(s) of research:
B. Image Use Practices
Think about the research activities where you used digitized photographs.
Please describe the following:
8. Topic of research: _______________________________________
9. Chronological period (e.g., 1950-1965): _______________________
10. Year you started this research: _______
Year you ended this research or ongoing: ________
11. Main archives, special collections and repositories used in this research:
12. Can you describe what techniques you used when you were searching for [Image x]?
a. [probe] used google image search; used digital library collections, etc.
i. [probe] what specific collections did you use?
ii. [probe] did you have specific image in mind? What point in the process?
13. [probe: read back list mentioned] What did you consider to be the most useful technique
when you were searching for an image?

208

14. How were you planning on using the images? For teaching? Presentation at a conference?
In your research?
15. What are the factors that are most important to when you are deciding whether to use a
digital image or not?
a. [probe] e.g., Trustworthiness of image repository; ability to access collection
i. [probe] How do you ensure that [factor x]?
ii. [probe] What other factors matter to you?
16. Are there particular types of images that resonate with you as forms of historical
evidence?
a. [probe with examples]
17. What does “historical evidence” mean to you?

209

APPENDIX F: PHOTO-ELICITATION INTERVIEW PROTOCOL
SCENARIO 1: Photograph selected by participant for use in teaching
Interviewer: You were asked to pre-select a digitized photograph you have used in teaching
1. Can you describe the techniques you used in your search for materials?
a. [probe] used google image search; used digital library collections, etc.
i. [probe] What specific collections did you use?
ii. [probe] Did you have specific images in mind?
2. [Read back list mentioned] Out of that list, what do you consider to be the most useful
technique in your search? Why?
3. How did you find this image?
a. [probe] Did you look at other related materials in the collection?
i. [probe] Do you remember how you established any important details
about this photograph?
4. Tell me more about how you would interpret this image.
a. [probe] What can you tell me about the context?
b. [probe[ What do you know (if anything) about the photographer?
c. [probe] Have you seen this image used previously as historical evidence?
d. [probe] Are there particular details related to the arrangement or composition of
this photograph?
e. [probe] What is being represented? What is being excluded?
5. Why did you decide to use this image in your teaching?
6. What do you see as the most important factors in the presentation of this photograph?
a. [probe]: descriptive info – which are most useful?
b. [probe]: provenance and context?
c. [probe]: ability to zoom? quality?
7. Do you trust that this photograph is an accurate historical representation?
Why or why not?
8. Who do you think was the original audience(s) for this image?

210

SCENARIO 2: Photograph selected by participant for use in research
Interviewer: You were asked to pre-select a digitized photograph that you have used in research.
9. How did you find this image?
a. [probe] Did you begin your search for this particular image or more broad idea?
10. Please describe how you used this image in your scholarship.
a. [probe] publication or presentation? Illustration, primary source of evidence, etc?
i. [probe] illustration, primary source of evidence, etc.
11. Tell me more about how you would interpret this image.
a. [probe] What can you tell me about the context?
b. [probe[ What do you know (if anything) about the photographer?
c. [probe] Have you seen this image used previously as historical evidence?
d. [probe] Particular details about arrangement in photograph – significance of
relationships
e. [probe] Who do you think was the intended audience for this photograph?
f. [probe] What is being represented? What is being excluded?
12. Why did you decide to use this image in your scholarship?
a. [probe] Are there specific factors that might prevent you from using this image as
a form of evidence?
i. [probe] trustworthiness of image repository, ability to access collection
13. What do you see as the most important factors in the presentation of this photograph?
a. [probe]: descriptive info – which are most useful?
b. [probe]: provenance and context?
c. [probe]: ability to zoom? quality?
14. Do you trust that this photograph is an accurate historical representation?
Why or why not?
15. What does “historical evidence” mean to you?

211

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Akker, Chiel van den, Susan Legene, Marieke Van Erp, Lora Aroyo, Roxane Segers, Lourens
Van der Meij, Jacco van Ossenbruggen, Schreiber, Guus, Boband Wielinga, Johan
Oomen, and Geertje Jacobs. “Digital Hermeneutics: Agora and the Online Understanding
of Cultural Heritage.” In Proceedings of the ACM Web Science Conference 11, June 1417 2011, Koblenz, Germany.
Alexander, Arden and Tracy Meehleib. “The Thesaurus for Graphic Materials: Its’ History, Use,
and Future.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 31, no.3-4 (2001): 189-212.
Allen, Rodney and Randall Felton. “Photographs as Historical Documents.” OAH Magazine of
History 5, no.3 (1991): 7–12.
American Council of Learned Societies. Our Cultural Commonwealth: The Report of the
American Council of Learned Societies Commission on Cyberinfrastructure for the
Humanities and Social Sciences. New York, 2006.
Anderson, Ian. “Are You Being Served? Historians and the Search for Primary Sources.”
Archivaria 58 (2004): 88-129.
Armitage, Linda H. and Peter G.B. Enser. “Analysis of User Need in Image Archives.” Journal
of Information Science 23, no. 4 (1997): 287–299.
Bale, John. “Capturing ‘The African’ Body? Visual Images and ‘Imaginative Sports.’” Journal
of Sport History 25, no. 2 (1998): 235-236.
Banks, Marcus. “Analyzing Images.” In The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Data Analysis,
edited by Uwe Flick, 394-409. London: SAGE Publications, 2014.
Banks, Marcus. “Presenting Research Results.” In Visual Methods in Social Research, edited by
Marcus Banks, 138-171. London: SAGE Publications, 2001.
Barthes, Roland and Stephen Heath. Image Music Text. New York: Hill and Wang, 1977.
Barthes, Roland. Camera Lucida, New York: Hill and Wang, 1981.
Bateman, Kirklin, Sheila Brennan, Douglas Mudd, and Paula Petric. “Taking a Byte Out of the
Archives: Making Technology Work for You.” Perspectives: Newsletter of the American
Historical Association 43, no. 1 (2005).
Bates, Marcia. “The Cascade of Interactions in the Digital Library Interface.” Information
Processing and Management 38, no. 3 (2003): 381-400.
Bateson, Gregory. Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1972.

212

Batley, Susan. “Visual Information Retrieval: Browsing Strategies in Pictorial Databases.” In
Online Information 88. Proceedings of the Twelfth International Online Information
Meeting, 373-381. Oxford, Learned Information LTD., 1988.
Baxter, Pamela and Susan Jack. “Qualitative Case Study Methodology: Study Design and
Implementation for Novice Researchers.” The Qualitative Report 13, no. 4 (2008): 554559.
Beard, Charles A. “Written History as an Act of Faith.” The American Historical Review 39, no.
2 (1934): 219-231. doi: 10.2307/1838720.
Beattie, Diane. “An Archival User Study: Researchers in the Field of Women’s History.”
Archivaria 29 (1989): 33-50.
Beaudoin, Joan E. “A Framework of Image Use among Archaeologists, Architects, Art
Historians and Artists.” Journal of Documentation 70, no.1 (2013): 119-147.
Berkhofer, Robert. Beyond the Great Story: History as Text and Discourse. Cambridge: Harvard
University Press, 1997.
Betz-Parker, Elisabeth. Graphic Materials: Rules for Describing Original Items and Historical
Collections. Washington, DC: Library of Congress, 1982.
Bignante, Elisa. “The Use of Photo-Elicitation in Field Research.” EchoGeo 11 (2010).
doi:10.4000/echogeo.11622.
Blandford, Ann and Simon J. Attfield. Interacting with Information. San Rafael, California:
Morgan & Claypool, 2010.
Block, Herbert. “Well, Everything Helps.” Illustration. 1930 or 1931. From Library of Congress
Prints and Photographs Online Catalog. http://www.loc.gov/pictures/item/00652175.
Bloor, Michael and Fiona Wood. “Phenomenological Methods.” In Keywords in Qualitative
Methods, 128-130. London: Sage Publications, 2006.
Bolick, Cheryl. “Digital Archives: Democratizing the Doing of History.” The International
Journal of Social Education 21, no. 1 (2006): 122-134.
Boonstra, Onno, Leen Breure and Peter Doorn. “Past, Present, and Future of Historical
Information Science.” Historical Social Research 29. Amsterdam: Netherlands Institute
for Scientific Information, 2004.
Booth, Douglas. “Evidence Revisited: Interpreting Historical Materials in Sport History.”
Rethinking History 9, no.4 (2005): 475. doi:10.1080/13642520500307990.

213

Borgman, Christine. Scholarship in the Digital Age: Information, Infrastructure, and the
Internet. Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 2007.
Bragg, Molly. “‘There is Always More that Can Be Done’: A Survey Investigating Libraries’
Measurement of Digitized Primary Source Use.” MA thesis, University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, 2011. https://cdr.lib.unc.edu/record/uuid:638682ef-5138-49c4-be16c3c8294b08ce.
Braun, Virginia and Victoria Clarke. “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology.” Qualitative
Research in Psychology 3, no.2 (2006): 77-101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.
Briet, Suzanne. What is Documentation? Edited by Ronald E. Day and Laurent Martinet.
Lanham, MD: Scarecrow Press, 2006.
Brockman, William, Laura Neumann, Carole Palmer, and Tonyia Tidline. Scholarly Work in the
Humanities and the Evolving Information Environment. Washington, DC: Digital Library
Federation and Council on Library and Information Resources, 2002.
Bruce, Christine. The Seven Faces of Information Literacy. Adelaide: Auslib Press, 1997.
Bryman, Alan. Research Methods and Organization Studies. London: Unwin Hyman, 1989.
Buckland, Michael. “Information as Thing.” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 42, no. 5 (1991): 351-360.
—. “What is a ‘Document’?” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 48, no. 9
(1997): 804-809.
Burger, Barbara Lewis. “Guide to the Holdings of the Still Picture Branch of the National
Archives and Records Administration.” Washington, DC: National Archives and Records
Administration, 1990. http://www.archives.gov/research/guides/still-pictures-guide.html.
Burke, Peter. New Perspectives on Historical Writing. University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State
University Press, 1992.
Capurro, Rafael. “Digital Hermeneutics: An Outline.” AI & Society 25, no.1 (2009): 35-49.
doi:10.1007/s00146-009-0255-9.
—. “Foundations of Information Science: Review and Perspectives.” 1999.
http://www.capurro.de/tampere91.htm
Case, Donald. “The Collection and Use of Information by Some American Historians: A Study
of Motives and Methods.” Library Quarterly 61, no. 1 (1991): 61-82.
CBPS Sub-Committee on Descriptive Standards. ISAD(G): General International Standard
Archival Description - Second Edition. September 2011. http://www.ica.org/en/isadggeneral-international-standard-archival-description-second-edition
214

Chassanoff, Alexandra. “Historians and the Use of Primary Source Materials in the Digital Age.”
The American Archivist 76, no.2 (2013): 458-480.
Choemprayong, Songphan and Barbara Wildemuth. “Case Studies.” In Applications of Social
Research Methods to Questions in Information and Library Science, 51-61. Edited by
Barbara Wildemuth. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited, 2009.
Choi, Youngok and Edie M. Rasmussen. “Searching for Images: The Analysis of Users’ Queries
for Image Retrieval in American History.” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 54, no. 6 (2003): 498–511.
Chung, EunKyung and JungWon Yoon, “Image Needs in the Context of Image Use: An
Exploratory Study.” Journal of Information Science 37, no. 2 (2011): 163–177.
Cohen, Julie E. “Cyberspace as/and space.” Columbia Law Journal 107, no. 1 (2007): 210–256.
Cole, Charles. “Information Acquisition in History Ph.D. Students: Inferencing and the
Formation of Knowledge Structures.” Library Quarterly 68, no. 1 (1998): 33-54.
Collier Jr., John and Malcolm Collier. Visual Anthropology: Photography as a Research Method.
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1986.
Collier Jr., John. “Photography in Anthropology: A Report on Two Experiments.” American
Anthropologist 59 (1957): 843–59.
Collins, Karen. “Providing Subject Access to Images: A Study of User Queries.” The American
Archivist 61, no. 1 (1998): 36–55.
Conniss, L.R., A.J. Ashford and M.E. Graham. Information Seeking Behavior in Image
Retrieval: Visor I Final Report. Institute for Image Data Research, Library and
Information Commission Research Report 95. Newcastle upon Tyne, 2000.
Conway, Paul and Ricardo Punzalan. “Fields of Vision: Toward a New Theory of Visual
Literacy for Digitized Archival Photographs.” Archivaria 71 (2011): 63–97.
Corbin, Juliet and Anselm Strauss. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures
for Developing Grounded Theory. Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications, 2008.
Cox, Richard J. “Machines in the Archives: Technology and the Coming Transformation of
Archival Reference.” First Monday, November 2007.
http://firstmonday.org/article/view/2029/1894.
Crawford, Walt. MARC for Library Use. Boston, MA: GK Hall, 1989.
Cutter, Charles Ammi. Library Journal 32. New Jersey: R.R. Bowker Company, 1907.
215

Dana, John Cotton The Picture Collection. Woodstock, Vermont: Elm Tree Press, 1910.
Danto, Arthur. Narration and Knowledge. New York: Columbia University Press, 2007.
Dooley, Jackie M. and Katherine Luce. Taking Our Pulse: The OCLC Research Survey of
Special Collections and Archives. Dublin, Ohio: OCLC Research, 2010.
Dourish, Paul. Where the Action Is: The Foundations of Embodied Interaction. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 2001.
Drucker, Johanna. “Intimations of Immateriality: Graphical Form, Textual Sense, and the
Electronic Environment.” In Reimagining Textuality: Textual Studies in the Late Age of
Print, edited by Elizabeth Bergmann Loizeaux and Neil Fraistat, 152-177. Madison:
University of Wisconsin, Press, 2002.
—. “Performative Materiality and Theoretical Approaches to Interface.” Digital Humanities
Quarterly 7, no.1 (2013).
Dublin Core User Guide. http://wiki.dublincore.org/index.php/User_Guide.
Duff, Wendy and Catherine Johnson. “Accidentally Found on Purpose: Information-Seeking
Behavior of Historians in Archives.” Library Quarterly 72, no. 4 (2002): 472–496.
Duff, Wendy, Barbara Craig, and Joan Cherry. “Finding and Using Archival Resources: A
Cross-Canada Survey of Historians Studying Canadian History.” Archivaria 58 (2004):
51-80.
Duff, Wendy, Emily Monks-Leeson, and Alan Galey. “Contexts Built and Found: a Pilot Study
on the Process of Archival Meaning-making.” Archival Science 12, no. 1 (2012): 69–92.
Edwards, Elizabeth and Janice Hart, Photographs Objects Histories: On the Materiality of
Images. New York: Routledge, 2004.
Edwards, Elizabeth. “Photography and the Material Performance of the Past.” History and
Theory 48, no.4 (2009): 130-150.
Ernst, Wolfgang. “Distory.” In Digital Memory and the Archive, edited by Jussi Parikka, 158171. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Ernst, Wolfgang. “Media Archaeography.” In Digital Memory and the Archive, edited by Jussi
Parikka, 55-73. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2013.
Ernst, Wolfgang. “Media Archaeology as Method of Re/Search in Parallel Lines.” Lecture notes,
transmediale.12 "In/compatible" symposium, Haus der Kulturen der Welt, Berlin,
Germany, February 5, 2012. https://www.medienwissenschaft.hu216

berlin.de/de/medienwissenschaft/medientheorien/ernst-inenglish/pdf/transmedial12kurz.pdf
Eskildsen, Kasper. “Leopold Ranke’s Archival Turn: Location and Evidence in Modern
Historiography.” Modern Intellectual History 5, no. 3 (2008): 425-453.
doi:10.1017/S1479244308001753.
Farber, Marvin. The Aims of Phenomenology. New York: Harper & Row, 1966.
Farmer, Sarah. “Going Visual: Holocaust Representation and Method.” American Historical
Review 115, no. 1 (2010): 115-122.
Fear, Kathleen. “User Understanding of Metadata in Digital Image Collections: Or, What
Exactly Do You Mean by ‘Coverage’?” The American Archivist 73, no.2 (2010): 26–60.
Fereday, Jennifer and Eimear Muir-Cochrane, “Demonstrating Rigor Using Thematic Analysis:
A Hybrid Approach of Inductive and Deductive Coding and Theme Development,”
International Journal of Qualitative Methods 5, no.1 (2006): 1–11.
Fidel, Raya. “The Image Retrieval Task: Implications for the Design and Evaluation of Image
Databases.” New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia 3, no. 1 (1997): 181–199.
Finlay, Linda. “‘Outing’ the Researcher: The Provenance, Process, and Practice of Reflexivity.”
Qualitative Health Research 12, no.4 (2002): 531-545.
Forsyth, William. The Rules of Evidence as Applicable to the Credibility of History. London:
Robert Hardwicke, 1874.
Furner, Jonathan. “Information Studies without Information.” Library Trends 52, no.3 (2004):
427-446.
Gabriela Redwine. Personal Digital Archiving. DPC Technology Watch Report 15-01. 2015.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.7207/twr15-01.
Garcia-Molina, Hector. “Digital Libraries Research Agenda Report: A Strawman Report for the
IITA Digital Libraries Workshop.”
http://dbpubs.stanford.edu:8091/diglib/pub/reports/iita-dlw/appendix2.html.
George, H.B. Historical Evidence. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1989.
Glaser, Barry and Anselm Strauss, The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for
Qualitative Research. New York: Aldine, 1967.
Gordon, Eric. The Urban Spectator: American Concept Cities from Kodak to Google. Hanover,
NH: Dartmouth College Press, 2010.

217

Graham, Paul G. “Current Developments in Audiovisual Cataloging.” Library Trends 34, no. 1
(1985): 55-66.
Greenberg, Jane. “A Quantitative Categorical Analysis of Metadata Elements in ImageApplicable Metadata Schemas.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 52, no. 11 (2001): 917–924.
—. “Intellectual Control of Visual Archives: A Comparison Between the Art and Architecture
Thesaurus and the Library of Congress Thesaurus for Graphic Materials.” Cataloging &
Classification Quarterly 16, no. 1 (1993): 94.
Guba, Egon. “Criteria for Assessing the Trustworthiness of Naturalistic Inquiries.” Educational
Communication and Technology 29, no.2 (1981): 75-91.
Hansen, Mark B.N. “New Media.” In Critical Terms for Media Studies, edited by W.J.T.
Mitchell and Mark B.N. Hansen, 172-185. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press,
2010.
Harley, Diane, Jonathan Henke, Shannon Lawrence, Ian Miller, Irene Perciali, and David
Nasatir. “Use and Users of Digital Resources: A Focus on Undergraduate Education in
the Humanities and Social Sciences.” UC Berkeley: Center for Studies in Higher
Education (2006).
Harper, Douglas. “Talking about Pictures: A Case for Photo Elicitation.” Visual Studies 17
(2002):13-26.
Harris, Valerie and Peter Hepburn. “Trends in Image Use by Historians and the Implications for
Librarians and Archivists.” College and Research Libraries 74, no. 3 (2013): 272-287.
doi:10.5860/crl-345.
Hartel, Jenna and Leslie Thomson, “Visual Approaches and Photography for the Study of
Immediate Information Space,” Journal of the American Society for Information Science
and Technology 62, no. 11 (2011): 1–11.
Hayles, N. Katherine. Writing Machines. Cambridge: MIT Press, 2002.
Hedstrom, Margaret L., Christopher A Lee, Judith S Olson, and Clifford A Lampe. “’The Old
Version Flickers More’: Digital Preservation from the User’s Perspective.” The American
Archivist 69 (2006): 159–187.
Heidegger, Martin. Being and Time. Albany: SUNY Press, 1973.
Henige, David. Historical Evidence and Argument. Madison, Wis: University of Wisconsin
Press, 2005.

218

Hilpert, Zachary. “Ruins Reframed: The Commodification of American Urban Disasters, 18611906.” PhD diss., College of William and Mary, 2014.
Hjørland, Birger and Hanne Albrechtson, “Toward a New Horizon in Information Science,”
Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 46, no.6 (1995):
400-425. doi:0.1002/(SICI)1097-4571(199507)46:6<400::AID-ASI2>3.0.CO;2-Y.
Hjørland, Birger. “Domain Analysis in Information Science: Eleven Approaches – Traditional as
Well as Innovative.” Journal of Documentation 58, no. 4 (2002): 422-462.
Hong, Weiyin, James Thong, Wai-man Wong, and Kar-yan Tam. “Determinants of User
Acceptance of Digital Libraries: An Empirical Examination of Individual Differences and
System Characteristics.” Journal of Management Information Systems 18, vol. 3 (2002):
97-124.
Howell, Martha C. and Walter Prevenier. From Reliable Sources: An Introduction to Historical
Methods. Ithaca, N.Y: Cornell University Press, 2001.
Hudgins, Nicole. “A Historical Approach to Family Photography: Class and Individuality in
Manchester and Lille, 1850-1914.” Journal of Social History 43, no. 3 (2010): 559-586.
doi:10.1353/jsh.0.0298.
Ihde, Don. “More Material Heremenutics.” In Yearbook of the Institute for Advanced Study on
Science, Technology, and Society. Graz: Profil Verlag, 2004.
Israel, Paul. Edison: A Life of Invention. New York: John Wiley, 1998.
Januarius, Joeri. “Picturing the Everyday Life of Limburg Miners: Photographs as a Historical
Source.” International Review of Social History 53, no.2 (2008): 293-312.
doi:10.1017/S0020859008003453.
Jenkins, Keith. The Postmodern History Reader. London: Routledge, 1997.
Jensen, Mikkel and Mads Søgaard. "Refocusing the Contextual Turn: The Forgotten
Construction of Meaning at the Interface." In Proceedings of the Third Nordic
Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 185-188. New York: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2004.
Johnson, Allen. The Historian and Historical Evidence. New York: C. Scribner's Sons, 1926.
Jorgensen, Corinne. “Attributes of Images in Describing Tasks.” Information Processing &
Management 34, no. 2/3 (1998): 161-174. doi:10.1016/S0306-4573(97)00077-0.
—. “Image Attributes: An Investigation.” PhD diss., Syracuse University, 1995.

219

Joseph, Michael. “Information Technology and Access to Visual Images in Printed Books.” Visual
Resources 11, no.1 (1995): 78-80.
Kaplan, Elisabeth and Jeffrey Mifflin. “‘Mind and Sight’: Visual Literacy and the Archivist.”
Archival Issues 21, no. 2 (1996): 73-97.
Kessler, Ben. "Encoding Works and Images: The Story behind VRA Core 4.0." Visual Resources
Bulletin 34, no.1 (2007): 20-33.
Keutel, Marcus and Werner Mellis. “An In-Depth Interpretive Case Study in Requirements
Engineering Research: Experiences and Recommendations” MCIS,University of
Cologne, 2011.
Krase, Jerome. Seeing Cities Change: Local Culture and Class. Farnham: Ashgate, 2012.
Lacy, Mary A. and Anne Mitchell. “EAD Testing and Implementation at the Library of Congress.”
The American Archivist 60, no. 4 (1997): 420-435.
Lapenta, Francesco. “The Image as a Form of Sociological Data: A Methodological Approach to
the Analysis of Photo-Elicited Interviews.” PhD diss., University of London, 2004.
Latour, Bruno. “Beware Your Imagination Leaves Traces.” Times Higher Education Literary
Supplement, April 6, 2007.
Leary, William H. The Archival Appraisal of Photographs: a RAMP Study with Guidelines. Paris:
Lee, Christopher A. “Digital Curation as Communication Mediation.” In Handbook of Technical
Communication, edited by Alexander Mehler, Laurent Romary, and Dafydd Gibbon, 507530. Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter, 2012.
Lewis, George Cornewall. An Inquiry into the Credibility of the Early Roman History. London:
J.W. Parker & Son, 1855.
Library of Congress. Development
www.loc.gov/ead/eaddev.html.

of

the

Encoded

Archival

Description

DTD.

—. Introduction to VRA Core 4.0, 2014.
http://www.loc.gov/standards/vracore/VRA_Core4_Intro.pdf.
—. MODS User Guidelines Version 3.0. http://www.loc.gov/standards/mods/userguide/
Limberg, Louise. “Phenomenography: A Relational Approach to Research on Information Needs,
Seeking, and Use.” The New Review of Information Behaviour Research 4, no.1 (2003):
51-67.

220

Lincoln, Yvonne and Egon Guba. Naturalistic Inquiry. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications,
1985.
Ma, Jin. “Metadata in ARL Libraries: A Survey of Metadata Practices.” Journal of Library
Metadata 9, no. 1-2 (2007): 5.
Ma, Lai. “Some Philosophical Considerations in Using Mixed Methods in Library and
Information Science Research.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science
63, no. 9 (2012):1865.
MacKay, Donald. Information, Mechanism, and Meaning. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1969.
Mai, Jens-Erik. “The Quality and Qualities of Information.” Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology 64 no.4 (2013): 675-688. doi:10.1002/asi.22783.
Margolis, Eric. “Mining Photographs: Unearthing the Meanings of Historical Photos.” Radical
History Review 40 (1988): 33-49.
Markey, Karen. “Access to Iconographical Research Collections.” Library Trends 37, no. 2
(1988): 154-174.
Markey, Karen. Subject Access to Visual Resources Collections. Greenwood Press: The University
of Michigan, 1986.
Markkula, Marjo and Eero Sormumen. “Searching for Photos-Journalists' Practices in Pictorial
IR.” Electronic Workshops in Computing. Challenge of Image Retrieval, Newcastle Upon
Tyne, February 1998. http://www.bcs.org/upload/pdf/ewic_im98_paper8.pdf.
Maron, Nancy and Sarah Pickle. Appraising our Digital Investment: Sustainability of Digitized
Special Collections in ARL Libraries. Washington, DC: Association of Research Libraries,
2013).
Martinez, Katharine. “Imaging the Past: Historians, Visual Images and the Contested Definition
of History.” Visual Resources 11, no. 1 (1995): 21-45.
doi:10.1080/01973762.1995.9658317.
Marton, Ference. “Phenomenography - Describing Conceptions of the World Around Us.”
Instructional Science 10 (1981): 177-198.
Masur, Louis. “Pictures Have Now Become a Necessity”: The Use of Images in American History
Textbooks.” The Journal of American History 84, no.4 (1998):1409–1424.
Maxwell, Alexander. “Digital Archives and History Research: Feedback from an End-User.”
Library Review 59, no. 1 (2010):24-39.

221

Mccay-Peet, Lori and Elaine Toms. “Image Use Within the Work Task Model: Images as
Information and Illustration.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science 60,
no. 12 (2009): 2416–2429.
McDonough, Jerome. “METS: Standardized Encoding for Digital Library Objects.” International
Journal on Digital Libraries 6, no.2 (2006): 148-158. http://hdl.handle.net/2142/177.
McGann, Jerome. “Shall These Bones Live?” In The Beauty of Inflections: Literary Investigations
in Historical Method and Theory. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1985.
McHale, John. The Changing Information Environment. Boulder: Westview Press, 1976.
McIntyre, Ronald M and David Woodruff Smith. “Theory of Intentionality.” In Husserl’s
Phenomenology: A Textbook, edited by J.N. Mohanty and William R. McKenna, 147-179.
Washington, D.C.: Center for Advanced Research in Phenomenology and University Press
of America, 1989.
Miles, Matthew, A. Michael Huberman, and Johnny Saldana. Qualitative Data Analysis: A
Methods Sourcebook 3rd edition. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, 2013.
Miller, Daegan. “Witness Tree: Landscape and Dissent in the Nineteenth Century United States.”
PhD Diss., Cornell University, 2013.
Miller, Frederic. “Use, Appraisal, and Research: A Case Study of Social History.” The American
Archivist 49, no. 4 (1981): 371-392.
Miller, Lisa, Stephen K. Galbraith, and RLG Working Group. Capture and Release: Digital
Cameras in the Reading Room. Dublin, OH: OCLC Research, 2010.
Mingers, John. “Combining IS Research Methods: Towards a Pluralist Methodology.”
Information Systems Research 12, no.3 (2001): 240–59.
Muller, Philipp. “Understanding History: Hermeneutics and Source-Criticism in Historical
Scholarship.” In Reading Primary Sources: The Interpretation of Texts from 19th and 20thCentury History, edited by Miriam Dobson and Benjamin Ziemann, 21-36. Abingdon:
Routledge, 2009.
Myers, Michael and David Avison. “Information System Use as a Hermeneutic Process.” In
Qualitative Research in Information Systems, edited by Michael Myers and David
Avison, 224–241. London: Sage Publications, 2002.
Nahl, Diane. “Social-Biological Information Technology: An Integrated Conceptual Framework.”
Journal of the American Society for Information and Technology 58, no. 13 (2007): 20212046. doi: 10.1002/asi.20690.

222

—. “The Centrality of the Affective in Information Behavior.” In Information and Emotion: The
Emergent Affective Paradigm in Information Behavior Research and Theory, edited by
Diane Nahl and Dania Bilal, 3-38. Medford, New Jersey: American Society for Information
Science and Technology, 2007.
OCLC/RLG Working Group on Preservation Metadata. “Preservation Metadata for Digital
Objects: A Review of the State of the Art.” January 31, 2001.
https://www.oclc.org/content/dam/research/activities/pmwg/presmeta_wp.pdf.
Orbach, Barbara. “So That Others May See So That Others May See: Tools for Cataloging Still
Images.” Cataloging & Classification Quarterly 11, no.3-4 (1990): 163-191.
doi:10.1300/J104v11n03_08.
Palmer, Carole and Laura Neumann, “The Information Work of Interdisciplinary Humanities
Scholars: Exploration and Translation,” Library Quarterly 72, no.1 (2002): 85-117.
Palmer, Carole. “Thematic Research Collections.” In A Companion to Digital Humanities.
Oxford: Blackwell Publishing, 2004.
Panofsky, Erwin. Meaning in the Visual Arts. Garden City, NY: Doubleday Anchor Books, 1955.
Park, Jung-Ran and Yuji Tosaka. “Metadata Creation Practices in Digital Repositories and
Collections: Schemata, Selection Criteria, and Interoperability.” Information Technology
& Libraries 29, no. 3 (2010): 104-116.
Patton, Michael Quinn. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Press, 2002.
PREMIS Editorial Committee. PREMIS Data Dictionary for Preservation Metadata, version 2.0
(March 2008). http://www.loc.gov/standards/premis/v2/premis-dd-2-0.pdf.
Quanchi, Max. “Visual Histories and Photographic Evidence.” The Journal of Pacific History 41,
no.2 (2006): 165-173. doi:10.1080/00223340600826052.
Ranger, Terence. “Pictures Must Prevail: Sex and the Social History of African Photography in
Bulawayo, 1930-1960.” Visual History 27 (2001): 261-266.
Ranke, Leopold von. “On the Character of Historical Science.” In The Theory and Practice of
History, edited by Georg G. Iggers, Konrad von Moltke, Wilhelm Humboldt, and Leopold
von Ranke, 14-15. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1973.
Robinson, James H. The New History; Essays Illustrating the Modern Historical Outlook. New
York: Macmillan, 1912.

223

Rumer, Jennifer and Roger C. Schonfeld. "Supporting the Changing Research Practices of
Historians:
Final
Report
from
ITHAKA
S+R.”
2012.
doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.18665/sr.22833.
Salo, Edward. “Crossing the Rivers of the State: The Role of the Ferry in the Development of
South Carolina, Circa 1680-1920s.” PhD diss., Middle Tennessee State University, 2009.
Sampsell-Willman, Kate. “Using Lewis Hine's Child Labor Photographs, Part 2: The
Miners.” The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era Online.January 25, 2011.
http://www.shgape.org/supplement-using-lewis-hine-child-labor-photographs-part-twominers.
—. Lewis Hine as Social Critic. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2009.
Schlack, Tim. “Framing Photographs, Denying Archives: The Difficulty of Focusing on Archival
Photographs.” Archival Science 8, no. 2 (2008): 85–101.
Scholz, Roland and Olaf Tietjie. “Types of Case Studies.” In Embedded Case Study Methods:
Integrating Quantitative and Qualitative Knowledge, edited by Roland Scholz and Olaf
Tietjie, 9-14. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2002.
Schwartz, Joan M. “Coming to Terms with Photographs: Descriptive Standards, Linguistic
‘Othering,’ and the Margins of Archivy.” Archivaria 54 (2002): 142-171.
Segal, Jane and Lisa Spiro. “The Impact of Digital Resources on Humanities Scholarship.” Rice
University, 2007. http://library.rice.edu/services/dmc/about/projects/the-impact-ofdigital-resources-on-humanities-research.
Shannon, Claude E. “The Mathematical Theory of Communication.” The Bell System Technical
Journal 27 (1948): 379-423.
Shatford-Layne, Sara. “Analyzing the Subject of a Picture: A Theoretical Approach.” Cataloging
& Classification Quarterly 6, no. 3 (March 1986): 39-62. doi:10.1300/J104v06n03_04.
—. “Some Issues in the Indexing of Images.” Journal of the American Society for Information
Science 45, no. 8 (1994): 583-588.
Shaw, Renata V. A Century of Photographs, 1846-1946. Washington DC: The Library of
Congress, 1980.
Sheble, Laura and Barbara Wildemuth. “Transaction Logs.” In Applications of Social Research
Methods to Questions in Information and Library Science, edited by Barbara Wildemuth,
166-177. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited, 2009.
Shenton, Andrew K. “Strategies for Ensuring Trustworthiness in Qualitative Research Projects.”
Education for Information 22 (2004): 63-75.
224

Simcox, William Henry. Principles of Historical Evidence Considered in Their Bearing on the
History of Remote Times. Oxford: T. & G. Shrimpton, 1868.
Sinn, Donghee. “Impact of Digital Archival Collections on Historical Research.” Journal of the
American Society for Information Science and Technology 63, no. 8 (2012): 1521-1537.
Smith, Barry. Cambridge Companion to Husserl. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Smith, Marian. “Young People: A Phenomenographic Investigation Into the Ways They
Experience Information.” PhD diss., Loughborough University, 2010.
Snyder, Jamie. “Image-Enabled Discourse: Investigating the Creation of Visual Information as
Communicative Practice.” PhD diss., Syracuse University, 2012.
Solomon, Paul. “Discovering Information in Context.” Annual Review of Information Science and
Technology 36, no.1 (2005): 229-264.
Soloski, John. “Meaning and Information: A Perspective on Donald M. MacKay.” Journal of
Communication Inquiry 2, no. 2 (1977): 51-59.
Sontag, Susan. On Photography. New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977.
Spink, Amanda and Charles Cole. “Human Information Behavior: Integrating Diverse Approaches
and Information Use.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and
Technology 57, no. 1 (2006): 25-35. doi: 10.1002/asi.20249.
Stake, Robert E. The Art of Case Study Research. Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications,
1995.
—. “Qualitative Case Studies.” In The SAGE Handbook of Qualitative Research, edited by
Norman Denzin and Yvonna Lincoln, 435-454. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications,
2000.
Stearns, Peter and Jan Lewis. An Emotional History of the U.S. New York: NYU Press, 1998.
Sternfeld, Joshua. “Archival Theory and Digital Historiography: Selection, Search, and Metadata
as Archival Processes for Assessing Historical Contextualization.” The American Archivist
74 (2011): 544-575.
Stieg-Dalton, Margaret and Laurie Charnigo. “Historians and Their Information Sources.” College
and Research Libraries 65, no. 4 (2004): 400-425.
Stoan, Stephen. “Research and Information Retrieval among Academic Researchers.” Library
Trends 39, no. 3 (Winter 1991): 238-258. http://hdl.handle.net/2142/7725.

225

Stone, Lawrence. The Past and the Present Revisited. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1987.
Stone, Sue. “Humanities Scholars: Information Needs and Uses.” Journal of Documentation 38,
no. 4 (1982): 292-313. http://www.emeraldinsight.com/doi/abs/10.1108/eb026734.
Suter, W. Newton. Introduction to Educational Research: A Critical Thinking Approach.
Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications, 2006.
Taylor, Bradley. “The Effect of Surrogation on Viewer Response to Expressional Qualities in
Works of Art.” PhD Diss., University of Michigan, 2001.
Taylor, Robert. “Information Use Environments.” In Progress in Communication Sciences Vol.
10, edited by Brenda Dervin and M.J. Voight, 217-225. Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing
Corp, 1991.
—. Value-added Processes in Information Systems. New Jersey: Ablex Publishing Corporation,
1986.
Terras, Melissa. “Digital Curiosities: Resource Creation via Amateur Digitization.” Literary and
Linguistic Computing 25, no.4 (2010): 425-438. doi:10.1093/llc/fqq019.
Theiler, Janine M. "A Shared Story of Successful Spanish Learning: An Embedded Multiple Case
Study". PhD diss, 2012.
Thomas, James and Angela Harden, “Methods for the Thematic Synthesis of Qualitative Research
in Systematic Reviews.” BMC Medical Research Methodology 8, no.45 (2008).
Thomas, Joe D. “Photographic Archives.” The American Archivist 21, no.4 (1958): 419-424.
Thomas, Julia Adeney. “The Evidence of Sight.” History and Theory 48 (2009): 151-168.
Thompson, Ruth. “The Collection and Preservation of Local Historical Pictures in the Minneapolis
Public Library.” The American Archivist 9, no. 4 (1946): 219-225.
Tibbo, Helen. “Primarily History in America: How US Historians Search for Primary Materials at
the Dawn of the Digital Age.” The American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 9–50
Troncale, Anthony T. “Worth Beyond Words: Romana Javitz and the New York Public
Library’s Picture Collection.” New York Public Library Website. Retrieved from
http://www.nypl.org/locations/tid/45/node/62019.
Turner, Kristen. “Opera in English: Class and culture, 1878-1910.” PhD diss., University of
North Carolina, 2015.
United States, David Fitzgerald, and A. W. Greely. List of the Photographs and Photographic
Negatives Relating to the War for the Union, Now in the War Department Library.
226

Washington: Government Printing Office, 1897.
https://archive.org/details/listofphotograph00unit
van Hage, Willem, Veronique Malaise, Roxane Segers, Laura Hollink, and Guus Schreiber.
“Design and Use of the Simple Event Model (SEM).” Web Semantics: Science, Services
and Agents on the World Wide Web 9 (2011): 128-136.
Visual Resources Association. Cataloging Cultural Objects. http://cco.vrafoundation.org/.
—. Core Categories for Visual Resources Version 4.0. 2007.
http://www.vraweb.org/project/vracore4/index.html.
W3C. Resource Description Framework. https://www.w3.org/RDF/.
Walker, Jonathan. “Let Us Burn the Gondolas: Venice as a Modern City.” Rethinking History 15,
no.1 (2011): 3-32. doi:10.1080/13642529.2011.546128.
Walsham, Geoff. “Interpretive Case Studies in IS Research: Nature and Method.” European
Journal of Information Systems 4 (1995): 74-81. doi: 10.1057/ejis.1995.9.
Warwick, Claire, Melissa Terras, Paul Huntington, and Nikoleta Pappa, “If You Build It Will They
Come? The LAIRAH Study: Quantifying the Use of Online Resources in the Arts and
Humanities through Statistical Analysis of User Log Data.” Literary and Linguistic
Computing 23, no.1 (2007): 85-102. doi: 10.1093/llc/fqm045.
Weibel, Stuart and Eric Miller. “Image Description on the Internet: A Summary of the
CNI/OCLC Image Metadata Workshop.” D-Lib Magazine, January 1997.
http://www.dlib.org/dlib/january97/oclc/01weibel.html.
Weintraub, Karl. “The Humanistic Scholar and the Library.” The Library Quarterly 50, no. 1
(1980): 22-39.
White, Hayden. “Historiography and Historiphoty.” The American Historical Review 93, no. 5
(1988): 1194.
Willis, Gordon. Cognitive Interviewing: A Tool for Improving Survey Design. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage Publications, 2005.
—. “Cognitive Interviewing: A ‘How To’ Guide.” 1999 Meeting of the American Statistical
Association. Research Triangle Park, NC: Research Triangle Institute, 1999, 7.
Wilson, T.D. “Alfred Schutz, Phenomenology and Research Methodology for Information
Behaviour Research.” New Review of Information Behaviour Research 3 (2002): 71-82.

227

Wineburg, Samuel. “Historical Problem Solving: A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the
Evaluation of Documentary and Pictorial Evidence.” Journal of Educational Psychology
83, no.1 (1991): 73-87.
—. “Historical Problem-Solving : A Study of the Cognitive Processes Used in the Evaluation of
Documentary Evidence.” PhD diss., Stanford University, 1990.
Yakel, Elizabeth and Deborah Torres. “AI: Archival Intelligence and User Expertise.” The
American Archivist 66, no. 1 (2003): 51–78.
Yin, Robert. Case Study Research: Design and Methods 2nd edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage
Publishing, 1994.
Zhang, Ying and Yuelin Li. “A User-Centered Functional Metadata Evaluation of Moving Image
Collections.” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 59,
no. 8 (2008): 1331–1346. doi:10.1002/asi.20839.
Zinkham, Helena, Patricia D. Cloud, and Hope Mayo. “Providing Access by Form of Material,
Genre, and Physical Characteristics: Benefits and Techniques.” The American Archivist
52, no.3 (1989): 300-319. http://dx.doi.org/10.17723/aarc.52.3.g657371200612642.
Zinkham, Helena. “Reading and Researching Photographs.” In Photographs: Archival Care and
Management, edited by Mary Lynn Ritzenthaler and Diane Vogt-O’Connor, 59-77.
Chicago: The Society of American Archivists, 2006.
Zunde, Pranas. “Selected Bibliography o+A20n Information Theory Applications to Information
Science and Related Subject Areas.” Information Processing and Management 20, no.3
(1984): 417-497.

228

