EDUCATIONAL HYPERCOMICS: LEARNERS, INSTITUTIONS, AND COMICS IN
E-LEARNING INTERFACE DESIGN

BY
DAMIAN DUFFY

DISSERTATION
Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Library and Information Science
in the Graduate College of the
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2016

Urbana, Illinois
Doctoral Committee:
Professor Linda C. Smith, Chair
Associate Professor John Jennings, Director of Research
Associate Professor Spencer Schaffner
Associate Professor Rayvon Fouché








ProQuest Number: 10301786





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10301786
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract
Current literacy education research suggests that formal affordances of the comics
medium lend themselves to critical pedagogies of new media literacy (see, e.g., Schwarz, 2006;
Jacobs, 2007; Schwartz & Rubinstein-Ávila, 2006; Duffy, 2010). This research connects comics
and new media because both are visually dominant, juxtapositional compositional forms that
make meaning through multiple modes of communicative design. However, this research
generally construes comics as a narrative form that bridges the traditions of print-based literacy
with the wide array of multiliteracies required by new media. The evolution of comics as a form
of digital communication within new media pedagogical texts has received far less attention. The
present study addresses this lacuna in the literature through analysis of social semiotics of comics
in the contexts of online learning.
This is a study of multimodal pedagogical discourse in online educational comics,
specifically educational hypercomics. Hypercomics can be loosely defined as comics on the
World Wide Web which incorporate semiotic affordances of digital delivery such as
interactivity, multiplicity of reading paths, hypertextuality, audio, video, and animation. This
study is a comparative social semiotic analysis of three educational hypercomics, focused on the
ways in which the comics form interacts with digital affordances in educational institutional
contexts in order to construe readers as learners. The goal of this research is to explicate ways in
which digital comics' formal characteristics can function not only as a vehicle for narrative
expression in pedagogy, but also as a strategy for e-learning information organization and
interface design.

ii

To Jen, Simon, and Gwen, as always

iii

Acknowledgements
I would like to extend my deep appreciation to the various advisors, colleagues, and
confidants who have helped me through the research and writing of this dissertation. My
heartfelt thanks to my committee members for their time, attention, and intelligent, incisive
critique. To my chair, Associate Dean Linda Smith, for patiently helping me along a sometimes
uncertain research path; to Professor Jennings for his consistent provision of expert knowledge
and the gift of creative collaboration; to Dr. Schaffner for his unerring attention to both small
details and the larger picture; and to Dr. Fouché for his practical advice and theoretical acumen.
This work would not exist without them.
Thanks additionally to Dr. Caroline Haythornthwaite and Dr. Allison Clark for starting
me on this academic journey. Unwavering, eternal love to my mom, mom-in-law, wife, and kids
for helping make time and space for me to work, and for all the support and just putting up with
me in general. Mad props and big ups to Daniel Merlin Goodbrey, Jayms Nichols, and Jared
Gardner for editing articles that provided the basis for portions of this work.

iv

Table of contents
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER 2: COMICS INDEFINITE, DISCIPLINARITY, AND MULTIMODALITY ......... 22
CHAPTER 3: RESOURCE COLLECTION AND SAMPLE SELECTION ............................... 68
CHAPTER 4: INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXTS AND INTERFACE DESIGN........................... 85
CHAPTER 5: PEDAGOGY IN REMEDIATION & NAVIGATION ....................................... 110
CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION—LEVERAGING LIMINALITY ............................................. 124
REFERENCES ........................................................................................................................... 131

v

CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION

Comics has long been implicated in education as variously deleterious and beneficial to
learning. In contrast to the discourse surrounding comics and education at the middle of the
twentieth century, best characterized as cautious approval (see, e.g. Lehman & Witty, 1927;
Frank, 1943; Sones, 1944; Zorbaugh, 1949) drowned out by rabid condemnation (see, e.g. North,
1940; Mulberry, 1943; Legman, 1948; Wertham, 1954), recent studies of intersections between
comics and education tend to extol the benefits of the use of comics in curricula throughout
primary, secondary, and higher education (e.g. Versaci, 2001; Gorman, 2003; Bitz, 2004; Carter,
2008). A growing body of research is especially concerned with the affordances of comics for
teaching and learning to be critically literate in multiple modes of meaning making, beyond
traditional word-based literacy (e.g. Norton, 2003; Yannicopoulou, 2004; Schwarz, 2006;
Schwartz & Rubinstein-Ávila, 2006; Jacobs, 2007; Chun, 2009). This research on the use of
comics in multimodal literacy pedagogy places comics in conversation with the production and
interpretation of new media, i.e. media making use of digital information communications
technology (Moulthrop, 2009; Duffy, 2010; Gardner, 2012).
However, despite implicit connections between comics and new media, the majority of
this literature focuses on comparing digital multimodality with the multimodal design of
meaning in print comics formats like comic books, manga, and graphic novels. Far less attention
has been paid to comics-related pedagogy on the World Wide Web. This is hardly surprising,
given that study of emergent contemporary forms of comics on the World Wide Web is
relatively sparse overall. The majority of webcomics scholarship employs a mix of economic and
cultural historical analysis (see McCloud, 2000; Fenty, Houp, & Taylor, 2004; Campbell, 2005;
Allen, 2007; Salkowitz, 2012).
1

Scholarly literature specific to the use of ICTs and comics in education has also been
mostly limited in its analytic methodology, focused primarily on case studies of student comics
creation using software or online applications that provide simplified drag-and-drop interfaces
and customizable predesigned templates for image, panel, and page compositions (e.g. Francis
Pelton et al., 2007; Seyfried, 2008; Lawrence et al., 2009; Zimmerman, 2010). In contrast,
comics created as online pedagogical texts have been largely overlooked. This inattention to
educational online comics is problematic because comics that make meaning through modes of
representation and interaction which print cannot easily reproduce represent a largely untapped
area for innovation in online pedagogical design. This study addresses the current lack of
research on the social semiotics of educational hypercomics through a comparative multimodal
discourse analysis of digital-born texts1 that combine the comics form with online interactivity in
order to promote learning. The results of this analysis will contribute to the emerging body of
research on the use of comics in critical multimodal literacy pedagogy, as well as the utility of
comics as information organization and e-learning interface design.

Comics, literacy, and multiliteracies

Librarians and educators alike assert that comics help raise literacy rates by engaging
reluctant readers (see, e.g., Gorman, 2003; Krashen, 2004; Goldsmith, 2005; Andera, 2007). This
is a long running thread in comics research dating back to the first half of the 20th century,
owing, in part, to the tendency of anti-comics critiques of the 1940s and 1950s to declare comics
(especially comic books) as causing the degradation of both children's morals and their (verbal
linguistic) reading ability, usually under the auspices of the pictures in the comics "ruining"

2

children's ability to pay attention to works that are exclusively prose, especially those prose
works canonized as "good literature" (see, e.g. North, 1940; Mulberry, 1943; Legman, 1948;
Wertham, 1954). In reaction to the popularity of comic books among young people and the
attendant popularization of such anti-comics sentiments during this period, a primary focus of
1940s and 1950s comics research is “…the relations of comics to education and educational
method” (Sones, 1944, p. 232). A number of early empirical comics studies investigate children's
self-directed comics reading habits, and compare those habits to other forms of reading, as well
as to measures of intelligence and academic achievement (e.g. Witty, 1941a, 1941b; Heisler,
1946; Blakely, 1958). In these studies, findings are generally inconclusive, in the sense that there
are few findings to indicate that comics reading had any significant correlation to intelligence,
academic achievement, or overall reading habits.
Beyond this research on the seemingly negligible effects of comics reading on children's
academic performance, a small number of case studies from this early period actively investigate
the inclusion of comics in classroom pedagogy, often finding that the form can be beneficial to
both literacy education, and learning outcomes across disciplines. For example, Sones (1944)
enumerates several uses of comics as instructional texts, ranging from the use of Superman
themed workbooks, to comic book adaptations of classic literature and true stories, to the utility
of comics in remedial reading instruction, to disseminating military and governmental
information, ultimately recommending comics for the classroom because their popularity and
easy comprehension fit well with a teaching philosophy "...that instruction must begin in the ongoing activities and concerns of the learner and that its effectiveness depends on the efficiency of
the form of communication that is employed" (p. 233). Hutchinson (1949) reports on an
instructional program where, based on a pilot study in Philadelphia schools, a handbook on using

3

comic strips in the classroom was compiled and offered to teachers nationwide for a 13 week
experiment in comics pedagogy. Of the 2,027 teachers who requested the material, 438 returned
the questionnaire included with the material, reporting generally favorable responses to the
instructional method across subject areas, noting especially the utility of comics' popularity in
motivating children to work on language assignments, while the support of word comprehension
by pictorial representations recommended comics for teaching remedial readers (Hutchinson,
1949, p. 239). From these mid-20th century beginnings, the usefulness of comics as a way to lure
children into more sophisticated readings of the classics is a persistent theme in comics-related
education and library science research (see, e.g., Schoof, 1978; Wright, 1979; Dorrell & Carroll,
1981; Brenner, 2006; McTaggart, 2008).
Despite the positive learning outcomes of increased literacy among reluctant readers,
Hatfield (2005) critiques such educational research for construing comics reading as "easy"
while neglecting "the specificity of the comics reading experience" characterized as "a complex
means of communication" with "a plurality of messages... heterogeneous in form," and defined
by interwoven "tensions" wrought in part by the co-presence of words, images, along with
compositional and narrative meaning making (p. 36, emphasis original). Jacobs (2007) echoes
Hatfield's critique, arguing that conceptions of comics as “debased or simplified word-based
literacy" ignore the “complex multimodal literacy” required of and taught by reading the form (p.
21). Schwartz & Rubinstein-Ávila (2006) similarly align comics, and specifically manga
(Japanese comics), as requiring a complex understanding of hybridized visual and verbal
semiotics, which in turn complements a pedagogy that teaches students to be self-reflexive and
self critical readers. According to Jacobs (2007), it is through the coexistence of these multiple
modes of meaning on the page that comics engender an “active process” of reading and writing

4

which can “prepare students for better negotiating their worlds of meaning” (p. 25). Norton
(2003) describes this active process of reading comics as developing a “sense of ownership” on
the part of students, a connection to students’ worlds rarely found in traditional classroom
curriculum.
In part, by explicating potentials for comics in critical pedagogy of multiple literacies,
Jacobs (2007), Schwartz & Rubinstein-Ávila (2006), and Norton (2003) pinpoint overlapping
and interrelated formal and sociocultural similarities between comics and new media (i.e. media
created and distributed through information communication technologies). From a predominately
sociocultural perspective, the unique sense of interaction and ownership comics can engender in
its readers predicts and parallels similar online community-driven media production, what
Jenkins, Clinton, Purushotma, Robinson, & Weigel (2006) term “participatory cultures.” Indeed,
the participatory nature of fandom associated especially with serialized print comics formats like
comic books and manga, as well as the various transmedia properties based on comic books and
manga (through, e.g. film, live action television, animation, merchandising), are among the
signal examples used by Henry Jenkins (2006) in explicating the similarly conceived
"convergence culture" in which contemporary transmedia interrelations between corporatecontrolled cultural production and popular participation blur boundaries between consumer and
producer, professional and amateur. The convergence cultural connotations of comics are vital to
literacy pedagogy, given "the powerful role popular culture plays in the online literacy practices
that are central to media convergence... particularly when it comes to the performance and
interpretation of identity" (Williams, 2011, p. 201-2). Of course, the conflation of comics with
popular culture is not entirely accurate, since relatively few comics works have large audiences,
and idiosyncratic stories for small niche audiences are as possible in comics as crowd-pleasing

5

genre fiction. However, in this instance, the limiting conception of comics as solely popular
culture, and especially youth culture, is useful in that it serves to highlight the tendency in
comics culture towards building the kinds of participatory communities that increasingly
characterize online interaction, as well as the opportunities for online learning within those
community contexts.
The idea of using popular culture materials generally, and comics specifically, to
motivate learning and make education relevant to students' interests has a long history. For
example, during the 1930s and 1940s National Comics solicited and published reviews and
recommendations of prose books from educators and young readers, and in so doing "...
leveraged the experimental and subversive nature of comics to help... create a different kind of
community of readers, where comics and classics could co-exist" (Tilley, 2012, p. 12). Comics
fans who regularly, critically wrote into the letters columns of 20th century comic books,
published fanzines, engaged in community building with fellow collectors and aspiring creators,
and made their own comics exemplify the notion that comics has always been "a form that
openly inspired... collaboration, community, and communication" predicting ways "the Internet
connects fans along infinite numbers of axes" in digital virtual communities (Gardner, 2012, p.
104).
From a formal standpoint, both comics (or, more specifically, those characteristics of
sequential pictorial juxtaposition and the integrative use of words and pictures that generally
evince a form of reading recognized as "comics") and new media (broadly understood as
communicative works designed and distributed through contemporary and emergent digital
technologies like computers and the Internet) simultaneously and overtly make meaning through
multiple modes of design, often with a dominance of pictorial over verbal linguistic elements,

6

part of what Mitchell (1994) describes as the "pictorial turn" in contemporary cultural
philosophy. Gunther Kress (2003) frames this overall cultural trend as “…the broad move from
the now centuries-long dominance of writing to the new dominance of the image …the move
from the dominance of the medium of the book to the dominance of the medium of the screen”
(p. 1). These technocultural trends necessitate pedagogy which values “…the wide array of
literacies [students] will need in order to participate fully and productively in the technological
dimensions of their professional and personal lives” (Selber, 2004, p. 234).
According to the New London Group (1996), teaching this formidable array of literacies
requires a reconceptualization of literacy to recognize that "...language and other modes of
meaning are dynamic representational resources, constantly being remade by their users as they
work to achieve their various cultural purposes" (p. 64). The primary focus of multiliteracies
theory is digital ICTs, but the tendency of comics towards overtly pictorial, generally narrative
meaning making necessarily implicates the form in multiliteracies pedagogy. According to Jewitt
(2004):
The move from page to screen realizes a changed compositional relationship between image and writing.
Image dominates the space in the majority of the screens. The relationship between image and writing is
newly configured and is itself a visual meaning-making resource. In the context of the screen the writing
has become a visual element, a block of "space," which makes textual meaning beyond its written content
(p. 185).

The "textual meaning" to which Jewitt refers, in which verbal linguistic written representation
moves within a visual compositional space, is the kind of meaning making typically identified
with comics. This change in the dominance of visual over verbal linguistic composition supports
observations by educators that, "...the act of reading a comic cuts much more closely to how our
students today receive information. ...the Internet, where the sites... are densely packed and ask

7

readers to move their eyes diagonally and up and down in addition to side to side--the same kind
of movements that come with reading comic book panels and pages" (Versaci, 2008, p. 97).
Explication of the shared tendency between comics and new media towards
juxtapositional and imagetextual multimodal designs of meaning is aided by the "metalanguage"
of multiliteracies suggested by the New London Group (2000), a typology of modes of meaning
making that can be combined through multimodal design: Visual, Gestural, Linguistic, Audio,
and Spatial. As I have noted elsewhere (Duffy, 2010), the complex network of meanings found
in comics can make use of all five of the New London Group’s typology of modes of meaning
making:


Visual: As a form of visual communication, visual modes of meaning making are
essential, and perhaps the most obvious shared feature of comics and new media.



Gestural: Figure drawings function as abstracted visual symbols of real physical
gestures, and the lines drawn in comics are records of the gestures of the artist’s
hand.



Linguistic: The textual component of comics’ hybridization of image and text.



Audio: Devices such as word balloons and onomatopoeic sound effects function
as simulated audio, making synaesthetic use of silent image and text to stand in
for aural elements.



Spatial: Aspects of page design, particularly those related to the sequential and
architectonic placement of panels, are a key component to the unique ways in
which comics communicate the passage of time, and thus narrative (see, e.g.,
McCloud, 1993; Groensteen, 1999/2006; Pratt, 2009).

8

For Gardner (2006), the century-old imagetextual characteristics associated with comics
function as a sort of temporal reciprocal to the contemporary dominance of visual information
organization occasioned by new media:
New media technologies (the database, internet, hypertext, etc.) are ideally suited for making sense of the
present in relation to the future […] But it is the comic form that might be best suited to articulating the
complex demands of the present new media age in relation to the media of the past (p. 803).

Here the comics form is conceptualized as a through line between industrial and post-industrial
media, evoking the notion of comics as a bridge between 20th and 21st century pedagogy. For
Schwarz (2006), this connection between past and present means that "Both traditional,
alphabetic literacy and literacies such as information, visual, and media literacy can be well
served by classroom engagement..." with comics because the form "...combines the visual and
verbal as do films, TV, and even popup ads," with the signal difference being that comics
"...holds still and allows special attention to be given to its unique visual and word arrangement"
(p. 59). However, in order for this idea to be pedagogically useful, it is necessary to understand
with greater specificity how the formal properties of comics straddle this line between past and
future information communication, and what forms of "special attention" the "unique visual and
word arrangements" necessitate.

Multimodality, temporality, and interactivity

As explained above, the comics form can make use of the same modes of meaning
making available for digital new media design as described by the New London Group (2000)
typology, with the caveat that time based modes using sound and motion to design meaning are
simulated through common visual symbolic strategies including speech balloons, motion lines,

9

onomatopoeic sound effects, and the widespread comics design practices of spatial composition
of juxtaposition, a visual/verbal blend, and sequentiality. In these elements comics exemplifies
what Kalantzis & Cope (2000) term synaesthetic design, wherein meaning is made through
“processes of integration and moving backwards and forwards between the various modes” (p.
211). This integration of modes of meaning making is largely characteristic of online spaces,
where image, text, audio, and video commonly comingle creating a high level of what Norris
(2004) terms modal density, the complexity and intensity of multiple modes of “embodied” and
“disembodied” communication:
Any communicative event consists of the interplay among a multiplicity of communicative modes. Social
actors draw on certain embodied modes… At the same time, the social actors may employ disembodied
modes, such as… reading magazines. Disembodied modes always entail some frozen actions, where frozen
action does not imply one static form but rather a higher level of permanency of a communicative mode
(Norris, 2004, p. 103, emphasis original).

Norris (ibid.) discusses modal density in reference to video recorded multimodal discourses of
interpersonal body language in face to face social interactions, but modal density is also relevant
to the more literally static images of comics.
The comics form tends towards a high level of modal density generally characterized by
its high degree of visual permanence, allowing readers to navigate the text at their own pace and
through their own choices of reading path, a characteristic Yang (2003a) sees as pedagogically
useful in that it “can be harnessed in practically any subject and at practically any grade level."
The frozen design actions of the comics creator in a sense embody disembodied communication,
using visually permanent images to both represent and imply the more fleeting embodied
communications of human interaction, cognition, and imagination. This complex of potential
meanings made available through comics' interrelated imagetextual representational resources,

10

derived from the form's simultaneously high levels of modal density and visual permanence,
“...responds to a model of organization that is not that of the strip nor that of the chain, but that of
the network” (Groensteen, 1999/2006, p. 146, emphasis original).
In The System of Comics, Groensteen (ibid.) refers to the networked meanings of comics
in his explication of the "hyperframe" and the "multiframe," terms he borrows from fellow
Francophone comics scholars Benôit Peeters and Henri Van Lier respectively (p. 30). For
Groensteen (ibid.), the hyperframe describes the framing of a comics page as a single unit of
meaning, within which the potentials for meaning are enacted through page layout (mise-enpage), while the multiframe encompasses the totality of the comics work, from the three panels
of a single daily newspaper comic strip to the entirety of a graphic novel (p. 31). Groensteen uses
the term "arthrology" to describe his semiotic analytic framework for the systems of relations
between various units of meaning in comics, specifically relationships between panels, both
linear ("restrained arthrology") and nonlinear ("general arthrology"). Restrained arthrology is
comprised of "sequential syntagms" that create linear progressions of meaning "suborned to
narrative ends," as in, e.g., the basic communication of meaning along the reading path from left
to right on the pages of English language comics, while general arthrology studies hyper- and
multiframes for ways in which relationships between various design elements are repeated,
reused, and recontextualized in spaces that are "translinear and distant," as when a certain image
is repeated with slight changes or in juxtaposition with differing images on non-consecutive
pages (ibid., p. 22). This general arthrological analysis in particular is what leads Groensteen to
characterize the meanings in comics as networked. One example he offers of such meanings is
"the proliferation of a motif," where a particular image or visual element is repeated throughout a
comics work in differing contexts, imbuing that visual element with shifting or accruing amounts

11

of meaning, as in the famous repetition of the smiley face image spattered with blood repeated
throughout Alan Moore and Dave Gibbons' influential Cold War-era superhero graphic novel
Watchmen (ibid., p. 155).
In Watchmen the smiley face image appears in the first panel, a button worn by a
particular character whose murder frames one of the main plot threads of the work. Versions of
the same circle circumscribing two dots for eyes, a curved line for a mouth, with a drop-shaped
spatter over one eye, repeats throughout the work, sometimes as the reappearance of the original
button, but also in everything from a topographic view of Mars to a smiley face t-shirt spattered
with ketchup. Each instance recalls the original image of the button, and the murder mystery it
indexes, but beyond that the narrative and compositional contexts of the smiley face motif add
to, alter, and call into question the symbolic meaning of the iconic image. In part this exemplifies
the tendency in Moore's work towards performance of formal virtuosity which highlights the
more unique potentials for meaning making in comics (see, e.g. Di Liddo, 2009). Moulthrop
(2009) identifies such complex interwoven networks of meaning in Watchmen as paralleling the
“many changes of mind” required by continual technological emergence and thus encouraging
“…an ability to map across multiple coordinate systems, an awareness of contingent or emergent
forms, and a keen appreciation of the limits to any neat, self-enclosing order” (p. 300). Moore
describes these affordances for reflection in comics, focusing especially on the modal density
and visual permanence of the form:
A picture can be set against text ironically, or it can be used to support the text, or it can be completely
disjointed from the text - which forces the reader into looking at the scene in a new way…[and] you cannot
do [this] anywhere near as precisely as you can in comics. Here the reader has the ability to stop and linger
over one particular 'frame' and work out all of the meaning in that frame or panel, as opposed to having it

12

flash by you at twenty-four frames per second in a cinema (quoted in Wiater and Bissette 1993, p. 162163).

Far from an idiosyncrasy of Moore's oeuvre, this tendency towards patterning through linear
juxtaposition and sequence combined with nonlinear compositional repetition and
recontextualization of visual images is essential to the potential density of modes of meaning
making in comics.
Much like Moore, McCloud (1993) compares comics and film in order to posit the
principal method of interacting with the comics text, what McCloud calls closure. In McCloud’s
conception of closure, the reader’s imagination is engaged by the blank spaces between panels
(called gutters) to mentally insert what the printed static images excerpt from the visual
representation of the scene. McCloud asserts that narrative time in comics is propelled by this
closure, a form of cognition that takes place as the eye moves from panel to panel. Thus, the
reader is “a willing and conscious collaborator” with the artist, the two collaborating to create
closure, which McCloud dubs, “the agent of change, time and motion” and thus narrative
meaning in comics (p. 65). Lawrence Abbot (1986) places a greater emphasis than McCloud
(1993) on text as such an agent, although McCloud does touch on the place of text in comics
narrative time, quoting heavily from Will Eisner’s writings on the subject. Abbot (1986) asserts
that the time it takes to a read a caption or word balloon is what gives the reader’s mind a chance
to perceive “the illusion of running time, the ‘duration’ of a scene” within a single panel (p. 165).
In effect, Abbot is describing the same participatory reader cognition as McCloud’s closure, but
with the focus of that cognition occurring within panels, rather than between them. Eisner (1985)
discusses the visual side of this in-panel cognitive creation of narrative time, asserting that the
imposition of imagery within the panel acts as a “catalyst,” transforming panels set in sequence

13

to “the criterion by which to judge the illusion of time” and “the device most fundamental to the
transmission of timing”(p. 28).
In his critique of McCloud's articulation of closure as an essential difference between
comics and film, Beaty (1999) argues that the process of closure is not so different from
watching moving images, since effects created in film and video editing like montage and jumpcuts can provoke a similar leap of viewer cognition as the investment of meaning required of the
comics reader when inferring change from one panel to the next. For Beaty (1999), the important
idea is "the acknowledgement that the same type of transition [between panels or shot sequences]
in the two media functions differently because of the way each processes time and space" as
opposed to "a false claim that comics do something that film does not" (p. 71). Beaty is one of
the scholars who translated Groensteen's The System of Comics into English, unsurprising since
Groensteen is especially focused on the peculiarities of comics' use of space (see, e.g. the
discussion of the hyper- and multiframe, above). In fact, Groensteen (1999/2006) describes a
comics work as a "spatio-topical system" whose meaning is "...not just a matter of proportional
and positional relationships between the panels, but also of the perceptive and pertinent degree of
autonomy to the space of the strip and of the network composed by the [speech] balloons 'over'
or 'within' the drawing of the frames [i.e., the borders surrounding the panels in which each
depicted visual instance takes place]" (p. 91). Hence, in their introduction to System of Comics,
translators Beaty and Nguyen (2006) assert that semiotic analyses of comics such as those put
forth by Groensteen "offer a wide range of possible insights into the spatial and temporal
operations of the image" (ibid., p. viii).
Despite his strict delineation of comics as an interaction completely apart from film,
McCloud does not overlook the role of space in the temporality of comics. The popular theorist

14

of comics has referred to the form as based on the "simple idea" of "placing one picture after
another to show the passage of time” (McCloud, 2000, p. 2). In Understanding Comics,
McCloud's cartoon avatar literally gestures towards the temporal implications of comics' spatial
designs of meaning (see Figure 1 in the Figures section below). Pulitzer Prize winning graphic
novelist Art Spiegelman makes a similar assertion, that comics is “…made up of units of time
placed next to each other so that one sees past and present simultaneously, before decoding the
moments that are being depicted in any given box” (quoted in Cioffi, 2001, p. 19).
A number of scholars (e.g. Eisner, 1985; McCloud, 1993; 2000; Groensteen, 1999/2006;
Bernard & Carter, 2004) observe what Moulthrop (1999) surmises: “…the time sense in comics
is inherently complex because this form demands both sequence and simultaneity." Simultaneity
refers to the idea that the real-life time events we experience in a linear fashion actually occur all
at once, simultaneously, all fragments of a singular fourth dimension that we are incapable of
perceiving as a whole. This concept is explained thematically in Watchmen through the character
of Dr. Manhattan, a supernatural being capable of perceiving the fourth dimension all at once,
making him "...a metaphor for the art of the graphic novel in and of itself as well as for the
graphic novel experience. He is everywhere all the time as well as where he is presently"
(Bernard & Carter, 2004). Thus comics is able to offer the linear conception of narrative time
similar to that found in traditional prose texts, while at the same time able to show multiple
narrative moments simultaneously, with all the panels visible on the page at once as a single
unified design. The difference between real-life time and comics’ narrative time is that, in
comics, we are capable of perceiving the singular fourth dimension as well as its linear
components, allowing for the coexistence of linear and nonlinear meaning making. The latter
form of meaning making connects with contemporary sociotechnical reflexivity, which elides

15

any transcendent space for critical reflection from outside the increasingly ubiquitous digital new
media:
Reflexivity in the technological culture is not a separate process of reflection. There is no time, no space for
such reflection. There is fusion of words and things, of thought and practice. […] In technological culture,
reflexivity becomes practice; it becomes communication (Lash, 2002, p. 18).

Comics can reopen the space for reflection that Lash (2002) argues is erased by immediacy of
technologically mediated information, because comics allows a space for the coexistence of
linear narrative meaning and nonlinear, networked, informational meaning. In comics, if you do
not understand the meaning of a panel, the form allows you to detach from the diegetic world,
move your eye back to a previous point in the line of the narrative, and reflect on what has come
before, in a way that is understood as closer to reading words than viewing moving images. At
the same time, comics is able to access the tendency towards reflexivity in contemporary society,
which “…presumes the existence of non-linear systems” (Lash, 2003, p. 50).
With the increasing ubiquity of computers and the internet, "...we pass from the linear
time typical of the alphabet to a dimension of time and space connected to each other and
capable of drawing a net of relations and 'places,'" by altering the perception of proximity so that,
"What was once perceived as distant is now part of our space of experience, that is, of that place
where everything appears to be simultaneous" (La Rocca, 2012, p. 2). Comics pauses this
"passage" from linear to simultaneous notions of time and space precisely at the moment where
the two perceptions overlap, where the linear and nonlinear coexist, creating what Kuhlman
(2007) describes as a complex “network of visual and semantic correspondences” (p. 855). The
interstitial juxtaposition of linear and nonlinear temporality in comics design creates a basis for
the comparative analysis of linear with nonlinear, the sort of space for reflection that Lash (2002)
argues is elided by the immediacy of digital networked information communication.

16

A number of educators identify the space for critical reflection in comics specifically in
the form's marked "unfixability" (Hatfield, 2005, p. xiii); what Gardner (2012) alternately
describes as "...the liminal space between past and present, text and image, creator and reader...
the comic frame is necessarily a space where these binaries overlap, collaborate, and compete for
attention and meaning" (p. 176). As Eisner (1985) states, comics "presents a montage of both
word and image, and the reader is thus required to exercise both visual and verbal interpretive
skills" (p. 8). The form's hybridity makes reading comics "...an unstable process as continual
transitions... require readers to constantly shift perspective" (Bernstein, 2008, p. 86). Comics can
thus "facilitate" critical analysis because, "By combining words and pictures, comic books force
students, rather directly, to reconcile these two means of expression," an affordance teachers can
make more explicit with open ended questions about the ways visuals and words work to create
complex narrative meanings (Versaci, 2001, p. 64). Low (2012) advocates comics-related
literacy pedagogy that focuses specifically on the functions of the gutter in making meaning (i.e.
McCloud's notion of closure), because by attending to the gutter comics becomes "...an
extremely suitable medium for readers in twenty-first century schools" since "...each gutter in a
piece of narrative sequential art presents a distinctive challenge (large or small) to the reader, and
cumulatively, the superset of all gutters in a work gives readers the task of coauthoring the entire
narrative using their own inferences" (p. 376). Again, the prototypical use of gutters in the spatial
composition of comics is approached as a salient point of reader interaction with the comics text,
the liminal space of meaning making where reader inference meets creator's implication, an
interaction that invites critically literate practices abetted by critical literacy pedagogy.
One preeminent pedagogical strategy for teaching comics as a unique form of reflective
multimodal reading is making readers' "co-authorship" of comics texts literal. The role of comics

17

creator software and web-based applications in education is an area of inquiry that has garnered
much of the research attention on education, comics, and technology, primarily in the form of
case studies of programs integrated in or appended to classroom curriculum. However, there are
myriad intersections of comics and education on the internet, including downloadable and/or
viewable files of educational print comics;2 the digital distribution of comics-related curriculum,
lesson plans, and research guides;3 online communities for comics educators;4 and educational
hypercomics, i.e. comics that make use of the forms of digital interactivity and the inclusion of
multimedia characteristic of content on the Web. However, little critical attention has been
directed towards the latter, especially in terms of specific pedagogical affordances for meaning
making in the remediation of the temporality of print comics traditions within the continual
immanence of new media.
Chapter 2 discusses the development and operationalization of the term "educational
hypercomics" as a scoping mechanism during stages of data collection and analysis. This
includes a survey of the contentious history of attempts to define "comics," and how the issue is
further problematized by the indistinct boundaries of subcategories like "educational comics,"
"digital comics," "webcomics," and "hypercomics." Defining comics and their intersections with
education and digital technology necessarily implicates the role of disciplinary approaches to
comics studies. The chapter concludes by locating the place of the present study within those
disciplinary definitional boundaries. The focus of this study on pedagogical issues, and the
impact that cultures of education have on definitional meanings, relates, in turn, to the
applicability of multimodality and social semiotics as a theoretical framework for comparative
analysis.

18

Chapter 3 enumerates a list of 22 examples of educational hypercomics formed during
initial data collection, as a means of establishing a bibliographic beginning and curatorial context
to the broad study of comics in online learning. From this initial list, I identify three exemplar
hypercomics that are the subject of comparative analysis, introducing their institutional origins
and stated educational goals. The variety of formats and diversity of topics identified in research
on educational hypercomics, and typified by the list of 22 examples, serve to contextualize the
selection of these three sample educational hypercomics as subjects of close analysis.
Chapters 4 and 5 present comparative analyses of the ways in which these three works
incorporate comics and digital methods of communicative design to create multimodal
pedagogical discourses. The purpose of these analyses is to explicate how these works construe
readers as learners in a digital environment. Chapter 4 focuses on the heterogeneous institutional
contexts of the three exemplar educational hypercomics. This chapter analyzes how sociocultural
contexts created by institutional stakeholders give shape to these multimodal designs of
pedagogical discourse. Chapter 5 moves from institutional contexts to the specifics of interface
design. Analysis in Chapter 5 compares and contrasts navigation and digital interactivity in the
respective works to elucidate ways traditional notions of reader control of temporality in print
comics are variously simulated and subverted towards pedagogical purposes in e-learning
environments. A deeper understanding of ways these interfaces are designed for pedagogy,
within the affordances and constraints established by institutional contexts, serves to further
knowledge of how the comics form is employed as, variously, a visual aesthetic style, a means of
narrative development, a cultural and/or generational signifier, and a model for information
organization.

19

Taken together, comparative analyses of ways in which the sample educational
hypercomics construe readers and reflect institutions offers insight into the evolving practices
and processes of integrating comics—already identified as a potent tool in teaching critical
multimodal literacy—into online learning design. Chapter 6 discusses ways in which the
conclusions of this study indicate future potentials for the use of educational hypercomics in
critical multimodal literacy pedagogy. In particular, this conclusion highlights the limitations
imposed by describing comics in digital spaces solely in relation to storytelling, especially
storytelling for younger audiences. Commonly understood as an inherently narrative form of
communication, the study of educational hypercomics shows that comics can also be used to
restrain or contravene narratological meaning in service of didactic educational goals. The study
of educational hypercomics thus gestures towards the flexibility of comics as both a form of
information design and as a cultural signifier; as a means of both combining multiple critically
literate practices and accommodating the sometimes disparate expectations of teachers, students,
and educational institutions involved in online learning.

20

Figures

Figure 1: McCloud (1993) literally illustrates the simultaneity of narrative time in comics composition (p. 104).

1

i.e. authored digital pedagogical works, as opposed to Web 2.0 comic creator applications—interactive websites
that allow users to compose their own comics works with premade templates for panels, characters, word balloons,
etcetera.
2
e.g., the University of Nebraska-Lincoln Government Comics collection,
http://contentdm.unl.edu/cdm/landingpage/collection/comics; Ethan Piersoff's Comics with Problems,
http://www.ep.tc/problems/; the Duke University Center for the Study of the Public Domain comic Tales from the
Public Domain: BOUND BY LAW?, http://web.law.duke.edu/cspd/comics/
3
e.g., Reading with Pictures, http://readingwithpictures.org; ReadWriteThink, http://www.readwritethink.org;
Comics in the Classroom, http://comicsintheclassroom.net
4
e.g. Making Curriculum POP, http://mcpopmb.ning.com/; Comix-Scholars Discussion List,
http://www.english.ufl.edu/comics/scholars/; Graphic Novels in Libraries Listserv,
http://www.angelfire.com/comics/gnlib/

21

CHAPTER 2: COMICS INDEFINITE, DISCIPLINARITY, AND MULTIMODALITY

Early in Information Comics, an exhaustive study of pedagogic print comic books, Heike
Elisabeth Jüngst (2010) notes that, "Many people will find a definition of the term 'comics'
simply superfluous" because "Everyone knows what a comic looks like" (p. 13). Jüngst is
comfortable with "a restricted definition" composed of "prototypical" elements of comics
composition (ibid., p. 13). These prototypical elements are commonly identified by a number of
scholars to include 1) the sequential placement of multiple images (e.g., Kunzle, 1973; Eisner,
1985; McCloud, 1993); 2) the juxtaposition of images coincident with their sequential placement
(e.g., McCloud, 1993; Hayman & Pratt, 2005); and, 3) the blend of pictures and words (e.g.,
Harvey, 1996; Carrier, 2000), but there is perpetual debate over which of these elements is most
essential to defining comics. For Jüngst (2010), this debate is inconsequential since it is based on
"...discussions of special cases [that] are important in the field of artistic comics" but are
unimportant for her study since pedagogic comic books "often do not have a strong artistic
design" and "never have a primarily artistic or expressive purpose" (p. 13).
Questions of aesthetic philosophy aside, whether or not the pedagogic online comics that
are the focus of the present study might be labeled "artistic," they all represent "special cases."
Because the works that comprise this study's corpus of data employ a variety of new media via
digital delivery, these works inexorably raise questions as to what qualifies something as a comic
as opposed to, for example, animation or illustrated prose. With their respective heterogeneous
incorporations of digital interactivity and time based media (e.g. audio and video), the comics
analyzed in this study compete with and problematize historically prototypical characteristics of
their print predecessors, calling into question the extent to which comics theory is applicable in

22

contextualizing and analyzing such online texts. Defining essential characteristics such as the
juxtaposition of images in sequence and the integration of pictures with words provide a useful
heuristic for describing the form and function of comics in online spaces, but are inherently
problematic insofar as they connote totalizing views whose generalities prove insufficient to
describing the vast diversity of idiosyncratic expression that construes comics as a field of
discourse.
Comics understood as "an artistic form that historically developed with technologies
belonging to print culture" has that history "both reflected and challenged" in digital spaces
(Priego, 2012). Positioning the present study within that contested historical space, establishing
what makes the texts in this corpus of data all in some sense "comics," and then, more precisely,
"educational comics," "hypercomics," and finally "educational hypercomics," requires a foray
into an already highly contested theoretical space: the notion of defining comics. The purpose
here is to articulate salient formal characteristics scholars and practitioners commonly identify
with "comics," while simultaneously outlining the sociocultural contexts that rhetorically shape
and reshape those definitions, working towards what futurist Bruce Sterling (2005) calls "a
designed metahistory" (p. 42).
Sterling (ibid.) describes metahistory as a "cultural thesis" for understanding how
information about people and objects transits time; a socially constructed set of underlying
assumptions about what constitutes shared meanings of past, present, and future. For Sterling
these metahistorical underpinnings govern views on the appropriateness of the incorporation or
rejection of new objects and ideas into historical understandings of self and community.
However, while these overarching cultural narratives are important determinants of how
associations between objects and meanings are made, and how these associations evolve over

23

time, metahistorical constructions are inherently flawed when they do not account for their own
provisional nature (ibid., p. 38). The notion of a designed metahistory, then, is meant to be
multiple histories of the construction of history that account for the provisional nature of
assumptions about what counts as historic. In this case, I seek to highlight the various and
competing ways comics is clarified and operationalized as a term in scholarly literature, in order
to locate my own self-reflexively provisional use of the term.
One provision that immediately necessitates reflection is that the notion of comics in this
study is limited to English language comics. Of course, comics of all types, including comics
made for the purposes of teaching and learning, exist throughout the world in myriad social,
cultural, political, and economic contexts, the subject of a heterogeneous array of scholarly
research (see, e.g., Lent, "The World's Potent"). The limitation of the present study to mostly
English language comics history and texts is a scoping measure by the monolingual author, and
should not be misinterpreted as support for the claim sometimes made that comics is an
American invention, as opposed to a widespread communicative practice with formal and
cultural contiguity with medias past, present, and future. The claims made for the role of comics
in e-learning are necessarily contingent upon sociocultural context because "comics" is like
"culture", as described by Jahoda (2012): "...not a thing, but a social construct vaguely referring
to a vastly complex set of phenomena" (p. 300). Like Marianne Hirsch (1997) in her study of
photo albums, I want my own critical analysis of imagetexts to be grounded in "...theory as a
form of reflection and contemplation [that] emphasizes mutual implication over domination,
affiliation over separation, interconnection over distance, tentativeness over certainty" (p. 15). In
other words the term "comics," like terms such as "culture" or "discourse," is heuristic; an
analytic abstraction not a finite exactitude.

24

Defining comics as interstitial form

Following the examples of McCloud (1993), and Witek (1992), I will use the term
"comics" as a singular (i.e. "comics is...") to refer to the form of expression found in various
formats, including comic strips, comic books, graphic novels, and webcomics. I understand the
term to also inescapably connote both commonly identified formal characteristics (e.g., pictures
juxtaposed with words and other pictures, pictures in sequence, word balloons) as well as various
histories of sociocultural contexts (e.g. popular culture, newspaper and magazine publishing,
superhero fandom, graphic novels). However, my terminology will depart from the common
tendency of comics creators and scholars to classify comics as a medium (see, e.g. Witek, 1992;
Wolk, 2007). Referring to comics as a medium serves the rhetorical function of separating
comics form from content, a move that comes partially in opposition to the stereotype,
particularly prevalent in America, that comics is solely a genre of youth literature, limited in
content to humor or superhero stories (McCloud, 1993). Conversely, Jüngst (2010) makes the
logical argument that "...comics are not a medium, as they can appear in a variety of media
(print, Internet)" and "[comics] ...are also not a genre, as they can accommodate a variety of
genres (cooking recipes, superhero stories)," so comics is best described by a term that mediates
between medium and genre (p. 12).
Jüngst (2010) opts for the term "format," which fits with her "restricted definition" of
comics, and its emphasis on communicative/normalized rather than artistic/experimental
practice. However, "format" somewhat grounds comics in a materiality antithetical to the less
restricted visual spatiality of digital comics, because "format" connotes, especially in a library

25

science context, types of physical library materials (e.g. comic books, graphic novels, manga,
CD-Rom, etc.), as opposed to the means of communication that appears in all of these artifacts.
More appropriate to the variable digital formats of the comics in this study, I will
describe comics as a form of expression, one that can contain various discursive genres and
(re)produce those genres in multiple media, i.e. in the multiple material bases for composition
(e.g. pencil, pen, marker, paint), which are generally reproduced through ink and/or pixel on
paper and/or screen, through analog and/or digital information communication technologies. The
singular, "comic," will function as a general term for particular instantiations of the comics form,
e.g. a single item in a format like comic books, graphic novels, manga, etc.
Of course, none of these usages are standardized, which is the point. My use of "form" is
especially inspired by Bourriaud's (1998/2002) notion of "relational aesthetics," found in "...art
taking as its theoretical horizon the realm of human interactions and its social context, rather than
the assertion of an independent and private symbolic space" (p. 14). In discussing relational art,
Bourriaud (ibid.) insists on "the instability and diversity of the concept of 'form'" that arises from
the increasingly complex "visual experience" occasioned by visual information communication
technologies; a technocultural context that presents a space in which, "An artist's artwork...
acquires the status of an ensemble of units to be re-activated by the beholder-manipulator" (p.
20). Bourriaud (ibid.) describes this as conceptualizing an artwork as a social interstice, "a space
in human relations which fits more or less harmoniously and openly into the overall system, but
suggests other trading possibilities than those in effect within this system" (p. 16). My particular
use of "form" to describe comics connotes an understanding of comics as an interstice of pictures
and words, genre and medium, sociocultural contexts and formal expressions. Comics' interstitial
nature allows the form to "...represent the unmapped spaces between familiar forms" in the sense

26

that comics "...borrow something from prose fiction (comics as over-illustrated stories) and other
elements from cinema (comics as runaway storyboards, or movies with exceedingly low frame
counts) but really belong to neither of these major domains" (Moulthrop, 1999). In other words, I
am choosing to call comics a "form" of expression precisely because the ambiguity of this
categorization evokes potentials for critical (re)conceptualization.
One result of comics' interstitiality is the marked ambiguity that pervades scholarly work
seeking to define the form, historicize its cultural production, and distinguish comics from other
related forms of pictorial and literary expression (Heer & Worcester, 2009, p. xiii). This formal
and cultural ambiguity is readily observable in the profusion of alternate names for the form,
such as comic art, graphic narratives, trade paperbacks, the funnies, funny pages/papers/pictures,
picture stories, picture magazines, picto-fiction, visual narrative, visual humor, imagetexts,
image strips, sequential art, and narrative illustration/design (Yezbick, 2008, p. 112). In addition
to connoting a multitude of narrative genres, intended audiences, and compositional techniques,
the proliferation of naming conventions also grows out of a desire to "disassociate" the form
from the "preconceived notion of a comic book as cheap (if not trashy) juvenile entertainment"
(Duncan & Smith, 2009, p.18). These limiting cultural preconceptions of comics
disproportionately grow out of "long-standing commercial considerations and the formal
attributes of comics as physical and cultural artifacts" (Witek, 1992, p. 75). Because comics is "a
tightly woven matrix of art and commerce," the understanding of comics as a culturally
legitimate form of expression, appropriate for all types of stories told by all sorts of people,
competes with the idea of comics as a narrative genre, "...where the distinctive graphic look and
storytelling elements associated specifically with superhero comic books... have taken hold in
other media like film, television, and video games" (Salkowitz, 2012, p. 16). Material, social,

27

economic, and cultural histories collude to give comics its characteristic “unfixability," making it
"an unresolved, unstable, and challenging form” (Hatfield, 2005, p. xiii). But despite this
"unfixability," or perhaps because of it, the definition of comics remains a predominant debate in
the growing interdisciplinary field of comics studies, to the extent that articulating such a
definition has become a typical opening rhetorical gambit for work in the field (Hatfield, 2010, ¶
10).

Disciplinary limitations in formalist versus sociocultural definitions

The two definitions of comics to have gained the most widespread use in the last 30 years
come from comics creators Will Eisner and Scott McCloud (Tilley, 2008). Eisner (1985)
describes the form of comics as “Sequential Art... a means of creative expression, a distinct
discipline, an art and literary form that deals with the arrangement of pictures or images and
words to narrate a story or dramatize an idea” (p. 5). McCloud (1993) explicitly builds on
Eisner's term with more precise language: "Juxtaposed pictorial and other images in deliberate
sequence, intended to convey information and/or to produce an aesthetic response in the viewer"
(p. 9). In addition to echoing Eisner, the emphases of McCloud's definition on the placement of
images in sequence and the intentions of author towards audience draw on the "four conditions"
art historian David Kunzle (1973) uses to define comic strips:
1). There must be a sequence of separate images; 2). There must be a preponderance of image over text; 3).
The medium in which the strip appears and for which it is originally intended must be reproductive, that is,
in printed form, a mass medium; 4). The sequence must tell a story which is both moral and topical (p. 3).

French semiotician Thierry Groensteen (1999/2006) critiques Kunzle's definition, among
others, as "normative and self interested" and "made to measure in order to support an arbitrary

28

slice of history," due to such strict qualifications as original intent towards a mass medium and
story content focused only on the moral and topical (p.13). Groensteen (ibid.) rejects definitions
as impossible, opting instead to develop the critical vocabulary of arthrology, described in
Chapter 1.
Meskin (2007) discounts the overall "definitional project" of comics studies as
problematically ahistorical and ultimately unnecessary for analysis of comics texts, which also
sums up various critiques aimed specifically at McCloud's definition and argumentation in his
highly influential 1993 treatise on the comics form, composed in the comics form,
Understanding Comics. For example, both Harvey (1996) and Horrocks (2001) critique
McCloud's emphasis on juxtaposed sequential images as a defining characteristic of comics
because this criterion includes works of pictorial narrative historically unconnected to comics,
(e.g. cave paintings, the Bayeux tapestry), while excluding works that have historically been
identified as comics, such as single image newspaper comic strips (e.g. editorial cartoons, daily
features like Family Circus or The Far Side).
In contrast to McCloud's focus on sequential imagery, Harvey (1996) defines the "static
blending of word and picture" as the essential characteristic of comics (p. 3). Carrier (2000) also
focuses on "word/image unity" as necessarily characteristic of comics, but goes a step further by
identifying the convention of the speech balloons as the "defining element" (p. 4). But just as
McCloud's definition excludes single panel comic strips, Harvey and Carrier's definitions
exclude wordless comics. A number of comics scholars label comics as an essentially narrative
form (e.g. Blackbeard, 1974; Harvey, 1996; Hayman & Pratt, 2005), but even that basic
characteristic is called into question by abstract comics: "...sequential art whose panels contain
little to no representational imagery, or that tells no stories other than those resulting from the

29

transformation and interaction of shapes across a comic page" (Molotiu, 2009, p. 1). On the other
hand, abstract comics' inability to completely escape narrative, to the extent that even nonrepresentational imagery goes through processes of "transformation and interaction" that evoke
narrative, may support the interpretation of comics as an inherently storytelling form.
Groensteen (1999/2006) argues that the profusion of attempts at defining "the essence of
comics" is caused by the same state of affairs that makes such a definition ultimately impossible:
any one comic "is necessarily (constitutionally) a sophisticated structure" and "only actualizes
certain potentialities... [of the form] to the detriment of others that are reduced or excluded," (p.
12). The inherent complexity and incomplete actualization of the comics form in any particular
instantiation ensures that any attempt to "draw a boundary that includes everything that counts as
comics and excludes everything that doesn't" will produce examples of the form that traverse
those boundaries while highlighting the implicit political ideologies of said boundaries' author
(Wolk, 2007, p. 17). This is because attempting to define comics is inherently polemical, making
arguments based on value judgments about what comics should and should not be (Horrocks,
2001, p. 29). While McCloud (1993) believes establishing a definition of comics is important to
"give lie to the stereotypes" of comics as a limited genre of juvenile literature (p. 3), science
fiction author Samuel R. Delany (1996) argues that the converse is true: such definitions actually
capitulate to limiting stereotypes by implying that comics is a form of expression so simplistic
and unchanging as to be easily categorized (p. 240).
Instead, Delany (1996) posits comics as an example of "social objects," a term inspired
by the work of sociologist Lucien Goldmann. For Goldmann (1966/1969), sociological study is
concerned with "collective consciousness," understood as "...only the totality of states of
individual consciousness and of their tendencies resulting from the mutual influence of men [sic]

30

upon each other and their effects on nature" (p. 127, emphasis original). Thus, while an
individual work may express the inner workings of an individual author's consciousness,
...these ways of thinking and feeling are not independent entities... They exist and may be understood only
in terms of their inter-subjective relations... a text becomes an expression of collective consciousness only
to the extent that the structure which it expresses is not peculiar to its author but is shared by the various
members who form the social group... (ibid., p. 128-9, emphasis original).

Delany (1996) interprets this to mean that comics, like other forms of expression, cannot
be defined by characteristics observed in "a relatively limited number of material objects," but
instead can only be understood as "an unspecified number of recognition codes" shared by "an
unlimited population," a group of codes that is "constantly developing and changing" (p. 239).
The changing and dynamic social sharing of these "recognition codes," the "inter-subjective
relations" between people engaged in the production, distribution, consumption, and critique of
comics artifacts (re)form the meaning of comics in the collective consciousness. In this
conceptualization comics is understood as "part of an organized social world," which requires
"understanding the social contexts in which... [comics] are produced, circulated, consumed, and
commented upon" through analyses of "a wide range of objects and practices that articulate with
the space of comics" (Woo, 2011).
Cohn (2003) also identifies comics studies with the social contexts occupied by comicsas-cultural artifacts, but is more radical in his assertion that, "...categorically, comics can only be
understood as a sociological, literary, and cultural artifact, independent from the internal
structures comprising them" (p. 14, emphasis added). Cohn (2005) rejects the tendency of
comics scholars to discuss comics as a medium or art, asserting instead that the formal attributes
of comics should be understood as a type of language:

31

Bearing in mind McCloud’s focus on sequence, sequential images can also be considered a language – a
purely visual language (VL) – following the same structural properties and mental processes as verbalized
symbolic language, though in a separate modality of thought: a visual modality. Indeed, any time someone
draws a picture without viewing the referent, its origin must be conceptual. And, like verbal or signed
languages, the unique property that separates visual language from other forms of visual communication
lies in its deliberate and systematic sequence – its syntax (p. 2).

Cohn (2004) asserts that the notion of "comics" must be separated from this visual
language commonly found within comics, because notions of comics-as-Art limit expectations
for images to be rendered in either photorealistic or highly individualistic illustration styles,
constructing comics creation as a specialized practice, thus preventing "the creation of a more
systematic and shared use of a vocabulary." Cohn (2003) describes the relationship between
comics and visual language as "symbiotic," but insists that viewing the two as separate entities
would allow comics scholarship to "embrace its place within the interdisciplinary fields of
literary, sociologic, and cultural investigation" while formal analysis of visual language "opens a
new field of inquiry within linguistics, psychology, and the cognitive sciences" (p. 14). Cohn
(2012) characterizes visual language as a "unifying theory" for the analysis of sequential pictorial
narrative that resolves debates over formal definitions of comics by recognizing comics as just
one of many sociocultural objects within which visual language and verbal linguistic writing cooccur.
Cohn's overall cognitive linguistic approach to the comics form presents a forceful
disciplinary paradigm especially useful for cognitive scientific inquiry, just as Woo (2011)
makes a strong disciplinary case for reader response and audience studies as the preeminent way
in which to frame comics as an object of study within a social world. In both cases, comics is
understood as a socially constructed field of discourse, its formal elements the site of social

32

(re)interpretations of the meaning of comics. Cohn's insistence on the separation of the formal
structures of visual sequence from the sociocultural milieu associated with comics as an industry
and art form can usefully generate theory within linguistic and cognitive scientific fields, but at
the expense of integrated attention to the construction of meaning at the point of interaction
between visual formal elements and sociocultural contexts. However, it is exactly within this
intersection of social and formal meaning potentials that actual meaning is (re)created, and
meaning-making is learned. To understand comics in a way that acknowledges the complex
interactions of compositional form with sociocultural context, interactions which define the
learning and practice of communication (i.e. literacy), "'comicsness' might be usefully
reconceptualized[...] as a historically contingent and evolving set of reading protocols that are
applied to texts" (Witek, 2009, p. 149).
Witek (ibid.) analyzes the use of arrows and numbered panels by early 20th century
comics artists (as well as more contemporary appropriations of those forms to reference incipient
comics texts), concluding that these indicators of reading order and direction "remain as traces of
the process by which the Western comics reader has been constructed...trained to perceive the
comics page as both a linked sequence of separate panels and a meaningful semiotic field in
itself," an evolutionary process that continues "as reading conventions and textual practices
continue to revise each other" (p. 149). Like Delany's (1986) notion of comics as social object,
Witek (2009) frames comics as a dynamic process in which the formal elements and
sociocultural contexts that Cohen seeks to separate are understood as co-constitutive of meaning.
Witek's (ibid.) conception of "reading conventions and textual practices" describes the
interaction of form and context as mutually (re)defining comics in those intersections of shared
understanding among the varied perceptions of society, the "collective consciousness" described

33

by Lucien Goldmann. It is in this notion, where the sociocultural and formal elements of comics
evince a mutable kind of imagetextual literacy, that the implication of comics in critical new
media literacy pedagogy comes to the fore, largely because this is a conception of comics as a
species of interactivity where creators imply and readers infer narrative through spatial
expressions of temporality. The comics reader is "...given space within the comics page to make
choices, to make connections, and to make her own comics... [inviting] the reader to project
herself into the narrative and project the narrative beyond the page" (Gardner, 2012, p. 193).
Again, from this perspective the similarities in the interactivity of both comics and new media
engage "multiliteracies" that account for both "...the increasing multiplicity and integration of
significant modes of meaning-making, where the textual is also related to the visual, the audio,
the spatial, the behavioral, and so on ...particularly important in the mass media, multimedia, and
in an electronic hypermedia" and "...the realities of increasing local diversity and global
connectedness" (New London Group, 1996, p. 65).
Because this study is concerned with uses of comics as a form of interactivity in
pedagogy, it requires attention to that space of meaning where the formal and sociocultural
interact. As I will explain below, the term "educational hypercomics" is a rhetorical means of
laying claim to the interstitial space required by the disciplinary paradigm of multiliteracies
pedagogy —the fuzzy edges of definitional meaning whose very indistinctness provides space
for teaching and learning.

34

Meanings of "educational comics"

In this section and the next, I will locate "educational comics" and "hypercomics" within
the broader field of comics discourse, and then explain the need for understanding how the two
can interact. In discussing "educational comics," Duncan and Smith (2009) use the simple
descriptor, "comics with intentionally educational aims," including nonfictional works and
comics adaptations of works from the traditional literary canon. Nonetheless "...to stipulate what
an educational comic is 'about' proves to be highly problematic, contingent mainly on the use to
which an observer means to put it... educational comics are didactic, not analytical, and to
classify them accurately one needs to discover what sort of lesson they are each intended to
convey" (Van Hook, 2008, ¶ 2). However, "Since the motives for creating and consuming
comics are inescapably mixed and complicated," depending on "identifying these motives" to
categorize educational comics means the categorization will "necessarily remain fuzzy" (Rifas,
2009, p. 161). In part, the "disparate provenance as to purpose and intended audience" of
educational comics, often "produced in very small numbers to be marketed to specific groups,"
given "limited distribution," and representing "a low priority for preservation among their target
audience..." have made such works "perhaps the most marginalized and culturally invisible
comics category of all" (Witek, 2008, ¶ 2-3).
Pioneering educational comics creator, publisher, and scholar Leonard Rifas (1991)
contextualizes this marginalization by describing educational comics as neither an industry, a
subculture, nor a professional field, but rather "a flexible, popular art that is constantly being
reinvented by diverse people working in isolation from each other" (p. 81). This lack of a welldefined community of practice for educational comics means that, despite a long history of

35

comics being used for "imparting information, shaping attitudes and teaching skills,"
educational comics are often viewed as "a perennial novelty item" (Rifas, 1988, p. 145).
Tendencies towards the ahistorical conceptualization of educational comics belies their
longstanding use in furthering a wide variety of socio-political perspectives "...by establishment
institutions to propagandize for the status quo, and also by establishment critics of both Left and
Right" (ibid., p. 145). Like comics overall, educational comics functions as a social object that
resists distinct definition:
Rather than constituting a single genre, 'educational comics' encompasses a large constellation of related
(and somewhat overlapping) categories. These include local and global history comics, 'true fact' comics,
illustrated adaptations of novels and plays, instructional comics, propaganda and psychological warfare
comics, religious education and proselytizing comics, advertising and industrial public relations comics,
political campaign comics, health education comics, biography and autobiography comics, development
education comics, educational fotonovelas, benefit/cause comics, comics-illustrated brochures, cartoonillustrated nonfiction picture books, infotainment and classroom-based edutainment (Rifas, 2009, p. 160161).

Davidson (2008) describes some of these forms of didactic comics as "special purpose"
or "impact comics" which are "created by an individual or organization" with a particular goal in
mind, seeking "...to promote an idea... a product... or a purpose" (p. 340). Thus, didactic comics
are understood as especially "pragmatic" and attempting "to reach the most diverse audiences
with the widest range of objectives," compared to other types of comics (ibid., p. 341).
The delineation between fiction and non-fiction comics is a common scoping technique,
generally employed to differentiate adaptations of prose novels and plays seeking to broaden
audiences for culturally canonized "classics" from educational comics intended to communicate
strictly factual information (Davidson, 2008; Jüngst, 2010). As Rifas (2009) notes this distinction
"only goes so far" since "comics have combined factual and fictional elements in many ways" (p.

36

161). Again the comics form evinces a tendency to break down binary notions: like sociocultural divisions between word and picture and high and low art, the lines between fact and
fiction, education and entertainment, are actively blurred: "Just as educational aspects are present
in all comics, dramatization, embellishment and imagination are part of even the severest factual
presentations" (Davidson, 2008, ¶ 4). Comics offers "a larger inventory [of stylistic devices]
from which to choose, if only by virtue of the fact that comics are a forme mixte, a polysemiotic
genre consisting of many codes (linguistic, cultural, graphic, color, pictorial, symbolic); in brief,
their message is reinforced and made redundant at many levels" (Brown, 1977, p. 24-5). In
essence, educational comics exploit various actualizations of the form's tendencies towards
social, temporal, and technocultural interstitiality in order to facilitate pedagogical imagetextual
expression.
Like comics generally, there are a variety of alternate names and approaches to defining
and/or categorizing comics with pedagogical aims. McCloud (2000) uses the distinction between
"narrative non-fiction," including historical retellings and comics journalism, and "pure
nonfiction" that does not couch its informational content in a story, such as Larry Gonick's
Cartoon History of the Universe and its multiple sequels, whose slightly humorous tone and
abstracted "cartoony" illustration style inspired McCloud's own theorizing about comics through
the form of comics (p. 41). Gonick is among the many authors inspired by the "...for Beginners"
books of Mexican cartoonist Eduardo del Río, better known as Rius. In a discussion of
"pedagogical comic books" that function as Leftist historical critique, Gene Bell-Villada
characterizes the teaching and learning through comics as necessarily aesthetic, informal, and
experiential:
Marx for Beginners and Cuba for Beginners grew out of Rius’s day-to-day activities as a popular artist
working for the press. His comics were conceived not for school or university use but for general non-

37

academic readers situated somewhere on the left, who might read the book in a cafe or on the bus and may
not even purchase a great deal of "political" literature. A comic book by Rius or for that matter by anyone
else (whatever its politics) bought and read as much for the achieved pleasures of its ”art” as for the social
values of its “content.” I don’t think it a risky value judgment to say that Rius’s appeal as a left-wing
”pedagogue” owes everything to the fact that he is a fine graphic stylist and a first-rate wit (quoted in
Brown, 1984, p. 239-240).

Participating in the same symposium as Bell, Larry Gonick also describes pedagogy in
comics as necessarily bound to the abilities of the cartoonist not only as an illustrator and writer,
but also as a researcher:
The humor in a pedagogical comic book should be based primarily on the material and social
contradictions of its subject matter ...it imposes on the cartoonist a heavy responsibility to understand
history well enough to express those contradictions. The rewards are rich: the book will be funnier, as the
humor springs from the very crux of the issue; the book will be more comprehensible, as humor and story
line work together instead of at cross purposes; the characters will come more fully alive, as the reader sees
people respond in a familiar way to situations which are often, after all, not so unfamiliar; and unfamiliar
situations can also be more fully explained. In short, find humor there, and it will facilitate the goal of
every historian to arouse empathy, to make history come alive (quoted in Brown, 1984, p. 235).

Eisner (1985) links this "familiarity" to the "experience sequential art is so good at
providing," an experience described by salient characteristics of 1) visual permanence: "...there is
no pressure of time as there would be in a live action motion picture or animated film... The
amount of time allowed to the reader of a printed comic... is unlimited"; 2) modal density: "...the
arrangement of panels, the position of the balloons and/or explanatory text carefully arranged on
the page are all calculated to involve the reader [in performing the technical procedure]"; and 3)
frozen design actions mitigating embodied and disembodied communication: "There is room for
approximation and opportunity for specific performances which the reader can examine ...the
broad generalization of artwork permits exaggeration which can more quickly make the point

38

and influence the reader" (ibid., p. 144). Again, in discussing comics as pedagogy, the sociocultural (e.g. the familiarity of comics as popular culture), is intertwined with the formal (e.g.
the use of sequence and static image in creating narrative temporality).
Eisner (1985) describes "the arena of instruction visuals--or the application of sequential
art to teach something specific" as divided into two categories: technical instruction comics, "...in
which the procedure to be learned is shown from the reader's point of view, gives instruction in
procedures, process, and task performance..." and attitudinal instruction comics, whose function
is "conditioning an attitude toward a task," accomplished through "the identification evoked by
the acting out or dramatization in a sequence of pictures [which] is in itself instructional" (p.
143-4). Jüngst (2010) adopts Eisner's two categories and adds a third, "fact comics":
Fact comics do not give instructions and are also not meant to primarily change the reader's attitude or
behaviour, apart from the fact that they are meant to create interest in a given topic[...] The three types of
comics can mix in varying proportions. Fact comics can have an element of attitudinal instruction,
particularly if they deal with subjects that consist of complex facts but at the same time have a connection
to the readers' everyday world. This is true e.g. of comics about environmental protection. They list the
facts behind the problem and sometimes give detailed explanations of chemical or physical processes, but
often they also encourage the readers to tackle the problem locally wherever they can (p. 18).

Jüngst (2010) applies these categories to the analysis of "information comics," defined as
a subset of educational comics that focus on the popularization of expert information in a
prototypical comic book form. As mentioned previously, the emphasis on prototypical
characteristics of comic books is problematic for the present study because my focus is as much
on innovative uses of digital interactivity and compositional design as it is on the social,
historical, and cultural meanings coproduced by creators and readers of comics artifacts, thus my
description of the corpus of this study as educational, not informational, hypercomics. It is
nonetheless important to note the technical, attitudinal, and fact categories, while sometimes
39

overlapping within a single work, present a useful organizational tool for analysis of any corpus
of educational comics. The three categories simultaneously articulate both the primary learning
objective and the ways in which reader subjectivities are construed by the text via "competencies
shared by producers and consumers" that allow for the understanding of "visually encoded"
representations of social interaction (Kress & van Leeuwen, 2006, p. 115). Technical instruction
involves relating the steps of performing a task and generally involves the direct address of the
reader. Attitudinal instruction, in contrast, necessitates comparatively more instances of indirect
address of the reader (e.g. dramatization), since modeling social behaviors involves representing
social interactions within the text. The fact category suggests a notion of objective truth that puts
the reader in a less interactive position, in the sense that the reader is not engaged in a way that
encourages action or behavioral change beyond general interest.
The use of comics texts as educational tools has a long history of dispersed, parallel
practices, with as wide a variety of intended audiences, proposed learning outcomes, and
institutional contexts. Educational comics can sometimes function as a form of public relations to
counter accusations of the corruptive influence of comics as popular culture (Perry & Aldridge,
1971, p. 245). Alternately, non-fiction comics meant to inform, instruct, and/or persuade readers
can provide nuanced socio-historical observation and contextualization. The scattershot nature of
educational comics as a field of social discourse means that "No survey of educational comics
could possibly be complete" (Rifas, 1988, p. 204). If anything, the attempt to nail down a
definition of educational comics (or non-fiction comics, instructional comics, pedagogical
comics, information comics, etc.) presents an even greater challenge than defining comics in
general. Works considered quintessential educational comics, like the works of Ruis and Larry
Gonick, tend to incorporate images in panels alongside large blocks of text, which leads Jüngst

40

(2010) to classify such works as "picture books," sometimes nearing "the fuzzy edge between
picture book and comic" occupied by hybrid works that incorporate "some comics-specific
properties" (p. 23). In short, educational comics, as a field of discourse, is hyperinterstitial, by
which I mean educational comics is an area of inquiry that intensifies the formally and socially
interstitial tendencies scholars identify as characteristic of comics overall. This is just one of
several characteristics educational comics share with comics on the Internet: both are
characterized by an extreme mutability. Educational comics and comics on the Internet both
move along the fuzzy edges of formal categories.

Comics on the Internet

Comics on the Internet exemplify hyperinterstitiality in that, like educational comics, the
ambiguity and "in-betweenness" associated with comics generally is intensified by 1) the
blurring of traditional boundaries between different forms of communication, and 2) the
multiplicity of socio-cultural contexts in which comics works are created and read. To take the
second issue first, the proliferation of socio-cultural contexts of digital comics proceeds from the
"few barriers to entry" for online creators since "there are no editors to fire off rejection slips and
no retailers who refuse to order your books" (Salkowitz, 2012, p. 204). The term commonly
applied to comics on the Internet is webcomics, i.e. comics on the World Wide Web (see, e.g.
McCloud, 2000; Campbell, 2005). Because of relative freedoms from editorial interference and
preexisting market constraints, Fenty et al. (2004) equate webcomics with the underground
comix movement of the 1960s and 1970s, due to the shared common characteristics of aesthetic
experimentation, transgressive self-expression, and developing niche audiences within an

41

alternative distribution framework. These are, incidentally, some of the same contiguities that
exist between underground and educational comics. And, as with educational comics,
contiguities with the underground movement only go so far, pertaining only to certain
webcomics works, in certain contexts.
Fenty et al. (2004) define webcomics as "comics that are made first for the web, made by
an independent creator, who may be working with others, but who all have no originary print
version and no corporate sponsorship" (¶ 6). In this conception, webcomics is construed as either
akin to or an outgrowth of the "alternative press" (Lacy, 2007). However, attempting "to
construct a webcomics subculture" using "ideologically loaded" constraints, and focusing on the
particular cultural foci of a small sample of popular online comics, is highly problematic because
there are actually "many webcomic subcultures, or rather, subcultures in which webcomics are
made public (such as gaming or arts and craft)" (Kogel, 2013, p. 9). Like educational comics,
webcomics are best understood as widespread, diverse, often more connected to various other
subcultures than a comics-specific subculture akin to the fandom associated with print comic
books. Garrity (2008) describes this as potential for webcomics to reach "the audience that
abandoned comics in the real world—people who, to their surprise, really love comics after all,"
by appealing to diverse, niche interests with unconventional, experimental, and politically radical
content (p. 28). Thus, Garrity conceives of webcomics as providing something akin to
Bourriaud's notion of art as a social interstice, presenting alternative possibilities for relational
transaction within a dominant discourse, in this case the stereotypical discourse of comic books
as limited to superheroes, comic strips to humor.
Nonetheless, analyses of webcomics through the lens of print comics like Fenty et al.
(2004) and Lacy (2007) help characterize a certain subset of the larger amorphous phenomenon

42

of comics on the Internet. The rise in popularity of webcomics in the late 1990s and early 2000s
coincided with the dwindling number of small press comics during the same period and, while
myriad factors lead to both trends, their shared time frames meant that monetizing comics on the
Internet became technologically and financially viable at around the same time small press print
comic books were largely priced out of the specialty comic shop market (Allen, 2007). "Many
independent comics artists are choosing to lower printing costs and release their first efforts via
the Web" (Jenkins, 2002).
Prior to 1993, "The few comics that made it online tended to be work by college students
studying computer-tech stuff, since those were just about the only people with Internet access"
(Garrity, 2011). These included humor strips published through Compuserve, FTP and Usenet
(ibid.). The common interests of early Internet users in computer technology led to many early
humor strips "written from a technically savvy position with primarily a geek audience in mind"
(Blasingim, 2004, p. 5). However, by the early 2000s, as display technologies improved,
bandwith increased, and computers became increasingly ubiquitous, genres became more
various, and making generalizations about webcomics increasingly difficult. The most popular
and long running strips tended to reflect broader interests than just technology, but, "...the most
popular webcomics tended to be gag strips about nerd interests. Strips about video games
outstripped all else in popularity" (Garrity, 2011). Examples of web comics based on nerd
interests include: "... gamers (Penny Arcade, Ctrl-Alt-Del, PvP), Dungeons & Dragons and
World of Warcraft players (The Order of the Stick, Looking for Group), math and science geeks
(xkcd), anime fans (Megatokyo)... science-fiction (Girl Genius, Saturnalia), and so on" (Lacy,
2007). "Webcomics cater to a large number of niche audiences by providing for interest groups
who would otherwise never receive the attention of the mainstream media" (Hicks, 2009, 11.15).

43

Although some are extremely popular (Penny Arcade has, over the past 15 years, developed into
a media empire with its own nonprofit charity and convention), more commonly, webcomics are
similar to blogs: websites created and updated by independent, self-employed authors that
survive by developing "a smaller group of dedicated readers" that provide financial support for
creative work, "...either through donations or product purchases" with only a small percentage
becoming a sustainable way for creators to earn a living (Liming, 2012, p. 20). Some common
means of monetizing webcomics:
1.

Traffic and advertising

2.

Sponsored by larger sites

3.

Springboard for other media deals (books, TV, movies)

4.

Generating more freelance opportunities and higher rates

5.

Sales of branded merchandise

6.

Sales of print-on-demand or e-book collections

7.

Sales of original art or commissions

8.

Crowdsourced publication/subscriber-based model

9.

Tips/donations

10. Leads to paid speaking/teaching/media opportunities (Salkowitz, 2012, p. 209).

Many of these paths to monetization, including the need for online content to be portable to print
formats, as well as the more general requirements of developing a large or at least dedicated
fanbase, have tended to curb experimentation with new formats that lack an analog analogue
(i.e., a point of comparison drawn from print comics examples).
Returning to Hatfield's (2005) theory of comics as defined by multiple tensions, we might
describe online comics as (re)defined by tensions between print and digital forms of
composition, interaction, and monetization. At first glance, it seems like comics and digital
interfaces should be fairly interoperable. Even beyond their shared tendency towards visually

44

dominant multimodal meaning making, discussed in an earlier section, new media has also
adopted specific information design strategies commonly associated with comics. For example,
both comics and computers require the navigation and ordering of multiple frames or windows,
and graphical user interfaces remediate comics tropes like word balloons and cartooning (e.g. the
Microsoft Office Assistant Clippy the Paperclip, desktop icons) (Saraceni, 2003). In fact, the
cartooning conventions found in comic strips and books have been viewed as a way to ease
transitions from print to digital: "As computer interfaces become more complex, designers have
turned more often to cartoon conventions to enhance usability and ease the learning process"
(Horn, 1998, p. 134). However, while certain conventions drawn from comics have been integral
to new media interface design, comics works themselves have "resisted complete digital
translation most studiously..." (Gardner, 2012, p. 192).
Remediation of comics in digital formats has been problematized by the differing design
constraints of print and digital production. For instance, the difference in the portrait (vertical
rectangular) orientation of the print comic book page and the landscape (horizontal rectangular)
orientation of computer screens can result in interface designs that diminish immersive reading
experiences (McCloud, 2006). The limitations on file size and image resolution in the 1990s
cemented single-panel cartoons and comic strips as the earliest comics online (Campbell, 2005;
McCloud, 2006). The formal association of newspaper comic strips with webcomics leads some
researchers to make an analytic distinction from print formats based on the codex: "The
aesthetic, and therefore narrative, structures of both daily strip cartoons and on-line web comics
are unique unto themselves and barely resemble those of the comic book, trade paperback (which
collect a series of comic books) and graphic novel" (Witty, 2010, p. 4). However, there are a
number of online comics that remediate the size and shape of print comic books, and these are

45

generally comics in the process of being created for collection in a single print volume, or else
previously printed comics scanned in and posted online. There are also hybrid forms of
webcomics that combine the joke-a-day format with the character development and evolving
relationships of long form narrative, such as the popular strip Questionable Content by Jeph
Jacques (McCloud, 2006).
More recently, mobile devices, particularly tablet devices, have been a popular way for
people to read comic books. For example, the digital comics reader application Comics by
comiXology, through which the few major comic book publishers release digital versions of their
print comics offerings, was iTunes #10 top grossing iPad app in 2011, the #3 top grossing iPad
app for 2012, and the top grossing nongame iPad app in 2013 (McMillan, 2014). Comics by
comiXology and similar applications include a zooming interface that allows the reader to shift
between viewing a full page at a time as in a comic book, and viewing one panel at a time, close
up. Because the latter view removes the juxtaposition of multiple panels from comics, it becomes
what McCloud (2000) describes as the "slice-and-dice" method of digital comics display which,
along with the inclusion of multimedia (e.g. animation, audio), produce a narrative temporality
that contradicts the core identity of the comics form (p. 215-6).
Naturally, this argument retains the problematics of McCloud's essentialist definitional
project. Reading a single panel at a time may not use comics' characteristic juxtaposition of
multiple panels, but it still makes use of other forms of reading recognized as characteristic of
comics, e.g. static images shown in sequence, containing integrated pictorial and verbal linguistic
communication, word balloons, onomatopoeic sound effects, cartoon-style illustration, etc.
Additionally, this critique of panel-by-panel reading is mitigated by the ability to toggle back to a
view of the full page design. In contrast, adding multimedia like audio or video has greater

46

potential to override or compete with the sorts of literacy embodied by comics' formal identity.
This is because interaction with narrative time portrayed spatially, as in comics, is much different
from interaction with narrative time portrayed temporally, as in video or audio. In as much as
comics symbolically simulates time with such devices as word balloons, sound effects, and
sequential composition, sharing space with multimedia within the same narrative has the
potential to destabilize the simulation. The move from spatial to temporal is a major shift in the
power relationship between audience and text: from readers, who control the speed at which the
narrative unfolds, to viewers, who lack that degree of control. Perhaps this is why, as
comiXology CEO David Steinberger asserts:
Since the advent of the computer people have been trying to 'improve' the comic book reading experience
— adding animation, adding sound, adding creator commentary — and it just has never caught on. I think
the real value add that digital has for comic books is in delivery" (qtd. in B. Moore, 2011).

Then again, comics on the Web viewed through an Internet browser tend to differ
significantly from downloadable digital comics for tablet devices (Salkowitz, 2012). As writer
and comics futurist Warren Ellis (2011) notes, digital comics' format is “paygated digital files in
a wrapper for delivery to a device" which provides "...the closest digital emulation of the [comic
book specialty] store experience," while webcomics are usually released online for free, where
they become a broadcast medium, "...surrounded by an expanding sphere of URLs and
shortcodes, of RTs and Likes and +1s, and are being opened on desktops and laptops and tablets
and phones." But, while webcomics are generally characterized by free content, this has not
always been the case. Prior to the popularization of paid content models for mobile and tablet
computing, webcomics interstitial nature "invited comparisons" to comic books, where the
content was sold, as well as newspaper comic strips, and online entertainment, where content
was generally free (Campbell, 2005, p. 140). Thus, there was a great deal of experimentation

47

during the early-to-mid-2000s with various business models and formats for webcomics (see,
e.g. Campbell, 2005; Allen, 2007; Garrity, 2011). During this period Scott McCloud, an early
advocate for new models of financing and formatting comics for the Internet, became a
polarizing figure in these overlapping areas of webcomics discourse.

The infinite canvas and hypercomics

Scott McCloud casts a long shadow in the research and practice of formal innovation in
online comics. In his sophomore non-fiction book Reinventing Comics, a collection of twelve
essays on potential "revolutions" in comics in the 21st century, McCloud (2000) dedicates the
final three chapters to comics and computers, including the issues of digital production, digital
delivery and distribution via the Internet, and finally innovations in comics form that take full
advantage of online spaces. Many of McCloud's views on the form and monetization of online
comics, presented in Reinventing Comics and expanded upon in a series of webcomics essays
entitled "I Can't Stop Thinking," were controversial among working webcartoonists. As the
author who popularized discussions of comics on the Internet, garnering attention from
mainstream news media such as WIRED magazine and organizing a panel on digital comics at
the world's largest comics industry trade show, Comic-Con International, held in San Diego,
McCloud drew criticism for advocating new, experimental models of digital comics art and
commerce while ignoring the impact of generally more popular webcomics that remediated
newspaper comic strip formats and revenue streams (Campbell, 2005, p. 30-32). McCloud's
qualifications that he was focusing on long form online comics, as opposed to the short form of
strips, did little to quell criticism that McCloud was "ignoring" the reality of webcomics for a

48

theoretical ideal of online comics in the future (McCloud, 2001). Part and parcel of this conflict
between McCloud's notions of online comics as a site for experimentation in the making and
selling comics runs the risk of losing money by losing casual readership (Campbell, 2005).
McCloud (2000) was an advocate of micropayments, exchanging small amounts of
money for small chunks of content, making, "...the path from selling ten comics to selling ten
thousand comics to selling ten million comics is as smooth as ice" (p. 188). While McCloud's
notions of a "frictionless economy" between artists and their audience has resonances with
popular webcomics that maintain living wages for their creators through a community of fiercely
devoted readers, the notion of that economy based on the sale of principally the comics content
itself proved untenable prior to the rise of tablet computing.
McCloud's considerations on formal experimentation in online environments are perhaps
his most influential thoughts on digital comics, in that they continue to influence online comics
creators, programmers, and educators. The final chapter of Reinventing Comics is called "The
Infinite Canvas," the term which came to be associated with a form of comics that "...does not
lend itself easily for straightforward stories... emphasizes spatiality, movement and flow and can
make complex use of scrolling to build suspense..." (Kogel, 2013, p. 66). The Infinite Canvas
comic has come to be defined by McCloud's (2000) suggestion that the screen be treated like a
window onto a larger comic instead of a print page, remediated for the screen (p. 222). For
McCloud (ibid.), this means a return to what he identifies as comics' prehistory, extended
sequential visual storytelling such as the Bayeux Tapestry or Trajan's Column: "The ancestors of
printed comics drew, painted and carved their time-paths from beginning to end, without
interruption" (p. 220). For McCloud (2009), the notion of the Infinite Canvas is, despite
criticisms to the contrary, intended to make reading a more immersive experience for the reader:

49

Print cartoonists (myself included) make a constant series of compromises in pacing and design to stuff our
stories into pages. We add and subtract panels, restrict size variation, break reading flow, and rarely if ever
vary the distance between panels for fear of wasting paper. Without such restrictions, though, every one of
those choices can be made exclusively on behalf of the needs of the story.

As technology improved, the term "infinite canvas" was adopted by a number of artists
to generally define comics that incorporated a large size, shape, or unconventional reading path
intended to provide the reader with "an uninterrupted flow, a matrix of spatial relations that
pulled the reader from the first frame to the last" (Campbell, 2005, p. 115). Early examples of
this work, by artists including McCloud himself, usually involve comics images stacked
vertically or placed horizontally for the space of several screens, requiring the user to scroll
through online storytelling that approximates the continuous reading paths of the sequential
visual storytelling in things like tapestries and scrolls. While the idea of infinite canvas comics
"has failed to become a widespread technique," it has been adopted by some artists, and inspired
programmers to create interfaces that allow people without coding experience to make infinite
canvas comics (Kogel, 2013, p. 66). McCloud (2009) posits that, while "such formats are still a
poor fit for most readers' day-to-day reading habits," the infinite canvas may still be an idea that
will become more popular in the future, as technology and bandwidth improve.
Applications for creating infinite canvas comics have been identified as worth academic
attention in the field of digital storytelling, because teaching people to tell stories through such
interfaces presents, "...an excellent difficulty/benefits ratio, since it affords many of the narrative
possibilities to be found in the moving image domain, as well as some of those provided by
traditional interactive media, while remaining within the easier to teach, learn, and share domain
of sequential art" (Puentedura, 2010). While this argument provides another example of
educators' focus on the use of digital interfaces for simplified comics composition at the expense

50

of using digitally interactive comics texts as pedagogic resources, it is nonetheless true that
working with static visual images generally allows for greater flexibility in aesthetic choices with
less technical knowledge than the skills required for creating animation.1
Although the infinite canvas concept has come to represent a few particular types of
digital interfaces and forms of comics composition, the term was never intended to be so specific
(McCloud, 2006). However, "infinite canvas" has accrued the limitations of the digital comics
composition applications named after it. For example, Keeper and McDevitt (2012) suggest that
"when you pull up your favorite Infinite Canvas comic, the whole comic is on the screen all at
once." In fact, this is really only the case with the zooming infinite canvas interfaces, such as the
Tarquin Engine and Prezi, while with other interfaces, including McCloud's many webcomics, it
is more generally true that in an infinite canvas comic, the whole comic is accessible via
navigation of a single screen, or a single webpage, as opposed to multiple pages hyperlinked to
one another.
Because of the ironically limited connotations of the term "infinite canvas," to particular
spatial and interface designs, I have chosen "hypercomics" to serve as a more inclusive notion
for online comics that take advantage of affordances for information design in a digital
environment. Most webcomics are technically hypertextual, in the sense that usually each page
or strip of the comic is a single webpage connected by hyperlink to the previous and next page,
with the click of the mouse and the loading of the next web page in place of turning a page
(Marrs, 2005). Hypercomics, however, is less invested in hypertextual linking per se. For the
artist Neal von Flue, an early innovator of infinite canvas style comics, "hypercomics" comes
closer to defining what McCloud originally meant with his Reinventing Comics chapter title,
because "hypercomics" describes a work that "blends visual storytelling with any of the unique

51

formal properties of computer technology" (qtd. in Goodbrey, 2012, p. 6). The strength of von
Flue's definition is in its vagary, its resonance with the concepts of comics and computing
without reliance on strict definitional characteristics. Kogel (2013) asserts a similarly broad
notion of webcomics as "a screen-based medium sharing many common principles with comics
but expanding upon those principles using the systems of the Web" (p. 10). While these
definitions focus on the addition of digital affordances to the comics form, Keeper and McDevitt
(ibid.) define the concept by what it is not: "Hypercomics: Juxtaposed pictorial and other media
in deliberate sequence, intended to convey information and/or to produce an aesthetic response in
the viewer, of which, in order to create a printed form, portions must be re-sequenced or
removed."
In discussing hypertext as pedagogy, Joyce (1996) argues that reading hypertexts requires
"collaboration by the reader... to give meaning to the texts through her constant textual
intervention and shaping, her construction of successive interpretive frameworks, and her
responses as a reader" (p. 234). Another early adopter and innovator in hypercomics, and the
programmer of the Tarquin Engine application, designer and scholar Daniel Merlin Goodbrey,
similarly focuses on the forced co-creation of meaning through hypertextual interaction.
Goodbrey (2012) approaches defining hypercomics by connecting McCloud's definitions of
comics and the infinite canvas with the characteristics of hypertextual literature, or cybertexts,
described by Aarseth (1997). Thus, a hypercomic is:
...a comic with a multicursal narrative structure. Cursality is the apprehension that there are multiple paths
in addition to the one followed... a multicursal maze has many different possible pathways to navigate.
Multiple paths through a narrative mean a choice must be made by the reader as to which path to follow. As
such, a multicursal narrative foregrounds the importance of reader's choice... the choices made by the
reader may determine the sequence in which events are encountered, the outcome of events or the point of

52

view through which events are seen. Hypercomics... are ergodic in nature... the reader's experience of the
work will often be locally unique based on the specific pathway taken and choices made in navigating the
comic. This process of navigation requires a non-trivial effort on behalf of the reader... progression comes
about as a consequence of intention, deliberate choice or inadvertent action on behalf of the reader...
reading a hypercomic can often engender a sense of tmesis... the sense of have skipped over or missed
something and relates to the reader's apprehension that their own path through the narrative is one of many
different potential pathways (Goodbrey, 2012, p. 1-2).

Recalling Douglas Wolk's (2007) assertion that attempts to define comics 1) produce
examples outside the boundaries of the definition, and 2) highlight political biases of the
definition's author: 1) Goodbrey's (2012) definition of hypercomics as an instantiation of the
multicursal ergodic reading experiences Aarseth (1997) ascribes to hypertextual literature
excludes the numerous digital comics that provide a single, linear (i.e. unicursal) reading path,
but incorporate other affordances unique to computer mediated communication (e.g. the
incorporation of sound or animation, the use of sequences of images overlaid in various patterns
on a repeated background); and 2) the majority of Goodbrey's own comics work is multicursal
and ergodic, mazes of intersecting panels taking multiple divergent narrative paths.
Goodbrey's description of hypercomics is further problematized by his description of
digital comics as necessarily inducing a sense of tmesis. In linguistics, tmesis refers to the
interpolation of one word in the middle of another word for effect or emphasis, but Goodbrey,
after Aarseth (1997), is drawing on the use of the term by Roland Barthes (1973/1975) to
describe the reader skipping or skimming the text of a novel, in contravention to the reading
order established by the linear text as composed by the author (p. 14-15). However, Aarseth
(1997) argues that while Barthes' notion of tmesis refers to "a fragmentation of the linear text
expression that is totally beyond the author's control," reading hypertext is made antithetical to
the concept "by controlling the text's fragmentation and pathways," allowing for reading that is
53

neither linear nor nonlinear, but rather hyperlinear, "...the improvised selection of paths along a
network structure" (p. 78-79). Reading hypertext cannot be the subversive or playful act which
Barthes refers to as the bliss of the text because hypertext is inherently nonlinear, which can
contribute "to a brand of author-imposed disorientation that leads potentially to an antagonistic
relationship between narrator and reader" (Ciccoricco, 2007, p. 34). Such antagonistic reading
experiences are observable in common critiques of digitally interactive comics as formalist
experiments that foreground interface over narrative (see, e.g., Campbell, 2005; McCloud, 2006).
Nonetheless, Goodbrey's conception of hypercomics accurately captures a significant
subset of the larger discursive field of myriad and diverse instantiations of comics created for the
Web. Furthermore, as a comics creator Goodbrey continues to push at the boundaries of all
definitions of comics, working on "new mutations and innovations" of digital comics, including:
Game Comics that marry the conventions of the comics medium to those of interactive narrative-based
videogames... Sonic Comics that create reactive soundscapes based around the reader’s current position in a
multimodal narrative... Locative Comics that react to their environment and the proximity of other comic
readers... AR Comics that use Augmented Reality to extend physical spaces into the digital world of the
hypercomic or extend comic page out into the physical world... [and] Spatial Comics that use installations
to extend hypercomics into real-world locations and architectural structures (Goodbrey, 2011, p. 14-18).

Thus, a hypercomic is more complex than traditional notions of hypertext based solely in
the electronic reproduction and semantic interconnection of verbal linguistic texts in that
hypercomics is primarily defined by its location in digital media, to the extent that hypercomics
by definition cannot easily exist in print formats (see, e.g. Keeper & McDevitt, 2012; Kogel,
2013). The caveat implied by "easily" in the previous sentence is that hypercomics can exist in
physical space, but in a gallery or exhibition space, what Goodbrey (2011) describes as "Spatial

54

Comics," above. The overlap of digital and museological spaces in hypercomics creation makes
sense in the context of Hayles' (2004) assertion that:
Electronic hypertexts are navigable in at least two senses. They present to the user a visual interface that
must be navigated through choices the user makes to progress through the hypertext; and they are encoded
on multiple levels that the user can access using the appropriate software, for example, by viewing the
source code of a network browser as well as the surface text. As a result of its construction as a navigable
space, electronic hypertext is intrinsically more involved with issues of mapping and navigation than are
most print texts (p. 83).

Navigation of both the breadth of the hypertextual environment through the interface and
what Hayles (ibid) refers to as the "depth" of the source code on which that interface is built,
parallels the ambulatory navigation of the gallery space, and the pedagogical interactions with
informational texts, labels, and gallery tours. Keeper and McDevitt (2012) suggest this is an
example of one of the "techniques" of hypercomics creation they identify as "Absorbed Into
Other Media," wherein "..a Hypercomics creator wants to make something that is more about
environmental experience than about narrative... they begin to focus on pure composition and
visual symbolism, they slow the flow and (hopefully!) enhance the aesthetic experience... [and]
their Hypercomic has been Absorbed Into Art Installations!"
The dynamics of representational power implied in the notion of absorption are
problematic overall, a generalization that fails to account for instances when, e.g., animation is
embedded within a single panel of a primarily static digital comic, and oversimplifies the
complexity of potential interactions between comics and multiple media. For example, McCloud
(2000) also employs the metaphor of absorption, but as a critique of audio and animation
overpowering comics' use of two dimensional space to simulate human perceptions of the fourth
dimensional. The notion of art installations absorbing hypercomics further problematizes Keeper

55

and McDevitt's (ibid.) definition of hypercomics as necessarily digital, incapable of being printed
without significant editing. While a hypercomic in a museological space may not be printed in a
codex, it is still an instantiation of a form supposedly defined by its electronic nature, located in
physical materiality, as in printed comics panels or pages hung on a gallery wall. This seeming
paradox goes unmentioned by Keeper and McDevitt, but it likely arises from the problematic
concentration of their definition of hypercomics as something not-print, unprintable.
Just as hypertexts can be in print and digital (Hayles, 1992), so too can hypercomics be in
print, as in comic books constructed with narratives similar to the Choose-Your-Own-Adventure
paperback series (see, e.g. Goodbrey, 2012). For example, the "cartoonish yet algorithmically
complex graphic novel" Meanwhile by Jason Shiga creates a print hypercomic through "...an
elaborate series of maze-like paths and tabbed pages to help the reader guide the protagonist"
through 4,000 potential stories that function as "...a kind of extreme, logical conclusion to the
evolution of the codex... an edge case for digital comics," literalized by the creation of
Meanwhile as an iOS app, the multiple narrative paths explored by touchscreen instead of page
turn (Sample, 2012).
Such traversal of boundaries between print and digital become increasingly nontrivial as
hypertexts "...mix words with graphics, sounds, images, animation, and a host of other
multimedia components," and, as a result, "...the foundational metaphor of the page as a twodimensional plane mutates... increasingly represented as a topographic area to explore, with
layered strata, hidden openings, crosscutting pathways, links between different world levels, and
other spatial and temporal unfoldings..." (Hayles, 2004, p. 86). In the case of the majority of
online comics, these layered strata include "...the computer screen, the browser page layout, and
the comics' layout – whose panels are the final windows to the content" (Marrs, 2005, p. 29).

56

Kogel (2013), adopting Hayles' Media Specific Analysis in concert with Groeensteen's
(2000/2009) arthrology framework, identifies in digital comics the foundational strata of code,
which can be exploited to add metatextual commentary or otherwise make content more
"malleable" than is possible in print. More complicated user interfaces that take advantage of the
z axis through zooming interfaces, or layer multiple panels, offer further strata for navigation,
interaction, and exploration.
In the case of hypercomics art installations, the topographic metaphor employed by
Hayles becomes literalized in the three dimensional physical space of the gallery. In fact, the
move from virtual to physically embodied exploratory navigation occasioned by hypercomics in
gallery spaces overlaps with the parallel movement of practitioner-scholars in fine arts circles
towards the concept of gallery comics. Gallery comics, or installation comics, represent "a
challenging new form of art lying between book-based sequential comics and the spacial / wall
situation of fine art… a sequential, or quasi-sequential work which both can be read like a book
and comfortably viewed as a gallery/museum work" (Brandl, 2006). Gallery comics are created
through "…the intentional gathering of such a preponderance of comic art elements in ‘madefor-the-wall’ art so that audiences instantly sensed the kinship of gallery comics to traditional
comics” (Hill, 2007, p. 9). Taken a step further, conceptualizing the gallery wall as the space of
the page, and each piece of art in a comics exhibition as a single panel on that page, involves
combining the idea of gallery comics with the conceptions of new media art curation as a process
of narrative remix, thereby moving from the single installation or gallery comic to the extended
exhibition comic, where each curated piece is representative of an instance in the larger, loosely
constructed nonlinear narrative of the exhibition as a whole (Duffy, 2009).

57

Re-remediating hypercomics, moving hypercomics from the Web to the gallery and back,
invites conceptualizing digital hypercomics as a virtual exploratory space akin to the pedagogical
public spaces of museums and libraries. For example, Taylor (2012) suggests "the relationship of
narrative and space and navigable space" in hypercomics can inform methods of information
organization and access in digital libraries and archives, infusing virtual "shelf visualization
tools" with "spatial navigation common and uncommon to library collections as a way to
facilitate different types of interactions with material." I would add to this that envisioning
hypercomics not only as a method for the navigation of information through spatial relations,
something achieved through the mutable space of the Prezi interface linked to the
communicative genre of giving a presentation, but also as a method for narrativizing the
navigation of information. In other words, educational hypercomics combine salient
characteristics, tropes, and/or reading protocols identified with the comics form with the
mutable, multimedia, and hypertextual affordances of design on the World Wide Web, in order
to create pedagogical narratives foregrounding particular domain-specific learning objectives.
Kogel (2013) adopts Hayles' Media Specific Analysis to conceptualize comics on the
Web as "a process, a mixture between comics and image code," but moves on to also describe
webcomics as the processes of archive building and artistic growth (p. 36). Here Kogel refers to
the ways in which the low editorial barriers, serialized format, and Web 2.0 asynchronous
communication between authors and readers create in the archives of long running webcomics a
navigable metanarrative of online socio-cultural interactions producing radical evolutions in
visual aesthetic and thematic content, a widely observed characteristic of serialized webcomics
(see, e.g., Campbell, 2005; Garrity, 2011). Carter (2011) identifies these archival and interactive
aspects as "a powerful tool" for young adult literacy pedagogy in which, "...teachers and

58

adolescents consider how product and process intersect in new social spaces" through the use of
web archives and social media interactions with contemporary comics practitioners (p. 193).
While webcomics archives and Web 2.0 social interactions are among the myriad
important and underexplored research topics on comics-related pedagogy in digital spaces, such
research is largely beyond the scope of my study. Instead, I bring up this prevalent characteristic
of popular webcomics as a point of contrast with educational hypercomics, which do not
conform to this common type of webcomic. Hypercomics in general are more consistent with a
different type of online comics text:
In the webcomic site, there are also short graphic novels which are structured in an interactive cluster. This
"hyper cluster" deploys the various tables that compose the entire story in a slideshow format, through
which the user can move forward or backward by virtually acting either on buttons or arrows. So what
webcomic readers can actually see on their computer screen is a slot placed in central position in which a
single table of the entire graphic novel is deployed. This means that an interactive behavior is required on
the part of the user at least for reading the entire story. This kind of interaction is quite different from that
required by the printed format of the comic. ...the storyline develops in a series of tables that form a cluster
which has a virtual depth. [...]the webcomic implements a kinetic modality and a different way of reading...
(Zanfei, 2008, p. 57).

Although Zanfei's use of "graphic novel" and "slideshow" are imprecise comparisons, and the
description does not account for zooming interfaces any more than Goodbrey's definition of
hypercomics accounts for unicursal digital interactive comics narratives, both converge on the
notion of hypercomics as generally discrete (as opposed to continuing, serialized, open-ended)
texts.
The notion of hypercomics as finite texts is especially true of educational hypercomics,
which are largely finite projects tied to diverse learning objectives, design constraints, and
evaluative regimes arising from the specific localized requirements of learning institutions and

59

other educational stakeholders. In this educational hypercomics are like print educational comics
as described by, e.g., Rifas (1988, 1991, 2009); Van Hook (2008); Davidson (2008); Witek
(2008): diverse and diffuse, varied in aesthetics, formats, politics, desired learning outcomes, and
intended audiences. Nonetheless, these works share a similar impulse towards the creation of a
unified pedagogical text for Internet distribution. McCloud (2001) argues that, while learning
through the navigation of multiple semantically hyperlinked texts "is a wonderful way to explore
information and to follow one's interests," it does not supersede or replace "the idea of an authorcentered work," since eventually an online learner researching a particular subject "is going to
want an organized, comprehensive treatment of this subject, and an interface that reflects that
organization" (qtd. in Hatfield, 2001, p. 74).
Educational hypercomics, in other words, function along an interstice that maintains the
authorial paradigm of print texts while surpassing, or at least presenting a significant challenge
to, the formal constraints of print reproduction. The latter scoping boundary immediately
disqualifies the majority of online educational comics texts, which take the form of
downloadable Portable Document Files (PDFs), digitized versions of print works, or works
created simultaneously for digital and print reproduction (Jüngst, 2010). The former boundary,
the authorial paradigm, excludes comics creation software from the scope of this project. What
remains within the scope defined by my use of "educational hypercomics" are online authored
texts that address identifiable learning objectives through juxtapositional and/or sequential
imagetextual narrative discourse combined with interactivity characteristic of digital
environments.

60

Multimodality, social semiotic analysis, and comics pedagogy

As described above, the study of comics as pedagogy necessitates an understanding of
comics as a field of discourse that exists at the intersection of socio-cultural meaning and formal
composition, a critical stance contrasting especially with the cognitive linguistic approach to
comics studies found in Neil Cohn's conceptualization of visual language. Social semiotics
mitigates such dichotomous views of form and social meaning because, "Social semiotics treats
all semiotic acts and processes as social acts and processes" (Hodge and Kress, 1988, p. 122).
Kress (2003) describes the move from a linguistic to a social semiotic perspective as, "... a move
from a concern with form in one mode... to a concern with form-and-meaning in many modes...
[and] The move... away from a theory in which form is dealt with separately from meaning"
(Kress, 2003, p. 41-2). A social semiotic analytic approach therefore offers a palliative to the
intractable ambiguity of educational hypercomics as a field of discourse, because social
semiotics is less concerned with essentialist formal categorization than it is with "...meaning in
all its appearances, in all social occasions and in all cultural sites" (Kress, 2009, p. 2, emphasis
original).
This recognition that meaning potentials are actualized by the interrelation of semiotic
resources with the socio-cultural contexts in which said resources are used is predicated on
M.A.K. Halliday's theory of metafunctions, described in his work on systemic functional
linguistics.2 Halliday (1978) describes the metafunctions of language as "present in every use of
language in every social context" (p. 112). There are three types of metafunction: 1) the
ideational function, which "represents the speaker's meaning potential as an observer... the
content function of language, language as 'about something;'" 2) the interpersonal function,

61

which represents "...the participatory function of language, language as doing something... the
component through which the speaker intrudes himself into the context of situation, both
expressing his own attitudes and judgements and seeking to influence the attitudes and behaviour
of others;" and 3) the textual function which "represents the speaker's text-forming potential...,"
an "enabling function," since "...it is only in combination with textual meanings that ideational
and interpersonal meanings are actualized" (ibid., p. 112-113). The ideational function can be
further subdivided into experiential systems, wherein, as language is learned, it becomes "a tool
for learning everything else," and logical systems, which "extend the experiential power of the
grammar by theorizing the connection between one quantum of experience and another"
(Halliday, 2006, p. 17). All three metafunctions occur simultaneously in the construction of a
text, defined here as "an instance of the process and product of social meaning in a particular
context of situation" (Halliday and Hasan, 1985, p. 11). Thus, meaning is created at the
interstices of 1) the metafunctional constructions of discourse that organize meaning potentials of
various semiotic resources, and 2) the situational contexts that shape and are shaped by said
metafunctional constructions.
The theory of social semiotics, and the school of systemic functional linguistic thought
from which it is derived, is unique in this insistence on "...direct correlation between the
functional organization of language and the organization of context" (Eggins and Martin, 1997,
p. 239). These processes, by which resonance between metafunctional construction and
situational context specify "a range of meaning potential" is called register: "the semantic
configuration that is typically associated with the situation type in question" (Halliday, 1978, p.
123). Situational context is therefore described as a semiotic construct, i.e. constructed through
systems of meaning making, via three register variables:


field: what the language is being used to talk about;

62



mode: the role language is playing in the interaction; and



tenor: the role relationships between the interactants (Eggins, 1994, p. 52).

These register variables allow for the analysis of the organization of the situational context in
which a text is embedded, the context being the "ecological matrix that is constitutive of the text"
(Halliday, 1978, p. 122).
While the mode variable of a register of discourse in systemic functional linguistics is
taken to be monomodal, i.e. language in the role of spoken or written word, in the theory of
multimodality mode is understood more broadly as "a socially shaped and culturally given
semiotic resource for making meaning" (Kress, 2009, p. 79). "Multimodal analysis must work
with concepts and methods that are not specific to language, or indeed to any other mode, but
can be applied cross-modally... [and] necessarily center on the communicative functions that can
be fulfilled by several or all semiotic modes (van Leeuwen, 2004, p. 15, emphasis original).
O'Halloran & Fei (2009) clarify this meaning, and the interrelation of the various terms of social
semiotics, when they describe the subject of multimodal analyses as "multimodal phenomena"
created through "...choices from semiotic resources (e.g. language, images, music, mathematical
symbolism, gesture and movement) which integrate across visual, auditory and somatic (haptic,
gustatory and olfactory) modes to construct meaning in the context of their instantiation" (p.
140). Multimodal analysis is thus, "... the work of scholars who have extended the categories and
methods of systemic-functional linguistics to visual modes of communication or ones that mix
the verbal and nonverbal..." (O'Toole, 2011, p. 193).
Wood and Kroger (2000) assert that verbal and nonverbal features of discourse are
"interrelated" and inseparable from each other, necessitating a view of "discourse in the broadest
sense" as an integrated "semiotic system," whose "multiple facets and functions" analysis must
recognize, and whose interactions can be illustrated although meaning is "constantly shifting

63

with the context" (p. 63). Like the notions of comics as a social object or systems of meaning,
this notion rejects essentialist definitional categorizations:
...we cannot make statements about forms of discourse in general in terms of some set of essential
properties. Rather, we must look at the forms as ways that people orient to discourse of a particular sort and
further, at the way in which people do so on particular occasions. ...We cannot specify ahead of time that
the discourse we look at will be of a particular kind, because the features in which we are interested are
matters of orientation rather than essence. The best we can do is to select material that may bear on our
questions and to guard against taking its features for granted (ibid., p. 67).

This has been my approach to selecting educational hypercomics texts for this study:
compiling a list that does not claim to be comprehensive, but instead is understood as
exemplifying the characteristic heterogeneity of this field of discourse, a comparative analysis of
the construction of pedagogical discourses through the integration of comics' traditional formal
characteristics with the affordances of digital media. Within the semiotic systems of the
exemplar educational hypercomics analyzed below, the present study focuses on how modes of
meaning making understood to be "comics" function within their respective situational contexts,
in terms of institutional origins (e.g. independent author, non-profit organization, government
department, etc.), disciplinary paradigms (e.g. math, physical sciences, social sciences, etc.), and
desired learning outcomes.
The underlying interest driving this research is in how design choices drawing on
semiotic resources of comics and the Internet in particular contexts and on particular occasions
communicate representations of teaching and learning in online spaces. Kress (2003) suggests
learning is wrought in the creative tension of articulation and interpretation, (e.g. of writing and
reading), a process whereby "The resources through which meaning is made are changed in the
process of meaning-making, but so is the inner disposition of those who have made that meaning

64

inwardly in interpretation or outwardly in articulation" (p. 40). The goal of this study is to
describe ways in which the designs of educational hypercomics work to insert themselves in this
cycle, as multimodal texts that articulate systems of pedagogical meaning in order to open space
for transformative interpretation and creative re-articulation.
While social semiotic analysis provides a "descriptive framework" for the systemic
interrelations of various modes of meaning making, "In studies of the use of semiotic resources,
visual social semiotics can only ever be one element of an interdisciplinary equation which must
also involve relevant theories and histories" (Jewitt and Oyama, 2001, p. 138). "Social semiotics
is not an end in itself" but rather "a tool for use in critical research," which "only becomes
meaningful once we begin to use its resources to ask questions" (ibid., p. 136). In the context of
this study, these questions originate from the above intellectual history of comics studies, from
the theorization of educational and online comics as collectively hyperinterstitial, and from
education science research that implicates comics in teaching critical multiliterate approaches to
the interpretation and articulation of e-learning. Research on comics, ICTs, and multiliteracies
describes the impetus for analyzing educational hypercomics. Visualized as a space for inquiry,
"educational hypercomics" exists at the intersection of the fields of discourse that define this
study: comics, Internet technologies, and pedagogy (see Figure 2 in Figures section below). The
anti-essentialist, socially constructed approach to definitions of comics form, the marked
ambiguity of educational and digital comics within that broader tradition, and the characteristic
entanglement of the socio-cultural with the formal that define this space of inquiry all signal the
appropriateness of social semiotics as an analytic framework, given its attention to meaning at
the overlap of semiotic resources with social situational context.

65

Figures

Figure 2: A sequential art visualization of educational hypercomics as the overlap of three discursive spaces whose
fuzzy edges represent the heuristic nature of the analytic boundaries that describe socially objectified constructions
of meaning.

66

1

These infinite canvas comics creation applications, usually based on Flash or Macromedia, include the Tarquin
Engine (http://www.webcomicsnation.com/tarquin/), Infinite Canvas.app (http://www.infinitecanvas.com/), and an
iPad application, also called Infinite Canvas (http://infinitecanvas.appjet.net/). While not specific to comics, the
zooming and rotating presentation software Prezi (http://prezi.com) offers similar functionality as the various
infinite canvas comics creation applications.
2
Systemic functional linguistics is thus named because its practitioners understand language as a system that
evolves according to the needs and socio-cultural contexts of its use; that is, systemic linguists are "interested in
what language can do, or rather what the speaker... can do with it" as well as, "the nature of language, its internal
organization and patterning, in terms of the functions that it has evolved to serve" (Halliday, 1978, p. 16). Systemic
linguists assert that the function of language is "to make meanings" which are "influenced by the social and cultural
context in which they are exchanged" through a process that is semiotic, i.e. "a process of making meanings by
choosing" (Eggins, 1994, p. 2). Language is therefore understood "not as a set of rules, but as a resource" with
"meaning potentials" realized through the "creative use" of available resources, use that results in continuous
modification of said resources (Halliday, 1978, p. 192, emphasis original). It is in its broad adoption of the systemic
functional perspective on "resources" that social semiotics departs from the more traditional notion of the sign,
famously described by Ferdinand de Saussure (1916/2011) as composed of the "signified," or "concept" that is being
communicated, and the "signifier," or "sound-image," the means through which the "concept" is communicated (p.
67). In contrast, social semiotics conceives these "actions and artefacts we use to communicate, whether they are
produced physiologically... or by means of technologies" as "resources" instead of "signs" because the former term
"avoids the impression that 'what a sign stands for' is somehow pre-given, and not affected by its use" (van
Leeuwen, 2005, p. 1).

67

CHAPTER 3: RESOURCE COLLECTION AND SAMPLE SELECTION

The three educational hypercomics that are the primary focus of this study are drawn
from a larger (though far from comprehensive) list of examples. This initial list is comprised of
22 examples of educational hypercomics (See Table 1 in the Tables section below). A number of
these examples come out of prior research on pedagogy in digital and museological contexts (see
Duffy, 2009; 2010). Other texts in the list were located in research literature on digital comics in
education found via education and library science databases, including ERIC, LISA, and Library
Literature.
Some hypercomics were located via the online presence of preeminent practitionerscholars doing work combining comics, computers, and pedagogy. For example, Scott McCloud
is perhaps the most well known comics creator and theorist, whose influence on research related
to comics created for digital spaces, the field of discourse I have equated in this study with the
term "hypercomics," is inescapable. Therefore it is hardly surprising that McCloud often links to
the work of artists experimenting with iterations of comics in digital spaces. McCloud is himself
the author of a series of six nonfictional infinite canvas comics essays, entitled I Can't Stop
Thinking! and published online from 2000-2001, that continue the theoretical work of
Reinventing Comics, embodying the metatextual pedagogical use of comics to discuss comics, in
this case the use of digital comics to extrapolate on his theories for comics in digital spaces.
Among those artists McCloud links to are the aforementioned Daniel Merlin Goodbrey,
and artist Yves Bigerel. Goodbrey and Bigerel, like McCloud, have created hypercomics that
posit, exemplify, and design ways comics can make use of the affordances of digital
interactivity; that is, hypercomics about hypercomics, or "metahypercomics" (Keeper, 2012).

68

This term describes a subset of the list of educational hypercomics, comprised of ten examples:
the six installments of McCloud's (2000-2001) I Can't Stop Thinking essay series, Bigerel's
(2009) two works, About Digital Comics and About About Digital Comics, Goodbrey's (2001)
Comics Tetrad, and the metahypercomic created by Keeper and McDevitt (2012), Understanding
Hypercomics. This final entry was located via entering "understanding hypercomics" as a search
query in Google, which seemed a likely play on Understanding Comics, based on the influence
of McCloud in the field of digital comics studies overall, as well as the fact that McCloud's title
is itself a paraphrasing of Marshall McLuhan's Understanding Media.
Other practitioner-scholars, Leonard Rifas and Gene Luen Yang, are representative of
creators that stepped briefly out of the print tradition of educational comics to create early
educational hypercomics, both in 2003. Rifas, working with Seattle Community College web
design students, created a hypertextually annotated online comic about lessening individual
carbon imprints through increased awareness of connections between home and travel (Luke,
2010). This hypercomic is entitled Searching For A Home: A Car Smart Comic
(http://www.scn.org/feetfirst/comics/index.html). This work continues Rifas' longer tradition of
creating and publishing comic books about ecological issues and environmentalist activism (see,
e.g., Interview with, 1978; Luciano, 1984; Rifas, 1991). Yang, a high school computer science
teacher, gained prominence as a cartoonist in 2006, for his graphic novel American Born
Chinese, the first graphic novel to be nominated for a National Book Award, and won the 2007
Michael L. Printz Award for outstanding young adult literature sponsored by Booklist and
administered by the Young Adult Library Services Association. But three years earlier, Yang
created an online tutorial of algebraic factoring in the form of an interactive webcomic as the
final project for a Master's Degree of Education, entitled Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley

69

the Alien (http://www.humblecomics.com/factoring/). This comic employs a Flash interface that
simulates classroom interactions by including portions of lessons where readers can choose to
insert panels with additional examples of a particular concept.
That both Rifas and Yang created a single educational hypercomic before returning to
print comics publication suggests their limited scholarly interest in digital comics compared to,
for example, McCloud or Goodbrey. Thus, while scholars and practitioners in the overlap of
print comics and education, neither Rifas nor Yang are sources for locating other educational
hypercomics. Instead, educational comics researchers in various fields tend to include
hypercomics as entries in larger bibliographic overviews. For example, the literature review of
education and online comics compiled as an initial phase of the European Union project
EduComics (2008) lists several online educational comics, including the educational
hypercomics Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien and the Feeding Minds, Fighting
Hunger comics from the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization
(http://www.feedingminds.org/cartoon/rtf_en.htm). However, while EduComics (2008) cite "The
creation of a new generation of web comics that take advantage of the potentials of hypermedia"
as one of two "current trends in using web comics in education," the EduComics project
consortium focuses their further research primarily on the second trend, student use of comics
composition software for digital content creation (p. 10).
EduComics (ibid.) also lists "Interactive viewers of educational comic books, such as
ΚΑΒΑΜ [sic] by Centers for Disease Control and Prevention USA. (US Department of Health
and Human Services) which presents stories with dialogues and asks the student to interact with
the book, asking for their opinion which may influence the development of the story" (ibid., p.
10). This example, the KaBAM Comic Creator, integrated into the BAM! Body and Mind

70

website, adopts a choose-your-own-adventure approach, presenting a two panel comic strip that
poses a problem, with three hyperlinked answers to the problem leading to three potential
outcomes (http://www.cdc.gov/bam/life/kabam.html).
In his survey of print and digital educational comics about science-related topics
Tatalovic (2009) makes note of the educational hypercomics series Eco Agents Special Unit as
unique, stating:
Although many of the other science comics discussed are available online [as downloadable pdfs], the Eco
Agents Special Unit series innovatively uses the web platform to its full advantage. Readers have to register
in order to access the comics, and as part of registration process they design an avatar which then features
in the comic as one of the characters. This presumably enhances identification with the character and helps
immerse the reader into the story. As the reader flips through the comic (which has the feel of a book, as
the turning of pages is graphically simulated), there are many clickable frames that either provide extra
information related to the story, or open up new frames which feature a film, a game or other interactive
content (e.g. a quiz) (p. 12).

The above paragraph, and a second providing descriptions of the avatars in greater detail,
amounts to the total analysis Tatalovic (ibid.) dedicates to the "innovative" digital platform.
While the Eco Agents Special Unit site was operational during initial data collection for this
study, it has since been taken down and labeled a "discontinued site"
(http://ecoagents.eea.europa.eu/).
I did locate two full papers in the research literature concerning educational hypercomics;
these are two evaluative studies of particular educational hypercomics projects performed in
educational institutions. Shipwright, Mallory, Atack, & Demacio (2010) discuss the results of a
pilot study of the use of a custom "online graphic novel" called Citizen Researcher meant to
teach research literacy skills to college undergraduates. Costello & Bliton (2009) describe the
design, use, and evaluation of a webcomic called The Secret in the Cellar, part of the

71

Smithsonian forensic anthropology exhibition "Written in Bone". The webcomic incorporates
limited animation, along with hyperlinks at the bottom of the page linking to learning activities
and photos from artifacts of the real life archeological dig on which the comic is based. In both
cases, interviews, surveys, and other evaluative metrics suggest digitally interactive online
educational comics had positive impacts on learning experiences for readers from multiple
backgrounds and, in the case of The Secret in the Cellar, age groups. The Secret in the Cellar
remains accessible online, publicly available via the Smithsonian website. Citizen Researcher, on
the other hand, appears to have been available only to enrollees of a research skills course at
Centennial College in Scarborough, Ontario. Given these limitations in availability and access,
Citizen Researcher was left off the final list.
Shipwright et al. (2010) published their study of the use of the Citizen Researcher
educational e-comic through the MERLOT (Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning and
Online Teaching) Journal of Online Learning and Teaching. The MERLOT website also features
a database of learning materials. Searching "comics" on http://www.merlot.org brings up 22
results, a number of which are digital mathematics learning objects concerned with "conics," and
one which is an entry describing another example of educational hypercomics: Women's
Adventures in Science. Part of "...a National Academy of Sciences project highlighting the work
on prominent women scientists for young women," the Women's Adventures in Science website
(iwaswondering.org) incorporates comics along with "games, science experiments, video... and
other activities" about " physics, astronomy, biology, anthropology, geology, genetics, robotics
and sociology" (Sweeney, 2006). The comics are biographies of noted women scientists that
integrate point-and-click interactions within a Flash animated interface, one of the most common
interfaces for hypercomics generally (Keeper and McDevitt, 2012). The Women's Adventures in

72

Science comics are also integrated as a single module in a larger virtual learning environment. In
fact, three of the educational hypercomics in this study are part of a component of a larger virtual
learning environment, including Eco Agents Special Unit, the Feeding Minds comics, and The
Secret in the Cellar. The latter is included as a page on the Smithsonian website for the "Written
in Bone" exhibition, while the former and median are embedded in interfaces including other,
related, non-comics educational multimedia resources. This organization seems to parallel the
tendency, noted by Jüngst (2010), for many educational comics to be one of many components
of a larger educational campaign (p. 10).
There are, of course, also hypercomics by single, self-motivated authors, such as the
various aforementioned metahypercomics texts, Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien,
and a Japanese language-learning hypercomic called Electric Spirit. Described on its home page
as “the web's only Japanese instructional interactive manga,” Electric Spirit is a ghost story in
the style of a Japanese comic whose interface allowed the reader to toggle the dialog balloons
between English and Japanese. The interface allowed the reader to change all of the text to one
language or another, or alter a single word balloon by mousing over it with the cursor. Mousing
over also brought up another balloon containing conversational and linguistic context for the
dialog, and a side menu opens lists of study goals. Clicking on particular kanji in the manga
brought up “a description of the character with notes regarding strokes, readings, and tips for
remembering them” (Watkins, 2011). Electric Spirit was an educational hypercomic series
created in 2005 by artist and interface designer Chris Watkins, for a comic anthology website
called BorderWalker, but because Watkins found the innovative design combined with
attempting to create comics using a manga style of illustration, "...a bit much for one me to
handle... I had to put it on hiatus" (Watkins, 2011). In its apparently permanent hiatus, the

73

Electric Spirit interface "became incompatible with current web browsers," so that only the last
completed page of the series, created in Flash, remained online (ibid.).
As of this writing, the last page of Electric Spirit appears to have left the Web, with only
a broken link (http://www.chris-watkins.com/electricspirit.htm) and a video of the interface of
the last page being used on Watkins' professional website (http://chris-watkins.com). Thus, to a
certain extent, Electric Spirit, like Eco Agents Special Unit, described above, becomes an
example of the issues of digital preservation that compound preexisting challenges in research
into educational comics presented by the lack of concentrated archival collection in the area.
These issues resonate with problematic issues of the ownership of digital media that have arisen
with the growing popularity of comics leased through mobile device applications, and the lack of
a downloadable digital file kept locally on the user's machine (see, e.g., Stevens, 2012).
However, that discussion focuses primarily on intellectual property rights from an economic
perspective. The issue of how innovative forms of digital learning can be preserved and archived
are a major 21st century challenge for library and information science, but beyond the scope of
the current study. Nonetheless, the tendency of scholars to report challenges in obtaining or
accessing comprehensive collections of educational comics for the purposes of research
highlights the importance of secondary literature as a record of works that may themselves be
inaccessible (see, e.g. Rifas, 1991; Jüngst, 2010). It is in the service of this curatorial impulse—
along with the salience of the digitally interactive interface that, while no longer accessible, is
viewable to an extent—that Electric Spirit is included in the initial list of examples in Table 1.
While Electric Spirit represents a formal outlier, in the sense that the actual digital
learning object is no longer online, the scrolling comic America: Elect!: The action-packed
journey to US election day in graphic novel form represents an outlier in the context of

74

production, in that this educational hypercomic was created at the behest of neither a government
department nor a nonprofit educational organization, but instead for The Guardian website, as a
recapitulation of the recent history of the 2012 US Presidential election
(http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/interactive/2012/nov/06/america-elect-graphic-novel). In
America: Elect!, static illustrations are given limited animation created through parallax style
vertical scrolling, down the page creates the motion of the images (Burgess, 2012). Parallax
scrolling, "...originally used in 2D video games where background images moved slower than
foreground images, creating an illusion of depth," is, at the time of this writing, a "major trend in
web design" (Chang, 2013). The cutting edge design of America: Elect! intimates its private
sector origins, in the sense that the artists were commissioned to create something in line with
broader, popular, market-driven trends in web design and online news reportage.
The last three educational hypercomics texts in the corpus of this study also emerge from
a different professional context, e-learning instructional designers creating online training
courses for workplace environments. Two of these, Broken Co-Worker and What Would You Do
If… Nine Scenarios to Practice and Improve Your Customer Service Skills, are created for an
office environment. The former, Broken Co-Worker, is a workplace assertiveness training course
that combines audio and video with a comic book layout to present scenarios where the user
must choose the actions of the main character in that scenario
(http://www.brokencoworker.com/). The e-learning course is not intended for actual use—its
website proclaims "For Entertainment Purposes Only" (ibid.). Rather, this is a contest entry from
instructional design studio eLearning Engaged for the Guru Awards administered by the elearning software design company Articulate as a way of creating example uses of their Storyline
online course creation software (LeStage, 2012). Nonetheless, in its exemplary use of the

75

Storyline software, the eLearning Engaged designers present an example of the integration of
comics elements into a pedagogical framework. It is laid out as an instructional course, listing
learning objectives and showing the consequences of various interpersonal choices in a
workplace environment. While perhaps not intended as a formal training module, commissioned
by a client with organizational training needs, Broken Co-Worker nonetheless presents an
example of informal asynchronous learning, modeling digital instructional design practices as
much as it does assertiveness in workplace interactions.
What Would You Do If… offers a similar example of computer mediated workplace
skills training through scenario-based pedagogy, where the user chooses from several options to
direct the actions of a character within the e-learning narrative (http://agilee.com/images/project-1.swf). However, this e-learning design was created by Agile-e Learning
Design Studio for a paying client: "This project for the County of San Diego was created to help
county employees practice and improve their customer service skills... [via] an interactive
scenario-based solution..." that integrates word balloons and comics panels to present the user
with "...compelling job-based situations with nuanced responses and feedback modelled [sic] on
real world consequences" (Thompson, 2012).
The third example of an e-learning training course that employs scenario-based learning
and is developed by instructional designers for a client organization is Connect With Haji Kamal
(World Warfighter, 2010). This digital learning activity was developed by the instructional
media design firm Kinection, initially for the blended learning environment of the United States
Army Noncommissioned Officers Academy, for the "Senior Leader Course" LSA 2 Rapport
Building Across Cultures (ibid.). In the comic, the user is presented with static images and audio
placed in a comic panel layout, with some characters talking only in silent word balloons. The

76

goal of the training module is to, "...help a young lieutenant overcome cultural differences and
make a good impression on a Pashtun leader" (Moore, 2010).
Comics are employed in e-learning training modules based on the form's cultural
connotations as a form of popular narrative. For example, Broken Co-Worker's Ryan Martin
describes the comics panel layout as "...a classic, familiar storytelling style, and fits nicely with
scenario development" (qtd. in LaStage, 2012). The affinity for comics-as-narrative with
scenario-based learning makes sense since "scenarios," as operationalized in user interface
design, are "stories about people and their activities," and focusing on scenarios leads to
reflective considerations of information needs, use, and organization (Carroll, 1999, p. 2). Agile
e-Learning Design Studio head Leslie Thompson (2012) also notes the usefulness of a comicsbased design in scenario-based learning, as well as making the What Would You Do If... training
course more "visually interesting" (online). Despite the implied usefulness of the comics form,
these e-learning modules are never described as (hyper)comics themselves. Instead, the common
parlance of e-learning training course design for professional contexts describes the use of
comics formal elements as a "comic book style" (Gumienny, 2012).
As is observable in an e-learning designer community forum, the notion that comics is
"informal" and "not serious" is widespread in the corporate e-learning environment, leading
Cathy Moore (2011a) to suggest using the phrase "graphic novel style" to mitigate negative
preconceptions. These preconceptions of comics as antithetical to serious topics, along with the
notion that a comic book style is primarily a template for visual aesthetics, reiterate the
longstanding concerns of American studies of comics in education stretching back to at least the
media effects literature of the 1920s. The repetition of these debates among e-learning design
professionals serves to underline the vastly differing socio-cultural contexts of this particular

77

community of practice with the high theoretical model of the metahypercomics in the corpus of
this study, the government and non-profit educational comics that focus primarily on comics as
an educational resource for children and young adults, and the general audience served by the
recent political historical reportage of America: Elect! The wide variety of socio-cultural
contexts for the production and intended use of the texts, along with the diverse range of
informational content and learning objectives, mirrors the heterogeneity of educational and/or
online comics overall.
Each entry in this list is coded based on analytic frameworks from research into
educational comics and hypercomics, discussed in Chapter 2. Using the typology of educational
comics suggested by Eisner (1985) and Jüngst (2010), I note which works in the corpus contain
elements of the technical, attitudinal, and/or fact comics categories. Along with the application of
this educational comics typology, I identify learning goals and institutional contexts of the
respective works, in order to further identify and clarify each work's identity as a pedagogical
text. I further enumerate formal digital comics characteristics present in each text, using
terminologies suggested by Goodbrey (2012) and Keeper and McDevitt (2012), in order to
identify how each work falls into my heuristic definition of "hypercomics." Despite the
ontological imprecision of these educational comics and hypercomics typologies—as discussed
in Chapter 2—they nonetheless serve to highlight similarities in information organization and
interface design strategies employed in these 22 examples, as a starting point for analysis.

78

Exemplar selection

The goal of this study, social semiotic analysis of the ways in which comics new media
combine to construe readers as learners in particular institutional contexts, requires further
scoping from the initial list of 22 educational hypercomics. The limitation of number of works
studied is necessitated by the robust number of multimodal pedagogical discourses within even a
single educational hypercomic. The focus of this analysis requires the researcher,
...consider everything that might be important and view the whole as a semiotic system [...] recognizing the
multiple facets and functions of the system and attending to how its features can be seen to work together
[...] this is not a question of the interaction of variables in the usual way, because their meaning is
constantly shifting with the context (Wood and Kroger, 2000, p. 63).

Analysis of multimodal discourses understands forms of communication "as ways that people
orient to discourse of a particular sort and [...] the way in which people do so on particular
occasions," (ibid, p. 67). A smaller sample size is necessitated by this research design, which
demands close attention to the multimodal designs of meaning within complex semiotic
constellations of, e.g., static sequential art composition, animation, audio, synaesthetic design of
verbal linguistic text (i.e. word balloons), hyperlinking, etc., while simultaneously accounting for
the educational institutional contexts within which these designs of meaning are initiated.
As a secondary scoping technique, I disqualified those hypercomics whose subject
matter, while related to the broader notion of pedagogy as didactic explication, were not
designed for specific learning goals. First, the subset of metahypercomics, while useful as
secondary sources of digital comics theory and design, were excised because the work has no
learning objectives beyond explicating formal potentials of hypercomics in digital environments.
In a broad sense the questions posed by these works are very much my own, but my interests in

79

the potentials for hypercomics are centered on the use of such resources to achieve learning
outcomes outside the comics domain, in contexts socio-culturally specific to teaching and
learning. I disqualified America: Elect for similar reasons, because as historical reportage the
work is not directed towards particular learning outcomes, portraying narrative details of the US
Presidential election, but little in the way of context or political economic meaning. In other
words, the primary goal of the work is capturing the drama of political theater for the
entertainment of a mainstream news-reading audience, offering facts on how candidates
performed, and who eventually won. There are no specifically articulated learning goals.
I also disqualified works that were no longer available online, or no longer available for
regular use, since the lack of access would obviously severely limit analysis of interface design.
These included the Eco Agents Special Unit series and the Electric Spirit Japanese language
learning comic.
From the remaining list of hypercomics works, I have selected three exemplars for
comparative analysis: Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien, Secret in the Cellar: A
"Written in Bone" Mystery, and Connect with Haji Kamal. One reason these three exemplars
were chosen for close analysis is because their variety of course topics parallel the characteristic
heterogeneity of the initial corpus of educational hypercomics overall. The subject matter of each
comic originates from vastly different disciplines: algebraic factoring for the high school
classroom, forensic anthropology for a general audience museum exhibition, and intercultural
interaction for a classroom setting where US Army personnel learn to cultivate intelligence
assets in Afghanistan. Additionally the different forms of authorship in each exemplar is
representative of the types of hypercomics creators found in the larger list: single independent
authors (Factoring with Mr. Yang); a team of authors and researchers (Secret in the Cellar;

80

Connect with Haji Kamal); and a scenario-based e-learning training course developed by
instructional designers for a client organization (Connect with Haji Kamal). The various labor
relationships—student author (Factoring with Mr. Yang); in-house design team combined with
work-for-hire contractors (Secret in the Cellar); work-for-hire design (Secret in the Cellar,
Connect with Haji Kamal)—and their related educational institutional contexts (secondary
education, governmental nonprofit, and vocational/professional post-secondary education), also
mirror the various types of institutional origin found in the larger list of educational
hypercomics.

81

Tables
Hypercomic

Subject

America:
Elect!
Connect
with Haji
Kamal

Journalistic/Contempo
rary historical
CYOA Interpersonal
interaction—US Army

Broken CoWorker

CYOA Interpersonal
interaction—Office

“What
Would You
Do If…
Nine
Scenarios to
Practice and
Improve
Your
Customer
Service
Skills.”
Searching
For A
Home: A
Car Smart
Comic
Eco Agents

CYOA Interpersonal
interaction—Office

Technical

Attitudinal

Fact
X

X

X

X

Institutional
Context
Newspaper
journalism
US Military
training

X

Workplace
etiquette

X

Customer
service,
government
office

Digital
elements
Parallax
scrolling
Absorbed by
other media
(audio,
video,
hypertext),
branching
narrative
Absorbed by
other media
(video,
hypertext),
branching
narrative
Absorbed by
other media
(hypertext),
branching
narrative

Ecology/Environment
alism

X

X

NPO

Hypertextual
annotation

Ecology/Environment
alism

X

X

EU govt
agency

Integrated
with games,
avatar
creator,
video, etc.,
Features
remediated
comic books
zoom
feature.
User's avatar
is inserted
into the
comic cover
and a few
panels of
each issue

Table 1: List of 22 examples of educational hypercomics formed during initial data collection, labeled by
educational discipline, educational comic typology, institutional origin, and new media affordances integrated with
the comic form.

82

The Right
To Food

Nutrition, social
justice, globalism

eSpirit

Language learning

BAM! Body
and Mind:
KaBAM
Comic
Creator
The Secret
in the
Cellar: A
Written in
Bone
forensic
mystery
from
colonial
America
Factoring
with Mr.
Yang and
Mosley the
Alien

CYOA Health and
Moral Instruction

Women's
Adventures
in Science

Science, history,
biography

X

Archeology/Forensic
Anthropology

X

Math (Algebraic
Factoring)

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

Government

X

X

Museum

Hypertextu
al
annotation,
Flash
animation,
Slideshow

X

Independent
Author, HS
teacher,
Master's
Thesis

X

NPO:
(National
Academy of
the Sciences
initiative)

Infinite
Canvas,
Flash
animation,
branching
narrative
Biographies
integrated
into site
with games,
interactive
timeline,
alt- text.

X

Table 1 (cont.)

83

10
international
partners and
NPO
spearheaded
by the Food
Agriculture
Organization
(FAO) of the
United
Nations and
the US
National
Committee
for World
Food Day
Independent
Author

Comics non
interactive,
embedded
in larger
multilingual
site with
each comic
linked to a
place on a
world map

Absorbed
by other
media
(hypertext),
Flash
animation
Branching
narrative

Comics Tetrad

Digital comics

X

Independent
Author

Understanding
Hypercomics

Digital comics

X

Independent
Author

About Digital
Comics
About About
Digital Comics

Digital comics

X

Slideshow

Digital comics

X

Independent
Author
Independent
Author

I Can't Stop
Thinking! (#16)

Digital comics

X

Independent
Author

Infinite
Canvas,
Absorbed into
other media
(hypertext)

Table 1 (cont.)

84

Infinite
Canvas,
branching
narrative
Slideshow

Slideshow

CHAPTER 4: INSTITUTIONAL CONTEXTS AND INTERFACE DESIGN1

In his essay on personal computers and education, "No More Teachers Dirty Looks",
reprinted in his seminal text Computer Lib/Dream Machines, Ted Nelson (1974/2003) critiques
"computer-assisted instruction" trends of the late 1960s and early 1970s for perpetuating
longstanding classroom practices that shun students' interests and degrade their active
engagement. By placing the onus of informational sequencing, choice, and navigation on the
computer rather than the user, students were "led by the nose through every subject" (ibid., p.
310-11). Nelson instead proposed "hyper-media", including "hyper-comics", as forms of
"branching or performing" presentations, "that grant students autonomy to explore concepts
based on their own choices and interests" (ibid., p. 313). It was within the context of this broader
critique of educational institutions that Nelson established "the fundamentals of hypercomics",
describing "a screen-based, digital medium" featuring "a comic that branches into different
pathways based on reader's choice" (Goodbrey, 2012, p. 2).
Nelson's early focus on reader interaction with malleable digital objects proved prescient
in identifying design issues for hypercomics creators (see, e.g. McCloud, 2000; Bigerel, 2009a,
2009b; Goodbrey, 2013). But research on the original context of hypercomics design—as digital
pedagogy that transcends educational institutional limitations on student engagement—remains
sparse. This chapter returns to Nelson's topic, placing the three exemplar educational

1

Portions of this chapter were previously published in Networking Knowledge: Journal of the MeCCSA
Postgraduate Network. Duffy, D. (2015). Hyper/Comics/Con/Text: Institutional contexts and interface design in
online educational hypercomics. Networking Knowledge: Journal of the MeCCSA Postgraduate Network, 8(4). Used
with permission and available at http://ojs.meccsa.org.uk/index.php/netknow/article/view/390/219

85

hypercomics within their educational institutional contexts in order to identify ways in which
those contexts effect integrations of the comics form with new media.

Comics, consumerism, and educational institutional memory

[...]institutions should not be exclusively identified with organizational entities (for example theatres,
galleries, publishing-houses, music labels, etc.), but also with explicit rules (e.g. legal norms, established
professions), forms of exchange (markets, social prestige) as well as with implicit conventions (behavioral
patterns such as social roles) (Hasitschka, Goldsleger, & Zembylas, 2005, p. 7).

Insofar as comic strips, comic books, and graphic novels are totemic of popular cultural
exchange through print mass media and commercial art, "comics" can be considered a cultural
institution. For example, in the United States, in the 1920s and 1930s, the popularity of
newspaper comic strips, combined with the concurrent adoption of "comic-strip-style
advertising", blurred the line between entertainment and information consumption, making
comics art "an ingrained feature of American life" (Gordon, 1993, p. 81-82). But ingrained
notions of comics as a popular cultural institution also contributes to widespread notions of
comics as antithetical to institutions of education, because stereotypes of comics as solely cheap
disposable products—simultaneously sold to and harmful for young readers—arise from the
conception of comics as commercial product (Groensteen, 2000/2009). But educational comics
are generally understood as non-commercial, often distributed to target audiences for free or sold
to organizations at reduced cost (Jüngst, 2010, p. 96-97). Because educational comics have been
historically placed in opposition to popular comics, "Many comic book fans are repulsed by any
comic with even the faintest odor of the classroom about it..." (Rifas, 1988, p. 145).

86

The use of comics in educational institutions activates tensions between institutional
goals and reader reactions:
...each institution has a narrow agenda and particular reason for using comics in the sponsorship of literacy.
[...]the use of multimodal literacy that is being promoted has a particular cast to it, a particular inflection
that reflects the agenda of the sponsoring institution. However, the readers who are sponsored may comply
with or resist such agendas in ways that are often unpredictable to sponsors (Jacobs, 2013, p. 29-30).

Ironically, part of the potential for comics in inciting creative tensions in educational settings
grows out of the medium's historical perception by educators as a negative influence on readers.
Within this discourse of "comics" as a cultural institution, both educational comics and
hypercomics are outliers, because both types of comics are largely produced outside the editorial
regimes, print production and distribution methods, fan and artist communities, and
entertainment industry tie-ins so often associated with comics as popular cultural production.
Nonetheless, the association of comics and pop culture escapism persists in educational
institutions, including the specific institutional contexts of the educational hypercomics analyzed
below.

Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien: Classroom in the comics
The impact of historical educational institutional meanings on comics is no more explicit
than in the example of Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien (Yang, 2003b). Factoring
with Mr. Yang was created by award-winning cartoonist and high school computer science
teacher Gene Luen Yang as part of a final project for a Masters Degree of Education from
California State University at Hayward. Factoring with Mr. Yang is posted to Yang's website,
along with his proposal for the project¸ Comics in Education (2003a). In the proposal, Yang

87

synthesizes a literature review of education science research on comics-related pedagogy to
identify five strengths of comics in education:
1. Motivating: Students have a high affinity for reading and making comics and
"Children[…] have a natural attraction to comics."
2. Visual: The imagery in comics is able to embody, anthropomorphize, and explain
difficult concepts in understandable ways
3. Permanent: Whereas mediums of communication like film, television, and face-to-face
lectures are "fleeting", since the medium controls the passage of time, comics is "visually
permanent", allowing the reader to set their own pace.
4. Intermediate: Yang asserts "Comics can serve as an intermediate step to difficult
disciplines and concepts", a means of teacher scaffolding. Yang cites the common use of
comic books to engage reluctant readers.
5. Popular: Students more readily form personal connections with popular culture and
introduction of popular culture in the classroom can help teach "media literacy" (Yang,
2003a).
As a high school teacher and a graduate student in education, Yang's project proposal,
and subsequent project, incorporate implicit educational institutional assumptions about comics.
Yang's descriptions of "motivating", "intermediate", and "popular", proceed from perceptions of
comics as exclusively for children, and as an "easier" type of literacy; a traditionalist
educationalist view critiqued by comics scholars as minimizing the form's complex
multimodality (see, e.g. Hatfield, 2005; Jacobs, 2007). In contrast, Yang mitigates the rhetoric of
comics as 'easy' with attention to the formal complexities of comics, as in the above description

88

of 'visual permanence' (2003a). Yang explains how attention to such compositional complexities
of comics is incorporated into Factoring with Mr. Yang:
Because comics are visual and static, past, present and future sit on a page next to each other. This gives the
reader control over the rate, and even sequence, of information flow. The comic is structured in such a way
that students are encouraged to read both backwards and forwards, returning to earlier concepts for review
and moving on to more challenging examples once those concepts have been mastered (qtd. in "Comics
across the Curriculum," 2009).

Factoring with Mr. Yang encourages reading backwards and forwards via a Flash
animated interface, one of the most common interfaces for hypercomics generally (Keeper &
McDevitt, 2012). The hypercomic features two parallel narrative threads in the form of two
horizontal rows of comics panels. The top row features Yang's visually minimalist self-caricature
lecturing on algebraic factoring. The bottom row features a purple extraterrestrial character
named Mosley the Alien that stands in for the student. Throughout the lesson, Mosley is visible
in a panel on the left of the screen, pointing to the left, saying, "Can we review a bit?" and in a
panel on the right of the screen, pointing right and saying, "Let’s keep going!" These panels
double as navigational buttons that, along with the keyboard arrow keys, can be clicked to move
Mr. Yang’s lecture forwards and backwards. In social semiotic terms, Mosley's pointing finger
creates a "unidirectional non-transactional rhetorical vector", gesturing out of the frame,
directing reader attention (Kress & Van Leeuwen, 1996). Animated panel movements literalize
that rhetorical vector, reinforcing linear navigation as a metaphor for learning.
Mr. Yang's lectures vary visually in only small changes in facial expression and the
gesture of an arm. Mr. Yang is visible above the waist, in the left of the panel, and occasionally
framed in a close up, when transitioning between subtopics in the lecture. In comparison to
Yang's art in, e.g. his graphic novel American Born Chinese, the visual style of Factoring with

89

Mr. Yang is indicative of the pragmatic nature of educational comics art: single color vector
graphics with minimal shading, rendered once, copied, pasted, rescaled and repositioned.
Pedagogical complexity appears when, several times during lectures portrayed in the top row of
panels, a third Mosley panel appears on the bottom row, in the middle of the other two.
In this middle panel, Mosley asks for clarification or more examples, gesturing up to the
related panel(s) in the top row. Should the reader share Mosley’s need for extra help, (s)he can
click on this middle panel, causing the rightmost panel to slide right and out of view, making
room for more panels that descend into the top thread. In these panels, Mr. Yang recaps concepts
from earlier lessons, or provides additional (often more involved) factoring problems and
extended discussions of topics, including, e.g., an explanation of why 1 is not a prime number; a
hyperlink to a website about prime numbers; an introduction of the concept of variables in
algebraic equations (Yang 2003b). Thus, far from being ancillary to the comic, these extra panels
take advantage of the potential depth of information and "sense of tactile discovery" that can be
incorporated into online comics "understood as malleable image files on the web" (Kogel, 2013,
p. 27, 84).
The animation that inserts or removes panels into and out of the top row implies a
continual spatial narrative, with the rest of the comic off screen to the right, an example of Scott
McCloud's notion of the screen as a window onto an infinite canvas, rather than a digital
remediation of the printed page (McCloud, 2000, p. 222). The animated insertion or removal of
panels maintains the linear spatial narrative of the top row, reinforcing the tactile aspect of the
comic, the click of the mouse granting users control of composition, while simultaneously
recalling the mathematical processes of factoring, where numbers and variables are broken down
into component parts. This gives the user a sense of control over the sequence of information

90

flow, in keeping with Ted Nelson's early hopes for educational hypercomics. That sense of
interactive control is buttressed by the Mosley character's additional questions, along with Mr.
Yang's reactions, which simulate a face-to-face teaching presence often lost or problematized by
asynchronous e-learning interfaces (see, e.g. Garrison, 2011).
Like its project proposal, Factoring with Mr. Yang juxtaposes attention to unique formal
affordances of the medium with traditional educational institutional approaches to comics in the
classroom. In one sense, the hypercomic's performance of classroom instruction uses "ubiquitous
computing devices [...]to do old-fashioned didactic teaching," which Cope et al. (2010) describe
as a counterproductive view of contemporary pedagogy (p. 20). The traditional classroom setting
is reproduced, with Mr. Yang in front of a dark green background lit by a light green circle,
simple shading that reinforces the materiality of the implied chalkboard. "Implied" because Mr.
Yang is never shown writing. Instead, equations appear in a sans-serif font, like the typesetting
of a textbook projected onto a chalkboard. The effect is interstitial, somewhere between textbook
and classroom lecture, between prose and performance. In short, clearly a form of comics, but
comics created in a way that is always referential and deferential to traditional formal
institutionalized learning.
This design choice builds on the "intermediate" strength Yang ascribes to comics in
education (2003a). The "About this site" page describes Factoring with Mr. Yang as "designed to
be used as supplemental material" assigned as "a tutorial, an introduction to a unit, or a review
before an exam" (Yang, 2003b). As information visualization, Factoring with Mr. Yang largely
remediates transmission models of pedagogy; top down information transfer echoed by the two
tier layout, with the alien student visually suborned to the teacher, a science-fictional visual
metaphor for the student's lack of subject knowledge, in the guise of a friendly referent to comics

91

as popular culture. This is because Factoring with Mr. Yang is in a sense autobiographical, in
that it is a cartoon self-representation of Yang's persona as a teacher, and of his research as a
graduate student in teacher education. The titular "Mr. Yang" is predicated on the author's
professional and scholarly experiences with educational institutions. Factoring with Mr. Yang
reflects those experiences and learned social practices as teacher and student in as much as the
hypercomic sets out to simulate roles of teacher and student.
Toh (2009) offers a contrasting example which illustrates the extent to which Factoring
with Mr. Yang represents traditional pedagogy through innovative means. The approach to using
comics to teach algebra described by Toh (ibid.) is shaped by the author's perspective as an
education science researcher collaborating with teachers. Based on education science research
showing that students learn algebra better when teachers emphasize continuity between algebra
and "generalized arithmetic", Toh (ibid), designs the comics as a means to "introduce the
language of algebra" rather than using "...the routine way of introducing algebra from the
classical textbooks based on procedural approach" (p. 233). These comic strips portray
characters, objects, and settings as conceptual visual metaphors, representative of general
algebraic concepts (see Figure 3 in the Figures section below). Lacking the autobiographical
element of Factoring with Mr. Yang, the narrative content of these print comic strips more
explicitly embodies mathematical concepts and educational research, as opposed to Mr. Yang's
recontextualizing of "classical textbook" taught by solving sample equations.1

The Secret in the Cellar: Hyperlinks, heterogeneity, and museology

92

The hypercomic The Secret in the Cellar (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History, 2009a), was created as part of the "popular exhibition" "Written in Bone: Forensic Files
of the 17th-Century Chesapeake," which was on display at the National Museum of Natural
History from February 7, 2009-January 6, 2014 (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History, 2009b). A press release lists highlights of the exhibition, including "skeletal remains and
artifacts from five 'Colonial Cold Cases,' [...] five stunning facial reconstructions based on actual
skulls" and a "Forensic Anthropology Lab allowing visitors to experience firsthand how forensic
anthropologists examine human remains" ("Written in Bone: Forensic Files...," 2008).
The hypercomic (labeled as a webcomic on the exhibition website) is Flash-based with a
HTML frame containing backwards and forwards navigational arrows and hypertext links that
change with each panel/page. Clicking these hypertext links opens basic HTML pages in a new
browser window; pop-up window annotations to the comics narrative that provide further
context, define technical terms, contain photos of real artifacts referenced in the comic, or
present activities that allow "learners to assess case evidence and test hypotheses—essentially
stepping into the role of either an archaeologist or a forensic anthropologist" (Costello & Bliton,
2009, p. 5). The hypercomic, whose title page labels it as "Based on a true story," fictionalizes
the real life discovery, excavation, and identification of a human skeleton found "buried in the
ruins of a 17th-century house cellar" by an intern in "The Lost Towns Project, a team of
archaeologists digging up colonial Anne Arundel County, Maryland" (Caputo, 2009). The
fictional protagonist of the comic is Ana, a college student learning about forensic anthropology,
intended as a figure with which their intended audience would identify, and to which they would
aspire (Costello, 2009, p. 5). The non-fiction version of the discovery is also one of the "Colonial
Cold Cases," a description of which is linked to at the end of the fictional version.

93

The design of Secret in the Cellar elides the McCloudian comics characteristics of static
images in juxtapositional sequence underpinning Factoring with Mr. Yang. Instead, with a few
exceptions, Secret in the Cellar displays one panel at a time within a dedicated browser window,
a "reductive" version of the "panel delivery" format, in that it does not take advantage of
compositional meanings available through multiple panels juxtaposed in sequence (Goodbrey,
2013, p. 191). In Secret in the Cellar, each panel/page appears in place of the last with
transitional animations including cinematic zooms, fade-ins, the movement of objects and/or
figures into or out of frame, and the delayed appearance of word balloons over the art, visually
literalizing the standard implied reading order of the dialog. Like showing a single panel per
"page," such inclusion of time-based multimedia (e.g. animation, audio) can interfere with
comics' characteristic portrayal of fictive time through static images in compositional space
(McCloud, 2000, p. 215-6).2 This is because time-based media alter the mode of user interaction:
"...for the comic to still operate as a comic, the rate at which information is absorbed must still be
set by the reader" (Goodbrey, 2013, p. 195). Animation competes with rather than complements
the ways comics make meaning because the goal of comics is "not to make the reader observe
motion but rather participate imaginatively in its genesis" (Gunning, 2014, p. 38). McCloud
(2006) has similarly critiqued the use of navigational hyperlinks separate from narrative content
as "hunt and click" interactions that function as impediments to readers' imaginative immersion
(p. 7). Further, the prevalent use of pop-up windows is the Internet definition of interruption,
calling attention to the various frames of mediation at play by leaving the comic visible but
partially obstructed.
Thus, the salient characteristics of Secret in the Cellar as a hypercomic—limitation of
compositional space, combining time-based animation with space-based comics narrative

94

techniques, and requiring readers to navigate multiple ancillary hyperlinks, opening and closing
pop-up windows—are all stumbling blocks to readers becoming immersed in the narrative. In
most cases this would be seen as inefficient communicative design. But, in Secret in the Cellar,
designs that interrupt or complicate narrative progression are ideal because they further the
didactic goals of the work's educational institutional context. In their assessment of Secret in the
Cellar, Costello and Bliton (2009) note that the hypercomic's design team purposefully avoided
"interesting material [...]extraneous to the learning objectives," subordinating storytelling to
pedagogy (p. 4). The ultimate goal of this intricate multimedia combination of comics,
animation, hyperlinks, and pop-up windows is not to create immersive narrative, but instead to
"move free-choice users to the next level of engagement, from reading to doing[...] from fiction
(in this case based on actual events) to nonfiction" (Costello & Bliton, 2009, p. 5). Narrative
engagement is secondary; the educational institutional context uses comics and animation to
draw attention, but also to temper narrative engagement by redirecting reader focus on didactic
learning through interruptive hyperlinked articles and activities.3
Like Factoring with Mr. Yang, Secret in the Cellar positions comics as an intermediate
step into more complex (in this case, real life scientific) concepts. Secret in the Cellar is also
similar to Factoring with Mr. Yang, in terms of target demographics, using comics to create
"educational material about archaeological work aimed at a younger audience" (Swogger, 2012).
Both hypercomics emerge from educational institutional contexts, but Yang's positions as a
cartoonist, teacher, and graduate student all present opportunities for individual expression and
achievement. As a result, Factoring with Mr. Yang presents a more visually unified aesthetic,
and a navigational design that focuses primarily on comics as a means of simulating a single

95

form of classroom interaction, remediating the pedagogical model of the teacher-as-expert
transmitting information to the student-as-novice.
As an e-learning resource occasioned by a museum exhibition, Secret in the Cellar
garners vastly different institutional support and expectations. The comic was created by "a team
of three instructional designers, two subject-matter experts, two illustrators (one for storyline
images and one for scientific illustrations in the activities), a Flash developer and a basic HTML
developer", a team that included Smithsonian staff, employees from large government
subcontractor Booz Allen Hamilton, and individual subcontractors (Costello & Bliton, 2009, p.
6). The hypercomic's creation was further informed by "formative evaluations" from focus
groups of students grades 7-12, used to edit the comic's script and rough drafts of the art during
early design stages, before educational activities and annotations were incorporated (ibid., p. 4).
Within this institutional context, involving input from a variety of stakeholders, the educational
hypercomic takes on a visually diverse, multiplicative design, combining hand drawn, digitally
rendered comics illustration with photorealistic scientific illustration with actual photos with
quizzes, polls, and text-only articles. Interface design is equally multifarious, as reader control of
navigation competes with the animations that punctuate the appearance of each panel/page.
Reading forwards is encouraged, as in the progression of a museum tour, with each animation
functioning as an introduction or reveal of the next page and its attendant hyperlinks, while
reading backwards is frustrated, or at least less fluid, requiring users to relinquish control while
receiving no new information in return, unless they click on a hyperlink previously unexplored.
The multimedia multimodal multiplicity of Secret in the Cellar's design mirrors
preeminent exhibition design strategies characterized by "museums’ attempts to engage visitors
actively in the communication process," through the use of "...a range of now fairly familiar

96

strategies [...] such as the use of questions on text panels, providing alternative levels of
information or routes, and using various forms of interactivity" (Macdonald, 2007, p. 154). The
various questions, polls, articles, photos, and scientific illustrations linked to each panel/page of
Secret in the Cellar function as digital recreations of those museological strategies, exhibitions
staged along the margins of the slightly fictionalized comics narrative told in the center of the
HTML frame. Secret in the Cellar is itself an alternate level of information, displaying virtually
the practices, tools, and artifacts of forensic anthropology the "Written in Bone" exhibition
showed physically. Indeed, as one reviewer of the exhibition makes explicit, Secret in the Cellar
functions as, "... a web comic that virtually relays all of this information to those who are unable
to visit the exhibition personally" (Chhaya, 2010). Thus it is unsurprising that the museological
heterogeneity of the exhibition should be replicated virtually in the design of the hypercomic.
But that same close identification with its institutional origins leaves Secret in the Cellar open to
share in critiques of the museum, and the exhibition.
Cohen (2009), for example, critiques the exhibition's assumptions about identifying
"ancestry" from skeletal remains:
The exhibit... presents three skulls in a row as characteristic of European, African, and Native American
“ancestry,” respectively. Nowhere do labels clarify any difference between “European” and “white,”
“African” and “black,” or “Native” and “red.” One case study even conflates the terms, describing an
“African” body from a burial site “where whites and blacks are buried side by side.” Although a rising tide
of anthropological research denies significant correlation between biological or skeletal data and
identification of “race” or “ancestry,” “Written in Bone” refuses to distinguish between place and race. [...]
historians will find it [the exhibition] dangerously ahistorical. It applies contemporary demographic
categories without regard to period constructions of identity. Visitors move into the section of case studies
after learning to identify seventeenth-century people as either African, European, or Native American.

97

Thus, the exhibit erases individuals of mixed ancestry and notions of cultural adaptation and teaches
visitors that identity is biologically rather than culturally or socially constructed (ibid., p. 779-80).

Although Cohen (ibid.) never mentions the comic, Secret in the Cellar reproduces this
portion of the exhibition as an Activity—hyperlinked to the 16th panel/page—that uses a
combination of scientific illustration, photos, and text, leading up to a checklist where one can
guess the ancestry of the person to whom the photographed skull belonged (see Figures 4 and 5
in the Figures section below). The checklist includes a "Check Your Answer" button that, when
toggled on, marks the "correct" and "incorrect" ways of identifying skeletal characteristics as
racial indicators, using green checks and red X's, a visual semiotics that encodes the activities of
guessing race based on bone structure as if having a level of objective certainty on par with the
answers to an elementary school spelling test (see Figure 6 in the Figures section below).
My point here is not to affirm or discount Cohen's overall critique as an accurate
depiction of forensic anthropological viewpoints on skeletal data and ancestry; research into such
anthropological data is beyond the scope of the present study. Rather, I present Cohen's critique
to exemplify intricate ways in which the museological context shapes the cultural, narrative,
organizational, and compositional design elements of the educational hypercomic. Whatever
sociocultural and scientific assumptions pervade the exhibition, the comic reiterates and reifies
those assumptions within its narrative.
It is worth noting that part of Cohen's critique is couched in the exhibition's close
connection to popular culture:
The exhibition is partly sponsored by the History Channel, which airs several programs that employ
forensic scientists to “solve” historical mysteries. The orientation video promises museumgoers a “real life
CSI,” in which “bones are read” to “fill in history with such great detail that it goes beyond any records we
have available" (ibid., p. 778).

98

Nonetheless, Cohen admits to the "successes" of the exhibition in "...engaging
with people of the past in emotional and tactile ways beyond the scope of most history books and
exhibits" (ibid., p. 780). In this manner, Cohen's review of "Written in Bone" resonates with the
institutional tensions (between popular and academic cultures, between entertainment and
education, between fiction and non-fiction) that similarly characterize the shifting meaning of
comics in education.

Connect with Haji Kamal: The US Army, interpersonal training, and Agile e-learning

Like Secret in the Cellar, Connect with Haji Kamal (World Warfighter, 2010) is an
educational hypercomic created using Flash, by a design team, with input from multiple
stakeholders, for a learning institution tied to the US government. Also like Secret in the Cellar,
Connect with Haji Kamal is based on an actual event, in this case a conversation between an
inexperienced US army lieutenant and an Afghan elder. However, Connect with Haji Kamal has
a more narrow use than Secret in the Cellar's function as an online comics narrative vehicle for
much of the same information found in the "Written in Bone" exhibition. In contrast, Connect
with Haji Kamal, "is the homework part of a lesson plan that includes in-class discussion about
how to build rapport across cultures [...] part of a much larger effort in the Army to strengthen
soldiers’ cross-cultural and peacekeeping skills" (Moore, 2010). Connect with Haji Kamal was
initially designed for the "Senior Leader Course" LSA 2 Rapport Building Across Cultures
(World Warfighter, 2010). The course is taught at the "US Army Intelligence Center of
Excellence (USAICoE), Military Intelligence Noncommissioned Officer Academy" located at
Fort Huachuca ("Fort Huachuca," 2016). Since then the training module has been used in the US

99

Military Academy at Westpoint, Army Intelligence schools, and NATO training centers
(Kinection, 2015).
Like Factoring with Mr. Yang, Connect with Haji Kamal is envisioned as supplemental
material, reinforcing concepts taught during class sessions, functioning within a broader syllabus.
Because the primary learning objectives of the work are to "model specific rapport-building
behaviors and inspire class discussion" (Moore, 2013). This built-in potential for class discussion
means that, as a promotional video posted by the design firm Kinection (2015) describes,
Connect with Haji Kamal can be used by "individual learners, small groups, and even large
classroom environments." So, while the target audience is specific to Western military education
contexts, Connect with Haji Kamal exhibits, like all three exemplar hypercomics, flexibility in
terms of ways in which it can be integrated into classroom settings.
Kinection is an e-learning instructional design firm whose clients include "corporations,
government departments, universities, and non-profits"("About Us"). The World Warfighter
Culture and Language Training Program, of which Connect with Haji Kamal is one component,
is funded by a US Army SBIR (Small Business Innovation & Research) award through the Army
Research Lab (World Warfighter, 2016). Thus, at its foundation, Kinection's design of Connect
with Haji Kamal and World Warfighter is a continuation of longstanding collaborations between
the US Military and education science:
...the US military has a tradition of using specific theories and development models to guide instructional
design activity. During the 20th century, the US military offered instructional designers numerous
opportunities to contribute to the knowledge base of the discipline. [...] Military actions that required the
massing of troops from a civilian population also required that those troops receive training for their new
roles. In peacetime, military personnel must receive training on a variety of highly technical, demanding,
and dangerous tasks for which public school and college has not prepared them (Brown and Green, 2015, p.
13).

100

One way in which this tradition in US Military funding and support for instructional
design has evolved in the 21st century is to use ICTs to create scenario-based training exercises
related to interpersonal interaction, because, "Training—especially in complex or difficult
domains (e.g., interpersonal skills)—is often unable to keep pace" with the increasing complexity
of modern warfare (Campbell, Hays, Core, Birch, Bosack, & Clark, 2011, p. 9). As Caligiuri,
Noe, Nolan, Ryan, and Drasgow (2011) note:
These skills are especially important in the current environment of counterinsurgency and stability
operations. Soldiers are operating in areas of the world where the U.S. has had a limited history of
engagement from which an understanding of cultural norms and acceptable behavior might arise (p. 20).

To address that need for military training in "difficult domains," a number of instructional
designers turn to virtual learning environments. For example, Campbell et al. (2011) created
virtual characters for soldiers training to be officers to interact and mentor. Kim et al. (2009)
created a game-based environment where soldiers can use simulated social interactions to hone
"the ability to effectively negotiate with people of different cultures" (p. 289). Connect with Haji
Kamal is one of a number of projects funded by the military using game structures, narrative
design, and digital characters to address crucial but deficient needs for training in interpersonal
and cross cultural interactions. The game-based design and the desired learning outcomes of
Connect with Haji Kamal fit within preexisting paradigms of instructional design by outside
contractors for US military training contexts.
In addition to its impetus arising from the training needs required of contemporary US
Army actions, Connect with Haji Kamal is also shaped by specific US Army personnel, and their
interactions with members of the Kinection design team. Similar to the organizational approach
of the Secret in the Cellar design team, Kinection employs a mix of artists, writers, instructional
and software designers, and uses a design process that includes the target audience and one or

101

more SME (Subject Matter Experts). And both Secret in the Cellar and Connect with Haji Kamal
are based on actual events. However, while the Secret in the Cellar team only incorporated their
audience's reactions to the story elements—and not to the hyperlinked ancillary photos, articles,
and activities —the learning objectives of Connect with Haji Kamal require input in both the
story, (i.e. the social interaction), and the didactic content, (i.e. cross-cultural rapport building).
Indeed, because it simulates social interaction to teach social interaction, the narrative and
didactic elements of this educational hypercomic are inextricable. Those multimodal design
elements are also inextricably connected to the experiences of the designers' target audience. In
fact, even the use of the comics form comes out of interviewing soldiers:
In focus groups about their training preferences, soldiers made clear that they prefer video. However, that
wasn’t in our budget or timeline, so we went with the soldiers’ second best, graphic novel illustration. The
images are comic-ified photos (Moore, 2010).

In addition to focus groups about training preferences, Connect with Haji Kamal instructional
designer, Kinection subcontractor, and training design consultant Cathy Moore (2013) describes
the early step as an exhaustive interview process, with reference to, "Our (many!) interviews
with soldiers..." Elsewhere, in a comment on an e-learning blog review of Connect with Haji
Kamal, Moore (2012) elaborates on some of the other interactions with soldiers that went into
the design:
Other scenarios in the project... done in PowerPoint or even in text-only printouts, with instructions at each
decision point to turn to page so-and-so. These lower-tech versions, and the discussion about the Haji
Kamal scenario, were done in face-to-face sessions with soldiers [...] the intellectual challenge of a
branching scenario is far more important than the media it’s produced with. With the soldiers, the text-only,
printed scenarios seemed to generate as much discussion and debate as did the multimedia ones.4

The extent to which soldiers in conversation with the Kinection design team gave input to
Connect with Haji Kamal at every step of the design process is indicative of Kinection's

102

instructional design philosophy, which is described as "an iterative design and development
model based on Agile methodologies" ("About Us"). Agile methodologies began as a
"community-oriented approach" to software design philosophy that developed in reaction to
traditional, rigidly sequential models "...so complex and prescriptive that many software
companies have large manuals describing their methodology in detail and even go to the extent
of requiring forms to be filled out if anyone wishes to deviate from the prescribed method"
(Douglas, 2006, p. 29-30). While agile methodologies functions as an "umbrella" term for "a
complicated but vibrant ecosystem" of several software development communities, shared core
principles include adaptive over predictive practices, and a people-centered approach that
involves all stakeholders—including end users—as early as possible in the design process
(Fowler, 2005). This philosophy, based around group interaction and iterative design, has
migrated to other fields, including instructional design, to meet the demands of organizations
seeking "...faster and more efficient ways to train their employees and improve on-the-job
performance" (Pappas, 2015). In e-learning development, agile methods are "usually associated
with iterative processes" in order to "compress development time," and value "tangible
deliverables" for e-learning courses and content (Arshavskiy, 2014).
Thus, the design of Connect with Haji Kamal emerges from these institutional influences:
the training needs and budgetary allocations of the US Army; the preferences and experiences of
US Army soldiers; and the instructional design philosophy and practice of workplace training
and e-learning developers. It is out of the latter domain that the design characteristics of
branching pathways and scenario-based training also emerge. Connect with Haji Kamal designer
Moore (2011b) describes scenarios as "...suitable for teaching soft skills, such as having difficult
conversations, overcoming buyers’ objections, and leading a team through change," because

103

these skills, "don’t have as much information that requires memorization, and they have more
grey areas to give the stories depth." Because "decisions made in early scenes affect later scenes"
branching scenario training helps people "practice skills" such as:


Recognizing and challenging their own assumptions



Recovering from mistakes in a long or complex process



Navigating extended, ambiguous situations



Deciding when to stop gathering information and act (Moore, 2013).

Soldier interviews early in the design process of Connect with Haji Kamal, "suggested
that one challenge they faced was their western perspective of 'We’re here to help you, so let’s
get down to business,'" and so the training scenario needed to give soldiers, "...practice
recognizing when that perspective was hurting local relationships and, importantly, practice
recovering from mistakes" (ibid.). Thus, "To follow the 'good' paths [through the branching
scenarios], you need to see things from Haji Kamal's point of view, show respect and patience...
apply cross-cultural skills... discussed in class" while "making more ethnocentric choices" results
in endings to the story where the user is unsuccessful in establishing rapport with the Haji (ibid.).
In this way, the Agile methods of instructional design, and the complexity of drafting a
branching narrative also draws influence indirectly from social institutions in Afghanistan,
insofar as the training scenario simulates and models social interactions culturally appropriate to
the region—as understood by soldiers, instructors, and military intelligence.
Yet, within this intricate network of institutional influence, Connect with Haji Kamal
displays a much more unified design than Secret in the Cellar—closer in cohesiveness of visual
aesthetic to Factoring with Mr. Yang. In part that is owing to the more cohesive integration of
the target audience into the design process, owing to Kinection's adoption of Agile
methodologies, as described above. The cohesive design is also owing to the narrower focus of

104

the learning objectives for Connect with Haji Kamal, tasked not with replicating the scientific
knowledge embedded in a museum exhibition, but rather with tacit and learned skills taught in
concert with directed classroom discussion. Also, because Connect with Haji Kamal portrays the
use of cross-cultural skills "at a tactical level" (Kinection, 2015), the progression of the
hypercomic integrates all didactic information as a part of the scenario. Rather than placing
informational elements on the periphery of the narrative, the information is embedded in the
user's control over the narrative's progression—imparted by whether or not the user proceeds to a
successful or unsuccessful outcome. And, finally, the means by which Connect with Haji Kamal
is able to integrate the comics form with audio, animation, and interactivity in a cohesive design
also emerges out of the scenario's hypertextual, choose-your-own-adventure, and game-based
elements, which I will expand upon in Chapter 5.

Institutional evaluation and the evolution of educational hypercomics
The institutional contexts of all three exemplar educational hypercomics require some
form of assessment and evaluation after their initial deployment among target audiences.
Because Factoring with Mr. Yang was primarily a final project for receiving a Master's degree in
Education, the assessment is decidedly positive, i.e. Yang received the degree. And, more
generally, Yang's work as both a graphic novelist and an educator has resulted in him being
named Ambassador for Young People’s Literature by the Library of Congress (see, e.g.,
Gustines, 2016). But the educational contexts that led to the creation of Factoring with Mr. Yang
do not require or support more granular evaluation of this one particular work.
On the other hand, the more substantive processes of evaluation in the realms of
museology, US Army education, and the e-learning design industry, identify positive learning

105

outcomes at the level of the specific digital resource. Webmetrics measuring time spent on
different parts of Secret in the Cellar, for instance, "...all point strongly to the Webcomic as a
motivating tool for user initiative in seeking additional learning experiences on the same topic"
(Costello & Bliton, 2009, p. 9). Learner feedback on Connect with Haji Kamal revealed "70% of
the players said that they were looking forward to discussing the game in class the next day, and
instructors reported that the activity 'prompted the majority of the discussion' and encouraged
soldiers to share their own experiences" (Moore, 2010). Additional external metrics of success
also exist for both exemplars: Secret in the Cellar was awarded the 2009 Gold Award by the
United States Distance Learning Association (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History,
2009a), while Connect with Haji Kamal continues to be used in multiple military training
contexts (Kinection, 2015).
Institutionally mandated evaluative measures can also present an opportunity to
complicate educational institutional assumptions about comics pedagogy. During the creation of
Secret in the Cellar, the design team "focused exclusively on a teen audience without much
consideration for adult groups" (Costello & Bliton, 2009, p. 2). However, data from a survey
linked to on the last page of the comic found that "the youngest audiences [...] had lower
perceived learning experiences and thought somewhat less of the Webcomic relative to older
students and older others" (Costello & Bliton, 2009, p. 7). While the museum adopted the
traditional educationalist assumption that comics primarily appeal to young audiences, the
comic's connection to a general audience exhibition implicates a broader range of audience
demographics. The routine data collection regime of the museum, in turn, allowed for findings
that call that institutional assumption into question.

106

Figures

Figure 3: An example comic strip on the language of algebra (Toh, 2009, p. 234).

Figure 4: Panel/page 16 of Secret in the Cellar, with the hyperlink "Activity: Can you identify ancestry" opening in
a new window the worksheet displayed in Figure 5 (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, 2009a).

107

Figure 5: A resized screen capture of the ancestry identification activity (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural
History, 2009c).

108

Figure 6: Detail of the checklist at the bottom of the ancestry identification activity, with the "Check Your Answer"
button toggled on (Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, 2009c).

1

The "Introduction" section of Factoring with Mr. Yang does include a three panel sequence using visualizations of
conceptual metaphors. Mr. Yang relates the story of his cousin Rodney, whose actions are illustrated inside orange
panels, overlapping the green space where equations usually appear. Mr. Yang uses Rodney's failed attempts to eat
"possibly the biggest gumball in all of existence" in one bite, rather than breaking up the gumball, to illustrate the
general point that "Large things are easier to handle if you break them up into smaller pieces," as one does with
factoring. But no concepts specific to algebra are taught using this approach to storytelling.
2
see, also, Chapter 2, p. 46
3
I will describe in greater detail the ways in which this interruptive media design pedagogical meaning in Chapter 5.
4
I address the narrative complexity of the branching scenario design of Haji Kamal in greater detail in Chapter 5. It
is quoted here to illustrate the extent to which soldier input was incorporated into the instructional design,
throughout the pre- and postproduction of Connect with Haji Kamal.

109

CHAPTER 5: PEDAGOGY IN REMEDIATION & NAVIGATION1
Owing to "...rhetorical effects that continue to shape our conceptual media borders, both
in scholarly discourses and in popular ones [...] the discussions of what is considered
prototypical to print comics, to digital comics – and to comics’ relation between technology and
compositional features in general – will only become more contested in the future" (Wilde, 2015,
p. 9). Nonetheless, there are particular characteristics that are generally associated with uniquely
digital interactive forms of comics, what I have labeled in this study as "hypercomics." As with
the earlier discussion of definitions of comics, these characteristics of hypercomics are not
exhaustive definitional tenets, but rather, those characteristics commonly associated with digital
interactive comics forms in related research literature (see Figure 7 in the Figures section below).
Naturally, these descriptive characteristics are present in various combinations, in various
constellations of multimodal meaning making resources, in all three exemplar educational
hypercomics (see Figure 8 in the Figures section below). And all of these characteristics relate to
two central issues in the study of digital comics: remediation and navigation (see Figure 9 in the
Figures section below). The ways in which the three exemplar educational hypercomics make
meaning through socially inflected mulitmodal design remediate print comics and employ digital
forms of navigation that specifically construe readers as learners.

1

Portions of this chapter will also be published in the edited volume The Future Past of Comics. Duffy, D.
(forthcoming). Teaching hypercomics: Comics as information organization in digital pedagogy. In J. Gardner (ed.),
The Future Past of Comics. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press. Used with permission.

110

Figures

Figure 7: Iconic visualizations of major identified characteristics of hypercomics (see, e.g., Goodbrey, 2012; Keeper
and McDevitt, 2012; Jacobs, 2014; Wilde, 2015; Chapter 2, above.

Figure 8: Diagramatic representation of the three exemplar hypercomics, including titles, URLs, brief descriptions,
digital recreations of images from their respective home pages, and applicable hypercomics characteristics—their
icons sized to represent their relative contributions to the overall multimodal design of the exemplars.

111

Figure 9: Imagetextual analysis of ways remediation and navigation construe readers as learners in the three
exemplar hypercomics.

112

Figure 9 (cont.)

113

Figure 9 (cont.)

114

Figure 9 (cont.)

115

Figure 9 (cont.)

116

Figure 9 (cont.)

117

Figure 9 (cont.)

118

Figure 9 (cont.)

119

Figure 9 (cont.)

120

Figure 9 (cont.)

121

Figure 9 (cont.)

122

Figure 9 (cont.)

123

CHAPTER 6: CONCLUSION—LEVERAGING LIMINALITY1
Much of this study has been concerned with the mutable, indistinct-at-the-edges
meanings of educational hypercomics—digital born works created in and for pedagogical
contexts, outside of (but influenced by) discourses surrounding comics as either popular culture
or a literary art form. The heuristic adoption of the term "educational hypercomics" from the
many contested definitional constructs for intersections of comics, education, and information
communication technologies was self-reflexively documented, for the purposes of
contextualizing the label as my particular navigation of the various, sometimes overlapping or
contradictory socially constructed meanings ascribed to terms related to comics, learning, and
ICTs. These meanings remain fluid, dynamic, shaped by ever-shifting cultural, social, and
technological discourses, moving like weather patterns over the topographic maps of linear and
nonlinear fictive temporality that comics create.
...differentiation [between analog and digital comics] may come from self-imposed limitations derived from
new points of comparisons, which rely less on semiotic or material dimensions [...] If there is an “actual”
feature common to all kinds of digital comics, it might be their higher degree of flexibility to choose their
own forms and limitations (Wilde, 2015, p. 8-9).

In this study I have referred to this high degree of flexibility as hyperinterstitiality, the
characteristic "in-betweenness" of what is recognized as comics (see Figure 10, in Figures
section below), intensified further by the multimedia capabilities of computer composition and
the interconnectedness of ICTs networked via the World Wide Web. This hyperinterstitiality is
in fact a rare point of agreement between literacy education scholars. Despite historical shifts in

1

Portions of this chapter will also be published in the edited volume The Future Past of Comics. Duffy, D.
(forthcoming). Teaching hypercomics: Comics as information organization in digital pedagogy. In J. Gardner (ed.),
The Future Past of Comics. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State University Press. Used with permission.

124

educationist sentiments concerning the impact of comics on literacy—as well as coincident shifts
in how critical literacy skills are defined—all of these researchers understand comics as liminal
in its relationship to literacy (see Figure 11, in Figures section below). Undertaken through the
hybrid lens of social semiotics and educational and digital comics research, the comparative
analyses in this study of Factoring with Mr. Yang, Secret in the Cellar, and Connect with Haji
Kamal explicate ways in which the combination of comics and digital multimodal design
resources serve to operationalize comics' hyperinterstitiality—pedagogical uses of the liminal
nature that allows the comics form to "point to our experience in a way that lets us fill in the gaps
for our own context" (Quinn, 2005 , p. 167).
The impetus for this study was to wonder if, as the literature reviewed in Chapters 1 and
2 suggests, comics is a useful means of bridging print and digital literacies in multimodal literacy
pedagogy, what is the role of comics within digital learning environments? The initial corpus
delineated in Chapter 3, from which the three exemplars were drawn, illustrates that salient
characteristics of the comics form can coexist with the digital affordances of new media in ways
that, while calling into question definitional meanings of the term "comics," nonetheless work to
make e-learning resources navigable and engaging. The ways in which these constellations of
comics, multimedia, and digital interactivity organize and take shape are impacted by the
educational institutional contexts from which they arise, and the ways in which meaning making
resources are designed to construe readers as learners.
In all of these cases, the comics form is chosen primarily from expectations about which
types of multimodal communication with which target audiences will identify. These
expectations may be based on interviews with the target audience, as in the case of Connect with
Haji Kamal, or on a more general sense that the comics form indexes popular culture, and

125

popular culture interests young people, as in the cases of Factoring with Mr. Yang and Secret in
the Cellar. But, while Gene Luen Yang is an artist/practitioner, and thus well versed in the
complex meaning making affordances of comics as a communicative form, the design teams
behind Secret in the Cellar and Connect with Haji Kamal are less aware of these potentialities.
For example, the Connect with Haji Kamal team chose comics more because it was more
cost- and time-effective than the soldiers' first choice, video. Costello and Bliton (2009) note that
the "visual storytelling" form was employed because it makes reading comprehension "easier"
(p. 6), echoing the traditional education views of comics as simplified print literacy critiqued by,
e.g., Hatfield (2005) and Jacobs (2007). Costello and Bliton (2009) are nonetheless inclined to
consider the specificity of media interactions generally—the design team chose to avoid audio so
as not to interfere with the pace of reading (p. 6). But, beyond describing Secret in the Cellar as a
webcomic, Costello and Bliton (ibid.) discuss design solely in the more generic terms of "visual
storytelling," ignoring specific elements of comics composition like the roles of juxtaposition
and sequentiality.
Nonetheless, in both cases, the respective design teams discovered unexpected
pedagogical benefits to the comics form. For example, the survey data compiled by the National
Museum of Natural History, described at the end of Chapter 4, revealed the wide appeal of the
comics form to older museum goers, and not just the target demographic for which Secret in the
Cellar was designed. Moore (2011a) notes the usefulness of comics in avoiding logical
inconsistencies that would be made problematic by different media choices: Haji Kamal only
speaks in word balloons, meaning the character's dialog did not need to be translated or
transcribed in Pashtun. Comics' synaesthetic design of sound allows for the character to "speak"
in English, to maintain focus on learning to build rapport across cultures, but the liminal meaning

126

of text in a word balloon allows the language to implicitly exist somewhere between spoken
words and translated subtitles, whereas a video of an actual Afghan elder who speaks primarily
English would be an explicit test of suspension of disbelief, an unnecessary distraction for an elearning resource meant to simulate real life situations.
The study of educational hypercomics also illustrates how the liminal nature of digital
comics literacy can problematize basic assumptions surrounding the comics form. The accepted
notion of comics as essentially narrative, for example, is purposefully disrupted to pedagogical
ends in all three exemplars. In Factoring with Mr. Yang, the assumption that a comic strip will be
an unbroken chain of panels in sequence illustrated by the author is upended when one presses
the middle Mosley button, inserting new panels into the sequence. As noted in the previous
chapters, the comics illustrations carry the narrative weight of Secret in the Cellar, but the
overall design conspires to interrupt, disrupt, and qualify those narrative experiences with
annotative hyperlinked non-fictional information. In Connect with Haji Kamal, the narrative
outcome is derived from user choice, but the order and meaning of that narrative progression is
determined not by those elements that would be traditionally described as comics (pictures in
frames, words in balloons, etc.), but by the ergodic elements of audio debate from the squad
leaders and the multiple choice mechanism by which users advise the lieutenant what to say in
the next comics panel.
In other words, the predominant focus of narrative storytelling in comics gives way to the
interstitial. Those aspects of the three exemplars that work pedagogically to move the reader
from a passive observer to an (inter)active learner all involve not only the use of the comics form
as it has been traditionally understood through print technology, but also the purposeful
intervention into that form by digital elements. Whereas, in the McCloudian notion of closure,

127

the gutter between each panel is the space in which the reader imagines lines on paper becoming
motion in time and space, in educational hypercomics the gutter, the space before the next panel
or page in the sequence, is the place where reader input is directed not only towards reading the
next moment in the narrative sequence, but also towards compositional spaces whose
informational content can only be accessed through digital interaction and exploration.
Educational hypercomics provide an example of ways in which the experimentation in
digital comics with the inclusion of new media affordances like audio, animation, and
hyperlinking, is considered not as either aiding or distracting from the reader immersion in the
story, but rather understood as a means of organizing disparate informational components into a
unified e-learning resource. Placed within their educational institutional contexts, such digital
interactive comics prove to be adept at making multimodal meanings that remediate print comics
tropes in ways that, while they may detract from full aesthetic engagement with the story, do so
in order to engage readers as active participants in the didactic informational elements of the
work. By leveraging comics' liminal nature to create means at the level of the interface of
moving between narrative and didactic elements—between reading and learning—works such as
the educational hypercomics analyzed in this study indicate that the comics form is far more
flexible in its ability to incorporate digital multimedia than even the most ardent comics futurists
recognize. Far from anxiety over comics losing its identity as a "medium" in its migration to
digital spaces, educational hypercomics indicate ways in which pedagogical contexts of
educational institutional settings can expand the sequential, juxtapositional, imagetextual, and
synaesthetic capabilities of the form in ways that inform innovative 21st century instructional
design philosophy.

128

Figures

Figure 10: A sequence exploring the visual metaphor of comics as an interstitial form existing at the intersection of
multiple contested meanings and contexts.

129

Figure 11: An imagetextual analysis illustrating how educationalist theories on comics and literacy all tend to view
comics as liminal.

130

REFERENCES
Aarseth, E. J. (1997). Cybertext perspectives on ergodic literature. Baltimore: The John Hopkins
University Press.
Abbot, L. (1986). Comic art: Characteristics and potentialities of a narrative medium. Journal of
Popular Culture, 19, 155-173.
Allen, T. (2007). The economics of web comics, Chicago, IL: Indignant Media.
Andera, S. (2007). Graphic novels in the school library to help promote literacy for boys. PNLA
Quarterly, 71(4), 5-8.
Arshavskiy, M. (2014, September 12). eLearning development the Agile way!. eLearning
Industry. Retrieved from http://elearningindustry.com/elearning-development-agile-way
Barthes, R. (1975) The pleasure of the text. (R. Miller, Trans.) New York: Hill and Wang.
Original work published 1973.
Beaty, B. (1999). The search for comics exceptionalism. The Comics Journal, 211, 67-72.
Bernard, M., and Carter, B. (2004). Alan Moore and the graphic novel: Confronting the fourth
dimension. ImageTexT: Interdisciplinary Comics Studies, 1(2). Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v1_2/carter/
Bernstein, S. N. (2008). Material realities in the basic writing classroom: Intersections of
discovery for young women reading Persepolis 2. Journal of Basic Writing, 27(1), 80103.
Bigerel, Y. (2009a). About digital comics. Retrieved from
http://balak01.deviantart.com/art/about-DIGITAL-COMICS-111966969
Bigerel, Y. (2009b). About 'About digital comics.' Retrieved from
http://balak01.deviantart.com/art/ABOUt-about-DIGITAL-COMICS-112523191

131

Bitz, M. (2004). The Comic Book Project: Forging alternative pathways to literacy. Journal of
Adolescent and Adult Literacy, 47(7), 574-586.
Blackbeard, B. (1974). Mislabeled books. Funny World, 16, 41.
Blakely, W. P. (1958). A study of seventh grade children's reading of comic books as related to
certain other variables. The Journal of genetic psychology, 93(2), 291-301.
Blasingim, K. (2004). We are all L337: Examining the cultural message of webcomics. (Master's
thesis, English, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville).
Bourriaud, N. (2002). Relational aesthetics. (S. Pleasance & F. Woods, Trans.). Dijon, France:
Les presses du reél. Original work published 1998.
Brandl, M. S. (2006, May 8). Two new art terms and a new artistic development: Gallery comics
and a new compositional form: iconosequentiality. Sharkforum. Retrieved from
http://sharkforum.org/archives/2006/05/two_new_art_terms_a_new_artist.html
Brenner, R. (2006, March/April). Graphic novels 101: FAQ. Hornbook. Retrieved from
http://www.hbook.com/magazine/articles/2006/mar06_brenner.asp
Brown, A. H., and Green, T. D. (2015). The essentials of instructional design: Connecting
fundamental principles with process and practice. London: Routledge.
Brown, J. (1984). Comic books and history—A symposium. Radical History Review, 28(3), 228252.
Brown, J. W. (1977). Comics in the foreign language classroom: Pedagogical perspectives.
Foreign Language Annals, 10(1), 18-25.
Burgess, J. (2013, November 20). How we built our "America: Elect!" graphic novel interactive.
The Guardian. Retrieved from http://www.theguardian.com/info/developerblog/2012/nov/20/how-we-built-america-elect-graphic-novel-interactive

132

Caligiuri, P., Noe, R., Nolan, R., Ryan, A. M., and Drasgow, F. (2011). Training, developing,
and assessing cross-cultural competence in military personnel. Technical Report, U.S.
Army Research Institute.
Campbell, J. C., Hays, M. J., Core, M., Birch, M., Bosack, M., and Clark, R. E. (2011).
Interpersonal and leadership skills: Using virtual humans to teach new officers. In Proc.
of Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation, and Education Conference, Paper (Vol.
11358).
Campbell, T. (2005). A history of webcomics: "The golden age": 1993-2005. San Antonio, TX:
Antarctic Press.
Caputo, J. (2009, February 7). The secret in the cellar—New exhibit inspires webcomic.
Smithsonian. Retrieved from http://www.smithsonianmag.com/smithsonianinstitution/the-secret-in-the-cellar-new-exhibit-inspires-webcomic38190743/#WBM7IwqYsf7ypHgL.99
Carrier, D. (2000). The aesthetics of comics. University Park, PA: Penn State University Press.
Carroll, J. M. (1999). Five reasons for scenario-based design. Proceedings of the 32nd Hawaii
International Conference on System Sciences. Retrieved from
http://testingeducation.org/BBST/testdesign/CarrollScenarios.pdf
Carter, B., ed. (2008). Building literacy connections with graphic novels: Page by page, panel by
panel. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English.
Carter, B. (2011). Graphic novels, web comics, and creator blogs: Examining product and
process, Theory Into Practice, 50(3), 190-197.
Chang, J. (2013, April 9). Build a parallax scrolling website: 10 pro tips. Creative Bloq.
Retrieved from http://www.creativebloq.com/web-design/parallax-4132336

133

Chhya, Priya. (2010, August 8). Telling stories and Written in Bone: Exhibit review from three
angles. ...this is what comes next: histories, images, ideas, opinions and what inspired
them. Retrieved from
https://web.archive.org/web/20141201093647/http://thisiswhatcomesnext.com/2010/08/0
8/telling-stories-and-written-in-bone-exhibit-review-from-three-angles/
Chun, C.W. (2009). Critical literacies and graphic novels for English-language learners:
Teaching Maus. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 53(2), 144-153.
Ciccoricco, D. (2007). Reading network fictions. Tuscaloosa, AL: Alabama University Press.
Cioffi, F.L. (2001). Disturbing comics: The disjunction of word and image in the comics of
Andrzej Mleczko, Ben Katchor, R. Crumb, and Art Spiegelman. In R. Varnum and C. T.
Gibbons (eds.), The language of comics: Word and image (pp. 9–19), Jackson, MS:
University Press of Mississippi.
Cohen, K. (2009). Written in Bone: Forensic files of the seventeenth-century Chesapeake.
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History, Washington, DC http://anthropology.
si. edu/writteninbone. The Journal of American History, 96(3), 778-781.
Cohn, N. (2003). Early writings on visual language. Berkeley, CA: Emaki Productions.
Cohn, N. (2004, April). Comics identity crisis: Claiming “art” is a misguided quest. Comixtalk.
Retrieved from http://comixtalk.com/node/1552
Cohn, N. (2005, October). Un-defining 'comics.' International Journal of Comic Art, 7(2).
Retrieved from http://www.emaki.net/essays/NC_Undefining_Comics.pdf
Cohn, N. (2012). Comics, linguistics, and visual language: The past and future of a field. In F.
Bramlett (Ed.), Linguistics and the study of comics. New York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Retrieved from http://www.visuallanguagelab.com/P/NC_Comics&Linguistics.pdf

134

Comics across the curriculum: Science, math and technology. (2009). Diamond Bookshelf.
Retrieved from: http://www.diamondbookshelf.com/Home/1/1/20/626?articleID=82696
Cope, B. and Kalantzis, M. (2000). Introduction: Multiliteracies: The beginnings of an idea. In
B. Cope and M. Kalantzis (eds.), Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of
social futures (pp. 3-8). London: Routledge.
Cope, B. and Kalantzis, M. (eds.), (2010). Ubiquitous learning. Champaign, IL: University of
Illinois Press.
Costello, R., and Bliton, D. (2009, January). Assessment of educational visual storytelling at the
Smithsonian. The Interservice/Industry Training, Simulation & Education Conference
(I/ITSEC), 2009(1).
Davidson, S. (2008). Educational comics: A family tree. ImageTexT: Interdisciplinary Comics
Studies, 4(2). Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v4_2/davidson/
de Saussure, F. (2011). Course in general linguistics. (W. Baskin, Trans.). New York: Columbia
University Press. Original work published 1916.
Delany, S. R. (1996, October-December). “The politics of paraliterary criticism.” New York
Review of Science Fiction, 9(2-4). Rpt. in Shorter views: Queer thoughts & the politics of
the paraliterary. Hanover and London: Wesleyan University Press / University Press of
New England, 1999, 218-270.
Di Liddo, A. (2009). Alan Moore: Comics as performance, fiction as scalpel. Jackson, MS:
University of Mississippi Press.
Dittmar, J. (2012). Digital comics. Scandinavian Journal of Comics Art, 1(2), 83-91.

135

Dorrell, L., and Carroll, E. (1981). Spider-Man at the library. School Library Journal, 27(10),
17-19.
Douglas, I. (2006). Issues in software engineering of relevance to instructional
design. TechTrends, 50(5), 28-35.
Duffy, D. (2009). Remasters of American comics: Sequential art as new media in the
transformative museum context. SCAN Journal, 6(1),
http://scan.net.au/scan/journal/display.php?journal_id=130
Duffy, D. (2010). Out of the margins, into the panels: Toward a theory of comics as a medium of
critical pedagogy in library education. In M. Accardi, E. Drabinski, and A. Kumbier
(eds.), Critical pedagogy and library instruction, Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.
Duffy, D. (2015). Hyper/comics/con/text: Institutional contexts and interface design in online
educational hypercomics. Networking Knowledge: Journal of the MeCCSA Postgraduate
Network, 8(4).
Duffy, D. (forthcoming). Teaching hypercomics: Comics as information organization in digital
pedagogy. In J. Gardner (ed.), The future past of comics. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
University Press.
Duncan, R., and Smith, M. J. (2009). The power of comics: history, form and culture. London:
Bloomsbury Academic.
EduComics. (2008). Comics in education: State of the art. (Work package 1). Piraeus, Greece:
Educomics Project. Retrieved December 12, 2012 from
http://www.educomics.org/material/deliverables/Deliverable1_StateoftheArt.pdf
Eggins, S. (1994). An introduction to systemic functional linguistics. London: Continuum
International.

136

Eggins, S., and Martin, J.R. (1997). Genres and registers of discourse. in T.A. van Dijk, (ed.)
Discourse as structure and process (pp. 230-256). London: SAGE.
Eisner, W. (1985). Comics and sequential art. Tamarac, Florida: Poorhouse Press.
Ellis, W. (2011, October 10). The broadcast of comics. Retrieved from
http://www.warrenellis.com/?p=13421
Fenty, S., Houp, T., and Taylor, L. (2004). Webcomics: The influence and continuation of the
comix revolution. ImageTexT: Interdisciplinary Comics Studies, 1(2), Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v1_2/group/index.shtml.
Flynn, M. (2012, January 29). Connect with Haji Kamal: Concept map. Retrieved from
https://prezi.com/xvdaixxsjan8/connect-with-haji-kamal-concept-map/
Fort Huachuca. (2016, February 5). My base guide. Retrieved from
http://www.mybaseguide.com/army/61-38515603/fort_huachuca_noncommissioned_officer_academy
Fowler, M. (2005, December 13). The new methodology. Retrieved from
http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodology.html
Francis Pelton, L., Pelton, T., and Moore, K. (2007). Learning by communicating concepts
through comics. In R. Carlsen et al. (eds.), Proceedings of Society for Information
Technology & Teacher Education International Conference 2007 (pp. 1974-1981).
Chesapeake, VA: AACE.
Frank, J. (1943). The role of comic strips and comic books in child life. Supplementary
Educational Monographs, 57, 158-162.
Gardner, J. (2006). Archives, collectors, and the new media work of comics.MFS Modern
Fiction Studies, 52(4), 787-806.

137

Gardner, J. (2012). Projections: Comics and the history of twenty-first-century storytelling.
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Garrison, D. R. (2011). E-learning in the 21st century: A framework for research and practice.
Abingdon, UK: Taylor & Francis.
Garrity, S. (2008). Comics grow up. In D. Duffy and J. Jennings (eds.), Out of sequence:
Underrepresented voices in American comics. Champaign, IL: Krannert Art Museum.
Garrity, S. (2011). History of webcomics. Retrieved from http://www.tcj.com/the-history-of webcomics/
Goldmann, L. (1969/1966). The human sciences and philosophy. (H. V. White & R. Anchor,
Trans.) London: Jonathon Cape.
Goldsmith, F. (2005). Graphic novels now: Building, managing, and marketing a dynamic
collection. American Library Association.
Goodbrey, D. M. (2001). Comics tetrad. Retrieved from http://e-merl.com/comtet.htm
Goodbrey, D. M. (2011). Digital comics: New mutations and innovations. Retrieved from
http://comicsforum.org/2012/02/27/digital-comics-new-mutations-innovations-by-danielmerlin-goodbrey/
Goodbrey, D. M. (2012, September 9). From comic to hypercomic. Paper presented at the 1st
global conference of The graphic novel: An At the Interface project, Mansfield College,
Oxford, United Kingdom. Retrieved from http://www.inter-disciplinary.net/at-theinterface/wp-content/uploads/2012/09/danielgoodbrey_finalpaper.pdf
Goodbrey, D.M. (2013). Digital comics—New tools and tropes. Studies in Comics, 4(1), 185197.

138

Gordon, I. (1993). Comic strips and consumer culture, 1890-1945. Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Gorman, M. (2003). Getting graphic! Using graphic novels to promote literacy with preteens
and teens. Columbus, OH: Linworth.
Groensteen, T. (2006). The system of comics. (B. Beaty & N. Nguyen, Trans.) Jackson, MS:
University Press of Mississippi. Original work published 1999.
Groensteen, T. (2009). Why are comics still in search of cultural legitimization. (S. Smolderen,
Trans.) In J. Heer and K. Worcester (eds.), A comics studies reader (pp. 149-156).
Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi Press. Original work published 2000.
Guardian US interactive team, Adams, R., and McCann, E. (2012, November 6). America: Elect!
The action-packed journey to US election day in graphic novel form. Retrieved from
http://www.theguardian.com/world/interactive/2012/nov/06/america-elect-graphic-novel
Gumienny, K. (2012). WHAM! BAM! and POW! Comic books and e-learning. Retrieved from
http://lanyrd.com/2012/e-learning-symposium/srrbm/
Gunning, T. (2014). The art of succession: Reading, writing, and watching comics. Critical
Inquiry, 40(3), 36-51.
Gustines, G. G. (2016, January 4). Library of Congress Anoints Graphic Novelist as Ambassador
for Young People’s Literature. New York Times, p. C5. Retrieved from
http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/04/books/library-of-congress-anoints-graphic-novelistas-ambassador-for-young-peoples-literature.html?_r=0
Halliday, M. A. K. (1978). Language as social semiotic. Baltimore, MD: University Park Press.

139

Halliday, M. A. K. (2006). On the "architecture" of human language. In J. Webster (ed.), On
language and linguistics. Volume 3 in Collected works of M.A.K. Halliday (pp. 1-32).
London: Continuum International.
Halliday, M. A. K., and Hasan, R. (1985). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a
social-semiotic perspective. Victoria: Deakin University Press.
Harvey, R. C. (1996). The art of the comic book: An aesthetic history. Jackson, MS: University
of Mississippi Press.
Hasitschka, W., Goldsleger, P., and Zembylas, T. (2005). Cultural institutions studies:
Investigating the transformation of cultural goods. The Journal of Arts Management,
Law, and Society, 35(2), 147-158.
Hatfield, C. (2001). Scott McCloud, still thinking. The Comics Journal, 232, 66-82.
Hatfield, C. (2005). Alternative comics: An emerging literature. Jackson, MS: University Press
of Mississippi.
Hatfield, C. (2010). Indiscipline, or, The condition of comics studies. Transatlantica, 1.
Retrieved from: http://transatlantica.revues.org/4933
Hayles, K. N. (1992). The materiality of informatics. Issues in Integrative Studies, 10, 121-144.
Hayles, K.N. (2004). Print is flat, code is deep: The importance of media-specific analysis.
Poetics Today, 25(1), 67-90.
Hayman, G., and Pratt, H. J. (2005). What are comics? In D. Goldblatt and L. B. Brown (eds.),
Aesthetics (pp. 419–424). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Heer, J., and Worcester, K. (2009). A comics studies reader. Jackson, MS: University of
Mississippi Press.

140

Heisler, F. (1946). Comparison of Comic Book and Non-Comic Book Readers of the Elementary
School. Journal of Educational Research, 40, 458-464.
Hicks, M. (2009). ‘“Teh futar”: The power of the webcomic and the potential of Web 2. In R.
Scully and M. Quartly (eds.), Drawing the line: Using cartoons as historical evidence
(pp. 11.1-11.20). Melbourne: Monash University ePress. Retrieved from
http://books.publishing.monash.edu/apps/bookworm/view/Drawing+the+Line/77/xhtml/c
hapter11.html#ich11en18
Hill, C. (2007). Gallery Comics: The Beginnings. International Journal of Comic Art, 9(2), 6-12.
Hirsch, M. (1997). Family frames: Photography, narrative, and postmemory. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Hodge, R., & Kress, G. R. (1988). Social semiotics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Horn, R. E. (1998). Visual language: Global communication for the 21st century. Bainbridge
Island, WA: MacroVU, Inc.
Horrocks, D. (2001). Inventing Comics: Scott McCloud’s Definition of Comics. The Comics
Journal, 234, 29-39.
Hutchinson, K. H. (1949). An experiment in the use of comics as instructional material. The
Journal of Educational Sociology, 236-245.
Interview with Leonard Rifas. (1978, June). Cascade Comix Monthly, 1(4), 4-16.
Jacobs, D. (2007). More than words: Comics as a means of teaching multiple literacies. English
Journal, 96(3), 19-25.
Jacobs, D. (2013). Graphic encounters: Comics and the sponsorship of multimodal literacy.
London: A&C Black.

141

Jacobs, D. (2014). Webcomics, multimodality, and information literacy. ImageTexT:
Interdisciplinary Comics Studies, 7(3). Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v7_3/jacobs/
Jahoda, G. (2012). Critical reflections on some recent definitions of “culture”. Culture &
Psychology, 18(3), 289-303.
Jenkins, H. (2002, May). Will the web save comics? Technology Review. Retrieved from
http://www.technologyreview.com/news/401445/will-the-web-save-comics/
Jenkins, H. (2006). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York: New
York University Press.
Jenkins, H., Clinton, K., Purushatma, R., Robison, A., & Weigel, M. (2006). Confronting the
challenges of a participatory culture: Media education for the 21st century.[White Paper].
MacArthur Foundation.
Jewitt, C. (2004). Multimodality and new communication technologies. Discourse and
technology: Multimodal discourse analysis, 184-195.
Jewitt, C., & Oyama, R. (2001). Visual meaning: A social semiotic approach. In T.V. Leeuwen
and C. Jewitt (eds.) Handbook of visual analysis, 134-156.
Joyce, M. (1996). Of two minds: Hypertext pedagogy and poetics. Ann Arbor, MI: University of
Michigan Press.
Jüngst, H. E. (2010). Information comics. Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang.
Kalantzis, M., and Cope, B. (2000). A multiliteracies pedagogy: A pedagogical supplement. In
B. Cope and M. Kalantzis (eds.), Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of
social futures,(pp. 239-248). London: Routledge.
Kalantzis, M., and Cope, B. (2005). Learning by design. Champaign: Common Ground.

142

Kaltenbacher, M. (2004). Perspectives on multimodality: From the early beginnings to the state
of the art. Information Design Journal, 12(3), 190-207.
Keeper, S. (2012, November 5). Hyperstuck: Homestuck, Kickstarter, and experimental comics.
Retrieved from http://stormingtheivorytower.blogspot.com/2012/11/hyperstuckhomestuck-kickstarter-and.html
Keeper, S., and McDevitt, I. (2012). Understanding hypercomics. Retrieved from
http://understandinghypercomics.byethost15.com/
Kim, J. M., Hill Jr, R. W., Durlach, P. J., Lane, H. C., Forbell, E., Core, M., ... & Hart, J. (2009).
BiLAT: A game-based environment for practicing negotiation in a cultural
context. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 19(3), 289-308.
Kinection. (n.d.). About us. Retrieved from https://www.kinection.com/about-us/
Kinection. (n.d.). Project: Connect with Haji Kamal. Retrieved from
http://www.kinection.com/projects/project-connect-with-haji-kamal/
Kinection. (2015, November 8). Can you connect with Haji Kamal? A cross-cultural training
game. Retrieved from https://youtu.be/txoZg9Pj7HI
Kogel, D. (2013). Rethinking webcomics: webcomics as a screen based medium. (Masters thesis,
Art and Culture Studies, University of Jyväskylä). Retrieved from
https://jyx.jyu.fi/dspace/handle/123456789/40712
Krashen, S. D. (2004). The power of reading: Insights from the research. Westport, CT:
Libraries Unlimited.
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.
Kress, G. (2009). Multimodality: A social semiotic approach to contemporary communication.
London: Routledge.

143

Kress, G., and Van Leeuwen, T. (1996). Reading images: The grammar of graphic design.
London: Routledge.
Kuhlman, M. (2007) The traumatic temporality of Art Spiegelman's In the Shadow of No
Towers. Journal of Popular Culture, 40 (5), 849–866.
Kunzle, D. (1973). The early comic strip: Narrative strips and picture stories in the European
broadsheet from c. 1450 to 1825. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lacy, S. (2007, Nov. 21). Webcomics are profane, explicit, humorous — and influencing trends.
Charleston City Paper. Retrieved from
http://www.charlestoncitypaper.com/charleston/webcomics-are-profane-explicithumorous-mdash-and-influencing-trends/Content?oid=1112206
La Rocca, G. (2012). From the alphabet to the web. SAGE Open, 2(2). Retrieved from
http://sgo.sagepub.com/content/2/2/2158244012441940
Lash, S. (2002). Critique of information. London: Sage.
Lash, S. (2003). Reflexivity as non-linearity. Theory, Culture & Society, 20, 49-57
Lawrence, S. A., McNeal, K., and Yildiz, M. N. (2009). Summer program helps adolescents
merge technology, popular culture, reading, and writing for academic purposes. Journal
of Adolescent & Adult Literacy 52(6), 483-494.
Legman, G. (1948). The comic books and the public. American Journal of Psychotherapy, 2(3),
473-477.
Lehman, H.C. & Witty, P. (1927). The compensatory function of the Sunday “funny” paper.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 11(3), 202-211.
Lent, J. A. (n.d.) "The World's Potent," Witty World. Retrieved from
http://www.joeszabo.us/wittyworld/articles/worldspotentLent.html

144

LeStage, M. (2012, August 2). ELearner Engaged impresses with fresh, funny assertiveness
training. Articulate. Retrieved from http://www.articulate.com/blog/elearnerengagedimpresses-with-fresh-funny-assertiveness-training/
Liming, D. (2012). Bloggers and webcomic artists: Careers in online creativity. Occupational
Outlook Quarterly, 56(3), 16-21.
Low, D. (2012). Spaces invested with content: Crossing the ‘gaps’ in comics with readers in
schools. Children’s Literature in Education, 43, 368–385.
Luciano, D. (1984). Before it's too late: An interview with Leonard Rifas. The comics journal,
92, 87-90,92-96,98-102,104-106,108-109.
Luke, A. (2010, March 22). With Leonard Rifas pt. 2: Maps and webcomics and cyberactivism.
Retrieved from http://andy-luke.com/2010/03/22/with-leonard-rifas-pt-2-maps-andwebcomics-and-cyberactivism/
Macdonald, S. (2007). Interconnecting: museum visiting and exhibition design, CoDesign:
International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts, 3(1), 149-162.
Mandaville, A., and Avila, J.P. (2009). It’s a word! It’s a picture! It’s comics! Interdisciplinary
approaches to teaching comics. In S. E. Tabachnik (ed.), Teaching the graphic novel (pp.
245–253). New York: The Modern Language Association of America.
Marrs, L. (2005). American hypercomics in the 21st century. Retrieved from
http://www.leemarrs.com/HYPER2.pdf
Matthiessen, C. M. I. M. (2007). The multimodal page: A systematic functional exploration. In
T.D. Royce and W.L. Bowcher (eds.), New Directions in the Analysis of Multimodal
Discourse (pp. 1-62). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
McCloud, S. (1993). Understanding comics. Northampton, MA: Tundra.

145

McCloud, S. (2000). Reinventing comics. New York: HarperCollins.
McCloud, S. (2000-2001). I can't stop thinking!. Retrieved from http://scottmccloud.com/1webcomics/icst/index.html
McCloud, S. (2001). Understanding the backlash. Retrieved from
http://www.scottmccloud.com/home/xtra/backlash-full.html
McCloud, S. (2006). Making comics chapter 5 1/2. Retrieved from
http://www.scottmccloud.com/ makingcomics/five_half/00.html
McCloud, S. (2009, February). The "infinite canvas." Retrieved from http://scottmccloud.com/4inventions/canvas/index.html
McCloud, S. (2010, August 24). Works for me. Does it work for you?. Retrieved from
http://scottmccloud.com/2010/08/24/why-it-works/
McMillan, G. (2014, January 13). ComiXology tops Apple's 2013 iPad highest-grossing nongame app chart. Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved from
http://www.hollywoodreporter.com/heat-vision/comixology-tops-apples-2013-ipad670549
McTaggart, J. (2008). Graphic novels: The good, the bad, and the ugly. In N. Frey & D. B.
Fisher (eds.), Teaching visual literacy: Using comic books, graphic novels, anime,
cartoons, and more to develop comprehension and thinking skills (pp. 27-46). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Meskin, A. (2007). Defining Comics?. The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 65(4), 369379.
Mitchell, W. J. T. (1994). Picture theory. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

146

Molotiu, A. (Ed.). (2009). Abstract comics: The anthology: 1967-2009. Seattle, WA:
Fantagraphics Books.
Moore, B. (2011, November 3). Interview: comiXology CEO David Steinberger on digital
comics, pricing, & The New 52. Screen Rant. Retrieved from
http://screenrant.com/comixology-ceo-david-steinberger-interview-benm-138650/
Moore, C. (2010, May 3). Elearning example: Branching scenario. Retrieved from
http://blog.cathy-moore.com/2010/05/elearning-example-branching-scenario/
Moore, C. (2011a, February 7). Comic-style designs in courses. [Online forum comment].
Retrieved from http://community.articulate.com/forums/t/679.aspx
Moore, C. (2011b, July 12). Sample branching scenario cool tool. Retrieved from
http://blog.cathy-moore.com/2011/07/sample-branching-scenario-cool-tool/
Moore, C. (2012, February 10). Comment. [Online forum comment]. Articulate network.
Retrieved from http://blogs.articulate.com/rapid-elearning/let-others-inspire-yourinteractive-e-learning-heres-how-2/#comment-9634
Moore, C. (2013, July 7). When do you need a branching scenario?. Retrieved from
http://blog.cathy-moore.com/2013/07/when-do-you-need-a-branching-scenario/
Moulthrop, S. (1999). Misadventure: Future fiction and the new networks. Style, 33(2), 184-203.
Retrieved from http://iat.ubalt.edu/moulthrop/essays/misadventure/
Moulthrop, S. (2009). See the strings: Watchmen and the under-language of media. In P.
Harrigan and N. Wardrip-Fruin (eds.), Third person: Authoring and exploring vast
narratives (pp. 287-302). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Mulberry, H.M. (1943). Comic strips and comic books? Supplementary Educational
Monographs, 57, 163-166.

147

Nelson, T. (2003). Computer lib / Dream machines. In N. Montfort and N. Wardrip-Fruin (eds.),
The new media reader (pp. 301-338). Massachusetts: MIT Press. Original publication
1974.
New London Group (1996). A pedagogy of multiliteracies: Designing social futures. Harvard
educational review, 66(1), 60-93.
New London Group (2000). A pedagogy of multiliteracies. In B. Cope and M. Kalantzis (eds.),
Multiliteracies: Literacy learning and the design of social futures. London: Routledge.
Norris, S. (2004). Analyzing multimodal interaction: A methodological framework. London:
Routledge.
North, S. (1940, May 8). A national disgrace. Chicago Daily News.
Norton, B. (2003). The motivating power of comic books: Insights from Archie comic readers.
The Reading Teacher, 57(2), 140-147.
O’Halloran, K. L., & Fei, V. L. (2009). Sequential visual discourse frames. In E. Ventola and
A.J. M. Guijarro (eds.), The world told and the world shown (pp. 139-156). London:
Palgrave Macmillan.
O'Toole, M. (2011). The language of displayed art. London: Routledge.
Pappas, C. (2015, April 19). The power of AGILE instructional design approach. eLearning
Industry. Retrieved from http://elearningindustry.com/the-power-of-agile-instructionaldesign-approach
Perry, G. C., and Aldridge, A. (1971). The Penguin book of comics: a slight history. London:
Penguin Books.
Pratt, H. J. (2009). Narrative in comics. Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism, 67(1), 107–117.

148

Priego, E. (2012). Comics scholarship in the digital age: Towards media-specific research. The
arts pages. Retrieved from http://artspages.wordpress.com/2012/08/24/comicsscholarship-in-the-digital-age-towards-media-specific-research/
Puentedura, R. (2010). The infinite canvas reloaded: Digital storytelling, webcomics, and web
2.0. 2009 NMC Summer Conference Proceedings. Retrieved from
http://wp.nmc.org/proceedings2009/papers/infinite-canvas/
Quinn, C. N. (2005). Engaging learning: Designing e-learning simulation games. Hoboken, NJ:
John Wiley & Sons.
Rifas, L. (1988, November-December). Educational comics: a message in a bubble. Print, 42(6),
145-157.
Rifas, L. (1991). AIDS educational comics, Reference Services Review, 19(2), 81-87.
Rifas, L. (2003, November). Searching for a home: A car smart comic. Retrieved from
http://www.scn.org/feetfirst/comics/index.html
Rifas, L. (2009). Educational comics. In Booker, K. (ed.), Encyclopedia of comic books and
graphic novels (pp. 160-169). Santa Barbara, CA: ABC-CLIO.
Salkowitz, R. (2012). Comic-Con and the business of pop culture: What the world's wildest trade
show can tell us about the future of entertainment. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Sample, M. (2012, February 22). Meanwhile is big but not boundless. Media Commons.
Retrieved from http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2012/02/22/meanwhilebig-not-boundless
Saraceni, M. (2003). The language of comics. London: Routledge.
Scheiter, K. & Gerjets, P. (2007). Learner control in hypermedia environments. Educational
Psychology Review, 19(3), 285-307.

149

Schoof, R. N. (1978). Four-color words: Comic books in the classroom. Language Arts, 55, 821827.
Schwartz, A., and Rubinstein-Ávila, E. (2006). Understanding the manga hype: Uncovering the
multimodality of comic-book literacies. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 50(1),
40-49.
Schwarz, G. (2006). Expanding literacies through graphic novels. English Journal, 95(6), 58-64.
Scott, R.W. (1990). Comics librarianship: A handbook. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Company.
Selber, S. (2004). Multiliteracies for a digital age. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University
Press.
Seyfried, J. (2008). Reinventing the book club: Graphic novels as educational heavyweights.
Knowledge Quest, 36(3), 44-48.
Shipwright, S., Mallory, D., Atack, L., and Demacio, P. (2010). An online graphic novel:
Students' experiences and research literacy gains. MERLOT Journal of Online Learning
and Teaching, 6(3), 573-584.
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (2009a). The secret in the cellar. Retrieved
from http://anthropology.si.edu/writteninbone/comic
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (2009b). About the exhibit. Retrieved from
http://anthropology.si.edu/writteninbone/about_exhibit.html
Smithsonian National Museum of Natural History (2009c). Activity: Can you identify ancestry?.
Retrieved from
http://anthropology.si.edu/writteninbone/comic/activity/Identify_ancestry.htm
Sones, W. W. D. (1944). The comics and instructional method. Journal of Educational
Sociology, 18(4), 232-240.

150

Sterling, B. (2005). Shaping things. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stevens, J. R. (2012). Do fans own digital comic books? Examining the copyright and
intellectual property attitudes of comic book fans. International Journal of
Communication, 6, 751-772. Retrieved from
http://ijoc.org/ojs/index.php/ijoc/article/viewfile/1155/729
Sweeney, M. (2006). Material reference: Women's adventures in science. Retrieved from
http://www.merlot.org/merlot/viewMaterial.htm?id=227109
Swogger, J. (2012) The sequential art of the past: Archaeology, comics, and the dynamics of an
emerging genre. Retrieved from http://comicsforum.org/2012/06/29/the-sequential-art-ofthe-past-archaeology-comics
Tatalovic, M. (2009). Science comics as tools for science education and communication: a brief,
exploratory study. Journal of Science Communication, 8(4), 1-17.
Taylor, L. N. (2012, February 22). Navigable space. [online comment]. Media Commons.
Retrieved from http://mediacommons.futureofthebook.org/imr/2012/02/22/meanwhilebig-not-boundless#comment-3488
Thompson, L. (2012). “What would you do if...?”: Customer service e-learning course. Retrieved
from http://www.agile-e.com/project1.html
Tilley, C. L. (2008). Reading comics. School Library Media Activities Monthly, 24(9), 23-26.
Tilley, C. L. (2012, December 13). “Superman says,‘Read!’”: National Comics and reading
promotion. Children's Literature in Education, 1-13. Retrieved from
http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10583-012-9193-0
Toh, T. L. (2009). Use of cartoons and comics to teach algebra in mathematics classrooms.
Mathematics of Prime Importance—MAV, 1, 230-239.

151

Van Hook, J. (2008). On the difficulty of characterizing what educational comics are about.
ImageTexT: Interdisciplinary Comics Studies, 4(2). Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v4_2/van_hook/
van Leeuwen, T. (2004). Ten reasons why linguists should pay attention to visual
communication. In Levine, P. and Scollon, R. (eds.), Discourse & technology:
Multimodal discourse analysis (pp. 7-19). Georgetown University Press: Washington,
DC.
van Leeuwen, T. (2005). Introducing social semiotics. London: Routledge.
Vassilikopoulou, M., Boloudakis, M., and Retalis, S. (2007, September 21). From digitised
comics to digital hypermedia comics: Their use in education. International Council of
Educational Media Annual Conference, Nicosia, Cyprus.
Versaci, R. (2001). How comic books can change the way our students see literature: One
teacher's perspective. The English Journal, 91(2), 61-67.
Versaci, R. (2008). Literary literacy and the role of the comic book: Or,“You teach a class on
what?”. Teaching visual literacy: Using comic books, graphic novels, anime, cartoons,
and more to develop comprehension and thinking skills, 91-112.
Watkins, C. (n.d.). A word on BorderWalker. Retrieved from http://borderwalker.odoripark.com/
Watkins, C. (2011). Electric Spirit teaching comic UI overview. Retrieved from
http://vimeo.com/22152919
Wertham, F. (1954). Seduction of the innocent. New York: Rhinehart & Company.
Wiater, S., and Bissette, S. R. (1993). Comic book rebels: Conversations with the creators
of the new comics. New York: Donald I. Fine.

152

Wilde, L. R. (2015). Distinguishing mediality: The problem of identifying forms and features of
digital comics. Networking Knowledge: Journal of the MeCCSA Postgraduate Network,
8(4). Retrieved from http://ojs.meccsa.org.uk/index.php/netknow/article/view/386/215
Williams, B. T. (2011). Collages of identity: Popular culture, emotion, and online literacies.
Yearbook of the National Society for the Study of Education, 110(1), 200-219.
Witek, J. (1992). From genre to medium: Comics and contemporary American culture. In R. B.
Browne and M. W. Fishwick (eds.), Rejuvenating the humanities. Bowling Green, OH:
Bowling Green State University Popular Press.
Witek, J. (2008). From the margins of the margin: Seeing educational comics. ImageTexT:
Interdisciplinary Comics Studies, 4(2), Retrieved from
http://www.english.ufl.edu/imagetext/archives/v4_2/witek/.
Witek, J. (2009). The arrow and the grid. In J. Heer and K. Worcester (eds.), A comics studies
reader (pp. 149-156). Jackson, MS: University of Mississippi Press.
Witty, P. (1941a). Children’s interest in reading the comics. The Journal of Experimental
Education, 10(2), 100-104.
Witty, P. (1941b). Reading the comics—a comparative study. The Journal of Experimental
Education, 10(2), 105-109.
Witty, S. (2010). Illustrative text: Transformed words and the language of comics. [Will Eisner
Week educational materials.] Retrieved from
http://www.willeisnerweek.com/images/Witty_IllustrativeText.pdf
Wolk, D. (2007). Reading comics: How graphic novels work and what they mean. Boston, MA:
Da Capo Press.

153

Woo, B. (2011). Beyond our borders: Mapping the space of comics. Comics Forum. Retrieved
from: http://comicsforum.org/2011/11/25/beyond-our-borders-mapping-the-space-ofcomics-by-benjamin-woo/
Wood, L. A. & Kroger, R.O. (2000). Doing discourse analysis: Methods for studying action in
talk and text. London: SAGE.
World Warfighter. (2010). Connect with Haji Kamal. Retrieved from
http://www.worldwarfighter.com/hajikamal/
World Warfighter. (2016). Home. Retrieved from http://www.worldwarfighter.com/
Wright, G. (1979). The comic book: A forgotten medium in the classroom. The Reading
Teacher, 33(2), 158-161.
Written in Bone: Forensic Files of the 17th-Century Chesapeake opens Feb. 7 at the
Smithsonian's National Museum of Nat. (2008, December 17). artdaily.org. Retrieved
from http://artdaily.com/news/27869/Written-in-Bone--Forensic-Files-of-the-17thCentury-Chesapeake-Opens-Feb--7-at-the-Smithsonian-s-National-Museum-ofNat#.VtZzgpw4GM8
Yang, G. (2003a). Strengths of comics in education. Comics in Education. Retrieved from
http://www.humblecomics.com/comicsedu/strengths.html
Yang, G. (2003b). Factoring with Mr. Yang and Mosley the Alien. Retrieved from
http://www.humblecomics.com/factoring/
Yannicopoulou, A. (2004). Visual aspects of written texts: Preschoolers view comics.
Educational Studies in Language and Literature, 4: 169–181.

154

Yezbick, D. (2008). No color comics?: Ruminations and confessions of a multicultural fanboy.
In D. Duffy and J. Jennings, (eds.), Out of sequence: Underrepresented voices in
American comics. Champaign, IL: Krannert Art Museum.
Zanfei, A. (2008). Defining webcomics and graphic novels. International Journal of Comic Art,
10(1), 55-61.
Zimmerman, B. (2010, January). Using digital comics for language learning. eLearn, 1(5).
Retrieved from http://elearnmag.acm.org/archive.cfm?aid=1710033
Zorbaugh, H. (1949). Editorial. Journal of Educational Sociology, 23(4), 193-194.

155

