What Happens When Entrepreneurial Public Libraries Change Directors?

A Dissertation presented to the
Faculty of the Simmons College School of Library and Information Science

In partial fulfillment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy

By Jasmina Jusic

© 2016
Jasmina Jusic
All Right Reserved








ProQuest Number: 10602919





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10602919
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Abstract

Some public libraries engage in entrepreneurial activities and services as a means of
generating revenue or providing new services or products that address community needs. With a
dearth of literature on the topic, this study examines four entrepreneurial public libraries, each of
which has changed directors. The focus of this study is the entrepreneurial activities and services
in which the libraries engage, how the directors define entrepreneurship, the linkage between
entrepreneurship and innovation, whether the libraries have sustained and furthered
entrepreneurship under new leadership, the extent to which organizational cultures at the
libraries are entrepreneurial, the challenges the libraries face in being entrepreneurial, and future
plans for engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services.
This study uses a multiple case study approach, in which data were collected using semistructured interviews with directors and managers directly engaged in entrepreneurship,
document analysis of library documents (e.g., strategic plans), observation of the entrepreneurial
services, and an examination of physical artifacts (e.g., multi-modal interactive exhibits)
resulting from the entrepreneurial activities or services. An analysis of data uncovered five
general themes: (1) customer service is a priority at each library, (2) each library is focused on
community needs and the entrepreneurial activities and services are often a response to specific
community needs, (3) a revision of the definition of entrepreneurial leadership that addresses
partnerships and the need for external resources to support the entrepreneurial services is
necessary, (4) innovation is present at the libraries within entrepreneurial activities and services
and other areas of the organization, and (5) despite changes in leadership, which had a direct
effect on the libraries’ organizational structure and culture, entrepreneurship flourishes.

iii

The study reveals the importance of the directors’ commitment to entrepreneurship and
innovation in the organization and highlights the benefits and challenges of engaging in
entrepreneurial activities and services as well as future plans, some of which focus on revenue
generation, as the libraries continue to align the activities and services with their strategic plans
and priorities.

iv

Acknowledgements

I would like to thank the members of my dissertation committee, Peter Hernon, Robert
Dugan, Candy Schwartz, and Maureen Sullivan, for their guidance and support throughout the
dissertation process. I am especially grateful to Peter Hernon, my committee chair, for his
patience, thoughtful feedback, guidance on the content, and copyediting.
This dissertation would not have been possible without the participation of the pre-test
library and the four case study libraries that hosted my visits, answered my questions, and shared
information. I am grateful to the public library directors and managers at the libraries for their
time, interest, engagement, and contributions to this study.
I wish to thank the Simmons College GSLIS Doctoral Committee and the Simmons
College Student Research Fund. The funds they provided for the data collection made this
research possible.
My cohort in the Simmons College Ph.D. in Managerial Leadership in the Information
Professions program, and the cohorts who came before and after, thank you for your support and
friendship. You have made this journey enjoyable. I would also like to thank the staff and faculty
of the Simmons College GSLIS program for always answering questions and making the
program a rich learning experience.
To my family and friends, thank you for your support and encouragement throughout this
process, and for periodically checking-in despite my unavailability, stress, and absences.

v

Dedication

This dissertation is dedicated to my mother, Umihana Kapic-Jusic. Thank you for your
never ending support and encouragement. Thank you for emphasizing the value of education and
encouraging me to challenge myself. This dissertation is also dedicated to my grandmother, Pasa
Kapic. Thank you for your support and for cheering me on.

vi

Table of Contents

Chapter One: Introduction

1

Problem Statement

5

Literature Review

7

Innovation and Entrepreneurship

12

The Entrepreneurial Organization

16

Entrepreneurial Leadership

18

Entrepreneurial Leadership and Libraries

21

Organizational Culture

23

Entrepreneurial Organizational Culture

31

Theoretical Framework

32

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership

33

Innovation

35

Four Frames

36

Objectives and Research Questions

37

Procedures

49

Research Design

49

Case Selection

51

Methodology

61

Data Quality

73

Pre-Test

75

Conclusion

76

vii

References

78

Chapter Two: Overview of Findings

85

About the Libraries

86

Community Focus

87

Library A

87

Library B

88

Library D

89

Library E

90

Research Questions

90

Research Questions Focused on Directors

91

Entrepreneurship and Leadership

91

Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship

93

Innovation

94

Four Frames

95

Organizational Culture

97

Mission and Vision Statements

102

Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by Libraries

103

Benefits Derived

108

Library Stakeholders

108

Research Questions Focused on Managers
Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship

111
111

Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by the Libraries 113
Benefits Derived

114

viii

Organizational Culture

115

Directors Versus Managers

119

Conclusion

119

References

121

Chapter Three: Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership

122

Entrepreneurship and Leadership

122

Directors’ Perspective on Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship

133

Managers’ Perspective on Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship

138

Linkage of Discussion to the Literature

145

Conclusion

150

References

152

Chapter Four: Innovation

154

Innovation as a Part of Entrepreneurship

154

Innovation and Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

155

Innovation in Other Areas

158

General Comments of the Directors About Innovation

162

Manager General Comments About Innovation

163

Linkage of Findings to the Literature

165

Conclusion

169

References

171

Chapter Five: Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

173

Why the Various Activities and Services Are Entrepreneurial

173

The Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

176

ix

Celebrity Author Program

177

Café

178

College Access and Reengagement Center

180

Corporate Sponsorship for Sunday Hours

187

Discovery Space for Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs

187

Friends of the Library Bookshop

190

Makerspace

191

Multi-Modal Interactive Exhibits

195

Passport Service

198

Summer Reading Mobile Application

201

Other Activities and Services

204

Similarities and Differences Among Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

209

Success of Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

210

Documents and Physical Artifacts

211

Observation

212

Conclusion

212

References

214

Chapter Six: Four Frames Perspective on Managerial Leadership and a Focus on
Organizational Culture

215

Context of Four Frames in Libraries

216

Library A

217

Library B

219

Library D

220

x

Library E

222

The Directors’ Perspective on Organizational Culture

222

The Entrepreneurial Organization

226

Changes to Organizational Culture

231

Extent to Which Entrepreneurship is Engrained

235

Organizational Culture form the Perspective of Managers

237

The Entrepreneurial Organization

240

Changes to Organizational Culture

251

Extent to Which Entrepreneurship is Engrained

257

Director Versus Manager Perspective on Organizational Culture

261

Linkage of Findings to the Literature

263

Four Frames

263

Organizational Culture

266

Entrepreneurship in the Organization

269

Conclusion

271

References

273

Chapter Seven: Strategic Plans and Priorities and the Future of Entrepreneurial
Activities and Services at the Four Libraries
Plans for Future Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

274
274

Strategic Plans and Priorities

275

Library A

276

Library B

277

Library D

278

xi

Library E

281

Why the Future Activities and Services Are Entrepreneurial

282

Managers’ Comments Related to Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

285

Linkage to Literature

288

Revenue Generation

289

Innovation

290

Conclusion

293

References

295

Chapter Eight: Conclusion

297

Brief Overview

297

Common Themes

299

Customer Service

299

Community Needs

303

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership

306

Innovation

310

Innovation and Transformation
Organizational Culture

312
313

Topics for Further Research

316

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership

317

Entrepreneurial Activities and Services

318

Innovation

321

Library and Information Science Education

321

Directors and Managers as Managerial Leaders

322

xii

Organizational Structure and Culture

323

Strategic Plans and Priorities

325

Conclusion

326

References

329

Bibliography

331

Appendices

340

Appendix A: Interview Questions (Directors)

340

Appendix B: Interview Questions (Managers)

349

Appendix C: Informed Consent Form

354

Appendix D: Observation Data Collection Instrument

356

xiii

List of Figures
1.1: A diagrammatic definition of innovation

35

xiv

List of Tables
1.1: Neal’s typology adapted for public libraries

33

1.2: Objectives and research questions focused on the director

38

1.3: Objectives and research questions focused on mid to upper level managers

45

1.4: Public libraries engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services

52

1.5: Additional libraries engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services

58

1.6: Methods for answering research questions

65

2.1: General library characteristics

86

2.2: Entrepreneurial activities and services offered by the libraries

104

2.3: Key library stakeholders identified by directors

109

5.1: Why activities and services offered by libraries are entrepreneurial

174

6.1: Directors and the number of libraries in the system

216

6.2: Directors’ views of entrepreneurial characteristics that apply to the library

227

6.3: Managers’ views of entrepreneurial characteristics that apply to the library

241

7.1: Future entrepreneurial activities and services

282

xv

Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION

The word entrepreneurship is usually used in a business context and not in relation to
public libraries. Yet, some public libraries are engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services
as a means of generating revenue or offering new services to the community. Although
entrepreneurship is not limited to the business sector and can apply to the public sector, the
application of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries is relatively
new. Prior to discussing entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries, it is
necessary to first consider the definitions of entrepreneur and entrepreneurship.
Entrepreneurship can be defined in a number of ways, and there is no consensus on any
one definition (Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991; Gartner, 1990). For example, the concept of
entrepreneurship can be defined by the function of the entrepreneur and that person’s role,
personality, specific behavior, and characteristics. Alternatively, it can reflect the organization
(Casson & Casson, 2014; Sharma & Chrisman, 1999). Although the term is often associated with
small businesses, the notion of being an entrepreneur applies to more than just small business
owners (Bhattacharyya, 2006; Drucker, 1985). From a business perspective, an entrepreneur is
someone who develops a new business model, exploits market opportunities, capitalizes on a
new industry, and manages risk to maximize profits (Schumpeter, 1934b). Some believe it is the
entrepreneur who should provide funding for a venture and should ultimately bear responsibility
for its success or failure, while others feel that it is acceptable for entrepreneurs to secure funding
from other sources (Casson, 2010; Casson & Casson, 2014). It is generally held that
entrepreneurs may provide funding, but that they are not necessarily required to do so.

1

Entrepreneurs do not consider a lack of resources to be an obstacle. They can acquire
resources when necessary and exploit both resources and opportunities to achieve their goals
(Johnson, 2001; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). An important characteristic of entrepreneurs is the
ability to function in an uncertain environment (Johnson, 2001). They must be comfortable with
ambiguity and with adapting to constant change. There is a need for flexibility and creativity
(Johnson, 2001). Another important characteristic of entrepreneurship is the ability to create or
add value (Bhattacharyya, 2006; Drucker, 1985). An entrepreneur may do this by creating or
improving an existing product, service, or organization (Casson, 2010). Perhaps some of the
most appealing characteristics of entrepreneurship are invention, innovation, and the generation
of new ideas. However, entrepreneurs must be able to convert these into reality. A great idea
remains only an idea unless it can be applied, and, in the case of business, monetized (Drucker,
1985). Finally, entrepreneurs must have persistence, determination, and be able to tolerate
ambiguity and uncertainty (Johnson, 2001).
Entrepreneurship requires an individual to take charge of or manage risk. This includes
the exploitation of opportunity, creation of value and new ideas (or new combinations),1 and
revenue generation (Drucker, 1985; McGrath & MacMillan, 2000; Schumpeter, 1934a; 1934b;
Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). The concept of entrepreneurial leadership, a relatively new area of
study, has evolved from entrepreneurship (Cogliser & Brigham, 2004; Kempster & Cope, 2010).
Although there is no clearly agreed upon definition of entrepreneurial leadership, there are some
components of definitions that are common among different researchers in the fields of
entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership. For example, vision is often mentioned, as well

1

In this instance, “new combinations” means an entrepreneur putting new ideas into practice. According to
Schumpeter (1934b), the concept of “new combinations” also covers the introduction of a new good, the
introduction of a new method of production, the opening of a new market, the “conquest of a new source of supply,”
and the “carrying out of the new organisation of any industry” (p. 66).

2

as creating value for the organization, exploitation of opportunity, and revenue generation
(Cogliser & Bingham, 2004; Darling, Keeffe, & Ross, 2007; Gupta, MacMillan, & Surie, 2004).
However, neither entrepreneurship nor entrepreneurial leadership need be limited to the business
sector.
Entrepreneurship can apply in the public sector, the chief difference being that there is
less focus on revenue generation (Drucker, 1985). Also, accountability to stakeholders differs
because non-profit organizations, especially those concerned with social issues, do not have to
report quarterly profits or answer to investors in the same way that businesses do (Drucker,
1985). They can, however, use entrepreneurship to look for nontraditional means of funding.
Organizations in the public sector can also use entrepreneurship to create something new, add
value, discover new resources, and take advantage of opportunities.
Public libraries are changing how they serve their communities and, in some cases, doing
so with diminished library budgets. They may use entrepreneurship to deal with change, exploit
opportunities, create value, and supplement uncertain library budgets. Entrepreneurship is not a
concept typically associated with public libraries, but the set of activities which characterize
entrepreneurship fits what some public libraries are doing. They are responding to an information
environment in constant flux by making technology related improvements and offering new
services and new types of programs. The changes have not always been easy to achieve owing to
barriers such as limited budgets and the organizational changes required to streamline resources
and operations and implement new services. Public libraries must pay close attention to user
behavior, how library space is used, and what library users need, and they need to respond to
changing user information-seeking behaviors.

3

At a time when many public libraries see stagnation or a decline in budgets, they are
nonetheless striving to find a delicate balance between providing core services while adding new
services, as they try to remain relevant to their communities. As an example, in response to
changing user interests and information needs, some public libraries have started offering new
types of services that are not typically associated with a traditional library. Examples of these
services include technology petting zoos,2 digital media labs, library-specific mobile
applications, makerspaces (also referred to as hackerspaces), co-working spaces, and incubators
or creation spaces. These types of services emphasize spaces designed to promote content
creation and collaboration. Digital media labs, for example, offer content creation tools,
including software and equipment, that allow people to create and edit music and videos, and
work on a variety of digital projects. The activity in a makerspace can range from using a sewing
machine to using a 3-D printer. Co-working spaces bring together independent workers and
entrepreneurs in need of a work space. Although public libraries have been used as work spaces
for a long time, some libraries are creating dedicated spaces for this type of activity. By carefully
renovating library spaces, they attempt to make the physical library more user friendly and better
designed to meet changing customer needs. Examples of adjustments to spaces might include
more flexibility in design so that spaces can easily be reconfigured, accessible electrical outlets
for charging mobile devices, and spaces which allow collaboration with others, which sometimes
means a noisy environment. The challenge for public libraries is to reevaluate services
continuously and find ways to offer those services despite diminished budgets.

2

Spaces or programs in a library where users can learn about and try new technology, usually consisting of different
types of e-readers and tablets.

4

Some public libraries, with the support of their directors, have engaged in entrepreneurial
activities and services3 as a means of generating revenue streams to provide new services and
new funding models (Jusic, 2013). Library directors engaged in entrepreneurship recognize the
importance of such activities and provide support to their staff in order to allow for the
implementation of these activities. They nurture an organizational culture where entrepreneurial
activities and services are possible.
Problem Statement
Some public libraries have gained local or national recognition for engaging in
entrepreneurial activities or for the entrepreneurial services they offer to the public.
When these libraries change directors, do the new ones continue to support and nurture
entrepreneurship within the organization? No study has explored this issue, nor in fact has any
study examined organizational changes in these libraries that result from engaging in
entrepreneurship. This study aims to fill that gap by exploring what happens when
entrepreneurial libraries have a change in leadership. In addition, this study probes the extent to
which entrepreneurship helps a library to fulfill its mission and explores how entrepreneurship
fits into the vision guiding the organization. For the new directors of entrepreneurial libraries,
does entrepreneurship remain a focus and, if so, in what form? How engrained is
entrepreneurship in the library organization; is the characterization of being an entrepreneurial
leader limited to directors; and how do stakeholders view the library as an entrepreneurial
organization? Have changes been made to organizational cultures to accommodate

3

An example of an entrepreneurial activity is a library partnering with a sports team to fund a summer reading
program. An example of an entrepreneurial service is making it possible for the public to get passports at the library.
The act of obtaining funds is an activity and not a service.

5

entrepreneurship? In combination these questions deal with whether the libraries are more or less
entrepreneurial under the leadership of the new directors.
The results of this study should be of value to public library directors interested in
entrepreneurship. It provides them with insight into how those who have assumed library
directorships have moved their particular organizations forward. Additionally, the study offers
insights into approaches that may not have worked. The study should help directors develop a
better understanding of the priorities, focus areas, and vision of directors at entrepreneurial
organizations and the extent to which they are focused on entrepreneurship. The study’s results
offer public library directors and other interested readers the opportunity to learn whether
entrepreneurship is sustained once there is a change in leadership, and how new directors affect
their libraries’ organizational cultures and entrepreneurial leadership.
The study’s results may also serve as a guide to libraries that are developing, or are
interested in developing, entrepreneurial activities and services. The results of this study could be
beneficial to library trustees engaged in the strategic planning process by offering insights into
the role of entrepreneurship in a library’s vision and mission. The results may serve as a guide
for trustees as to how to support entrepreneurial activities and services in a library. Students in
graduate programs in library and information science (LIS) could gain awareness of trends
related to entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership and might explore why some library
directors consider entrepreneurship to be a priority.
Finally, professional library associations, such as the Public Library Association, may be
interested in entrepreneurship and the transition process for directors coming into entrepreneurial
organizations. Professional associations could develop leadership training programs and
workshops on topics related to entrepreneurship and changing the work culture. Specific topics

6

might include a guide to vision development, how entrepreneurship can be developed and
maintained in a library setting, and what kinds of organizational culture(s) support an
entrepreneurial environment. Workshops, training programs, and mentoring on these topics
could help library directors and staff become more comfortable with and knowledgeable about
entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership.
Literature Review
The term “entrepreneur” originates from the French “entreprendre,” meaning to
undertake or manage. Entrepreneurial activities were first recorded as early as the medieval
period in Europe, when the church, merchants, and members of the royal court engaged in
activities that demonstrated the entrepreneurial characteristics of innovation, risk-taking, and
judgment (Casson & Casson, 2014). In the 17th century, economist Richard Cantillon coined the
term “entrepreneur” (Sharma & Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990) and described the
entrepreneur as a rational decision-maker assuming risk and providing effective management
(Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991). Since that time, there has been confusion over the terms
“entrepreneur” and “entrepreneurship” because there is no clear agreement on their meaning and
no unanimously accepted definitions exist (Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991; Drucker, 1985;
Gartner, 1990). Despite a lack of definitional consensus, entrepreneurship has continued to
evolve as a concept and theory (Drucker, 1985, p. 26).
Entrepreneurship is a complex concept that encompasses a wide range of beliefs
(Gartner, 1990) and does not fit into a single category or philosophy. It is interdisciplinary
(Kuratko, 2007). Casson (2010) sees entrepreneurship as a bridge to economics, sociology,
management studies, economic history, and business history. In the economics literature, there
are two main approaches to defining entrepreneurship (Casson, 2010). One approach defines

7

entrepreneurs in terms of the economic functions that they perform (e.g., innovator, risk-taker,
arbitrageur) to make a profit. The second approach defines entrepreneurs as the founders or
owners of small to mid-sized businesses with the potential to grow (Casson, 2010).
Bhattacharyya (2006) and Drucker (1985) mention a small business owner in the context of a
commonly used definition. However, that definition is over simplified (Drucker, 1985).
Stevenson and Jarillo (1990) divide entrepreneurship studies into three categories, which overlap
with the categories presented by Casson and Casson (2014).4 The categories are: what happens
when entrepreneurs act, why they act, and how they act.
The traditional view of entrepreneurship is not confined to economic institutions and can
encompass non-profit organizations (Drucker, 1985; Gartner, 1990). Drucker (1985) writes,
“Public-service institutions […] need to be entrepreneurial and innovative fully as much as any
business does. Indeed, they may need it more. The rapid changes in today’s society, technology,
and economy are simultaneously an even greater threat to them and an even greater opportunity”
(p. 177). The statement, written over thirty years before the time of the present study, is as
relevant at this time as it was then. There has been an increase in social entrepreneurship, defined
as entrepreneurial activity with an embedded social purpose. Austin, Stevenson, and WeiSkillern (2006) define entrepreneurship as an “innovative, social value creating activity that can
occur within or across the nonprofit, business, or government sectors” (p. 2). They also
differentiate between corporate or commercial entrepreneurship and social entrepreneurship.
Commercial entrepreneurship deals with new needs and breakthroughs while “social
entrepreneurship often focuses on serving basic, long-standing needs more effectively through

4

According to Casson and Casson (2014), “The modern theory of entrepreneurship suggests several ways in which
entrepreneurship can be defined” (p. 1225). This includes the function, role, personality, or behavior of the
entrepreneur.

8

[the application of] innovative approaches” (p. 6). Further expanding on the definition, social
entrepreneurship “typically refers to the phenomenon of applying business expertise and marketbased skills in the nonprofit sector” (p. 2). Examples include innovative approaches to earning
income and creating social value instead of shareholder wealth. “The activity is characterized by
innovation, or the creation of something new rather than simply the replication of existing
enterprises or practices” (p. 2). Social entrepreneurship focuses on social returns rather than
economic concerns.
Gartner (1990) presents eight themes regarding what constitutes entrepreneurship. These
themes (the entrepreneur, innovation, organization creation, creating value, profit or nonprofit,
growth, uniqueness, and the owner-manager) emerge into two aspects: the characteristics of an
entrepreneur and the outcomes of entrepreneurship. The first group of participants in his study
believe a situation is entrepreneurial if an entrepreneur is involved and innovation, growth, and
uniqueness occur. These characteristics apply to an entrepreneur. The second group of
participants, who focus on the outcomes of entrepreneurship, suggest that a situation is
entrepreneurial if there is value creation. The two aspects (the characteristics of an entrepreneur
and the outcomes of entrepreneurship) that emerge from Gartner’s (1990) eight themes align
with the function of the entrepreneur and the role of the entrepreneur as presented by Casson and
Casson (2014).
Several characteristics of entrepreneurs emerge in the literature. Entrepreneurs create
something new and add value (Bhattacharyya, 2006; Drucker, 1985). They create new
combinations, which can include new products, markets, organizational forms, processes, or
sources of supply (Schumpeter, 1934b). Drucker (1985) describes entrepreneurs as creating
“something new, something different; they change or transmute values” (p. 22). Shane and

9

Venkatarman (2000) define entrepreneurship as the “discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of
opportunities to create future goods and services” (p. 218). Several other researchers mention the
pursuit or exploitation of opportunities (McGrath & MacMillan, 2000; Stevenson & Jarillo,
1990). Schumpeter (1934b) specifies exploitation of new sources of supply and identifying
opportunities when there are new markets. Casson (2010) points out that an entrepreneur may be
the only person to recognize an opportunity that others miss. An entrepreneur may also explore
variants of an already exploited opportunity (Casson, 2010) or “remix old ideas to make a
seemingly new application” (Stevenson & Gumpert, 1985, p. 87). Stevenson and Gumpert
(1985) discuss exploitation of opportunity, but they believe that external pressures, including
technology, consumer economics, social values, and political actions, stimulate opportunity
recognition for those with an entrepreneurial mentality.
Johnson (2001) takes some of the characteristics mentioned above and incorporates them
into a definition of entrepreneurship. He describes entrepreneurship as a creative act where
something is built or created that did not previously exist. According to him, creation is based on
perceiving and capturing opportunities in the environment and it is opportunity driven rather than
resource driven. This means that a lack of resources is not seen as a barrier if the opportunity is
deemed important enough. Entrepreneurship involves a degree of risk, and it “results in the
creation of value for the individual, community or society” (p. 138). Finally, it can involve
creative destruction, a process where the destruction of something old brings about something
new (Schumpeter, 1934a). An example would be a new and better product making an older
product obsolete. In the narrowest sense, entrepreneurial organizations “capture ideas, collect
resources and combine these to create a new product or service that adds value to the
organization’s offering to the market” (p. 138).

10

In addition to providing a definition for entrepreneurship, Johnson (2001) identifies key
entrepreneurial attributes and behaviors. They are:
•

the motivation to achieve and compete;

•

taking ownership and being accountable;

•

making independent and self-directed decisions;

•

being open to new information, people, practices, etc.;

•

being able to tolerate ambiguity and uncertainty;

•

creative and flexible thinking, problem-solving and decision making;

•

the ability to see and capture opportunities;

•

awareness of the risks attached to choices and actions;

•

the capacity to manage and ultimately reduce risks;

•

persistence and determination in the face of challenge or lack of immediate reward;

•

considering, discussing and formulating a vision; and

•

the capacity to make an impact. (p. 137)

However, he stresses the importance of viewing the list as attitudinal and behavioral preferences
rather than required competencies. It is difficult to predict what an organization may be doing in
five or ten years and what qualities may be needed. An entrepreneur need not possess every
single item on the list nor should a company try to develop individuals to master every single
item. This is especially true when there is uncertainly of what abilities may be needed in the
future of a constantly changing environment.
Cunningham and Lischeron (1991) consider the definition of entrepreneurship through
different schools of thought that view entrepreneurship from fundamentally different
perspectives. According to them, there are six schools of thought:

11

1. The great person school believes that the entrepreneur has intuitive ability as well as
traits and instincts with which they are born.
2. The psychological characteristics school believes that “entrepreneurs have unique
values, attitudes, and needs which drive them” (p. 46).
3. The classical school considers the central characteristic of entrepreneurial behavior to
be innovation.
4. The management school views entrepreneurs as “people who organize, own, manage,
and assume the risk” (p. 46).
5. The leadership school sees entrepreneurs as leaders who adapt their styles to the
needs of people.
6. The intrapreneurship5 school sees intrapreneurship as “the development of
independent units to create, market, and expand services” (p. 47).
These schools of thought can be grouped into four categories: assessing personal qualities,
recognizing opportunities, acting and managing, and reassessing and adapting (Cunningham &
Lischeron, 1991, p. 46).
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
Schumpeter’s (1934a; 1934b) association of entrepreneurship with innovation has gained
wide acceptance (Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990, p. 19). Nevertheless, there is no consensus about the
definition of innovation in the literature (Baregheh, Rowley, & Sambrook, 2009, p. 1324; Zhao,
2005, p. 26). Baregheh et al. (2009) write that innovation plays a “central role in creating value
and sustaining competitive advantage” (p. 1324). Although they do not link their definition to a
specific discipline, they acknowledge that innovation has been discussed in a variety of business
5

An intrapreneur is an employee in a large organization who is given the freedom and support to act as an
entrepreneur (create, market, and expand services) without becoming an owner (Cunningham & Lischeron, 1991).

12

and management disciplines including entrepreneurship, human resource management,
operations management, information technology, product design, and marketing.
Although different definitions of innovation exist, there is some overlap in how different
researchers define innovation. Zhao (2005) defines innovation as including “new products, new
processes, new services (including new uses of established products, processes and services),
new forms of organization, new markets, and the development of new skills and human capital”
(pp. 27-28), whereas Rowley (2011) defines it as a change in a product, service, process, or an
organization rather than necessarily something new. Baregheh et al. (2009) offer a more useful
and more detailed definition: “Innovation is the multi-stage process whereby organizations
transform ideas into new/improved products, services or processes, in order to advance, compete
and differentiate themselves successfully in their marketplace” (p. 1334). Among all of these
definitions there are similarities as well as subtle differences in what authors consider innovation
to be.
Innovation has been linked to entrepreneurship (Drucker, 1985; Schumpeter 1934a;
1934b; Sharma & Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). It is viewed as a characteristic of
the entrepreneur, as a component of entrepreneurship, and as a necessity for an entrepreneurial
organization. Sharma and Chrisman (1999) view innovation as an entrepreneurial act and as a
sufficient condition for entrepreneurship rather than a necessary one. Drucker (1985) sees
innovation as “the specific tool of entrepreneurs, the means by which they exploit change as an
opportunity for a different business or a different service” (p. 19). Innovation needs to be
purposeful so that entrepreneurs can use it to create resources or wealth. Drucker also describes
innovation as the knowledge base of entrepreneurship.

13

Schumpeter (1934b) distinguished five types of innovation: the introduction of a new
good, the introduction of a new method of production, the opening of a new market, the conquest
of a new source of supply or raw materials, and the carrying out of the new organization in any
industry. However, innovation need not be limited to those five types. Like entrepreneurship, it
can be characterized in many ways. According to Johnson (2001), innovation refers to: any
change in the product or service range that an organization takes to market, in the application of
a product or service from its original purpose, in the market to which a product or service is
applied from the originally identified market, or in the way a product or service is developed and
delivered from the original operational and logistical design. Johnson also mentions a special
category of innovation that involves an organization developing a core business model that
differs from the current or a previous business model. An example of this is organizations other
than banks trying to generate revenue by providing financial services.
Drucker (1985) discusses systematic innovation, meaning that areas of change that offer
entrepreneurial opportunities should be systematically examined. He identifies seven sources for
innovative opportunity that organizations engaging in systematic innovation should monitor. The
first four, considered to be within the enterprise, are the unexpected, the incongruent, innovation
driven by process need, and changes in industry structure or market structure that “catch
everyone unawares” (p. 35). The next three are changes that occur outside the enterprise:
demographics, “changes in perception, mood, and meaning, …[and] … new knowledge, both
scientific and nonscientific” (p. 35).
Systematic innovation does not always occur in a structured manner. For example, an
innovation can be generated by evidence that there is room for quality enhancement of a product
or a service (Rowley, 2011). Evidence that a service or product is unsatisfactory can come from

14

formal or informal feedback from staff or customers. This, in turn, can result in an innovation as
the organization attempts to improve the product or service. In other instances, innovation is
provoked by changes in the environment, including changing consumer behavior, economic
conditions, technological advancements, or policy changes. Of course, organizations do not
always actively engage in innovation or have a systematic approach to it. Bessant and Tidd
(2007) view innovation as an extended and organized process rather than a flash of inspiration.
Drucker (1985) acknowledges the existence of innovation that comes from something other than
the aforementioned evidence or changes in the environment. These are the bright idea or “flash
of genius” (p. 121) but they cannot be taught, learned, or replicated.
It is more difficult for public-service institutions to be innovative because they are limited
by budgets, have a multitude of constituents, and exist to “do good,” meaning they do not frame
their missions using a cost-benefit analysis (Drucker, 1985), do not generate revenue like
businesses, and do not have the same flexibility as businesses in taking risks. Their resources
may also be more limited. Rowley (2011), writing specifically about libraries, acknowledges that
innovation is difficult to accomplish because the public sector can be resistant to change and
innovation and because it is important to collaborate with other public sector organizations.
Collaboration with such organizations may be due to funding needs or common goals. Drucker
(1985) mentions that entrepreneurial policies are needed in public service organizations to make
them capable of innovations. Additionally, they need to view change as an opportunity rather
than a threat.
Zhao (2005) presents three main propositions about the relationship between
entrepreneurship and innovation. The first is that innovation and entrepreneurship are
complementary. Innovation is the source of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurship is what allows

15

innovation to flourish and realize its economic value (Zhao, 2005). McFadzean, O’Loughlin, and
Shaw (2005) support this concept as they note that some form of entrepreneurial activity is
needed to exploit opportunities within organizations, otherwise no action is taken on innovative
ideas. Something is needed to make those ideas a reality and that something is entrepreneurial
activity. Zhao’s (2005) second proposition is that “entrepreneurship uses innovation to expand
business scope and boost growth. Therefore, entrepreneurship and innovation are dynamic and
holistic processes that are not confined to the initial stage of a new venture” (p. 34). Innovation
and entrepreneurship are both necessary initially, as a business expands, and to keep the business
going in the future. The third proposition is that “the development of entrepreneurship and
innovation, and interaction between them for the successful commercialization of innovation,
require an organizational culture and a management style that are innovation-focused and
supportive” (p. 35). It is difficult for innovation and entrepreneurship to exist in organizational
cultures where they are not supported, especially because supporting entrepreneurship and
innovation in an organization is not without risk. An organizational culture and management
culture that are supportive of entrepreneurship and innovation recognize the risk but are
supportive because they also recognize the necessity of both entrepreneurship and innovation to
the success and longevity of the organization.
The Entrepreneurial Organization
Sharma and Chrisman (1999) propose two definitions that incorporate the organization
into the definition of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurs. They define entrepreneurship as
encompassing “acts of organizational creation, renewal, or innovation that occur within or
outside an existing organization” and entrepreneurs as “individuals or groups of individuals,
acting independently or as part of a corporate system, who create new organizations, or instigate

16

renewal or innovation within an existing organization” (p. 17). These definitions are important to
consider because individuals can be labeled as entrepreneurs, but organizations can also be
labeled as entrepreneurial.
What makes an organizational entrepreneurial? According to Bhattacharyya (2006),
“leadership style […] creates the appropriate climate for entrepreneurship and innovation in an
organization” (p. 110). Although leadership is important to and can influence organizational
climate and culture, there are other characteristics by which to define an entrepreneurial
organization. Stevenson and Gumpert (1985) describe an entrepreneurial organization as having
the following characteristics: encouragement of individuals’ imagination, flexibility, and a
willingness to accept risks. They mention that it is up to the individual organization to allow
entrepreneurship to flourish and to do this the organization should be “encouraging the timely
pursuit of opportunity, the most appropriate commitment and use of resources, and the
breakdown of hierarchy” (p. 93). Slaughter (1996) identifies seven steps to shaping an
entrepreneurial organization: hiring self motivated people, helping others be successful, creating
clarity in the organization (this includes the clarification of purpose, direction, structure, and
measurement), determining and communicating one’s own values and philosophies, providing
appropriate reward systems, creating an experimental learning attitude, and celebrating victories.
Stevenson and Gumpert (1985) identify some things that organizations can do to encourage
entrepreneurship, and these overlap with Slaughter’s seven steps. They note that organizations
can make an effort to determine the barriers to entrepreneurship, minimize the risks to
individuals for being entrepreneurial, exploit any resource pool, and tailor the reward system
within the organization to reward entrepreneurial behavior.

17

Another important characteristic of entrepreneurial organizations is their pursuit of
opportunity, regardless of the resources controlled (Austin, Stevenson & Wei-Skillern, 2006;
Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). That is, an entrepreneurial organization pursues opportunities and
does not view a lack of resources as a barrier. Bhattacharyya (2006) emphasizes the influence of
top management on engagement in entrepreneurship and innovation within a firm. However,
Stevenson and Jarillo (1990) place importance on those who may not be in leadership positions.
According to them, “the level of entrepreneurship within the firm (i.e., the pursuit of
opportunities) is crucially dependent on the attitude of individuals within the firm, below the
ranks of top management” (p. 23). Cornwall and Perlman (1990) echo this belief, emphasizing
that often subordinates are the key to successful changes and adaptations within an organization.
Members of top management act as entrepreneurial leaders and influence the behavior of
employees and the organizational culture.
Cornwall and Perlman (1990) describe an entrepreneurial organization as one willing and
able to adapt to a changing external environment, because such organizations realize that change
is an opportunity rather than a threat. Innovation and change should be commonplace in
entrepreneurial organizations. They discuss the importance of pursuing opportunities yet they
add that organizational entrepreneurship must be approached from a strategic management
perspective, meaning that entrepreneurship should be part of an organization’s strategic plan.
Entrepreneurial Leadership
Cogliser and Brigham (2004) consider “the definition of an entrepreneur to have
substantial overlap with that of a leader (but one who leads in extraordinary situations)” (p. 775).
Just as there is no clear agreement on the definition of entrepreneurship, there is no established
definition of entrepreneurial leadership; the study of entrepreneurial leadership is in its nascent

18

stages (Kempster & Cope, 2010, p. 9). Some (Cogliser & Brigham, 2004; Fernald Jr., Solomon,
& Tarabishy, 2005; Schuman 1994) find an overlap between entrepreneurship and leadership.
Cogliser and Bingham (2004) see the overlap as follows: “The primary categories that we see as
relevant are vision, influence (both of followers and of a larger constituency), leading
innovative/creative people, and planning” (p. 777). The mentioned categories are necessary for
both entrepreneurship and leadership. Eggers and Smilor (1996) also mention characteristics of
entrepreneurs that overlap with those of leaders, including creating and managing change,
motivating others, having a vision and direction, having focus, communicating effectively, and
motivating oneself.
Eggers and Leahy (1995) identified 34 leadership skills that are required of
entrepreneurial leaders. Of those the top five are: financial management, communication,
motivation of others, vision, and motivation of self. According to Schuman (1994),
entrepreneurial leaders have vision. Gupta, MacMillan, and Surie (2004) also include vision in
their definition of entrepreneurial leadership:
Leadership […] creates visionary scenarios that are used to assemble and
mobilize a “supporting cast” of participants who become committed by the
vision to the discovery and exploitation of strategic value creation. This
definition emphasized the challenge of mobilizing the resources and gaining
the commitment required for value creation that the entrepreneurial leader
faces, which involves creating a vision and a cast of supporters capable of
enacting that vision. (p. 242)
Darling and Beebe (2007) identify seven key communication priorities that are important to
entrepreneurial leadership: paradoxical thinking, controlled reflecting, intentional focusing,
instinctive responding, inclusive behaving, purposeful trusting, and relational being. They
emphasize the importance of communication in entrepreneurial leadership, bringing together the
concepts of communication, innovation, and opportunity. They state that “entrepreneurship is

19

fundamentally a way of thinking and communicating that bridges innovative discoveries with
opportunity fulfillment” (p. 152).
Kempster and Cope (2010) examine entrepreneurship and leadership and find that
entrepreneurship becomes increasingly distinct during the growth process of a company. Yet,
they could not determine how entrepreneurs learn how to become leaders. Lydon and colleagues
(Lydon, 2001; Swiercz & Lydon, 2002) feel that it is necessary for entrepreneurial leaders to
grow with their organization. Nicholson (1998) concludes that it cannot be determined whether
entrepreneurial leaders have a specific personality type. Yet, innovation and risk taking often
emerge in discussions of entrepreneurial leaders. Tarabishy, Solomon, Fernald, and Sashkin
(2005) describe entrepreneurial leaders as follows: “These leaders or ‘entrepreneurial leaders’
can help organizations by creating and implementing an organizational strategy that is
entrepreneurially oriented, which therefore exhibits proactiveness, innovation, and risk-taking”
(p. 25).
Thornberry (2006) identifies the following kinds of entrepreneurial leaders:
•

Generals, who display general entrepreneurial leadership behaviors;

•

Explorers, who are market focused;

•

Miners, who are operationally focused;

•

Accelerators, who are unit focused; and

•

Integrators, who are enterprise focused.

Thornberry believes that a company can figure out which type of entrepreneurial leader it needs
by using this list and putting mechanisms in place to support this type of entrepreneurial leader.
Thornberry also discusses the idea of developing entrepreneurial leaders within a company
through mentoring.

20

Darling, Keeffe, and Ross (2007) focus their research on what it takes to be a successful
entrepreneurial leader. “In essence, successful entrepreneurial leadership can generally be
thought of as leading, through direct involvement, a process that creates value for organizational
stakeholders by bringing together a unique innovation and package of resources to respond to a
recognized opportunity” (p. 42). Part of being a successful entrepreneurial leader includes
promoting new activities, being creative, being innovative, and constantly adapting to change. It
also means having the ability to take advantage of opportunities effectively and motivating
people to be actively involved in the process of utilizing those opportunities. Entrepreneurial
leaders must provide opportunities to others and take the organization towards achieving a
vision. “Entrepreneurial leadership is all about breaking new ground, going beyond the known,
and helping to create the future” (Darling, Keefe, & Ross, p. 42).
Entrepreneurial Leadership and Libraries
In LIS, there is little research on entrepreneurial leadership in libraries. Most writings
discussing entrepreneurship in the library profession are descriptive or opinion essays rather than
representing research. For example, Kilgour (1992) discusses entrepreneurial librarians between
1880 and 1970, and Nijboer (2006) looks at how libraries can engage in cultural
entrepreneurship. Dempsey (2004) provides examples of revenue generating activities in
libraries, ranging from commonplace activities such as used book sales and cafés to more nontraditional such as passport services, building rentals, consulting, and fee-based business
information services. deVries (2003) points out that while libraries engage in discovering,
evaluating, and exploiting opportunities to create new services, these activities are not labeled as
entrepreneurship.

21

Neal (2001) discusses the need for academic libraries to embrace the entrepreneurial
spirit and to “create new income streams for the organization” (p. 10). He also provides a
typology for entrepreneurial activity. Using this typology as a framework, Carpenter (2012)
looks at academic library directors identified as entrepreneurial leaders. Her research includes
discussion of a definition of entrepreneurial leadership, its attributes, and entrepreneurial
activities in which academic libraries are engaged. Participants in her study mention three major
barriers to becoming entrepreneurial: “the people around them, a change-resistant organizational
culture and structure, and lack of funding” (pp. 17-18).
Jusic’s (2013) research, which centered on entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries,
defined entrepreneurial leadership as “creating a vision and leading the organization through the
process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue streams
that reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or funding models” (pp. 30-31). She
found that the focus of entrepreneurial activities fell into four categories: (1) traditional library
services funded by outside support, (2) activities that directly generate revenue, (3) activities that
do not generate revenue but provide a new product or service, and (4) activities that are nonrevenue generating but add value. Examples included building rentals, reading programs, a
consulting service for other libraries, a passport service, development of an open source
integrated library system, development of an e-book platform, and a destination library located in
a children’s museum.6 Some of these activities are new and unlike traditional library services.
While they were successfully implemented in libraries whose directors were identified as
entrepreneurial leaders, such activities may not be easily accepted or implemented in the average
public library.

6

This is like a small library branch, but located within a children’s museum rather than in a standalone building.

22

Organizational Culture
The concept of culture stems from the study of ethnic and national differences in
sociology, anthropology, and social psychology (Baumgartner, 2009; Wilson, 2001). There is no
agreement on what culture is or how it should be studied (Schneider, Ehrhart, & Macey, 2013).
The concept of culture has been applied in various ways to organization studies (Smircich,
1983).
Pettigrew (1979) introduced the idea of culture to organization studies by showing that
the concepts of symbol, language, ideology, belief, ritual, and myth could be applied to the study
of organizations. He views these concepts as interdependent, to varying degrees, and feels “that
there is some convergence in the way they related to functional problems of integration, control,
and commitment” (p. 576). Further:
These concepts direct attention toward the mobilization of consciousness and
purpose, the codification of meaning, the emergence of normative patterns, the
rise and fall of systems of leadership and strategies of legitimization. It is
through such mechanisms and processes that culture evolves, and indeed the
ever fluctuating state which we describe as an organizational culture then acts
as a determinant or constraint on the way further attempts to handle issues of
purpose, integration, and commitment are handled. (pp. 576-577)
Schneider, Ehrhart, and Macey (2013) discuss different research approaches to organizational
culture. They note, two perspectives: “organizations have cultures,” in which researchers are
concerned with the ways in which organizations differ and focus on organizational effectiveness
and organizational change; and “organizations are cultures,” in which researchers focus on
description and understanding. Using this last perspective, researchers look at how
organizational members develop meaning and make basic assumptions that guide the way in
which the organization functions.

23

Another approach to the study of culture is through the lens of three theories: the
integration perspective, the differentiation perspective, and the fragmentation perspective
(Meyerson & Martin, 1987). In the integration perspective, portrayals of culture emphasize
consistency and consensus among group members. This perspective usually includes a focus on
leaders as culture creators. According to Wilson (1997), the majority of research highlighting
relationships between culture and performance has emerged from researchers who have adopted
this perspective. The differentiation perspective maintains that consensus occurs within the
boundaries of a subculture rather than being organization-wide. In this perspective, there are
multiple sources of cultural content, and it is not all leader generated (Meyerson & Martin, 1987,
p. 631). In the fragmentation perspective, ambiguity is the norm and part of organizational life,
and consensus and dissention co-exist in constantly fluctuating patterns. This perspective focuses
on what is unclear. “Cultural manifestations are not clearly consistent or inconsistent with each
other. Instead, the relationships among manifestations are characterized by a lack of clarity from
ignorance or complexity” (Meyerson & Martin, 1987, p. 637).
Although there are different approaches to the study of culture, Schein (1983, 2010)
developed one of the most commonly mentioned frameworks of organizational culture
(Schneider, Ehrhart, & Macey, 2013). Schein (2010) describes culture as shared norms, values,
and assumptions, and defines organizational culture as:
The pattern of basic assumptions that a given group has invented, discovered,
or developed in learning to cope with its problems of external adaptation and
internal integrations – a pattern of assumptions that has worked well enough to
be considered valid, and therefore, to be taught to new members as the correct
way to perceive, think and feel in relation to those problems. (p. 14)
In analyzing the culture of an organization, Schein (2010), describes three levels at which culture
manifests itself:

24

1. Artifacts, which include “visible and feelable structures and processes” along with
observed behavior.
2. Espoused beliefs and values, which encompass ideals, goals, values, aspirations,
ideologies, and rationalizations.
3. Basic underlying assumptions, which are defined as “unconscious, taken-for-granted
beliefs and values.” (p. 24)
Cameron and Quinn (2011) define organizational culture in terms of “taken-for-granted values,
underlying assumptions, expectations, collective memories, and definitions that characterize
organizations and their members” (p. 18). This characterization includes some of Schein’s (2010)
components. Cameron and Quinn see culture as something that provides unwritten, often
unspoken guidelines for getting along in an organization.
Wilson (2001) identifies four key elements related to organizational culture. The first is
that organizational culture is a shared phenomenon; culture is “a learned product of group
experience […] only to be found where there is a definable group with a significant history” (p.
355). The group does not have to be a whole company since companies can have multiple
cultures or subcultures (Kotter & Heskett, 1992; Wilson, 1997). The second element is that there
are two levels of culture, the visible level and the deeper less visible level. Examples of visible
aspects include behavior patterns of people, the physical and social environment, and the written
and spoken language used by the group. The deeper level of culture refers to values that are
shared by the group and that persist over time, even when group membership changes (Kotter &
Heskett, 1992, p. 4). Schein (2010) refers to the deeper level of culture that relates to group
values as basic assumptions. These values can vary greatly in different groups. It should be noted
that some of these values may be explicitly stated in a company’s mission statement as the

25

dominant values of the organization (Deal & Kennedy, 1982). These values can be seen as
espoused values if they are not based on prior cultural learning. Argyris and Schon (1978) define
espoused values as predicting what people say they will do in a variety of situations but which
may not be aligned with what people will actually do in situations where those values should
actually be used. The third of Wilson’s (2001) elements is the manner in which new members
learn the culture, and the fourth element is that organizational cultures tend to change slowly
over time. Culture changes or evolves due to workforce turnover, changes in the company’s
market environment, and general changes in society (Kotter & Heskett, 1992). Using those
elements, Wilson (2001) defines organizational culture as “the visible and less visible norms,
values and behaviour that are shared by a group of employees which shape the group’s sense of
what is acceptable and valid” (p. 356). These values, norms, and behavior are generally slow to
change. New group members learn them through both formal and informal socialization
processes.
Kotter and Haskett (1992) write that at the deeper and less visible level, where culture
refers to “values that are shared by the people in a group and that tend to persist over time even
when group membership changes” (p. 4), the culture can be difficult to change, partially because
group members are unaware of many of the values that bind them together. The other level,
which is the more visible level, is not as difficult to change. At that level “culture represents the
behavior patterns or style of an organization that new employees are automatically encouraged to
follow” (p. 4). It should be noted that Schein’s (2010) view is that cultures should only relate to
the deeper levels. He, however, uses visible evidence to describe and understand different
cultures.

26

Kotter and Heskett (1992) also discuss the notion of weak and strong cultures,
mentioning that events such as turnover or crises can weaken a culture. Conversely, cultures can
also grow to be extremely strong when there are “common values, behavior patterns, and
practices, and where the levels of culture are tightly interconnected” (p. 7). Also important to
culture strength are continuity of leadership and stable group membership. Cultures can have a
powerful effect, especially when they are strong. Cultures can “enable a group to take rapid and
coordinated action against a competitor or for a customer. They can also lead intelligent people
to walk, in concert, off a cliff” (p. 8). Cultures can contribute to a positive workplace or they can
lead people within an organization to make poor decisions.
The idea that organizations have cultures has led to a focus on the relationship between
organizational culture and organizational effectiveness. Schneider, Ehrhart, and Macey (2013)
suggest that “most research on culture focuses on the direct relationship between culture and
performance, but almost all theory related to how culture impacts performance would
conceptualize it in a more moderated/mediated fashion” (p. 375). A number of researchers who
have written about the relationship between culture and performance claim that success-oriented
or strong organizational culture increases organizational effectiveness (Deal & Kennedy, 1982;
Denison, 1990; Kotter & Heskett, 1992; Peters & Waterman, 1982; Schein 2010). Acar and Acar
(2014) acknowledge that organizational culture can affect business performance, and that
different types of organizational culture lead to different performance outcomes. They
specifically highlight the difference between public sector and private sector organizations due to
the performance of the latter being tied to profit.
Cameron and Quinn (2011) developed the Organizational Culture Assessment Instrument
(OCAI), which diagnoses organizational culture based on the competing values framework

27

(CVF). The CVF uses two dimensions, which represent two axes forming four quadrants. Each
quadrant represents different indicators of organizational effectiveness and a culture type:
•

The clan culture has a high level of flexibility and discretion with an internal focus.
Cameron and Quinn call it a clan because it has a similarity to a family-type
organization; they describe it as appearing like an extended family. In this type of
culture cohesion, shared values and goals, and teamwork are important.

•

The adhocracy culture has a high level of flexibility and discretion with an external
orientation. The adhocracy is meant to “foster adaptability, flexibility, and creativity
where uncertainly, ambiguity and/or information-overload are typical” (p. 49). A
challenge for an adhocracy is to “produce innovative products and services and to
adapt quickly to new opportunities” (p. 49).

•

The market culture has high control with an outward focus. This type of
organizational culture is described as one in which the major focus is to conduct
transactions such as exchanges, sales, and contracts with external constituencies.

•

The hierarchy culture has a high level of stability and control with an internal focus,
meaning that it is a formalized and structured organization. Cameron and Quinn
(2011) describe it as a place where procedures, formal rules, and policies hold the
organization together.

The OCAI, using a series of questions and scoring, identifies the current organizational
culture by determining which of the four quadrants the culture most closely matches. The OCAI
can also be taken by members of an organization to determine what the preferred or future
culture of an organization should be. Management can then work on making changes to lead the
organization towards the desired organizational culture.

28

There are many other descriptions of organizational culture. Hofstede, Neuijen, Ohavy,
and Sanders (1990) present six factors that describe differences in organizational culture:
process-oriented versus results-oriented, employee-oriented versus job-oriented, parochial versus
professional, open system versus closed system, loose versus tight controls, and normative
versus pragmatic. Deal and Kennedy’s (1982) model of organizational culture is based on two
dimensions: risk and feedback. They suggest that the business environment, or corporate culture,
influences a company’s organizational culture. Using the two key dimensions, they identify four
types of organizational culture:
1. The tough-guy, macho culture in which individuals regularly take high risks. In this
culture, people receive feedback quickly.
2. The work hard/play hard culture in which employees take few risks and receive quick
feedback. This culture is about fun and action and employees are encouraged to
maintain a high level of mostly low-risk activity.
3. The bet-your-company culture in which big-stakes decisions mean high risk.
Feedback is slow because it can take a long time to know whether decisions have paid
off.
4. The process culture, which is slow to provide feedback and reward. Employees focus
on details and process and the risks are low.
Deal and Kennedy recognize that this model is simplistic, but allow that it is a starting point for
looking at organizational culture. A company can have more than one of the culture types, and
they suggest that companies that have strong cultures have a mix of the four types of culture and
are responsive to a changing environment.

29

Another definition of organizational culture is “the shared beliefs and values guiding the
thinking and behavioral styles of members” (Cooke & Rousseau, 1988, p. 245). Most culture
studies take a qualitative approach, whereas Cooke and Rousseau (1988) take a quantitative
approach using the Organizational Culture Inventory (OCI), developed by Cooke and Lafferty
(1983). This instrument profiles the culture of an organization by looking at behavioral norms
and expectations. There is both agreement and differences within an organization about the
norms and expectations when measured by the OCI (Cooke & Rousseau, 1988).
An organization can have a dominant culture as well as subcultures. There are subcultural
differences that occur across hierarchical levels within the organization. This means that
different units within an organization can have different subcultures. Also, organizations
typically have different levels of positions (e.g., clerical staff, professional staff, and managers)
and different functions within those levels. With the possibility of there being many different
subcultures, counter cultures can emerge. Cooke and Rousseau (1988) describe these as “ways of
thinking and believing that are in direct conflict between subcultures, as in the classic sales
versus production battles that characterize many business firms” (p. 249). Although an
organization can have a strong culture, organizations in transition often have weaker cultures.
According to Cooke and Rousseau (1988), “Frequent changes in top management also seem to
be linked to weak cultures, suggesting that consistent direction from the top builds consistency in
rewards and other structures promoting behavioral norms” (p. 270). This statement underlines
the power of top management’s influence on organizational culture. Top level managers help to
shape the organization’s culture.

30

Entrepreneurial Organizational Culture
Duobiene and Pundziene (2007) write that flexibility, innovation, mutual trust, open
communication, and other features of entrepreneurship are promoted within an entrepreneurial
organization. They also identify such an organization as one having an entrepreneurial
organizational culture. Cornwall and Perlman (1990) emphasize that culture is a key determinant
of entrepreneurial activity within an organization. Building on Schein’s (2010) three levels of
culture (artifacts, values, and basic assumptions within the context of an entrepreneurial
organization), Cornwall and Perlman present ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organizational culture: risk taking (this includes innovation); earned respect within the
organization; integrity, trust and credibility; including people in what is considered important to
the organization; emotional commitment; an attitude among staff that work is fun; allowing
people at all levels of the organization to lead; the sense that everything the organization does
has value for its customers and workers; relentless attention to details, people, structure, and
process; and effectiveness and efficiency. They describe the last characteristic of an
entrepreneurial organization as the organization needing the discipline necessary to execute dayto-day activities, while having the freedom to adapt to change.
Organizational culture and management style are critical factors in the development of
innovation and entrepreneurial behavior in an organization (Zhao, 2005). Slevin and Covin
(1990) note that successful companies engage in entrepreneurial managerial behaviors, but have
the appropriate culture and organizational structure to support such behaviors. They caution that
a supportive organizational structure and culture are necessary for things that are often a part of
entrepreneurship such as risk taking, innovation, and proactivity among employees. Further, they

31

assert that entrepreneurship is not always a good option for organizations, especially if they do
not have the organizational structure and culture to support entrepreneurship.
Bhattacharyya (2006) believes that leadership style creates the appropriate climate for
entrepreneurship in an organization, while others (Cornwall & Perlman, 1990; Zhao, 2005) point
out that engaging in entrepreneurship is difficult without an organizational culture that supports
entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship is difficult “when it is attempted in an organization lacking in
entrepreneurial processes, strategies, and structures” (Cornwall & Perlman, 1990, p. vi). There
have to be mechanisms in place to support entrepreneurship within the organization. Within any
organization, managerial support is necessary for entrepreneurship to flourish, and that support is
necessary if entrepreneurship is to remain a focus.
Theoretical Framework
The theoretical framework for this study encompasses entrepreneurship (and
entrepreneurial leadership as an extension of entrepreneurship), innovation, and the organization
as viewed from the four frames perspective. Entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership are
approached through Neal’s (2001) typology of entrepreneurial activity as adapted by Jusic
(2013). Innovation is approached using Baregheh, Rowley, and Sandbrook’s (2009) model of
innovation. However, rather than being treated as an independent concept, innovation is
considered as a component of entrepreneurship using the model of innovation developed by
Baregheh et al. (2009). The final perspective draws on Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four frames,
which were developed for better understanding leadership and organizations from multiple
perspectives.

32

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership
Neal (2001) suggests that academic libraries “must pursue strategic thinking and action,
fiscal agility, and creative approaches to the development of collections and services and to the
expansion of markets” (p. 1). He envisions the future academic library as having a more
entrepreneurial approach to the packaging and delivery of information. According to him, there
are several characteristics that “reflect an entrepreneurial culture and an innovative spirit” (p. 8).
They are: “active faculty participation, a research and development focus, innovative
applications of technology, academic and corporate partnerships, foundation and federal funding,
and a potential for capitalization and marketing” (p. 8). One of the purposes, according to him, of
the aforementioned entrepreneurial business initiatives is to produce a new income stream for the
library that will benefit collections and services. As academic libraries transition from a
traditional model, Neal calls for more radical change rather than incremental change and for a
more entrepreneurial approach.
Jusic (2013) adapted Neal’s (2001) typology for entrepreneurial activity for public
libraries. Table 1.1, which compares Neal’s original typology with the one modified for public
libraries, incorporates changes suggested by study participants.
Table 1.1
Neal’s typology adapted for public libraries
Academic Library
Active faculty participation

Public Library
•

Active community participation

•

Active library board participation

•

Active staff engagement and support

33

•

Active stakeholder engagement (includes
volunteers, community leaders, elected
officials, foundations, Friends of the Library,
and the corporate community)

Research and development focus

•

Focus on community needs and relevance

•

Focus on library trends and innovation

•

Innovation, capital requirements, and
efficiency

Innovative applications of technology

Academic and corporate partnerships

•

Relevance to services being offered

•

Tracking of societal and professional trends

•

Application and integration of technology

•

Innovative applications of technology

•

Community and corporate collaboration

•

Library and vendor partnerships

•

Partnerships with community, corporate, and
non-profit organizations

Foundation and federal funding

•

City, state, federal governments, foundations,
Friends of the Library, and private funding

•
A potential for capitalization and marketing •

Sponsorships and in kind contributions
A potential for capitalization and marketing

Adapted with permission from “Entrepreneurial Leadership in Public Libraries,” by J. Jusic, 2013, Public Libraries,
52, p. 31.

34

Innovation
There are many variations on the definition of innovation across different disciplines,
without clear agreement. Baregheh et al. (2009) analyzed 60 definitions from different
disciplines to provide a cross-disciplinary definition of innovation: “Innovation is the multi-stage
process whereby organizations transform ideas into new/improved products, service or
processes, in order to advance, compete and differentiate themselves successfully in their
marketplace” (p. 1334). They also provide a diagrammatic definition (Figure 1.1) with six
attributes that the researchers identified as being common in the various cross-discipline
definitions of innovation which they examined. They emphasize that the model is not necessarily
the ideal or actual flow of the innovation process, and the innovation process is not necessarily
linear. However, the model, which captures the essence of innovation, presents a possible flow
for the innovation process and allows for different starting points in the process.
Figure 1.1
A diagrammatic definition of innovation

Creation
Generation
Implementation
Development
Adoption

Organizations
Firms
Customers
Social systems
Employees
Developers

Technology
Ideas
Inventions
Creativity
Market

Succeed
Differentiate
Compete

Product
Service
Process
Technical

New
Improve
Change

Adapted with permission from “Towards a Multidisciplinary Definition of Innovation,” by A. Baregheh, J. Rowley,
and S. Sambrook, 2009, Management Decision, 47, p. 1333. Copyright 2009 by Emerald Insight.

35

Innovation is a characteristic of the entrepreneur, a component of entrepreneurship, and a
component of an entrepreneurial organization. For the purposes of this study, innovation is taken
to be a component of entrepreneurship rather than an independent concept. In Jusic’s (2013)
definition of entrepreneurial leadership (“creating a vision and leading the organization through
the process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue
streams that reinforce existing services or lead to new service and/or funding models” (pp. 3031), innovation falls under “the process of discovery” and “exploitation of opportunities to […]
lead to new services and/or funding models.” This also fits within the six stages or attributes of
innovation presented by Baregheh, Rowley, and Sandbrook (2009) in their model of the
innovation process. For example, library employees (social) may create (stages), a new (nature)
product or service (type) using technology (means) to differentiate themselves or succeed (aim).
Four Frames
Bolman and Deal (2013) developed four frames for understanding organizations and
leadership. These frames allow managerial leaders to process information and view the
organization from multiple perspectives. The frames include:
•

The structural frame, which focuses on the organizational structure, and includes the
design of units, authority, rules, roles, goals and priorities.

•

The human resource frame, which focuses on the relationship between the
organization and its employees, and places importance on understanding people.

•

The political frame, which emphasizes conflict and competition, views resources
within an organization as scarce, and shows that conflict arises in the competition for
those resources and for power.

36

•

The symbolic frame, which focuses on the organization’s culture, and places
importance on ritual, ceremony, play, story, and meaning.

According to Bolman and Deal (2013), effective leaders rely on a multi-frame approach because
it allows them to develop a holistic picture of complex situations. Leaders can use the four
frames to “see new possibilities and to create new opportunities” and “to discover alternatives
when options seem severely constrained” (p. 434). As an example, a leader implementing change
in an organization needs to consider the process from multiple perspectives. If a leader focuses
only on the structural aspect in an attempt to align the organization better to meet the demands of
the external environment, the changes implemented are not likely to go smoothly. A leader needs
to consider also the human resource frame and how changes will affect the staff. Using the four
frames enables leaders to consider the organization from different perspectives, and ultimately
choose which framework (or combination of frameworks) is best used for approaching a
particular problem.
Objectives and Research Questions
The first set of objectives and research questions (Table 1.2) focuses on library directors,
and the second set (Table 1.3) focuses on mid to upper level managers who have entrepreneurial
responsibilities.

37

Table 1.2
Objectives and research questions focused on the director
Objectives

Research Questions
Entrepreneurship and Leadership

• To identify the director’s perspective on

•

entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial
leadership

Is there linkage between leadership and
entrepreneurship?

•

What is the director’s definition of
leadership?

•

How does entrepreneurship fit within that
definition?

•

Does the definition provided7 match the
director’s definition? This question
encompasses the following one:
•

What does the director think of this
definition?

•

Does the definition apply to the library and
what the director is trying to accomplish?

•

Does the typology (Table 1.1) encompass
the director’s perspective on
entrepreneurship? The following question
is a part of this one:

7

For this study, the following definition of entrepreneurial leadership will be used: “creating a vision and leading
the organization through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue
streams that reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or funding models.”

38

•

Does the director consider any one set
of items in the typology as most
important?

Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
•

To identify the director’s perspective on

•

Does the director agree with the statement:

individual entrepreneurship versus

A library can be entrepreneurial but may

organizational entrepreneurship

not have a single or central entrepreneur?
•

Does the director view himself or herself
or anyone within the organization as an
entrepreneurial leader? This question
encompasses the following ones:
•

What makes a person an entrepreneur
or an organization entrepreneurial?
o How do they come to that
conclusion?

•

To identify whether the library is

•

Is the library more entrepreneurial than

perceived as being more entrepreneurial

when the director first started (based on

than when the director first started

number of activities engaged in, revenue
generated, and plans for future activities)?
Innovation

•

To identify the role of innovation in the

•

library

Does the director consider innovation to be
a part of entrepreneurship or something

39

separate? This question encompasses the
following ones:
•

If the director does, how is it a part of
entrepreneurship?

•

If the director does not, how is it
separate?

•

Does innovation exist in the library
with regard to entrepreneurial activities
and services, and in what way?

Four Frames
•

To identify which frames (Bolman &

•

Do any of Bolman and Deal’s (2013)

Deal, 2013) the director considers most

frames relate to problems that the library

important in dealing with

needs to overcome as it continues its

entrepreneurship over the next two years

entrepreneurial direction? This question
encompasses the following ones:
•

If the director mentions human
resource or structural frames, do the
problems identified relate to
organizational culture?
o Did the director make
changes to either frame to
better support
entrepreneurship?

40

o Has the director made any
other changes to better
support entrepreneurship in
the organization?
Organizational Culture
To identify whether the organizational

•

How would the director describe the

culture has changed since the arrival of the

current organizational culture at the

new director

library? This question encompasses the
following ones:
•

Which of Cornwall and Perlman’s
(1990) ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organizational culture
exist in the libraries?
o Do the characteristics vary
by entrepreneurial activity?
o Is the culture for
entrepreneurial activities
and services the same as for
the library as a whole?

•

What changes in the entrepreneurial
culture, if any, has the director made since
starting at the library? The following
question is a part of this one:

41

•

Have those changes had any noticeable
impact on organizational culture
(change in beliefs, values, norms,
assumptions)?

•

Does the director foresee any challenges
related to the libraries’ culture in achieving
the direction set for the libraries?

•

Taking the typology for public libraries
(Table 1.1) into consideration, to what
extent is entrepreneurship engrained in the
current organizational culture? This
question encompasses the following one:
•

Is there anything in the typology in
which libraries should increase efforts
(e.g., more community and corporate
collaboration)?

Mission and Vision Statements
•

To identify the importance of

•

Have the mission and vision statements

entrepreneurship to the mission and

changed since the director assumed the

vision statements of the libraries

position?
•

Does entrepreneurship fit those
statements?

42

•

How essential is entrepreneurship to these
statements?

•

How essential is entrepreneurship to the
direction the library is heading?

Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by Libraries
•

To identify the entrepreneurial activities

•

In which entrepreneurial activities and

and services in which the libraries are

services is the library engaged? The

engaged

following question is a part of this one:
•

How long has the library been engaged
in each activity?

•

For each, why is the library engaging in
this entrepreneurial activity or service?

•

To identify whether any of the

•

Do any of the entrepreneurial activities and

entrepreneurial activities and services are

services generate revenue? This question

revenue generating

encompasses the following ones:
•

If yes, which activities or services
generate revenue?
o How much revenue does each
generate?
o How is that revenue used?
o Is it being used to support other
entrepreneurial activities and
services, to supplement the

43

library budget, or for another
purpose?
•

If not, is revenue generation a future
goal?
o If yes, what is the plan for
future revenue generation?

•

To identify whether any activities or

•

services have been eliminated

Have any entrepreneurial activities or
services been eliminated? The following
question is a part of this one:
•

•

If yes, why?

To identify whether the director has plans •

Does the director have plans for future

for future entrepreneurial activities and

entrepreneurial activities and services?

services

This question encompasses the following
ones:

•

•

If yes, what are they?

•

If no, why not?

Will there be more or less focus in the next
two to three years on entrepreneurial
activities and services in the library? This
question encompasses the following one:
•

If there will be less focus, what are the
other areas of focus (or priorities) for
the directors?

44

Benefits Derived
•

To identify the benefits derived from

•

entrepreneurial activities and services

What are the benefits derived from
engaging in entrepreneurial activities and
services (e.g., prestige, financial gain)?

Library Stakeholders
•

To identify key stakeholder views

•

towards entrepreneurship at the library

Who are the key stakeholders with respect
to entrepreneurial activities and services?
The following question is a part of this
one:
•

How is each important to
entrepreneurship?

•

What do the stakeholders think of the
entrepreneurial activities and services in
which the library is engaged?

Table 1.3
Objectives and research questions focused on mid to upper level managers
Objective

Research Question(s)

Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
•

To identify the managers’ perspective on

•

Do managers agree with the statement: A

individual entrepreneurship versus

library can be entrepreneurial but may not

organizational entrepreneurship

have a single or central entrepreneur?

45

•

Do mangers view themselves or anyone
within the organization as an
entrepreneurial leader?

•

What do managers think makes a person
an entrepreneur or an organization
entrepreneurial? This question
encompasses the following one:
•

How did they come to that conclusion?

Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by the Libraries
•

To identify the entrepreneurial activities

•

and services in which the managers are
engaged and learn more about each

In which entrepreneurial activities and
services are managers directly involved?

•

activity and service

Why is the library engaging in these
entrepreneurial activities or services?

•

What percentage of their time do
managers spend on the activities or
services?

•

To identify whether there is enough

•

Is there enough support (in terms of time

support (in terms of time allotted,

allotted, resources, and importance placed

resources, importance placed on

on entrepreneurial activities and services)

entrepreneurial activities and services)

within the organization for entrepreneurial

within the organization for

activities and services?

entrepreneurial activities and services?

46

•

To identify the resources and skills

•

needed to engage in entrepreneurial

How many staff members are devoted to
each activity or service?

activities and services

•

Approximately, how much of their time do
these staff members spend on each
entrepreneurial activity or service?

•

Do staff members engaged in
entrepreneurial activities and services need
any special skill set, educational
background, or training?

•

Are staff members assigned to
entrepreneurial activities internal or
contracted employees?

•

If internal, do the staff have master’s
degrees in library and information science,
or is a master’s degree not required?

Benefits Derived
•

To identify the benefits derived from

•

entrepreneurial activities and services

What are the benefits derived from
engaging in entrepreneurial activities and
services (e.g., prestige, financial)?

Organizational Culture
•

To identify whether the organizational

•

culture has changed the longer the library

How do managers describe the current
organizational culture related to those

47

has been engaged in entrepreneurial

engaged in entrepreneurial activities and

activities and services

services?
•

Which of Cornwall and Perlman’s (1990)
ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organizational culture exist in the
libraries? The following question is part of
this one:
o Do the characteristics vary by
entrepreneurial activity?

•

Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities
and services the same as for the library as
a whole or do the staff engaged in
entrepreneurial activities and services
create their own culture(s)? The following
question is a part of this one:
•

If the staff engaged in the activities
and services create their own
culture(s), is this enhanced by revenue
generation?

•

Has the organizational culture changed
since the new director started? This
question encompasses the following ones:

48

•

Have there been changes in beliefs,
values, norms, and/or assumptions
within the organization?

•

Is the library now more
entrepreneurial, the same, or less
entrepreneurial?

•

Taking the typology for public libraries
(see Table 1.1) into consideration, to what
extent is entrepreneurship engrained in the
current organizational culture?

Procedures
Research Design
A case study is “a method for learning about a complex instance, based on a
comprehensive understanding of that instance obtained by extensive description and analysis of
that instance taken as a whole and in its context” (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1990, p. 14).
The purpose of a case study is to gather and analyze information to obtain as complete a picture
as possible of what is happening, and why, in a particular setting. A case study can also test
theory, generate theory, or provide an in-depth description of a phenomenon (Klenke, 2008).
Case studies are widely used in organizational research because they allow “investigators
to retain the holistic and meaningful characteristics of real-life events such as leadership
processes” (Klenke, 2008, p. 59). Case study research has an advantage when “how” or “why”
questions are being asked about “a contemporary set of events, over which a researcher has little
or no control” (Yin, 2014, p. 14).

49

According to the U.S. General Accounting Office8 (GAO, 1990), there are different types
of case studies:
•

The illustrative case study describes what is happening and why. It is intended to add
realism and provide in-depth examples.

•

The exploratory case study is also descriptive in nature. However, it is a shortened
case study “aimed at generating hypotheses for later investigation” (p. 9). It is used to
develop evaluation questions, designs, measures, and strategies that will be used for a
large-scale study.

•

The critical instance case study examines one, or a limited number of, sites for one of
two purposes: (1) to investigate a situation of unique interest, or (2) to test a highly
generalized or universal assertion.

•

The program implementation case study is used to investigate operations, usually at
multiple sites. It is frequently used where there is concern about implementation
problems or to follow the implementation of programs or activities.

•

The program effects case study examines causality. This type of case study usually
involves multi-method, multi-site assessments and is used to determine the effects of
programs and reasons for success or failure.

•

The cumulative case study aggregates information from several sites that may be
collected over an extended period of time. It uses findings from multiple case studies
to answer an evaluation question.

It is also important to consider instance selection in case studies. There are three different
ways of selecting instances: convenience, purpose, and probability. According to the GAO,

8

The agency is now called the Government Accountability Office.

50

instance selection on the basis of purpose is often the most appropriate method. There are seven
varieties of purposive site selection: bracketing, best case, worst case, cluster, representative,
typical, and special interest. Bracketing can help answer what is happening at extremes and what
accounts for the differences. Best case helps to explain what makes an effective program while
worse case can help to answer why a program is not working. Cluster focuses on how different
types of programs compare to each other. In representative selection, instances are chosen to
represent different variations and explore what a program is like and why. Typical focuses on
what is happening and why at a typical site. Special interest focuses on what is happening and
why in a special or specific circumstance.
Case Selection
Case study sites were selected using purposive instance selection, specifically, special
interest selection, which helps answer the question, “in this particular circumstance, what is
happening and why?” (U.S. General Accounting Office, 1990, p. 23). Jusic (2013) identified
libraries known for their entrepreneurial leadership. Since no list of libraries known for their
entrepreneurial leadership existed, she scoured the literature and conference proceedings for the
names of such libraries, consulting as well a number of experts on public libraries and library
leadership. In addition, in her 2013 study, she used the snowball technique, asking each director
interviewed to suggest potential participants.
A total of 12 public library directors ultimately participated in the study.9 Participants
were assured of confidentiality and were identified by a letter from the alphabet in the original
study to conceal their identity. Here they are identified by a number. The names of the libraries

9

All of the libraries with the exception of library 11 had programs and services in place at the time of the initial
study. Library 11 was in the process of working with a local museum to have a branch with interactive exhibits
located in the museum.

51

also remained confidential. Thus, the libraries are not identified by name in Table 1.4, which lists
details about the entrepreneurial activities and services of the potential case study sites that
emerged from Jusic’s (2013) research.
Table 1.4
Public libraries engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services (Jusic, 2013)
Library

Activity/Service

How is the activity
entrepreneurial?

Library 1

•

Library building rented for

•

corporate events and

Library receives revenue
from building rentals

fundraisers
•

Library has contract with

•

catering company which

Library received a percentage
of catering profits

provides catering for all
events in the library
building
Library 2

•

Member of a nationally

•

recognized coffee chain in

Revenue generated from rent
paid to libraries

library
•

Library runs a bus service to •

Leading the organization

bring in children for library

through a process of

programs

discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities
to provide a new service

52

•

Passport service located

•

directly in the library

Revenue stream from
passport service, exploitation
of opportunity, new service
and funding model

Library 3

•

Library is planning to use

•

Generates revenue

•

Generates revenue

•

Organization went through a

library foundation for a
multi-million dollar
campaign to raise money for
library facilities
•

Friends of the Library
generate revenue by selling
used books (in library and
online) and also through
cafés or small gift shops

Library 4

•

Library developed its own
e-book platform

process of discovery,
evaluation, and exploitation
of opportunities to create a
new product in order to offer
a needed service

•

To help local business

•

Was not revenue generating

community, library

but the business community

conducted in depth

made donations for a

53

reference interview,

campaign to pass a library

identified the issues, found

ballot issue because they

resources, put research

were impressed by the project

together, and prepared an
executive summary and
presentation for the business
community answering their
questions
Library 5

•

Library rents three of its

•

historic buildings for special

Revenue generated from
building rentals

events (all renovated within
the past few years)
Library 6

•

Library participates in a

•

Leading the organization

television program where

through a process of

the director interviews

discovery, evaluation, and

historic characters from the

exploitation of opportunities

city’s past

to provide a new service
•

Revenue is not generated
directly through this activity
but some revenue is
generated via private support

Library 7

•

Library developed their own •

The organization went

open source integrated

through a process of

54

library system to better

discovery, evaluation, and

serve the needs of the

exploitation of opportunities

library and library users

to create a new product that
improved an existing service

•

Adult reading program

•

Revenue received from

supported by library

sponsors reinforces the

foundation

existing service of offering
summer reading programs to
the community

Library 8

•

Summer reading program

•

funded by sports team

Revenue received from
sponsors reinforces the
existing service of offering
summer reading programs to
the community

Library 9

•

Consortiums allow for costs •

Exploitation of opportunities

saving to libraries and a

to reinforce existing services

greater number of resources
for library patrons
•

Youth summer reading

•

Revenue received from

program funded by local

sponsors reinforces the

newspaper and sports team

existing service of offering

and winter reading program

summer reading programs to

funded by local corporation

the community

55

•

Library receives funding

•

from tobacco tax

Revenue received from tax
for outreach programs

(established to address
health, welfare, and
education issues for children
birth to give years old) and
uses it for outreach to
community centers, group
homes, homes for teenage
mothers, homeless shelters,
and apartment complexes,
focusing on early literacy
and resources for children
Library 10

•

Library plans to have branch •

Leading the organization

at children’s museum with

through a process of

interactive exhibits

discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities
to provide a new service

Library 11

•

Library offers pre-packaged

•

Revenue stream from

programs on a number of

consulting service,

topics such as

exploitation of opportunity,

merchandizing, self-check,

new service and funding

library websites, developing

model

56

centralized programming,
and planning delivery to
other libraries
•

Library offers the option of
having innovation manager
go to other libraries and
work with them on training
or modules

Library 12

•

Café (operated by outside

•

vendor) offers healthy food

Revenue generated from rent
paid to libraries

options and uses food from
community garden
•

Café also provides catering

•

for all events in the library

Revenue generated from rent
paid to libraries

meeting rooms
•

Summer reading program
supported by local bank

•

Revenue received from
sponsors reinforces the
existing service of offering
summer reading programs to
the community

To update Table 1.4, the investigator reviewed recent LIS literature (since 2013) and
asked experts on public libraries and library leadership to review the table for the names of

57

additional libraries.10 Table 1.5 lists details for four additional libraries with entrepreneurial
activities and services.11 In addition, one of the experts identified four libraries that have an
entrepreneurial culture: Charlotte Mecklenburg County Library in Charlotte, NC, Sunnyvale
Public Library in Sunnyvale, CA, Nashville Public Library in Nashville, TN, and Santa Fe
Springs Public Library in Santa Fe Springs, CA. In reviewing the websites of these libraries, the
investigator did not see any activities that were obviously entrepreneurial and, thus, with
committee approval, excluded these libraries from consideration.
Table 1.5
Additional libraries engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services
Library

Activity/Service

How is the activity
entrepreneurial?

Library 1

•

Reorganization and

•

Leading the organization

rebranding to create new

through a process of

service model

discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of
opportunities to provide a
new service

Library 2

•

First library in the county

•

Leading the organization

to provide public access to

through a process of

3-D printing technologies

discovery, evaluation, and

10

The experts the investigator asked are Luis Herrera and Jan Sanders, both public library directors and professors
of practice at Simmons College, as well as Maureen Sullivan and Camilla Alire, both professors of practice in the
Simmons Managerial Leadership in the Information Professions (MLIP) program and past American Library
Association (ALA) presidents.
11
The names of the libraries are excluded to preserve confidentiality of the final list of libraries that met the criteria
for this study.

58

exploitation of
opportunities to provide a
new service
•

Now also offers additional •

Leading the organization

makerspace programs and

through a process of

activities

discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of
opportunities to provide a
new service

Library 3

Library 4

•

Offers interactive,

•

Generates revenue,

multimodal, educational

leading the organization

exhibits for children which

through a process of

can be set up and exhibited

discovery, evaluation, and

in the children’s areas as

exploitation of

well as shipped and

opportunities to provide a

exhibited in other libraries

new service

•

Passport service

•

Generates revenue

•

Provides print-on-demand,

•

Generates revenue,

self-publishing, and

leading the organization

writing/publishing classes

through a process of
discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of

59

opportunities to provide a
new service
•

Passport service

•

Generates revenue

Just over half of the library directors whom Jusic (2013) interviewed had departed the
organization due to a number of reasons. From the list of additional libraries in Table 1.5 one of
the libraries has a new director (due to retirement). The total number of libraries with new
directors (from Tables 1.4 and 1.5) is eight; three of the directors are internal hires, four are
external hires, and one person serves as an interim director.
This dissertation includes both external and internal hires in order to gain perspectives on
entrepreneurship from directors who are new to the organization as well as directors who are not.
However, it excludes hires made in 2015 unless an individual was an internal hire already
familiar with the organization and its involvement in entrepreneurship. One library was excluded
because of its geographical location (distance from the investigator) and the fact that it engages
in only one entrepreneurial activity (summer reading funded by sports team). This activity is
duplicated by another library selected for this study, which is engaged in additional
entrepreneurial activities and services.
A total of five libraries met the investigator’s criteria for study, and therefore composed
the study population. Each is engaged in more than one entrepreneurial activity. The investigator
asked Maureen Sullivan, a senior library leader and member of the dissertation committee, to
facilitate an introduction by approaching each of the directors to let them know about the
investigator and the study. After this initial contact, the investigator directly contacted the library
directors via e-mail to describe the study and request their participation. Once the directors
agreed to participate in the study, the investigator worked with them or a designated contact to

60

set up a site visit and to retrieve those documents they were willing to share. The investigator
asked the contact person for a list of managers (mid-level and higher) who were directly
involved in entrepreneurial activities and services within the organization, along with their
contact information. She proceeded to gather documents from the websites and setting up the site
visits.
Methodology
The investigator adopted the multiple case study approach, and, for data collection
purposes, used documentation, qualitative interviews, direct observation, and physical artifacts.12
The first method of data collection included document collection and analysis. The investigator
downloaded documents from the library home pages and worked with the contact person at each
library to obtain access to other relevant documents; all of these were analyzed to explore
entrepreneurship in the organization. Examples of these documents include: the library’s
strategic plan, annual reports, the library’s mission and vision statements, and any documents
directly related to entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial activities and services within the library
that were provided. The investigator also reviewed any documents on the library’s website, such
as newspaper articles, and those available through databases or the Internet that focused on the
entrepreneurial activities and services at each library. A preliminary review of documents
provided the investigator with some context, allowed her to gain a better understanding of each
organization and its entrepreneurial activities and services, and provided some details on
entrepreneurial activities or services that had been discontinued by the libraries.
The second method consisted of semi-structured interviews, which were chosen due to
the limited time available to interview directors and managers during site visits. Semi-structured
12

Physical artifacts were used only at libraries where the entrepreneurial activities and services had resulted in a
physical artifact (e.g., the multi-modal interactive exhibits).

61

interviews allow the investigator to “rephrase the questions and add further inquiries such as
‘Who?’ ‘Where?’ ‘When?’ ‘Why?’ and ‘How?’ based on the interviewee’s answers and
conversation flow” (Klenke, 2008, p. 127). This allowed the investigator the flexibility to clarify
points and ask follow up questions when necessary. Appendix A lists the questions that were
used with directors, and Appendix B gives the questions for managers.
The one-on-one interviews with directors and managers were conducted on site. The
investigator sent each person the set of open-ended interview questions one week before the
scheduled interview, giving participants a chance to review the topics to be covered and prepare
notes if they wished. The directors and managers were assured of confidentiality, and they are
only identified in the study by a letter from the alphabet (or letter and number). The names of the
libraries also remained confidential and were identified by a letter from the alphabet. The
investigator let participants know that due to the unique nature of some of the entrepreneurial
activities and services, it is possible that they might be recognized by others. Directors had the
opportunity to review the write ups and offer suggestions for disguising the service or activity
discussed. Participants were asked to sign an informed consent form (Appendix C) indicating
that they were aware of the requirements, risks of participation, and their right to decline to
answer questions or to stop the interview. The risks of participation included the possibility that
the libraries might be recognized by others due to the unique nature of services. During the
interviews, the investigator took notes which were sent to each person after the interview so the
participant could review them for accuracy and make any corrections needed.
The third method of data collection used was observation, which is “the act of perceiving
the activities and interrelationships of people in the field setting through the five senses of the
researcher” (Angrosino, 2007, p. 37). Observation in case study research can range from formal

62

to casual, and it begins the moment the researcher enters the site. According to Angrosino (2007)
there are four main points related to an ethnographers’ roles. They are:
1. The complete participant, where the researcher is completely immersed in the
community and does not disclose the research agenda;
2. The participant-as-observer, where the researcher is immersed in the community, the
community is aware that research is being conducted, and the researcher has
permission to conduct the research;
3. The observer-as-participant, where the researcher is somewhat detached from the
community, interacting only on specific occasions such as to conduct interviews; and
4. The complete observer, where the researcher is detached and collects objective data
without becoming involved with the community or the community being aware of the
researcher’s presence.
The investigator fell under the “observer-as-participant” category because she interacted only on
specified occasions to conduct interviews and observation. The focus of observation was on the
actual entrepreneurial activity or service, the environment, work spaces, how each service or
activity is run, responsiveness from staff, and any sense of organizational culture that is evident.
If the opportunity arose, the investigator also observed how library users interacted with the
service or activity. These results were shared with study participants, who were given the
opportunity to comment.
Ethnography in libraries is not new to LIS. Emary (2015) describes ethnography as a
“useful method for gaining insight into user needs and wants” (p. 138). In the literature, there are
studies using an ethnographic approach in academic, public, and school libraries. Khoo,
Rozaklis, and Hall (2012) surveyed the use of ethnographic methods in the study of libraries and

63

library users. From a total of 81 studies, they identified five main types of ethnographic research
methods: (1) observation, (2) interviews, (3) fieldwork, (4) focus groups, and (5) cultural probes.
Their study shows a recent increase in the use of ethnographic methods in libraries, and it
includes a bibliography of the studies used in the analysis, which provides an overview of the
types of library related studies using an ethnographic approach.
There is no universally accepted format for recording observations and different
researchers prefer different methods (Angrosino, 2007). However, Angrosino believes good
ethnographic research involves some structure, and that researchers should be in the habit of
taking well-organized field notes. It is of the utmost importance to provide detailed and objective
descriptions and to avoid interpretation. Angrosino also suggest making sure that notes include a
heading with the date, place, and time of observation, recording as many verbatim exchanges as
possible, using pseudonyms or codes to preserve anonymity and confidentiality among
participants, recording events in sequence, and keeping descriptions objective.
The investigator used the observational instrument in Appendix D to collect data during
the formal observation of entrepreneurial activities and services. Less formal observations, such
as those that occurred during interviews or any other observations that were not possible to be
recorded immediately, were recorded as soon as possible following the event. Each formal
observation occurred over one and a half hours. This amount of time was thought to be sufficient
for the investigator to get a sense of the entrepreneurial activities and services. The investigator
worked with the appointed person at each library to schedule formal observations during a busy
time at each library (if possible) in order to have a better chance of seeing the public and staff
interacting with the entrepreneurial activities and services.

64

Lastly, the investigator examined physical artifacts when applicable. Examples of
physical artifacts include exhibits, instruments, works of art, technological devices, and other
physical evidence. The investigator used physical artifacts to develop a better understanding of
the entrepreneurial activities or services at the libraries that have such physical artifacts. For
example, examining the multi-modal interactive exhibits at one of the selected libraries allowed
the investigator to gain insight into how this service works. The examination of physical artifacts
helps to supplement what the investigator learns about entrepreneurial activities and services via
documents, interviews, and observation.
Table 1.6 summarizes the method(s) that were used in addressing each research question.
Table 1.6
Methods for answering research questions
Research Question

Method

Source of Data

The Director
Is there linkage between leadership and

Interview

Director

What is the director’s definition of leadership?

Interview

Director

How does entrepreneurship fit within that

Interview

Director

Does the definition provided match the director’s Interview

Director

entrepreneurship?

definition?

definition?
What does the director think of this definition?

Interview

Director

Does the definition apply to the library and what

Interview

Director

the director is trying to accomplish?

65

Does the typology (see Table 1.1) encompass the

Interview

Director

Does the director consider any one set of items in Interview

Director

director’s perspective on entrepreneurship?

the typology as most important?
Does the director agree with the statement: A

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

How do they come to that conclusion?

Interview

Director

Is the library more entrepreneurial than when the

Interview

Director

Does the director consider innovation to be a part Interview

Director

library can be entrepreneurial but may not have a
single or central entrepreneur?
Does the director view themselves or anyone
within their organization as an entrepreneurial
leader?
What makes a person an entrepreneur or an
organization entrepreneurial?

director first started (based on number of
activities engaged in, revenue generated, and
plans for future activities)?

of entrepreneurship or something separate?
If they do, how is it a part of entrepreneurship?

Interview

Director

If they do not, how is it separate?

Interview

Director

66

Does innovation exist with regard to

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

entrepreneurial activities and services, and in
what way?
Do any of Bolman and Deal’s (2013) frames
relate to problems that the library needs to
overcome as it continues its entrepreneurial
direction?
If the director mentions human resource or
structural frames, do the problems identified
relate to organizational culture?
Did the director make changes to either frame to
better support entrepreneurship?
Has the director made any other changes to
better support entrepreneurship in the
organization?
How would the director describe the current
organizational culture at the library?
Which of Cornwall and Perlman’s (1990) ten
characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organizational culture exist in the libraries?
Do the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial
activity?

67

Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities and

Interview

Director

What changes in the entrepreneurial culture, if

Interview,

Director, documents

any, have the directors made since starting at the

document analysis

services the same as for the library as a whole?

library?
Have those changes had any noticeable impact

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

Have the mission and vision statements changed

Interview,

Director, documents

since they became director?

document analysis

Does entrepreneurship fit those statements?

Interview

Director

How essential is entrepreneurship to these

Interview,

Director, documents

statements?

document analysis

on organizational culture (change in beliefs,
values, norms, assumptions)?
Does the director foresee any challenges related
to the libraries’ culture in achieving the direction
they have set for the libraries?
Taking the typology for public libraries (Table
1.1) into consideration, to what extent is
entrepreneurship engrained in the current
organizational culture?
Is there anything in the typology in which
libraries should increase efforts (e.g., more
community and corporate collaboration)?

68

How essential is entrepreneurship to the

Interview

Director

direction the library is heading?
In which entrepreneurial activities and services is Document
the library engaged?

Documents, director,

analysis, interview, site visit, physical
observation,

artifact

physical artifact
How long has the library been engaged in each

Document

activity?

analysis, interview

For each, why is the library engaging in this

Document

entrepreneurial activity or service?

analysis, interview

Do any of the entrepreneurial activities and

Document

services generate revenue?

analysis, interview

If yes, which activities or services generate

Document

revenue?

analysis, interview

How much revenue do they generate?

Document

Documents, director

Documents, director

Documents, director

Documents, director

Documents, director

analysis, interview
How is that revenue used?

Document

Documents, director

analysis, interview
Is it being used to support other entrepreneurial

Document

activities and services, to supplement the library

analysis, interview

Documents, director

budget, or for another purpose?
If not, is revenue generation a future goal?

Interview

69

Director

If yes, what is the plan for future revenue

Interview

Director

Have any entrepreneurial activities or services

Document

Documents, director

been eliminated? If yes, why?

analysis, interview

Does the director have plans for future

Interview

Director

If yes, what are they? If no, why?

Interview

Director

Will there be more or less focus in the next two

Interview

Director

Interview

Director

What are the benefits derived from engaging in

Document

Documents, director

entrepreneurial activities and services (e.g.,

analysis, interview

generation?

entrepreneurial activities and services?

to three years on entrepreneurial activities and
services in the library?
If there will be less focus, what are the other
areas of focus (or priorities) for the directors?

prestige, financial)?
Who are the key stakeholders regarding

Interview

Director

How is each important to entrepreneurship?

Interview

Director

What do the stakeholders think of the

Interview

Director

entrepreneurial activities and services?

entrepreneurial activities and services in which
the library is engaged?

70

Managers
Do managers agree with the statement: A library

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

How did they come to that conclusion?

Interview

Managers

In which entrepreneurial activities and services

Interview

Managers

Why is the library engaging in these

Document

Documents,

entrepreneurial activities or services?

analysis, interview, managers, site visit,

can be entrepreneurial but may not have a single
or central entrepreneur?
Do managers view themselves or anyone within
the organization as an entrepreneurial leader?
What do managers think makes a person an
entrepreneur or an organization entrepreneurial?

are managers directly involved?

observation,

physical artifact

physical artifact
What percentage of their time do managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

spend on the activities and services?
Is there enough support (in terms of time
allotted, resources, importance placed on
entrepreneurial activities and services) within the
organization for entrepreneurial activities and
services?

71

How many staff are devoted to each activity or

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

If internal, do the staff have a master’s degrees in Interview

Managers

service?
Approximately, how much of their time do these
staff members spend on each entrepreneurial
activity or services?
Do staff members engaged in entrepreneurial
activities and services need any special skill set,
educational background, or training?
Are staff members assigned to entrepreneurial
activities internal or contracted contracted?

library and information science, or is a master’s
degree not required?
What are the benefits derived from engaging in

Interview

Managers

entrepreneurial activities and services (e.g.,
prestige, financial)?
How do managers describe the current

Interview, site visit Managers,

organizational culture related to those engaged in

observation

entrepreneurial activities and services?
Which of Cornwall and Perlman’s (1990) ten

Interview

characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organizational culture exist in the libraries?

72

Managers

Do the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

Interview

Managers

activity?
Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities and
services the same as for the library as a whole or
do the staff engaged in entrepreneurial activities
and services create their own culture(s)?
If the staff engaged in the activities and services
create their own culture(s), is this enhanced by
revenue generation?
Has the organizational culture changed since the
new director started?
Have there been changes in beliefs, values,
norms, and/or assumptions within the
organization?
Is the library now more entrepreneurial, the
same, or less entrepreneurial?
Taking the typology for public libraries (see
Table 1.1) into consideration, to what extent is
entrepreneurship engrained in the current
organizational culture?
Data Quality
With case studies, one way of increasing construct validity is to use multiple sources of
evidence. Another method is to have key informants review the case study report Yin (2014).

73

This gives them the opportunity to voice any concerns or disagreement they have and gives the
investigator the chance to clarify if necessary and resolve disagreements. One indicator of
reliability is matching what different participants at a site say. If there is disagreement, the
investigator can check with the different parties and determine whether it is possible to reconcile
the disagreement.
In case study research, “the most important use of documents is to corroborate and
augment evidence from other sources” (Yin, 2014, p. 107). Documentation as a source of data
has several strengths. It can be reviewed repeatedly; has specific information about an activity or
service; can cover a span of time, multiple events, or settings; and is unobtrusive (Yin, 2014). It
does, however, have weaknesses, including being difficult to retrieve, being deliberately
withheld, and displaying bias on the part of the author. Yin notes that with documents there is a
concern about validity due to bias, such as in meeting minutes or edited transcripts. Despite this,
documents have value and “play an explicit role in any data collection in doing case study
research” (p. 107).
Interviews have the advantage of being focused directly on case study topics and offer
insight by providing a range of information. However, they have weaknesses as well. Examples
include bias due to poorly articulated questions and reflexivity, that is, the investigator
unknowingly influencing the interviewees responses (Yin, 2014). According to Klenke (2008),
validity in interviews is “much less prescriptive or in some cases negligible” (p. 139). For
reliability and validity, the investigator shared the notes from the interviews with all participants
and they had a chance to offer corrections. Two participants offered minor corrections and
clarifications. In addition, the investigator shared the write up of the case study report with the
directors. There was no disagreement regarding the case study report, and the investigator did not

74

need to check against other data collected or try to clarify with participants to reconcile the
differences. The participants had the option to provide comments on the report, which is an
additional method of data collection. This would have allowed for disagreements to be noted if
the investigator was unable to reconcile them. There were no disagreements and the directors did
not provide any additional comments on the reports.
Qualitative researchers recognize that much of what happens during observation is not
truly replicable (Angrosino, 2007). However, researchers can conduct observations in a
systematic way. When they are able to do this repeatedly and regularly over a period of time,
credibility increases. In observation, validity can be seen as a problem because “observations are
susceptible to bias from subjective interpretations” (Angrosino, 2007, p. 59). For this research,
the investigator recognizes the bias inherent in observation and asked the directors and managers
to comment on any points arising from observation.
Pre-test. In September 2015, the investigator conducted a pre-test at one of the public
libraries used in Jusic’s study on entrepreneurial leadership (2013). Although this library does
not meet the criteria to be used in this dissertation, the pre-test allowed the investigator to review
the data collection instruments with the director and a manager for clarity (reliability) and the
extent to which the research questions were captured. The pre-test also indicated the approximate
length of time it took to complete the interviews with the director (90 minutes) and managers (60
minutes). Additionally, the investigator had a chance to pre-test the observation data collection
instrument to make sure she was able to capture what was needed in the proposed hour and a half
of formal observation. Based on feedback from the director and manager, the data collection
instruments were modified as necessary. For example, several questions were reworded because
they were difficult to understand. Also, the director suggested having the tables in the interview

75

questions on separate pages that could be pulled out and set aside. This made referring to the
tables for later questions easier for both directors and managers because they did not have to flip
through the questions to search for the tables. There was no need to modify the length of time for
conducting formal observation.
Conclusion
As the research on public libraries engaged in entrepreneurship is limited, this study
contributes to greater understanding of entrepreneurship in this setting. It probes whether the
practice of entrepreneurship remained a focus at libraries with a history of entrepreneurship that
had had a change in leadership. This research provides insight into how new directors interacted
with staff engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services, and it also reveals whether
entrepreneurship was sustained and what the directors thought about entrepreneurship. The study
provides information on entrepreneurial activities and services and offers the perspective of both
directors and managers involved in such activities. Additionally, the study explores whether
changes were made to the organizational culture and whether the libraries studied became more
entrepreneurial than they had been.
The next chapter presents an overview of the findings of this research. The findings are
presented for two sets of research questions: one with a focus on library directors and the second
with a focus on mid to upper level managers with entrepreneurial responsibilities. The section
focusing on directors presents their views on entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership,
mission and vision statements as they relate to entrepreneurship, challenges in relation to
entrepreneurship at each library, organizational culture, and comments about library
stakeholders. The manager section includes information related to the entrepreneurial activities
and services as well as the managers’ perspectives on organizational culture. Ultimately, the

76

research questions address whether each library was more entrepreneurial under the direction of
the new directors and to what extent entrepreneurship continued to be a part of the organization.

77

References
Acar, A. Z., & Acar, P. (2014). Organizational culture types and their effects on organizational
performance in Turkish hospitals. EMAJ: Emerging Markets Journal, 3(3),18-31.
Angrosino, M. (2007). Doing ethnographic and observational research. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
Publications.
Argyris, C., & Schon, D.A. (1978). Organizational learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Longman.
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship:
Same, different, or both? Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 30(1), 1-22.
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of
innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.
Baumgartner, R. J. (2009). Organizational culture and leadership: Preconditions for the
development of a sustainable corporation. Sustainable Development, 17(2), 102-113.
Bessant, J., & Tidd, J. (2007). Innovation and entrepreneurship (3rd ed.). Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons.
Bhattacharyya, S. (2006). Entrepreneurship and innovation: How leadership style makes
the difference? Vikalpa: The Journal for Decision Makers, 31(1), 107-115.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2013). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership
(5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cameron, K. S., & Quinn, R. E. (2011). Diagnosing and changing organizational culture: Based
on the competing values framework (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Carpenter, M. T. H. (2012). Cheerleader, opportunity seeker, and master strategist: ARL
directors as entrepreneurial leaders. College & Research Libraries, 73, 11-32.

78

Casson, M. (2010). Entrepreneurship: Theory, institutions and history. The Scandinavian
Economic History Review, 58(2), 139-170.
Casson, M., & Casson, C. (2014). The history of entrepreneurship: Medieval origins of a modern
phenomenon. Business History, 56, 1223-1242.
Cogliser, C. C., & Brigham, K. H. (2004). The intersection of leadership and entrepreneurship:
Mutual lessons to be learned. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 771-799.
Cooke, R. A., & Lafferty, J. C. (1983). Level V: Organizational cultural inventory-form I.
Plymouth, MI: Human Synergistics.
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral norms and expectations: A quantitative
approach to the assessment of organizational culture. Group & Organization Studies,
13(3), 245-273.
Cornwall, J. R., & Perlman, B. (1990). Organizational entrepreneurship. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Cunningham, J. B., & Lischeron, J. (1991). Defining entrepreneurship. Journal of Small
Business Management, 29(1), 45-61.
Darling, J. R., & Beebe, S. A. (2007). Enhancing entrepreneurial leadership: A focus on key
communication priorities. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship, 20(2), 151167.
Darling, J. R., Keeffe, M. J., & Ross, J. K. (2007). Entrepreneurial leadership strategies and
values: Keys to operational excellence. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship,
20(1), 41-54.
Deal, T. E., & Kennedy, A. A. (1982). Corporate cultures: The rites and rituals of organization
life. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

79

Dempsey, B. (2004). Cashing in on service: Entrepreneurial ventures make money and extend
library’s mission. Library Journal, 129(18), 38-41.
Dennison, D. R. (1990). Corporate culture and organizational effectiveness. New York, NY:
Wiley.
deVries, J. (2003). Entrepreneurial librarians: Embracing innovation and motivation. Science &
Technology Libraries, 24(1), 209-217.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Duobiene, J., & Pundziene, A. (2007). Development of entrepreneurial organizational culture.
Economics & Management, 5(3), 507-515.
Eggers, J. H., & Leahy, K. T. (1995). Entrepreneurial leadership. Business Quarterly, 59(4), 7176.
Eggers, J. H., & Smilor, R. W. (1996). Leadership skills of entrepreneurs: Resolving the
paradoxes and enhancing the practices of entrepreneurial growth. In R. Smilor, & D.
Sexton (Eds.), Leadership and Entrepreneurship: Personal and organizational
development in entrepreneurial ventures (pp. 100-110). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Emary, L. L. (2015). Librarians are already in the field: How and why to begin ethnographic
fieldwork. Bibliothek Forschung Und Praxis, 39(2), 138-142.
Fernald Jr., L. W., Solomon, G. T., & Tarabishy, A. (2005). A new paradigm: Entrepreneurial
leadership. Southern Business Review. 30(2), 1-10.
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Gupta, V., MacMillan, I. C., & Surie, G. (2004). Entrepreneurial leadership: Developing and
measuring a cross-cultural construct. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(2), 241-260.

80

Hofstede, G., Neuijen, B., Ohavy, D. D., & Sanders, G. (1990). Measuring organizational
cultures: A quantitative and qualitative study across twenty cases. Administrative
Sciences Quarterly, 35(2), 286-316.
Johnson, D. (2001). What is innovation and entrepreneurship? Lessons for larger organisations.
Industrial and Commercial Training, 33(4), 135-140.
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Kempster, S., & Cope, J. (2010). Learning to lead in the entrepreneurial context. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research, 16(1), 5-34.
Khoo, M. K., Rozaklis, L., & Hall, C. (2012). A survey of the use of ethnographic methods in the
study of libraries and library users. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 82-91.
Kilgour, F. G. (1992). Entrepreneurial leadership. Library Trends, 40, 457-474.
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Kotter, J., & Heskett, J. (1992). Corporate culture and performance. New York, NY: Free Press.
Kuratko, D. F. (2007). Entrepreneurial leadership in the 21st century. Journal of Leadership &
Organizational Studies, 13(4), 1-11.
Lydon, S. R. (2001). Entrepreneurial leadership in high-technology firms: Toward a
competency-based model (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations
and Theses. (No. 3000444)
McFadzean, E., O’Loughlin, A., & Shaw, E. (2005). Corporate entrepreneurship and innovation
part 1: The missing link. European Journal of Innovation Management, 8(3), 350-372.
McGrath, R. G., & MacMillan, I. C. (2000). The entrepreneurial mindset. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.

81

Meyerson, D., & Martin, J. (1987). Cultural change: An integration of three different views.
Journal of Management Studies, 24(6), 623-647.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1, 1-13.
Nicholson, N. (1998). Personality and entrepreneurial leadership: A study of the heads of the
UK's most successful independent companies. European Management Journal, 16(5),
529-539.
Nijboer, J. (2006). Cultural entrepreneurship in libraries. New Library World, 107(9), 434-443.
Peters, T. J., & Waterman, R.H. (1982). In search of excellence. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1979). On studying organizational cultures. Administrative Science Quarterly,
24(4), 570-581.
Rowley, J. (2011). Should your library have an innovation strategy? Library Management, 32
(4/5), 251-265.
Schein, E. H. (2010). Organizational culture and leadership (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Schein, E. H. (1983). The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational
Dynamics, 12(1), 13-28.
Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M.G., & Macey, W.H. (2013). Organizational climate and culture.
Annual Review of Psychology, 64(1), 361-388.
Schuman, P. G. (1994). Leaders manage the dream. Wilson Library Bulletin, 68(7), 41-44.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934a). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. London, UK: Ruskin House.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934b). The theory of economic development (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.

82

Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research.
The Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 217-226.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Slaughter, M. P. (1996). Seven keys to shaping the entrepreneurial organization. In R. Smilor &
D. Sexton (Eds.), Leadership and Entrepreneurship: Personal and organizational
development in entrepreneurial ventures (pp. 100-110). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Slevin, D. P., & Covin, J. G. (1990). Juggling entrepreneurial style and organizational structure:
How to get your act together. Sloan Management Review, 31(2), 43-53.
Smircich, L. (1983). Concepts of culture and organizational analysis. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 28(3), 339-358.
Stevenon, H. H., & Gumpert, D. E. (1985). The heart of entrepreneurship. Harvard Business
Review, 63(2), 85-94.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, C. J. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5), 17-27.
Swiercz, P. M., & Lydon, S. R. (2002). Entrepreneurial leadership in high-tech firms: A field
study. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 23(7), 380-389.
Tarabishy, A., Solomon, G., Fernald Jr., L. W., & Sashkin, M. (2005). The entrepreneurial
leader's impact on the organization's performance in dynamic markets. Journal of Private
Equity, 8(4), 20-29.
Thornberry, N. (2006). Lead like an entrepreneur. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Program Evaluation and Methodology Division. (1990). Case
study evaluations (PEMD 10.1.9). Retrieved from http://www.gao.gov/assets/80/76069.pdf

83

Wilson, A. M. (1997). The nature of corporate culture within a service delivery environment.
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 8(1), 87-102.
Wilson, A. M. (2001). Understanding organizational culture and implications for corporate
marketing. European Journal of Marketing, 35 (3/4), 353-367.
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Zhao, F. (2005). Exploring the synergy between entrepreneurship and innovation. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 11(1), 25-41.

84

Chapter 2
OVERVIEW OF FINDINGS

Five public libraries met the criteria for this study. Of the five, four public library
directors (libraries A, B, D, and E) agreed to participate in this study. The investigator attempted
to contact the director at library C multiple times and did not receive a response. With approval
from her committee, the investigator moved forward with the four library directors who agreed
to participate in the study.
The investigator worked with either the library director or a designated staff member at
each library to arrange the site visits, including scheduling interviews and obtaining documents
to review. Interviews were scheduled with each director and with managers with entrepreneurial
responsibilities. Prior to starting each interview, the investigator collected the signed informed
consent form and responded to any questions or concerns of the directors or mangers related to
the study.
The four libraries are located in three states. The investigator visited library A and B in
November 2015 and libraries D and E in December 2015. Although library D and E are located
in the same state, it was not possible to visit them both in the same trip due to distance and
scheduling. At libraries A and B, the investigator interviewed the director and four managers.
Due to the number of people interviewed and the number of observations of entrepreneurial
services, the site visits at libraries A and B were conducted over two days. At library D, the
investigator interviewed the director and two managers, and at library E she interviewed the
director and only one manager. The site visits at locations D and E were completed in one day. In
summary, four directors and eleven managers were interviewed for this study.

85

About the Libraries
All four public libraries are city library systems (as opposed to county library systems or
library districts). Table 2.1 compares some general characteristics from fiscal year 2013 public
libraries survey data provided by the Institute of Museum and Library Services (IMLS, 2013).
Table 2.1
General Library Characteristics
Libraries

A

B

D

E

Setting

City

City

City

City

Legal Service Area Population

125,000

1,486,000

984,000

171,000

4

17

23

2

Total Circulation

953,000

11,186,000

10,702,000

1,107,000

Annual Library Visits

736,000

4,829,000

5,836,000

578,000

$8.4 million

$34.1 million

Number of libraries

Total Operating Expenditures

$33.4 million $3.9 million

Note: The figures, except for the number of libraries in each system, have been approximated to disguise each
library.

The directors at library A and E are internal hires and the directors at library B and D are
external hires. However, the director at library B previously worked for the library system and
had some familiarity with it prior to starting in the position. The director of library B assumed
the position at the end of 2011, the director of library D did so in mid-2013, and the directors of
libraries A and D were appointed to the positions in the latter half of 2014. Chapter 6 discusses
how each director’s length of time and familiarity (or lack of) with their respective libraries
influenced the changes they made and how those changes may have impacted the organizational
culture. In the chapter the focus is on providing a general overview.

86

Community Focus
During the interviews, the library directors frequently mentioned community focus. Each
of the directors is attuned to community needs. They constantly reevaluate what types of services
to offer and how to improve existing operations to serve the public better. When questioned
about entrepreneurial services and activities, the directors mentioned that each activity or service
is linked to a specific community need. Further, two directors mentioned that services and
activities must be relevant to their strategic plans, which are carefully crafted to meet community
needs. The other two directors, while mentioning strategic priorities and how entrepreneurial
activities and services tie into those priorities, are in the process of developing new strategic
plans and, thus, could not comment on the new strategic goals under development.
Library A
The director provided examples of the importance of community focus. First, she
discussed the two things she considers before adding a new service: (1) the new service must be
part of the core focus of the strategic plan, must fit with the library mission, and should not
involve a fee for the public, and (2) the library must consider whether there is a possibility of
generating new revenue streams from the service. This director also mentioned the makerspace
trend; libraries across the country are offering designated spaces where users can engage in a
number of hands on activities such as 3-D printing, coding, crafting, robotics, and sewing.
Makerspaces often offer activities, materials, technology, and learning opportunities to which
library users may not have access at home. When makerspaces started becoming popular, other
libraries in the area added them in their libraries. This director did not want to simply copy a
current library trend, but instead wanted to consider community needs and how a makerspace
could help to meet those needs. In this library’s community early childhood education is

87

important. English is a second language for approximately 43 percent of the families and getting
children ready for school is critical. According to the director, if a child is not ready for
kindergarten he or she will fall behind in school. Creating a makerspace for children fits the
library’s strategic plan and mission because it can help bridge the education gap by offering
activities, technology, and learning opportunities that support early literacy. For example, a
makerspace may offer access to 3-D printing or other technology to which children do not have
access at home. Having access to this technology at the library helps children to learn and keep
up with their peers. When library A considered a makerspace for adults, the initial idea was to
focus on entrepreneurs. The library sought feedback from community members to determine
what they would want out of a makerspace. Library staff were surprised when the artistic
community voiced their needs. As a result, the library is considering how to create a makerspace
for adults that can serve both entrepreneurs and the artists in the community. These examples
illustrate how carefully the library evaluates potential services and seeks to do what users want.
The library is not seeking to emulate other libraries. Rather, it evaluates how possible services
can add value for its users and the greater community. There is a careful consideration process
that takes place rather than a simple decision to add a new service simply because it is new.
Library B
The director feels strongly about community focus emphasizing that “Often times we are
looking for new and better ways to deliver services to our community.” One example is making
it a work goal for managers to create partnerships within the community. According to the
director, this has helped the library to expand programming and service delivery exponentially.
Another example is the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs housed in the
library. At the time the library launched this service there was a huge city-wide focus on creating

88

jobs. The director sees this discovery space as a way for the library to play a role in helping the
community create jobs and support entrepreneurship. A final example is the focus on science,
technology, engineering, arts, and math (STEAM)1 activities. The director commented on a
recent focus in the education community, STEAM learning, by stating that traditionally, the
library had assumed a role of supporting the education system. The makerspace in the library
supports a current focus on education by providing a space that offers STEAM activities for
children and families in an informal learning setting. The makerspace offers access to technology
the average person does not have at home as well as programming focused on STEAM. For
example, one program focuses on science by teaching children about a scientific concept and
having them create a science related craft to take home. Another example is programming
focusing on technology, such as teaching children 3-D modeling, coding, or how to use specific
software. Many children do not have the opportunity to access these types of activities outside of
school. Engaging in these activities at the library reinforces what children learn in the classroom
and expands the interactive learning environment to allow family participation.
Library D
The library provides citizenship services as an example of community focus. The city
where the library is located is a majority-minority city, meaning the majority of the population is
composed of minorities. There is a large population of Spanish and Vietnamese speakers, and the
library is responding to their need by providing English as a second language (ESL), citizenship,
and immigration related programs and resources. This includes activities such as ESL classes,
citizenship workshops, and free legal clinics at select branch locations. Such programming is

1

Some libraries focus only on science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM), excluding arts from
programming and activities. During the data collection interviews, some directors and managers used STEAM and
STEM interchangeably.

89

conducted by trained facilitators, partnering agencies, or, in the case of the free legal clinics, by
an attorney and a Board of Immigration Appeals representative.
Library E
The library places community needs above the idea of the library as being
entrepreneurial. Entrepreneurship allows the library to do more for the community. The director
mentioned that the staff always wants to do more for the community, and she described the
community as the driving force for everything they do. The library needs to find resources to do
that, and that is where some of the entrepreneurship focus comes in.
Research Questions
The investigator created two sets of research questions: one with a focus on library
directors (Table 1.2) and the other with a focus on upper level managers with entrepreneurial
responsibilities (Table 1.3). Some of the questions were the same for both directors and
managers, while other questions were directed to only one group. The general findings are
broken down into two sections, with the first section focusing on directors and the second on
managers. The directors offered their views on entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership,
how the mission and vision statements relate to entrepreneurship, and library stakeholders. They
also provided insight into challenges they faced and the organizational culture from their
perspective. The managers were most helpful in answering questions related to specific
entrepreneurial activities and services because they oversee or are directly involved in the
activities and services. Their perspectives on organizational culture also helped the investigator
to build a more comprehensive picture of the characteristics of each library under the new library
directors. Most of the managers were able to comment on the differences between the previous

90

and current directors and the changes in organizational culture under the leadership of the current
director.
Research Questions Focused on Directors
This section provides general findings related to research questions asked of public
library directors. The section is further divided by topical headings with detailed findings.
Entrepreneurship and Leadership
Although all four directors defined leadership differently, they believe there is a linkage
between leadership and entrepreneurship. The director at library A supports servant leadership.
She stated that leaders have a vision but that she sees her role as extending beyond that. This
director believes her role is to get the right people in the right place, get out of the way so they
can do what they need to, be there when they need help, and provide support. The director at
library B defines leadership as a mindset and a collection of activities that inspire people to
achieve their own aspirations. She stated that “The trick in leadership is to take those
opportunities of having someone follow you or follow a particular path and have them use their
innate initiative to coalesce among common goals.” The director at library D provided a
definition that sounds similar to the director at library A. She defines leadership as being “about
creating a vision, engaging people in creating that vision (both internal and external) and
ensuring that the people that are following you have everything they need to carry out that vision
including understanding it, believ[ing] in it, [having the necessary] resources, and also …
know[ing] that they can take action.” The director at library E gave a briefer definition, defining
leadership as being “about providing a vision for the future, clear direction, and creating a
culture that supports innovation and excellent service.”

91

The investigator provided a definition of entrepreneurial leadership for the directors to
review. For this study, entrepreneurial leadership is defined as “creating a vision and leading the
organization through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to
generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or funding
models” (Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31). None of the definitions the directors provided matched this
definition but they did concur with it. When asked whether they would change anything about it,
the director at library A replied that one can be an entrepreneurial leader without the funding
piece. The director at library D, who offered the same sentiment, added that sometimes being
entrepreneurial is about bringing in resources rather than generating revenue.
When asked whether the definition applied to what they were trying to accomplish,
directors at libraries A, B, and D answered in the affirmative. The director at library E believes
that it applies only to a certain extent. While being entrepreneurial is something they do, it is not
a primary goal for the library.
Next, directors were asked to review Neal’s typology (2001) adapted by Jusic (2013) for
public libraries (Table 1.1) and comment on whether it encompasses their perspective on
entrepreneurship. The director at library A said “yes,” and considers the first set of items2 in the
table as most important. The director at library B, who agrees, commented that the list is
complete. From her perspective, the “community and corporate collaboration partnerships,”
which are part of the fourth set of bullets3 (Table 1.1) are the keys to success. Library B, the
director explained, relies heavily on various community partners to achieve its goals. Community

2

The first set of bullet points that appear in Table 1.1 are: active community participation; active library board
participation; active staff engagement and support; and active stakeholder engagement (includes volunteers,
community leaders, elected officials, foundations, Friends of the Library, and the corporate community).
3
The fourth set of bullet points that appear in Table 1.1 are: community and corporate partnerships; library and
vendor partnerships; and partnerships with community, corporate, and non-profit organization.

92

partners are what make a number of programs and services, including the entrepreneurial
services, possible. The director at library D, who also views the first set of items in the typology
as most important, indicated that the list fits her perspective on entrepreneurship. The director at
library E feels that many of the bullet points apply to her library but some more so than others.
She mentioned the second group of items,4 followed very closely by the first, are the most
important.
Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
All four directors thought that a library can be entrepreneurial but may not have a single
entrepreneur, with the director at library A offering this caveat: “If the culture allows it.” In
responding to the question as to what makes a person or an organization entrepreneurial, the
directors provided a mix of comments. The keywords that stood out in these comments included
risk taking, initiative, problem solving, not being bound by tradition, opportunities, and
necessity. The director at library D believes that a library cannot be entrepreneurial with only a
single entrepreneur. Entrepreneurship has to be embedded in the organization.
The directors reached their conclusions about what makes an organization or person
entrepreneurial based on their own definitions of what an entrepreneur is, other definitions they
have been exposed to, past experience, and watching entrepreneurship in action (both in their
organizations and in observing what other libraries are doing). All of the directors view their
organizations as entrepreneurial. However, two indicated that there is room for improvement and
that there is more that they could be doing. The director at library A discussed trying to move the
organization to one that has more of an entrepreneurial culture, where being entrepreneurial is

4

The second set of bullet points that appear in Table 1.1 are: focus on community needs and relevance; focus on
library trends and innovation; innovation, capital requirements, and efficiency; relevance to services being offered;
and tracking of societal and professional trends.

93

not as dependent on the library director as it was in the past. The director at library B did not
mention any specific examples but believes there is “definitely room to grow or improve the
entrepreneurial mindset.” She also added that the library has taken great strides to be more
entrepreneurial.
When asked whether they believe the library is more entrepreneurial than when they
started based on number of activities engage in, revenue generated, and plans for future
activities, the directors provided different answers. In the opinion of the director of library A, the
library is not more entrepreneurial if evaluated by the number of activities, but is more
entrepreneurial if initiative and risk taking are considered. In that regard, she views the library as
more innovative and more entrepreneurial. The directors at libraries B and D see the libraries as
more entrepreneurial now than in the past. The director at library E thinks the level of
entrepreneurship is about the same, but this director believes the organization is headed towards
being more entrepreneurial. She anticipates growth in the number of entrepreneurial services in
the future.
Innovation
All of the directors seemed to view innovation as a component of entrepreneurship
because innovation exists within the entrepreneurial activities and services in the organizations,
and all of the directors also indicated that innovation exists within the libraries but is not
confined to entrepreneurial activities and services. The director of library B believes that
innovation can be bigger that just being a part of entrepreneurship, and the director of library D
believes that it can be separate. In library D, innovation is tied to entrepreneurship but there are
also examples of innovation existing outside of entrepreneurial activities and services. For
example, it applies to reevaluating engrained processes such as check-in and check-out of

94

materials and finding an innovative way to improve them. An innovation can be as simple as
finding a way to save time or revise a process so that it is more efficient. Innovation can apply to
standard operating procedures and does not have to exist on a grand scale or only in regard to
entrepreneurial services.
Four Frames
The directors reviewed Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four frames and commented on how
the frames relate to problems the library needs to overcome as it continues its entrepreneurship.
The most frequently mentioned frame is the structural one. All of the directors discussed
structural changes they have made or challenges related to the structural frame. The
organizational structure for library A is very hierarchical. The director here thinks that the
benefit of this type of organizational structure is that everyone knows his or her role and place in
the organization. The downside is that the director is removed from some of the front-line staff
and the input they provide. The challenge for the director at library A is finding the balance
between creating an organizational structure that allows for hierarchy but is flat enough so that
her vision has an impact on what staff are doing. The directors of libraries B and D mentioned
changing the organizational structure soon after their arrival. The director at library E did not
change the organizational structure but is experiencing the challenge that comes with having
three upper managers retiring, and the organization is now in transition as new people move into
those positions and as new employees are hired.
When asked to consider the four frames as a way of characterizing changes they had
made to support entrepreneurship, the directors varied in their responses. The director at library
A thinks all of the frames are important, but the structural weights most heavily for her because
she is trying to find a balance between a hierarchical organization and a flatter structure. She has

95

not made changes yet but is trying to figure out how to make the organizational structure flatter.
She also mentioned the political frame. The director at library B thinks all are important but
places more emphasis on the first three (structural, human resource, and political). In the case of
library D, all four frames are involved in implementing entrepreneurship in the culture and
organization successfully. When the director first started in the position, the structural and
political frames played the biggest role. She had to restructure the library and gaining political
support was also extremely important. Focusing on those two frames was a high priority due to
the situation the library was in. The library had operated under the leadership of an interim
director and the organizational structure was altered to work with employees who were still at
the library. The library was operating using an organizational structure that was not sustainable
in the long term. Also, the library had to get a funding measure passed and gaining political
support for the library was a priority. The director at library E had the smoothest transition. She
worked closely with the previous director and served as interim director before she was
appointed director in late 2014. She followed the strategic plan and did not change much from
what the previous director did. In making changes to support entrepreneurship in the library
better she mentioned that they have continued doing much the same as they have been doing in
the past. However, the managers evaluate the programs and services each year and, together with
the director, consider whether they should make any changes. Although this director did not
specifically mention the structural frame, she did say that three of the top five upper level
managers retired within the last year, and this is resulting in some reorganization that was in
process at the time of the interview.

96

Organizational Culture
The four directors were asked about the current organizational culture at their libraries.
The director at library A described the organizational culture as “confused.” At the time of the
interview, she had been in the position for just over a year. Although she had worked in the
organization for years and served as interim director, she is a different leader than the previous
director and staff are getting used to her leadership style. She described the organizational
culture as changing, and that change takes time. One example she provides is seeking more staff
input than the previous director and it takes staff time to adjust to this. The director at library B
described the organizational culture as “one of teamwork, valuing employees across all of the
organization, celebrating employee accomplishments, and an organization that has a deep
emotional commitment to delivering excellent service.” This director has been in the position the
longest and has had more time to make changes and there has been more time for the
organizational culture to shift as a result of those changes. The director at library D emphasized
partnerships as being important in the organizational culture and staff as being “very positive and
nimble” despite the fact that the city has gone through enormous budget cuts. The director at
library D has had, perhaps, the biggest change in organizational culture because the organization
went through the longest period with an interim director and suffered severe budget cuts. The
situation has greatly improved since the director arrived. The director at library E described the
culture as one “of learning,” mentioning that there is emphasis on staff training and development.
This director has been in the position for the shortest amount of time and, thus, has had the least
amount of time to shape the culture.

97

Study participants reviewed Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization,5 selected which ones exist within their library, and answered a
question relating to whether the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity. The directors at
libraries B and E checked all the characteristics on the list, while the directors at libraries A and
D thought there were areas to improve on or that their libraries met the category to some extent
but not enough to characterize it as being applicable. One example is characteristic eight
(relentless attention to details, people, structure, and process). The directors at both libraries A
and D did not check this. It exists within the libraries in some work units, but both felt that this
was something that could be improved or that it did not exist in enough areas within the
organization to check it as an existing characteristic.
When asked whether the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity or service, the
director at library A answered “yes”. This director gives the example that there is not an attitude
among staff that work is fun. This is probably because the library has lost six full-time positions
since 2010, and some staff feel overwhelmed. One staff member may have the stress of an
increased workload in his or her area of responsibility greater than a staff member in another
department. As a result, the characteristics can vary by entrepreneurial activity or service. The
director at library B thinks all the characteristics apply to all entrepreneurial services. At library
D, the characteristics vary by activity, with the director adding that staff engaged in higher
profile projects are more committed to the items on the checklist. The director at library E did

5

The ten characteristics are: allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead; an attitude among staff that
work is fun; earned respect within the organization; effectiveness and efficiency; emotional commitment; including
people in what is considered important to the organization; integrity, trust, and credibility; relentless attention to
details, people, structure, and process; risk taking (this includes innovation); and the sense that everything the
organizational does has value for its customers and workers.

98

not provide a direct answer, instead stating: “These are things we really embody and are
important to us and the filter we use for everything we do.”
The directors were asked what changes they had made to the organizational culture to
support entrepreneurship better since they assumed the position. The director at library A has
worked on a higher level of staff involvement, seeking input from staff across different levels of
the organization. This is different from the previous director and, despite the changes,
structurally the library organization still remains hierarchical. However, the increased staff
engagement is generating more ideas. The director at library A is also more outwardly focused
on the community and that is changing how staff view their roles. The director at library B has
also made changes, providing examples of two new entrepreneurial services the library is
engaging in under her leadership and a third service that previously existed but that has been
expanded. In this director’s view, those changes have had a positive impact on the organizational
culture and resulted in services of which organizational members can be proud. At library B, the
culture for entrepreneurial activities and services is different because each is focused on a single
purpose. For example, the college access center is only focused on helping students through the
college preparation and admissions process. The center does not provide other library services
nor does it focus on other strategic priorities. The director at library D restructured the library
around priorities she set, and these brought changes in organizational culture. According to this
director, the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services should be the same as for the
organization as a whole, and there are certainly elements that are the same. Still, there is a
healthy tension between some of the departments and between the entrepreneurial services and
the rest of the organization. The director at library E has not made any changes to the

99

entrepreneurial activities and services since assuming the directorship, and she believes the
culture for these activities is the same as for the library as whole.
The various changes the directors have made have had an impact on the organizational
culture in terms of change in beliefs, attitudes, values, norms, and assumptions, but the extent to
which they do is different among the libraries. There are core professional values in libraries that
remain the same (e.g., access to information, privacy, and intellectual freedom). Other
components have changed. For example, at libraries A and D, staff across all levels of the
organization are encouraged to provide input, and this is becoming a new norm. This is not true
for all libraries, especially those with hierarchical structures that are not conducive to input from
staff across the lower levels of the organization. In such libraries, communication is supposed to
travel from employee to supervisor, and may travel through several levels of the organization to
reach upper level management or administration. Sometimes, the information never makes it to
the intended recipient. In such organizations, it is more difficult for lower level staff to provide
input and share creative ideas.
The directors at libraries A, D, and E did not foresee any challenges related to the present
library culture in achieving the directions they have set for the library. Even though the director
at library A did not foresee challenges related to the library culture, she discussed challenges
related to the library structure, including a lack of consistency across staffing levels for what is
needed in entrepreneurial areas. Staff are not yet used to her leadership style and to the idea of
being able to provide input across different levels of the organization. She hopes with time that
staff will begin to adjust to this change, be proactive, and be comfortable with taking risks. The
director at library B discusses several challenges, such as staffing, declining resources, and
political challenges, all of which affect the organizational culture in terms of attitudes, norms,

100

and assumptions. Lower staffing levels are the new norm at library B, and some staff still have a
hard time accepting that staffing is not going back to pre-recession staffing levels. The director at
library D does not foresee any challenges related to the present library culture but believes the
biggest challenge is having enough staff to do what the library needs to do. The director at
library E did not mention any specific challenges related to the library culture but talked about
the past year being one of transition due to retirements, promotions, and new hires. There is
some stability in the organization based on the presence of staff members who have been
groomed to move up and the creation of a succession plan for the library. With regard to bringing
in new staff with new ideas, the director says the library has to “make sure we evolve our course
as we keep going to one that we are all happy with.”
In addition to being asked to look at organizational culture through Bolman and Deal’s
(2013) four frames and Cornwall and Perlman’s (1990) list of ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization, participants were also asked to consider Neal’s typology (2001)
adapted for public libraries (Jusic, 2013; Table 1.1). They addressed the extent to which
entrepreneurship is engrained in the current organizational culture based on how many items
from the typology were reflected in the library. They were also asked whether there were any
areas they should engage in more or improve. The director at library A said that entrepreneurship
is deeply engrained, giving 90 percent of the credit to the previous director, who was very
entrepreneurial. Areas to improve include marketing and growing private funding. The director
at library B also answered that entrepreneurship is engrained and that most of the items apply.
Areas for improvement include the need to continue to focus on community and corporate
collaboration and doing more with capitalization and marketing. The director at library D
believes entrepreneurship is engrained but that there will always be tension between traditional

101

library services and entrepreneurial services and activities. Areas in which the library could
improve include the library foundation, which the library was focused on strengthening at the
time of the interview. Another area for improvement is capitalization but this is not something
the library is focusing on immediately. Although capitalization is identified as an area for
improvement, it does not seem as though capitalization will be a focus in the near future because
it is not a priority. The director at library E said that it was difficult to answer this question and
that it depends on what piece one was talking about. The list applies to one of the library’s
entrepreneurial activities but most of it does not apply to the second entrepreneurial activity
because it is very procedure and detail oriented. In her opinion, new staff members are not likely
to understand the importance of items on the list as well as long time staff members. At library E,
“Being entrepreneurial is part of the culture but only to the extent that it has to be.” The
entrepreneurial activities have to have a purpose and the library did not set out to be
entrepreneurial.
Mission and Vision Statements
The mission and vision statement have not changed at the libraries since the participants
started. Library A adopted its mission in 2014, and the director, who worked for the organization
at that time, was involved in the process. She became director later in that year. The mission and
vision for library B have not changed since the director started, but the library is in the process of
updating them now along with the strategic plan. Libraries D and E have the same statements as
before. When asked whether entrepreneurship fits the statements, the director at library A said
definitely, it does. The director at library B mentioned that entrepreneurship will be a part of the
new mission statement. The director at library D answered that it does, mostly in relation to the
technology component of the library’s mission. She believes it fits in the context of being

102

relevant to community needs. She otherwise describes the library as fairly traditional. The
director at library E thinks that it fits and sees entrepreneurship as “a means to do more for the
public and our community and our mission statement is providing excellent service.” She also
states that entrepreneurship is only one vehicle to do that. When asked how essential
entrepreneurship is to the mission and vision statements, the directors at libraries A and D
answered that it is essential. The director at library E said that she does not think it is essential
and sees it as being “about trying to go above and beyond.”
All four directors view entrepreneurship as essential to the direction the library is taking.
Library A has to raise 15 percent of its budget, with 85 percent coming from the city, so it has to
be entrepreneurial to continue to offer the same level of service. The director at library D sees
entrepreneurship as being essential to the library and as being a part of the library’s strategic
plan. This director also mentioned that it is absolutely essential because the library is underresourced. In order to move things forward, the thought has to be given to how the library can
work with others or bring in resources. The director also views entrepreneurship as being
important in any library because it is about staying relevant. The director at library E sees
entrepreneurship as essential and specifically as it relates to improvements and plans for the
second floor of the library. Currently that floor is empty and the library plans to expand into that
space. There are plans to make the space similar to an interactive children’s museum, with
exhibits and special programming. The library may charge a fee for some of the programming
that will be offered in this space.
Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by Libraries
The libraries in this study engage in a number of entrepreneurial activities and services.
Some are revenue generating, while others do not generate direct revenue, but they may result in

103

resources or have another benefit. It is also worthwhile noting that the directors recommended
that the investigator speak with one or more managers who oversee or are involved with the
entrepreneurial activities and services. Chapter 5 provides a detailed description of all the
entrepreneurial activities and services. Most of these activities are fairly recent, with libraries
engaging in them for the past several years. The exceptions are one of the passport service
locations, the café, and the Friends of the Library bookshop. These have been around for longer
than ten years. The reasons that libraries are engaging in the activities varies, but the most
frequently mentioned one is to meet a community need.
Not all of the activities identified as entrepreneurial by the library directors generate
direct revenue. The ones that do are the celebrity author event, passport service, the café, the
Friends of the Library bookshop, the multi-modal interactive exhibits, and corporate sponsorship
for Sunday hours. Revenue generated ranges from $2,500 to $250,000. Table 2.1 lists the
entrepreneurial activities and services offered by the libraries. The table also includes how much,
if any, revenue the activity or services generates for the library.
Table 2.2
Entrepreneurial activities and services offered by the libraries
Entrepreneurial Activity or

Brief Description

Revenue Generated

Service
Celebrity author program

•

The Friends of the Library
hosts a special program
featuring more prominent
authors than those usually

104

•

Approximately $120,000
per year

featured at free library
author programs
Café

•

The café is part of a

•

nationally recognized

Approximately $34,000
per year from rent

chain and located in the
library
College access and

•

reengagement center

The center offers

•

workshops, assistance,

No direct revenue
generated

and one-on-one
appointments related to
the college admissions
process
•

The center also offers
resources to adults who
have not completed high
school including General
Educational Development
(GED) test preparation
and an online high school

Corporate sponsorship for
Sunday hours

•

Corporate sponsors can

•

$2,500 per Sunday,

have their logo or

generates approximately

advertisement displayed in

$130,000 per year

105

front of the library on a
banner
•

This helps to fund Sunday
hours at the library

Discovery space for small

•

businesses and entrepreneurs

This space offers

•

resources, programs,

No direct revenue
generated

workshops, and mentoring
for small business owners
and entrepreneurs
Friends of the Library

•

bookshop

The Friends of the Library

•

operate a bookshop at the

Approximately $100,000
per year

main library and one of
the branch libraries
Makerspace

•

This space offers access to

•

software, technology, and

No direct revenue
generated

STEAM based programs
for all ages
Multi-modal interactive
exhibits

•

Interactive, multi-modal,
educational exhibits for
children which can be set
up and exhibited in the
children’s areas

106

•

Approximately $150,000
in past year and a half

•

Can also be shipped and

•

exhibited in other libraries
Summer reading mobile

•

application

Mobile application

Revenue depends on
number of units sold

•

designed by technology

No direct revenue
generated

company for the library’s
summer reading program
Passport service (offered by
two libraries)

•

Individuals can apply for
passports at the library

•

Approximately $275,000
per year at one library and
$100,000 at the second

The revenue from most of the entrepreneurial activities and services supplements the
library budget. Some of the funds are used on special projects or programming. The other
activities that do not generate direct revenue bring in resources to the library either via
partnerships, grant funding, or volunteer time. Sometimes the volunteers have expertise in a
specialized skill. For example, the library that partnered with a technology company would not
have had the resources to hire someone to design the mobile summer reading application and did
not have someone on staff who had the skill and time to do it. The library found volunteers with
expertise by make a presentation at a hackathon; this resulted in a partnership with a technology
company to work on the summer reading mobile application. The other libraries actively seek
volunteers with specialized skills to help with the various entrepreneurial services.
Finally, there are services that fall into the category of being innovative or unique and
that meet a community need. They are not generating revenue but, rather, are an example of the
library exploiting opportunities. An example of this is the library seeking grant funding,
volunteer time, and partnerships to provide a discovery space for small businesses and

107

entrepreneurs. Not only is the library offering a new service but it also brings in new users to the
library, supports job creation, and builds political support.
For three of the four libraries, revenue generation is a future goal. Libraries B and E have
activities and services planned that will generate revenue. Library D has several services that are
currently under development, with the anticipated completion dates in the first half of 2016 and
early 2017. This library does not plan to generate revenue in the future and wants to make sure
all activities are free to the public. It does, however, plan to pursue sponsorships for one of its
activities and this will help to fund this activity partially.
Only one library has eliminated an activity, the consulting service. This service,
according to the director, was based on a customer service model that is now commonly taught
in library schools, and it was not generating enough revenue to make it worthwhile for the library
to continue. A second library no longer gets funding from a sports team to support its summer
reading program. The library still offers summer reading but has changed the format and has
different partners.
Benefits Derived
There are several benefits derived from engaging in entrepreneurial activities and
services. Chapter 5 provides the details for each individual activity or service. Directors most
often identified prestige, financial, and value added as benefits derived from entrepreneurial
activities and services. Other benefits include acquiring new resources and bringing in new users
to the library.
Library Stakeholders
Each director offered a different set of key library stakeholders related to the
entrepreneurial activities and services. Table 2.2 lists the stakeholders each director identified.

108

Table 2.3
Key library stakeholders identified by directors
Library

Stakeholders

Library A

•

Friends of the Library, café, library board, citizen advisors,
foundation board, the city, staff, and the community

Library B

•

City economic development department, Friends of the Library,
partner libraries, library foundation, library board, discovery
space for small businesses and entrepreneurs partners, college
access and reengagement center partners, a trust (name withheld
to preserve confidentiality), and two non-library foundations

Library D

•

Friends of the Library, library foundation, the city, a number of
technology companies, segments of the community (e.g.,
families, seniors), donors, elected and appointed decision
makers, city manager, mayor and city council, the extremely
active volunteer base, small and local businesses, and the
relationship with the Knight Foundation6

Library E

•

Library board and trustees, city council, the library foundation,
community, staff, and city management

The stakeholders’ importance to entrepreneurship is based on the activities in which they are
involved. For example, the Friends of the Library may be particularly important to an
entrepreneurial activity or service because the group helped pay for the starting costs. Thus, the

6

This foundation works to create informed and engaged communities by providing funding for community
initiatives, the arts, journalism, and media innovation.

109

answer to the question of which activity or service the stakeholders prefer varies by activity.
Generally, the stakeholders have a preference for the activities and services in which they are
involved, and they have offered suggestions to the library on how to improve the services.
Similarly, a library board member who is also a businessperson offered community contact
suggestions for the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs.
When asked what the stakeholders thought of the entrepreneurial activities and services,
the answers varied. The director at library A mentioned that the library board and citizen
advisors view the library as an entrepreneurial organization. They have a good understanding of
what the previous director was trying to accomplish. The current director is not convinced that
municipal leaders see the library that way. According to her, this may be due to budgetary
pressures, with municipal leaders feeling that no one is doing enough. The director at library B
stated that the library board and Friends of the Library are excited about everything the library
does. The Friends of the Library are more connected to early literacy because the group provides
financial support for summer reading and the makerspace as well as the STEAM activities in the
makerspace. The library foundation is more excited about the college access and reengagement
center and its partners. Initially, the college access and reengagement center was funded through
private funding. Now it is part of the library’s general fund but also relies on funding from
foundations and grants. The library board is supportive of all the activities, but individual board
members may be drawn to different activities. According to this director, the community
economic development department sees the library as an entrepreneurial organization as well as
having stakeholders connected to the small business center. However, other stakeholders and
partners may not share this view. How a stakeholder views the library also depends on his or her
definition of entrepreneurship. If the definition of entrepreneurship is to make money, then the

110

stakeholder may not see the library as entrepreneurial. The director at library D also mentions
that there is a split on how stakeholders see the library. Some stakeholders see it as innovative
and that the visibility of the library has increased, but not everyone sees it as entrepreneurial.
Finally, the director at library E mentioned that the library board sees the library as
entrepreneurial but the community probably does not.
Research Questions Focused on Mangers
This section provides general findings regarding the questions the investigator asked
upper level managers with entrepreneurial responsibilities.7 The section is further divided by
topical headings.
Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
All the managers at library A believe that a library can be entrepreneurial but may not
have a single or central entrepreneur, with one manager adding that there needs to be a central
driver for entrepreneurship. Three of the managers viewed someone in the organization as an
entrepreneurial leader. Manager A3 does not think that there is another entrepreneurial leader in
the organization similar to the previous director. Three managers viewed themselves as
entrepreneurial leaders, but manager A3 says that, although he is an entrepreneurial leader by
virtue of position and because the library has entrepreneurial activities, he does not see himself
as an entrepreneurial leader in a classic sense. By this, he means that he is not an entrepreneur
operating a business that generates revenue. When asked what makes a person an entrepreneur or
an organization entrepreneurial the managers’ answers varied. They draw on their list of
characteristics from definitions they have either been exposed to, experienced, seen in practice,

7

The investigator interviewed multiple managers at libraries A, B, and D. These will be referred to using the letter
corresponding with the library along with a number to refer to each manager, for example, the investigator
interviewed four managers at library A and will refer to them as manager A1, manager A2, manager A3, and
manager A4.

111

gained through an educational or business background, or observed in people they know to be
successful entrepreneurs.
At library B, manager B1 thinks a library can be somewhat entrepreneurial without a
single or central entrepreneur. However, she believes it is not possible for a library to be
entrepreneurial through the whole organization without leadership making it possible. She sees
the director and herself as entrepreneurial leaders. When asked what makes the library an
entrepreneurial organization she answered: “Having the desire and willingness to change
according to the current needs of the community.” This manager reached this conclusion based
on observed changes. She also sees entrepreneurship as being based on change. Manager B2,
who agrees with the statement that a library can be somewhat entrepreneurial without a single or
central entrepreneur, views herself and others in the organization as entrepreneurial leaders. This
manager believes an organization is entrepreneurial if it has a culture of risk taking and supports
staff trying new ideas. She came to this conclusion based on personal and work experience.
Manager B3 does not see herself as an entrepreneurial leader but views others in the organization
as entrepreneurial leaders. She thinks revenue generation is what makes an organization
entrepreneurial. This view is based on observation of entrepreneurship at the library.
Manager D1 thinks a library can be entrepreneurial without having a single or central
entrepreneur because it is possible to develop a culture around entrepreneurship. Manager D2
agrees, stating that it is possible for a library to be entrepreneurial without a single or central
entrepreneur only after entrepreneurship is engendered and supported in the organization. Both
managers view themselves as entrepreneurial leaders along with the director and several other
people in the organization. Manager D1 states that several things make someone entrepreneurial,
including risk taking and being willing to fail. Manager D2 adds other characteristics such as

112

intention, planning, and good project management. They came to this conclusion through
experience and seeing entrepreneurship in action.
Manager E also agrees that a library can be entrepreneurial without having a single or
central entrepreneur. He views himself, along with the library director, as an entrepreneurial
leader. An entrepreneurial person should have goals, be able to generate ideas, gather resources,
have a sense of the big picture, make decisions, and follow through. He comes to this conclusion
from observation (his father is a business owner), experience working at other companies, and
his experiences at the library.
Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services Offered by the Libraries
All the managers interviewed were involved in at least one of the entrepreneurial
activities or services. When asked why the library engages in entrepreneurial activities and
services the answers most commonly mentioned were to support a core service (e.g., early
literacy), to meet a community need, or to provide something innovative for the community.
Entrepreneurial activities and services are also a way for libraries to remain relevant. The amount
of time managers spent on these activities and services ranged from 5 percent to 80 percent of
their time, depending on the activity, stage of development, and/or time of year. The activities
and services usually require less time from managers once they are established and working
smoothly. While the activities and services are being developed and when they first start
functioning, they take a large amount of time on undertakings such as staff training, adjusting
programming, seeking out resources, and initial marketing. Overall, there is not a large number
of staff dedicated to the entrepreneurial activities and services, with the exception of summer
reading related activities. Some activities do not require a master’s degree in library and
information science (MLIS), but do require special training and skills. Other activities have at

113

least one librarian with an MLIS involved. The employees used in entrepreneurial activities were
mostly internal, with some being contracted employees. In some cases the activities relied on
help or expertise from volunteers.
Managers were asked whether there is enough support in the organization for these
activities or services based on the following criteria: allotted time, resources, and importance
placed on the entrepreneurial activities and services. All directors are supportive of
entrepreneurial activities and services. Some managers wished there was more support when it
came to time. The level of support, based on the above criteria, varied by library and activity or
service. Managers at library A are satisfied with the level of support while some managers at
library B wish there was more support. According to manager B3, the makerspace is a service
that could use more resources, staff time for programming, and funding in order to support the
scope of programs and resources manager B3 would like to see in the space. Managers from
libraries D and E believe there is enough support for the entrepreneurial activities and services in
the libraries.
Benefits Derived
The managers echoed the directors’ responses in the types of benefits the libraries derive
from engaging in entrepreneurial activities. The list includes: prestige, financial, contributing to
economic vitality, exposing new people to library services, and drawing in new users to the
library. Some managers voiced their excitement at being able to provide new and relevant
services to their communities and placed this above direct benefit to the library. They
emphasized that, although the library may receive prestige for engaging in a specific activity or
service, that is not the goal. The goal is to serve the community and other benefits are secondary
to that.

114

Organizational Culture
The managers were asked to describe the current organizational culture related to
engagement in entrepreneurial activities and services. Manager A1 described it as being a vital
part of the library’s mission and goals, but did not elaborate. According to manager A2, staff are
excited about entrepreneurial activities and services. They like anything new including
technology, programming for children, and digital services. Manager A3 does not believe an
entrepreneurial culture exists beyond the three main entrepreneurial activities and services the
library engages in, which are now engrained because the library has operated them for a number
of years. Manager B1 describes the culture as excited and supportive of the entrepreneurial
activities and services. Manager B2 comments specifically on the culture related to the services
she is involved in, describing it on “a different plane” than the rest of the organization. Manager
B3 thinks the overall organizational culture is positive but believes many people in the
organization do not have a good understanding of the entrepreneurial service that she was
responsible for launching. Manager B4 does not view the organizational culture as
entrepreneurial. Rather, the library has pockets of entrepreneurship. Both managers D1 and D2
indicated that innovation is a part of the library’s organizational culture. Manager D1 described
the environment as supportive and one that encourages people from all levels of the organization
to provide input and be involved. She also described it as an environment that encourages risk
taking. Manager D2 added to that, describing the organizational culture as courageous because
there is a willingness and inclination to try new things (risk taking). Manager E mentions staff
input as being important to the organizational culture of the library as well as an understanding
that staff are there to serve the community.

115

Like the directors, managers were asked to review Cornwall and Perlman’s (1990) ten
characteristics reflective of an entrepreneurial organization and select all that apply to their
library. The results were mixed. Only one of three managers at library A checked all of the
characteristics. At library B, two of the four managers believe all characteristics apply to their
library. Both managers at library D and at library E selected all characteristics. The capacity in
which the managers work on entrepreneurial activities as well as their positions within the
organization may influence their selection. More details on this are covered in Chapter 6 as well
as detailed comments the managers offered on the characteristics.
Most managers see a difference among the set of entrepreneurial activities and services as
to which characteristics are emphasized. Three managers were not sure because they did not
have enough familiarity with all the other activities and services to comment. Some managers
believe the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for the library as a
whole because the same values are required. Others believe the culture is different for
entrepreneurial services because each service has a specific focus, involves a set amount of
people, and sometimes functions separately from other library activities, services, or programs.
When an entrepreneurial services has a different culture than the library as a whole and there is
revenue generation, there was not a clear answer whether the revenue generation enhances the
different culture. Some managers believe revenue generation would make the culture more
competitive but those managers are not currently involved in revenue generating activities. A
few managers added that revenue generation creates a different dynamic.
When asked whether there have been any changes in the organizational culture since the
new director started, the answers differed. At library A, managers mentioned that the director is
different from the previous one. Some of the managers here believe it is too soon to tell. At the

116

time of the interviews, this director had just completed her first year in the position. One
manager said that there were changes in the organizational culture. At library B, the director has
been there five years, and managers answered that there have been changes in the organizational
culture. There have also been changes at library D. Prior to the director starting, the library had a
different interim director and was not in a good place financially. Now the culture is different
and the budget situation has improved, allowing the library to engage in more entrepreneurial
activities and services. The manager at library E answered that the organizational culture has not
changed. The director served as interim director and was an internal candidate who worked
closely with the previous director. At the time of the interview she had just completed her first
year in the position.
The managers were asked to consider Neal’s (2001) typology adapted by Jusic (2013)
(Table 1.1) and to explain how engrained entrepreneurship is within their organizations. All
managers indicated that entrepreneurship is engrained. Their answers on which set of items in
the typology applied differed with some managers discussing what the library did well and which
areas listed in the bullet points the library could improve on in the future. Chapter 6 provides
further details.
The managers were also asked whether they see the need for any changes to the
entrepreneurial activities and services over the next two to three years and whether the library is
now more entrepreneurial, the same, or less entrepreneurial. As a whole, the managers expressed
a desire for an expansion of services and the desire to implement new services. One manager
pointed out that with a service such as passport provision, change may not be possible due to
government regulations. Growth for other services depends on staff, library budgets, and revenue
generation, all which are challenges. Manager A3 would like to see another entrepreneurial

117

activity or service implemented that is sustainable and would provide long-term revenue
generation. However, it may be hard to come up with an idea for such activities. Overall, the
managers are excited about the services they provide for the public.
Finally, the managers were asked whether the library is more entrepreneurial, the same,
or less entrepreneurial since the new directors started. Manager A1 thinks the library will be
more entrepreneurial. At this time, the director has been in the position for approximately a year
and things are the same. Manger A2 thinks the library is more entrepreneurial due to the
director’s involvement with staff. This interaction has resulted in ideas for the library to grow.
Manager A3 comments that the new director is extremely community focused and there is more
staff involvement. The organizational culture is changing. The library is not more or less
entrepreneurial, it is just different. Manager A4 also thinks the library is the same as before in
regards to the level of entrepreneurship. At library B, three of the four managers think the library
is more entrepreneurial than before. Manager B3 said the question was hard to answer because
the library is expected to do more with decreased resources, staff, and funding. In this manager’s
opinion, asking whether the library is more entrepreneurial now than before is not comparing
“apples to apples.” Both of the managers at library D had not been there during the tenure of the
previous director. Manager D1, who was there during the time the library had had an interim
director, said the library is more entrepreneurial than during that time. Manager E thinks the
library is at the same level of entrepreneurship as before. In sum, according to all of the
managers’ comments, the libraries are either at the same level of entrepreneurship or more
entrepreneurial.

118

Directors Versus Managers
All of the directors were aware of the level of entrepreneurship at the libraries as well as
the challenges for the future. The directors have a sense of how entrepreneurial the libraries are
and the steps they need to take to make the libraries more entrepreneurial in the future. Some
have specific plans for future entrepreneurial activities and services. In regards to the existing
entrepreneurial activities and services, the directors are very supportive. Most managers think the
directors are supportive of entrepreneurship and risk taking. Only two voiced a desire for more
resources for entrepreneurial activities and services. Although the directors considered risk
taking to be a characteristic reflective of the organization, not all managers thought that risk
taking was encouraged across all levels of the organization. At times, the directors’ views on
organizational culture differed from those of of managers. This is due, perhaps, to managers
being more immersed in the day-to-day challenges of operating entrepreneurial services. Also,
the managers interact with their peers and staff across all levels of the organization in a different
way, and perhaps more frequently, than directors do. This allows them to experience the
organizational culture from a different perspective. At the same time, managers do not have to
oversee the entire organization in the same way that the directors do, nor do they have to deal
with external political challenges as frequently.
Conclusion
This initial overview indicates that the new directors support entrepreneurship at the
libraries. The directors at two libraries have added new entrepreneurial activities or services and
three of the four libraries have specific plans for additional activities or services in the future. At
libraries B and D, where the directors have been longer, the organizational culture has changed
to support entrepreneurship better. At library A, the culture is changing, and it is likely to change

119

at library E as more time passes. By and large, it is also clear that the views of the directors and
managers generally converge. There are some areas of disagreement or different viewpoint, and
these are discussed in the appropriate topical chapters.
Building on this chapter, the next four chapters amplify the themes that emerged across
the four sites. The next chapter discusses entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership,
Chapter 4 covers innovation, Chapter 5 presents details on the entrepreneurial activities and
services in which the libraries engage, and Chapter 6 focuses on organizational culture. Chapter
7 discusses future plans libraries have for engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services.

120

References
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2013). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership
(5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cornwall, J. R., & Perlman, B. (1990). Organizational entrepreneurship. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Institute of Museum and Library Services. (2013). IMLS library comparison: Compare public
libraries. Retrieved from: https://harvester.census.gov/imlscompare/
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1, 1-13.

121

Chapter 3
ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND ENTREPRENEURIAL LEADERSHIP

This chapter provides findings on the perspectives of public library directors and
managers on entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership. The directors were asked questions
related to leadership, entrepreneurial leadership, and individual versus organizational
entrepreneurship. The managers were only asked questions related to individual versus
organizational entrepreneurship. The chapter also discusses how the findings relate to the
literature on entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership.
Entrepreneurship and Leadership
To understand whether public library directors believe there is a linkage between
leadership and entrepreneurship, the directors were first asked to define leadership. Before
providing a definition, the director at library A said she supports servant leadership. She also
mentioned that her understanding of leadership comes from reading articles and attending
workshops on leadership over the years. This director defines leadership as having a vision but
also believes her role as a leader is to get the right people in the right place, let them do what
they need to do, and be there when they need help or support. The support can be moral support,
in the form of resources, and funding. She sees leadership as “the spirit of helping folks to
succeed.” This director gives an example of ESPN, which she describes as a mission driven
organization that is willing to try new things. She also discusses defining the direction for the
library, determining barriers, and then figuring out how to break those barriers down to
accomplish goals.

122

The directors at libraries B and D provided briefer definitions of leadership. The director
at library B offered the following definition of leadership: “Leadership is a mindset and a
collection of activities that inspire people to achieve their own aspirations. The trick in
leadership is to take those opportunities of having someone follow you or follow a particular
path and have them use their innate initiative to coalesce among common goals.” The director at
library E thinks defining leadership is a difficult question to answer because leadership is a broad
term and depends on the situation. At library E, the director believes leadership is about
providing a vision for the future, a clear direction, and creating a culture that supports innovation
and excellent service.
The director at library D says that being a leader (in the context of this study), and
especially in libraries, is about creating a vision, engaging others in creating that vision, and
ensuring that staff have sufficient support carry out the vision. This includes understanding the
vision, believing in it, having the resources, and ensuring that staff know that they can take
action. The director proceeds to explain that another element of leadership is for followers to feel
that they can take steps without permission, and an additional element relates to innovation. She
provides an example of a position she created at the library: an innovation project manager. This
person’s role is to work with library staff to manage entrepreneurial and innovative projects,
including creating project timelines, seeking partners, identifying resources, and guiding the
project team. In the director’s view, her job is to give this employee projects she can work on,
resources, and connections, but then it is up to the employee to take action, risks, and to decide
how she does her job.
The directors were asked whether entrepreneurship fits within their definition of
leadership. The director at library A states that key words when someone looks up

123

“entrepreneur” are initiative and risk. According to this director, in servant leadership,
everything is moving forward and nothing is static. The leader manages change and followers
have to take initiative and risks. This director mentions that if an organization does not take risks,
it can become irrelevant. She provides the example of a nearby library that added a makerspace.
Other libraries were already offering makerspaces but this library took a risk and added the
service. The addition of the service was a risk because there was no guarantee that the space
would be successful. According to the director at library A, there was no reason for this library to
take the risk based on its strength indicators (strong circulation, backers, new building planned).
The library was not in trouble for any reason. The leader saw that the makerspace aligned with
the library’s mission and decided to implement it. According to the director at library A, the risk
that this library took paid off for the library in a positive way. The library developed a national
and international reputation, and a favorable reputation in the community. Ultimately, she sees
risk and initiative as components of entrepreneurship.
According to the director at library B, “if your definition is creating new ways to deliver
services then yes,” entrepreneurship fits with the definition of leadership. She proceeds to say
that “Often times it is what we are looking for, new and better ways to deliver services to our
community. Being entrepreneurial is discovering those ways. It is part of the leadership we want
to achieve.” The director at library E only answered with “definitely” but did not elaborate.
The director at library D says that entrepreneurship fits with the definition of leadership.
In listing some of the elements in her definition of leadership, this director had started
incorporating entrepreneurship. She believes that part of entrepreneurship that fits within her
definition of leadership includes setting a vision, engaging people (both internal and external) in
creating that vision, ensuring that staff understand and believe in the vision, making sure staff

124

have resources to carry out the vision and that they know that they can take action without
permission and be innovative. This director also states that perhaps a director is the only person
in the organization who is challenged to look at the vision and mission. She mentions that the
library pursued entrepreneurial efforts in the past that generated revenue. Now, the library looks
at how different types of systems can work to expand the role of the public library as appropriate.
The library considers things like “What do business systems do that would be appropriate for the
library (that fits with the library’s philosophy and beliefs)?” This question can also relate to
technology companies and non-profit organizations. She discusses challenging staff to see that
there is a benefit to the public from changes resulting from looking at different types of systems.
This director states that she and her staff have to be careful not to say “this does not work here
(at the library)” until they give that activity or service full consideration. The director strives to
have an open mindset and encourages her staff to do the same. She also says that
entrepreneurship is very important, starts at the top of the organization, and involves creating a
culture in which staff are able to have conversations that challenge what the library could be
doing differently.
For this study, entrepreneurial leadership is defined as “creating a vision and leading the
organization through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to
generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or funding
models” (Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31). All of the directors were asked whether they concur with this
definition or if they would like to offer changes. The director at library A said the only change
she would offer is that a person can be an entrepreneurial leader without the funding component.
She mentions that she does not want to distract from the importance of generating revenue, but
that she has seen some excellent leaders who fit every part of the definition except for the

125

revenue generation. They are entrepreneurial because of the innovation and risk taking
components.
The director at library B agrees with the definition, saying that she thinks it is well stated.
She did not offer any changes to the definition. The director at library D thinks the definition is
“really good,” and that the definition has elements she already mentioned in answering the
questions about leadership and entrepreneurship. This director says that the only difference she
sees is that entrepreneurial leadership is not always about revenue. She thinks it can instead be
about generating resources, which is not the same as revenue. The director at library D states that
“A huge part of what we do is partnerships that bring in revenue. I’m a big believer if you create
success the funding will follow.” She describes speaking publicly about partnerships and always
highlighting the partnerships when telling success stories about a library service. The director at
library E agrees with the definition and did not offer any changes.
The directors were asked whether the definition applies to the library and what they are
trying to accomplish over the next several years. In the case of library A, the definition,
including revenue generation, applies. This library has been entrepreneurial since the 1990s. The
previous director was a firm believer that taxpayers pay for library services and that the library
should not engage in fundraising. However, the library needed alternative funding so the idea
was to offer value added experiences for people visiting the library and generate funds at the
same time. Up to 2007, additional funds were generated by the used bookshop, the café (part of a
nationally recognized chain), and the passport service. According to the director at library A, all
three of those services are now core to the library values and are listed in the strategic plan as
part of the core services. These services are so engrained at this library, that the director cannot
image the library not having them. The vision of the previous director became a part of the

126

overall culture. In 2010, municipal funding for this library was cut by 20 percent, and the library
could no longer sustain operations in the same way. Fundraising became a revenue stream.
According to the director, the library now has to raise $1.1 million to continue offering the same
level of service, and approximately $700,000 of that comes through fundraising.
The director at library B answered “it very much does” when asked whether the study’s
definition of entrepreneurial leadership provided applies to what she is trying to accomplish at
the library over the next several years. She discusses examples of the definition applying to what
the library is doing at a basic level. The library is working on a new strategic plan. Part of that
work involves staff collecting and reviewing data, evaluating services the library currently offers,
looking for opportunities to improve services, and considering what services the library can offer
to help with unmet community needs. The director provides a more specific example with the
discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs. It was created as a resource for people
interested in starting a business or expanding an existing one. At the time this service was
launched, it was a new activity for libraries. The director describes the service as being
entrepreneurial in that it attracted partners and funding to make it into a full featured
entrepreneurial service. This director believes the library has an entrepreneurial leadership style.
Another exampled offered by the director at library B is the college access and reengagement
center. It is unique to have a college access and reengagement center in a library; such centers
are typically connected to universities. This center attracts a good deal of private funding. She
also discusses the addition of the online high school, which is a relatively new endeavor offering
the opportunity to gain a fully accredited high school diploma in an online environment. She
describes it as a “game changer for some people” and mentions that this library is among the first
libraries signed up to offer this service. The service has been extremely successful and it also

127

attracts private funding. The director states: “We are entrepreneurial because we are able to find
outside funders to support these great services.”
The director at library D mentions that entrepreneurship is a part of what she is trying to
accomplish at the library for the next few years. When she first started working at the library,
there had been severe budget cuts city wide. All of the library branches were open only four days
a week and a few library branches were built but never opened. The previous director had retired,
and the library had an interim director for approximately two years. Many people in managerial
leadership positions had left the organization, and the organization chart had been adjusted
around the remaining employees. There was no strategic plan in place, and one of the major
funding streams was expiring in a year. When the director arrived, she started a few innovative
projects as a way of “jump starting the spirit of an organization.” She mentions that part of her
strategy was to kick start the innovation component that the library had been known for in the
past and that the staff really wanted to engage in again. She says that this was part of the strategy
of beginning to move the library moving forward.
This director also had to concentrate on getting the funding measure passed in the first
year, which meant building political support. This was successful, and the funding measure
passed by 81 percent. In July 2015, all of the libraries in the system went from being open four
days a week to six days a week. This director says that getting the funding passed was part of the
“critical path” for the library but that she did not want to make it the only thing the library
focused on. There was a need to build momentum and excitement. There were two things that
resulted from the need to move the library forward and build momentum: a necessary
restructuring and the creation of new strategic priorities. Part of the restructuring was the
creation of an office of innovation and the position of innovation project manager. According to

128

the director, the scope of this position is different from what many libraries have. The innovation
project manager takes an idea and works within the organization to identify the resources needed
to implement it. This involves engaging staff, identifying the project team, identifying the
resources, mapping out time lines, and bringing in external partners.
The director also mentions something unusual that she did. She went to a technology
company hackathon and presented an idea. That particular technology company holds a
technology hackathon where individuals and organizations are invited to present an idea that the
technology company can prototype in a day. As a result of the presentation, the library was able
to create a project with that company (building a summer reading application) for free. It was a
success and the library received a great deal of media attention. The city was proud to have an
effective partnership with a technology company. According to the director “a lot of what you
have to do when you partner is to position the library in such a way that is extremely attractive.”
This increased awareness of the library and the positive image help create opportunities for other
partnerships.
The director at library E said that the provided definition of entrepreneurial leadership, to
a certain extent, applies to what the library is doing. She does not see being entrepreneurial as a
primary goal at the library, stating that “It is something that is a part of what we do but not why
we are here.” This director mentions that being entrepreneurial is something they have had to do
at the library since it opened in 1994. She has been at the library since that time and worked
closely with the previous director. The library staff did not have enough resources to accomplish
what they wanted. The director at library E describes the previous library director as
entrepreneurial and that he instilled the entrepreneurial spirit in many staff members. “It was
understood and expected that if you wanted to do something, you had to find a way or go out and

129

get it.” The budget at the library has improved, but being entrepreneurial is something that the
library will continue to do if it serves overall goals.
The library directors were asked to review Neal’s adapted typology (2001; Table 1.1) and
comment on whether it encompasses their perspective on entrepreneurship. The director at
library A said that it did, and she offered a few additional comments. According to this director,
if a library is going to be entrepreneurial, it has to have the partnerships with the community and
corporate collaboration in place. For example, the Friends of the Library bookshop is always
looking for new ways to be active in the community. The idea was proposed that the Friends of
the Library bookshop would partner with the local center for the arts and sell books related to the
topic of one of the center’s programs. The director at library A says that “you have to have a
relationship in place before you can make things happen.” The center was looking for a way to
promote itself and saw the library as a perfect venue. In talking to a staff member from the
center, the library director discovered natural synergies. The relationship between the library and
the center was new but created an opportunity that mutually benefited both organizations. The
director adds “You need to have that synergy in order to start taking risks.”
The director also mentioned that when the previous director pursued a relationship with
the café, he knew the community would respond well to it because of brand recognition. People
did respond well to the café and the library will continue renting the space to them for the
foreseeable future. She describes her community as a “logo, corporate community.” There are
several large companies (Fortune 500 and Fortune 1000) as well numerous divisions of large
corporations in the city where library A is located, and the city has a large financial district. The
city also has a large concentration of corporations. Thus, citizens respond to brand name
recognition.

130

Reviewing the typology, the director at library B describes the list as complete and did
not offer any changes to it. The director at library D thinks the list is good but is unsure where
technology partnerships fit in the typology. She sees technology partnerships as key for the
library and mentions that it is about the companies sharing knowledge and technology. This
director cautions that she has to be careful what partnerships she accepts, especially when there
are multiple interested potential partners. The partners can offer labor, technology, and expertise.
She also considers volunteering to be important.
The director at library E said that the typology encompasses her perspective with some
items in the typology applying more than others. She believes the library would not be able to do
a lot of what it does if it did not serve community needs and have buy-in from the library board
and stakeholders, including the city. She sees many items in the typology as applying, but does
not specify which. The director at library E provides an example where the library has started to
offer services because the goal is to do something good for the community, not because the
library intends to make money. It just so happened that the staff created something that generated
revenue.
In relation to the typology in Table 1.1, the directors were asked if they consider any one
set of items in the typology as most important. The director at library A views the first set of
items in the typology1 as the most important. However, she says she would slightly alter it and
instead of active community participation add the need to look outwards more and be part of the
community, which, according to this director, is more than just active participation. Even though
the library monitors societal and library trends, it is important to do what is right for the

1

The first set of bullet points in Table 1.1 is as follows: active community participation; active library board
participation; active staff engagement and support; and active stakeholder engagement (includes volunteers,
community leaders, elected officials, foundations, Friends of the Library, and the corporate community).

131

community. The director provides the example of the library being one of the last in the area to
add a makerspace. She did not just want to follow a library trend but rather wanted to evaluate
carefully whether adding a makerspace would be right for the library. She also wanted to
consider how a makerspace would fit with the library’s mission and strategic plan. She adds,
“You need more than just active participation […] you have to be part of the vascular system of
the community.”
The director at library B considers the fourth set of items in the typology as most
important.2 From the library’s perspective, she sees the community and corporate collaboration
partnerships as the keys to success. In the entrepreneurial model, many of the services the library
offers are made possible through community partners. She goes on to say that the library would
not be able to offer the services with just library staff. Approximately 90 percent of the
entrepreneurial services are offered in collaboration with community partners. She provides an
example of federal money distributed throughout the community and the city’s economic
development department as ways to support workforce development in the library. In the
discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs, this money has helped to fund a free
series of start-up workshops for business owners and entrepreneurs. The library hired a
consultant to develop and present the curriculum for the series. The curriculum included topics
such as creating a business plan, filing and registering a business, financing a business, branding
and marketing strategies, and contracts, proposals, and agreements. The library now owns that
curriculum and hires people to present it using funding from another source.
The director at library D says that the first set of bullets resonates the most with her. She
sees participation as important. Also, stakeholder engagement is important from her perspective
2

The fourth set of bullet points in Table 1.1 is: community and corporate collaboration; library and vendor
partnerships; and partnership with community, corporate, and non-profit organizations.

132

when she is trying to position the library to engage in an innovative activity. She has to consider
this, whereas library staff does not have to. They work more on the partnership levels, meaning
that staff engage with various partners to provide library programs and services. The director at
library E thinks it is difficult to narrow the items in the typology down to one set of bullets that is
most important, but if she had to make a choice, she thinks the second set of bullets,3 followed
very closely by, if not right next to, the first set of bullets, are most important.
Directors’ Perspective on Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
All of the library directors were asked whether they agree with the statement that a
library can be entrepreneurial but may not have a single or central entrepreneur. The director at
library A agreed but with a caveat “If the culture allows it.” She elaborated, saying that if staff
have a great idea and it is not received well in administration, or if the staff knows the library is
not looking for another revenue stream, then they will not suggest it. This director stressed that
the library has to have the type of culture that encourages staff participation and that creates a
safe place to share new ideas in order for the library to be entrepreneurial. The directors at
libraries B, D, and E simply agreed with the statement and did not provide further comment.
When asked what makes a person an entrepreneur or an organization entrepreneurial, the
director at library A believes that it goes back to the organization. Staff have to be willing to take
risks, show initiative, and be willing to try something new. She maintains that if the library does
not have those three elements, it will not have the fourth element: revenue streams. The director
comes to that conclusion based on the definitions of entrepreneurship she has encountered. The
director at library B thinks that being entrepreneurial is about problem solving and not being

3

The second set of bullets in Table 1.1 is: focus on community needs and relevance; focus on on library trends and
innovation; innovation, capital requirements, and efficiently; relevance to services being offered; and tracking of
societal and professional trends.

133

bound by traditional ways to problem solve. It is important to expand the scope of possible
solutions, including things not typically associated with a library. She comes to this conclusion
by observing entrepreneurship and what other libraries and agencies do. This director mentions
that it is important to focus on trends and research them, watch what other agencies and
organizations do to be successful, and apply those types of situations and solutions to delivering
library services. She thinks that entrepreneurship in libraries is more about the mindset and not
about the money because the purpose of libraries is not to generate revenue. The director also
believes entrepreneurship in libraries is about bringing together the resources necessary to
deliver a service in the community. The directors adds that, at times, it is important to be creative
in order to deliver the best services using the resources available, and that resources can come
from unexpected places.
The director at library D believes that the library cannot be entrepreneurial with only a
single entrepreneur. She says that leaders tend to get the credit for making decisions but
entrepreneurship has to be embedded in the organization. The organization has to be willing to
look externally for ideas, partnerships, and opportunities. She thinks the services the library
offers that benefits customers have to evolve over time. The library also needs to consider how to
bring in different resources to help the library accomplish its mission. She comes to that
conclusion based on experience. The director at library E thinks that if a person is
entrepreneurial, it is something that is probably already a part of his or her personal philosophy,
education, and upbringing. As far as organizations are concerned, she thinks that sometimes
necessity can make it entrepreneurial. She comes to this conclusion based on what the library has
done and on being part of the library since it opened more than twenty years ago.

134

The director at library A believes that the library is an entrepreneurial organization.
Library A has a past history of being entrepreneurial, and this director credits the previous
director, saying that the library was entrepreneurial because it had an entrepreneurial leader. She
is trying to move the organization beyond depending on the leader for entrepreneurship, so that
there is a team of talented people that feel they can be entrepreneurial and that entrepreneurship
is rewarded within the organization. She would like to see entrepreneurship move beyond the
administration to the entire organization. The director discusses the steps the library is taking to
be a more entrepreneurial organization. This started with a staff focus group in 2013 where
participating staff were honest in providing input. In the fall of that year, the library was not yet
ready to look outward and engage in community conversations. The director at the time was ill,
and the library was trying to “hold steady.” The current director held monthly staff meetings that
resulted in a customer service committee. In August 2015, the library participated in what the
director describes as a pilot project.4 According to the director, participation gave the library a
chance to “Stop, pause, reflect, and look outside the box to where we are going.” The director
mentions that staff have been wonderful and that silos among departments have been breaking
down. The director says that “One of the biggest things is to change the culture. We are setting
groundwork so when people are entrepreneurial they are doing it in a safe place.” She does not
think the library is there yet but that it is on the path towards changing the organizational culture
to make staff more comfortable with entrepreneurship.
The director at library B said “I think it is” when asked whether the library is an
entrepreneurial organization. On a scale of 1 to 10, she said the library is maybe a 7. There is
definitely room to expand and improve the entrepreneurial mindset. According to this director,
4

This project was conducted by an international non-profit organization which held a multi-stakeholder forum,
focusing the dialogue on re-envisioning public libraries for the future.

135

the library has taken great strides to be more entrepreneurial. She comes to this conclusion based
on the provided definition of entrepreneurship and what the library does. The director at library E
thinks the library is an entrepreneurial organization because the staff always want to do more for
the community. She describes the community as the driving force for everything the library does
and notes that sometimes the library must find additional resources to be able to provide services
or programs.
The director at library D also thinks that the library is an entrepreneurial organization.
This director worked at three large urban public libraries and sees this library as the most
comfortable with a faster pace of innovation, change, and partnerships. She states that the library
“is very much entrepreneurial, maybe because it was in the past or maybe where it is located”
geographically.5 There is a comfort with change. Under her leadership, the library has put in
systems for innovation.6 People are comfortable with wanting to implement their ideas, and there
is a structure to support this with the innovation project manager. According to the director, she
cannot support someone with good ideas if she does not provide support and resources to her
staff. The director comes to this conclusion based on previous experience. At library B,
innovation was abandoned for a time while the library was under interim leadership and due to
budget cuts. When the director first started working at the library, she interviewed every middle
manager. There were themes that emerged from those interviews and the one that appeared most
frequently was related to innovation. Staff expressed the desire to engage in innovation once
more and for the library to be innovative.

5

The library is located in a city with a high concentration of technology companies.
This is possible via the office of innovation and the innovation projects manager, who puts together teams, helps
them create timelines and manage projects, and helps find resources and partners for the projects.
6

136

The director at library A characterizes herself and upper level managers as being
entrepreneurial leaders, commenting that the administration team is entrepreneurial in its way of
thinking. The administration team is willing to take risks, take initiative, and try out new
methods and ideas. The director at library B also characterizes herself and upper level managers
as entrepreneurial leaders. She sees entrepreneurship as a developing skill at the library. She
states that “We’re not completely there but [we are] developing those skills as we go on, and it is
in reaction to the external environment and how much support we can get and what level of
resources are offered.” She adds that as resources from traditional funding sources have
diminished, the library has found ways to be more entrepreneurial and make things happen. The
director says “If there’s any upside to the recession that is it. We are way more creative.” The
library is creating new services and delivering services without having the same level of
resources.
The director at library D characterizes herself and upper level managers as
entrepreneurial leaders. When asked in what way, she mentioned innovation. When she first
started in the position, most of her priorities were basic: keep libraries open, focus on strategic
forms of leadership, and build support. She said that this was a sustainable plan, but at the same
time she recognized where she was coming to (geographic location) and the opportunities that
could be there. One of her priorities was understanding the culture of the geographic location and
considering how the library could create partnerships. The director mentioned eight priorities7
outlined in the strategic plan and that everything (including the budget and work plans) is
organized around those priorities. The library reports on what it accomplishes and, according to

7

The eight strategic priorities cannot be identified because doing so would disclose the identity of the library.

137

the director, builds external interest in working with the library, and, as a result, more partnership
opportunities emerge.
The director at library E characterizes herself and upper level managers as being
entrepreneurial leaders. She mentions that she essentially grew up professionally in the
organization and that entrepreneurship has been engrained in the library’s philosophy since the
beginning. She adds that she has always believed in what the library does, stating “practically
speaking, it takes resources to do things and the more you want to do the more money you need.”
Managers’ Perspective on Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
Library managers were also asked to offer their perspectives on entrepreneurship, but did
not have to answer the same number of questions as the library directors. All of the managers at
library A agree that a library can be entrepreneurial but may not have a single or central
entrepreneur. Manager A3 thinks that, conceptually, a library can be entrepreneurial without
having a central entrepreneur, but there needs to be a driver within the organization. He
elaborates on this by pointing out that the library was not culturally entrepreneurial and that it
probably would not be entrepreneurial at all had it not been for the previous director and his
drive to introduce that component. Having a culture that is entrepreneurial means that staff think
about entrepreneurship and are more aware of it. Three of the mangers view at least one person
in the organization as an entrepreneurial leader. They do not all see themselves as entrepreneurial
leaders. Manager A2 does not think of herself as an entrepreneurial leader, stating she is in a
leadership and supervisory role. Manger A3 says that he is a leader by virtue of the position he is
in and the fact that the library engages in entrepreneurial activities. However, he does not
consider himself an entrepreneurial leader in terms of what he sees as the classic definition (a
business owner generating revenue). This manager also mentions that there is not another

138

entrepreneurial leader in the organization similar to the previous director. Manager A4 adds that
the library operates in an entrepreneurial manner with staff always looking at new ways of doing
things, generating external interest in the library, and trying to partner with the community on
new projects or services.
Manager B1 thinks that the library can be entrepreneurial without having a single or
central entrepreneur “somewhat, on a peripheral level.” She believes that without leadership the
library cannot be entrepreneurial throughout. Manager B2 and B3 agree with the the statement
but did not offer further comments. Manager B4 agrees but adds that she thinks being
entrepreneurial comes down to leadership and initiative. She does not think the organizational
structure at the library supports or encourages entrepreneurship. In the case of library B,
entrepreneurship comes from individuals. Manager B1 views herself and the library director as
entrepreneurial leaders adding “We love adapting to the current needs of the community,” and
that the library has had to adapt numerous times over the years to stay relevant. Managers B2 and
B4 view both themselves and others in the organization as entrepreneurial leaders while manager
B3 does not view herself as one. However, she sees others in the organization as entrepreneurial
leaders. Manager B4 adds that part of the reason she views herself as an entrepreneurial leader is
because she is driven to accomplish things and she is motivated to do so. She sees the same drive
in others, adding that the manager of the college access and reengagement center has clear goals
to accomplish that are beyond just keeping the doors open.
The managers at library D both think that a library can be entrepreneurial without having
a central entrepreneur. Manager D1 adds that it is possible to develop a culture around
entrepreneurship, and that culture can help to serve as a motivator or driver. Manger D2 thinks
that a library can be entrepreneurial without having a central entrepreneur once entrepreneurship

139

is “inspired and engendered and supported within the organization.” Manager D2 mentions that it
helps if processes are developed that provide a clear path to how entrepreneurship or innovation
can happen. He gives an example of a library taking a risk and supporting a pilot program or
idea. While a library can have pilot projects it is necessary to have a process around how and
when to determine whether a project is a success or a failure. This helps staff to decide whether
to stop something or to put more resources in it and make it system wide and institutional.
Manager D1 views herself and several other people in the library system as entrepreneurial
leaders. She describes the library system as one that encourages risk taking, new ideas, and
finding new funding sources and partnerships. Manager D2 is the division manager for
technology and innovation. He says that the “innovation piece” is where a lot of the
entrepreneurship happens. When the position of innovation manager was created, the job
description was written to support entrepreneurship.
Manager E1 also agrees with the statement that a library can be entrepreneurial but may
not have a single or central entrepreneur. He views himself and others in the organization as
entrepreneurial leaders. He adds that there are staff members with ideas, and, as opportunities
present themselves, the staff share their ideas or their vision for new projects. The director sees
opportunities as they arise and has given staff a lot of guidance.
Managers were also asked to discuss what makes a person an entrepreneur or an
organization entrepreneurial. According to Manager A1, there are a few things. She thinks a
person is entrepreneurial if he or she is a disruptive thinker, meaning that the person looks
beyond traditional library service models. An entrepreneurial employee should seek out
opportunities or find opportunities in everyday things that can strengthen the mission and value
of the library without breaking any of the rules. An entrepreneurial employee should also be able

140

to find “work-arounds for certain things.” She also thinks it helps if someone has somewhat of a
business background. When asked how she came to this conclusion, manager A1 replied with “In
order for any organization to thrive or to sustain itself, employees have to look beyond the legacy
models. That requires entrepreneurial thinking and action.” Manager A2 thinks leadership,
planning, an open mind, being supportive, and engaging in fundraising are characteristics of an
entrepreneurial person or organization. The manager comes to this conclusion based on
observation of what is happening in the library. Over time, she has observed changes in
leadership, what staff are doing, and differences among staff members, noting that all of these
things have contributed to changes in the organization. She sees the library as evolving, being
more involved in the community, and willing to try new things.
Manager A3 believes that with entrepreneurs, there is a passion for success measured in
terms of money. Making money is a way of keeping score and comparing an entrepreneur’s
success with that of other entrepreneurs. He says that the library is not driven by that as much as
service and prestige. He gives the example of the café. The library has the café because of
prestige related to the brand. The café is part of a nationally recognized chain, and one of the
benefits the library derives from the café is prestige related to having café with that brand name
at the library. The lease with the café is not favorable in that the rent does not produce much
money. According to this manager, an entrepreneur would not have done that deal. He also
mentions that the Friends of the Library bookshop would not survive as a business. It is not much
of a money maker. It is a value added service8 loved by the community. Manager A3 comes to
his conclusion regarding entrepreneurship based on a business background and people he knows

8

The value to the community is to access books cheaply.

141

to be successful entrepreneurs. He mentions that entrepreneurs are ruthless about what makes
money and what does not make money.
In answering the question about what makes a person an entrepreneur or an organization
entrepreneurial, Manager A4 draws from the definition of entrepreneurship that she has been
exposed to in the past. She thinks entrepreneurship is about generating ideas, that is, coming up
with new ideas in order to provide services and sales for whatever product an organization is
promoting. She believes the idea behind entrepreneurship is to benefit society or the community
in some way. She discusses her role as the used book manager and that it is her duty to generate
interest so that resources are not wasted. The bookshop is another example of something that
benefits the library and the community.
According to manager B1, “having the desire and willingness to change according to the
current needs of the community” is what makes an organization entrepreneurial. She comes to
that conclusion because change does not happen if an organization is not willing and, in her
opinion, entrepreneurship is based on change. She mentions that an individual has to push ideas
through and that, in a large bureaucracy, things will not happen if someone does not make a
concentrated effort. This could be the director, a manager, or an individual in the organization in
a position to do so. She gives the example of the library using private money to introduce pilot
projects. The city did not fund them and, if the library had waited for city funding, the projects
never would have been possible. Manager B2 thinks that an entrepreneurial organization should
have a culture of risk taking, to some degree, and support staff to try new ideas. The
organization, whether it is in business or libraries, should also be a leader at the forefront of
trends. She arrived at the conclusion based on her own personal and work experience. She has
worked in libraries for decades but has also worked in the business sector. This manager

142

mentions that any successful organization changes and tries new things and adapts to the
community. She states: “You have to evolve to survive.”
Manager B3’s primary understanding of entrepreneurship is that it generates revenue. She
reaches her conclusion through observation of entrepreneurship in the library. She mentions that
the discovery space for small business owners and entrepreneurs generates funding in that the
library is able to secure grants or private funding to provide programming and resources in the
discovery space. However, the makerspace is disconnected from that. It focuses on “creating”
rather than achieving specific results. In manager B4’s opinion, being entrepreneurial is about
being accountable to specific goals that meet community needs. She says that by “specific” she
means doing a deeper analysis. Operating a library meets a community need but looking at
something “specific” is different. For example, according to this manager, a majority of Hispanic
third graders are not reading at the appropriate grade level. How can the library make a
difference by meeting this specific need? In her opinion, how the library handles this is what
defines leadership and if the library is doing it right, entrepreneurial leadership. The manager
adds that entrepreneurial leadership is also about taking advantage of opportunities. She
mentions that she has to look for revenue streams because the library has a limited budget. She
reiterates that being entrepreneurial starts with accountability and community engagement. This
manager’s corporate background influences her understanding of entrepreneurship. She mentions
that in a corporate environment there is pressure to “make your numbers” and a strong focus on
results. Government entities are much more risk averse, and she believes that it is partly due to
their working with public funds. This turns into something negative because people get used to
the status quo and do not take big risks that allow for change. She also adds that she does not
believe a career as a librarian prepares one to be an entrepreneurial leader, stating that “We do

143

not have the training or the experience in the workplace.” She is unsure of where that knowledge
comes from in people who do not have a corporate background.
Manager D1 believes that being a “risk taker and an idea maker” are what makes a person
entrepreneurial. An entrepreneurial person should not be afraid to try new things. Further, that
person has to be able to assess risks, fail, and establish connections with community partners.
Being entrepreneurial takes a certain amount of intention and planning, deliberateness, and good
project management, according to manager D2. These are qualities that are important to the role
of innovations manager. Manager D2 discusses the product life-cycle approach (pilot, reiteration,
revision, vetting, final definition, and multiplication) when discussing entrepreneurship. He adds
that start-ups and entrepreneurship take hard work, dedication, and follow through. Both
managers come to their conclusions from experience and observing entrepreneurship in the
organization.
Manager E thinks that “having the ability to get a sense of what the goals are and what
they are trying to accomplish, gathering ideas, gathering resources, getting a sense of the big
picture, making a decision and acting on it, and following through” are what makes a person
entrepreneurial. He has seen this happen over the past five years at the library. He comes to this
conclusion based on past experiences; his father was a business owner, and this manager also
worked in the business sector. He has seen how businesses have been built and how they have
developed something unique. Working at the library, he sees opportunities to take an idea and
run with it, make it meaningful and impactful for the community, and meet and exceed the
community’s needs. He concludes with this thought: “Create something the community didn’t
even know they needed until you brought it to them.”

144

Linkage of Discussion to the Literature
There appears to be a linkage between leadership and entrepreneurship, both in the
director comments and in the literature. However, there is no clear agreement on these terms. For
example, Cogliser and Brigham (2004) consider “the definition of an entrepreneur to have
substantial overlap with that of a leader (but one who leads in extraordinary situations)” (p. 775).
Fernald Jr., Solomon, and Tarabishy (2005) and Schuman (1994) also find an overlap between
entrepreneurship and leadership. Cogliser and Bingham (2004) list relevant categories (for
leadership and entrepreneurship) that overlap. These include “vision, influence (both of
followers and of a larger constituency), leading innovative/creative people, and planning” (p.
777). This is reflected in the directors’ understanding of leadership and entrepreneurship in the
definitions they provided.
Both the directors and managers considered others in the organization as entrepreneurial
leaders. All of the directors considered themselves as entrepreneurial leaders, while only some of
the managers did so. A few managers viewed themselves as what Northouse (2015) describes as
assigned leaders. According to Northouse, assigned leadership is “leadership that is based on
occupying a position in an organization” (p. 8). Manager A3, in particular, did not view himself
as an entrepreneurial leader in the classic sense of the definition but rather by virtue of his
position and the fact that the library engages in entrepreneurial activities.
Although there is no clearly agreed upon definition of entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial leadership, there are some components that are common among the different
definitions. Those components include vision, creating value for the organization, exploitation of
opportunity, and revenue generation (Cogliser & Bingham, 2004; Darling, Keeffe, & Ross, 2007;
Gupta, MacMillam, & Surie, 2004). All of the library directors mentioned vision. They

145

understand the importance of having a vision, but they also understand the importance of
providing support to their staff to carry out the vision. The director at library B says that the
library looks for new ways to deliver services. This is an example of both exploitation of
opportunity and creating value for the organization. In searching for a new way to deliver a
service, the library can exploit an opportunity that will help the library deliver the service. After
the service is established at the library, it creates value for both the organization and the
community. Some of the libraries generate revenue from entrepreneurial activities and services,
and this reflects a commonly mentioned component by researchers. Two directors mentioned this
in the context of providing support to staff. Sometimes that support is in the form of funds,
which potentially come from revenue generation. One of the directors emphasizes that revenue
generation could be equated to resource generation for libraries. She mentions that the library
often has to obtain resources that are not necessarily in the form of funds for projects, programs,
and services.
Traditional views on entrepreneurship often confine it to the business sector, but
entrepreneurship can apply to the non-profit sector (Drucker, 1985; Gartner, 1990). When
entrepreneurship is applied to the nonprofit or public sector, there is not as much focus on
revenue because the purpose of these organizations may not be to earn money. In Jusic’s (2013)
study, there was some discomfort and hesitation among a few directors with having “revenue
generation” a part of the definition of entrepreneurial leadership, as well as with the idea that
libraries generate revenue. Although some of the libraries in this study do generate revenue, two
out of the four library directors suggested that revenue generation does not have to be a part of
the definition of entrepreneurial leadership. One director suggested that it can be excluded from
the definition, while the other director suggested replacing it with resource generation. The

146

director at library A seems to be the most comfortable with revenue generation, perhaps because
this library has been entrepreneurial for the longest amount of time. Library D does not generate
any revenue at this time and the director stated that there are no plans to make this a priority in
the future. This library will, however, use sponsorship opportunities to fund a future
entrepreneurial service. Libraries B and D seem more comfortable with seeking partnerships and
resources as a way to fund their entrepreneurial activities and services.
Participants were asked to consider the definition of entrepreneurial leadership as
“creating a vision and leading the organization through a process of discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services or lead
to new services and/or funding models” (Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31). Although all of the directors
concurred with the definition when specifically asked, two of the four directors suggest in their
comments and discussion that revenue generation is not a requirement for entrepreneurial
leadership in public libraries. As mentioned above, resources and partnerships are what make
entrepreneurial services possible.
The reduced focus on revenue generation in the public sector (or nonprofit) definitions of
entrepreneurship may also be explained by library engagement in social entrepreneurship. This
may be due to the libraries engaging more in social entrepreneurship, which is defined as
entrepreneurial activity with an embedded social purpose and focuses on social returns rather
than economic concerns. Austin, Stevenson, and Wei-Skillern (2006) define social
entrepreneurship as focusing “on serving basic, long-standing needs more effectively through
innovative approaches” (p. 6). All of the libraries provide services that serve their community’s
needs and often they have to engage in innovative approaches to offer these services. Directors

147

and managers do not see the library’s primary role as revenue generation. Rather, it is there to
serve the community.
Johnson (2001) describes entrepreneurship as a creative act based on perceiving and
capturing opportunities in the environment. It is opportunity driven rather than resource driven.
This is particularly evident among all of the directors interviewed for this study. They often,
though not always, engage in entrepreneurship out of necessity. They exploit opportunities to
produce new services and to add value. Both of these are entrepreneur characteristics mentioned
by Bhattacharyya (2006) and Drucker (1985). Further, the entrepreneurs do not let the lack of
resources be viewed as a barrier if the service or activity is deemed to be sufficiently important.
Lack of resources has not prevented the libraries in the study from trying to improve current
operations and deliver new services to the community. For example, library B has three
entrepreneurial services that are largely supported by partnerships, grants, and outside funding.
The library provides these services even though it cannot fully support them only from the
library’s operating budget. This supports Johnson’s (2001) views that entrepreneurship is
opportunity driven rather than resource driven.
The concept of entrepreneurship can be defined by the function of the entrepreneur and
that person’s role, personality, specific behavior, and characteristics, or it can reflect the
organization (Casson & Casson, 2014; Sharma & Chrisman, 1999). When asked what makes an
organization or a person entrepreneurial, the answers provided by directors and managers varied.
Overall, the list of characteristics they provided includes:
•

risk taking,

•

initiative,

•

opportunity seeking,

148

•

new ideas,

•

willingness to change,

•

innovation,

•

finding new resources, and

•

revenue generation.

These characteristics match what appears in the literature. Organizations in the public sector can
use entrepreneurship to create something new, add value, discover new resources, and take
advantage of opportunities. Innovation and risk taking often emerge in discussion of
entrepreneurial leaders. Tarabishy, Solomon, Fernald, and Sashkin (2005) describe how
entrepreneurial leaders “can help organizations by creating and implementing an organizational
strategy that is entrepreneurially oriented, which therefore exhibits proactiveness, innovation,
and risk-taking” (p. 25). This reflects what some of the directors and managers have included in
their answers. Library D, in particular, places a lot of emphasis on innovation, both as a part of
entrepreneurship and in other areas of the organization. More details are provided in Chapter 4.
Drucker (1985) discusses the importance of non-profit institutions engaging in
innovation. Directors A and D understand this, mentioning innovation in their comments on
entrepreneurship. Director B alludes to it when discussing the library striving to create new ways
to deliver services. Director A and D also mention risk taking in their discussions of
entrepreneurship as well as the need for flexibility and creativity. A common theme is that of the
entrepreneur creating or adding value (Bhattacharyya, 206; Drucker, 1985) by creating or
improving an existing product, service, or organization (Casson, 2010). All of the libraries strive
to improve existing services. Leaders are continuously evaluating existing services to see

149

whether they can be improved, and they also consider evolving community needs to help decide
what new services they should implement.
Conclusion
As libraries recover from the Great Recession and tighter budgets, implementing strategic
priorities may require a focus on entrepreneurship. The directors at the four libraries studied are
focused on meeting the specific needs of the communities they service, and entrepreneurship is a
way for the libraries to meet strategic priorities and specific community needs. Although some of
the libraries generate revenue from entrepreneurial activities and services, revenue generation is
not the focus of all the entrepreneurial activities and services. In some cases, the directors choose
to focus on other aspects of the definition, such as innovation and risk taking, which have
resulted in new entrepreneurial services. In the cases where an entrepreneurial activity or
services does not generate revenue, the directors must focus finding new resources due to
budgetary constraints. In many cases, partnerships with other organizations and external
resources are required to make the entrepreneurial activities or services possible.
The directors’ views on leadership and entrepreneurship influence entrepreneurship in the
organization, and the directors’ support is a key component of having entrepreneurship in the
organization. Entrepreneurship is still relatively new for libraries. There is not necessarily
agreement among directors and managers on the definition or how entrepreneurial the library is,
and there are challenges associated with engaging in entrepreneurial activities and offering
entrepreneurial services. Yet the directors continue the focus on entrepreneurship because of its
value and role in helping the libraries meet specific community needs and provide better service
to the community.

150

The next chapter focuses on innovation, as it relates to entrepreneurship, at the four
public libraries studied. The chapter discusses whether the library directors consider innovation
to be a part of entrepreneurship or as something separate. It also looks at whether innovation
exists in the library in the capacity of entrepreneurial activities and services and whether
innovation exists in other areas of the organization.

151

References
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship:
Same, different, or both? Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 30(1), 1-22.
Bhattacharyya, S. (2006). Entrepreneurship and innovation: How leadership style makes
the difference? Vikalpa: The Journal for Decision Makers, 31(1), 107-115.
Casson, M. (2010). Entrepreneurship: Theory, institutions and history. The Scandinavian
Economic History Review, 58(2), 139-170.
Casson, M., & Casson, C. (2014). The history of entrepreneurship: Medieval origins of a modern
phenomenon. Business History, 56, 1223-1242.
Cogliser, C. C., & Brigham, K. H. (2004). The intersection of leadership and entrepreneurship:
Mutual lessons to be learned. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 771-799.
Darling, J. R., Keeffe, M. J., & Ross, J. K. (2007). Entrepreneurial leadership strategies and
values: Keys to operational excellence. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship,
20(1), 41-54.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Fernald Jr., L. W., Solomon, G. T., & Tarabishy, A. (2005). A new paradigm: Entrepreneurial
leadership. Southern Business Review. 30(2), 1-10.
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Gupta, V., MacMillan, I. C., & Surie, G. (2004). Entrepreneurial leadership: Developing and
measuring a cross-cultural construct. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(2), 241-260.
Johnson, D. (2001). What is innovation and entrepreneurship? Lessons for larger organisations.
Industrial and Commercial Training, 33(4), 135-140.

152

Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1, 1-13.
Northouse, P. G. (2015). Leadership: Theory and practice. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Schuman, P. G. (1994). Leaders manage the dream. Wilson Library Bulletin, 68(7), 41-44.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Tarabishy, A., Solomon, G., Fernald Jr., L. W., & Sashkin, M. (2005). The entrepreneurial
leader's impact on the organization's performance in dynamic markets. Journal of Private
Equity, 8(4), 20-29.

153

Chapter 4
INNOVATION

The public library directors were asked to discuss innovation at the library, specifically,
whether they consider it to be a part of entrepreneurship or something separate, and whether
innovation exists within entrepreneurial activities or services. They were also asked to comment
on whether innovation exists in other areas of the organization. Although the managers were not
asked other questions specific to innovation, several of them mentioned innovation in their
discussion of the organization or organizational culture. This chapter highlights their responses
to this line of inquiry.
Innovation as a Part of Entrepreneurship
The director at library A views innovation as a part of entrepreneurship. The act of
innovation, this director notes, involves trying out new methods and products. If staff members
are willing to do this, they must show initiative and be willing to take risks. The director at
library E believes that innovation “absolutely needs to be a part of” entrepreneurship, but did not
elaborate. The director at library B views innovation as more than a part of entrepreneurship.
Innovation can involve selecting a work process and making it more efficient or finding a new
way to complete the process. There are many processes the library performs repetitively, and
staff members search for innovative ways to reduce the amount of time it takes to complete these
tasks. In the past, the library has evaluated the work processes related to tasks such as
processing, checking in, and checking out materials to make these processes more efficient. This
approach to innovation is not necessarily entrepreneurial, but demonstrates that efficiency may
involve innovation, that is, innovation in problem solving.

154

The director at library D believes that, philosophically, innovation and entrepreneurship
can be separate concepts. However, for the library, the two concepts are “embedded” in the
organization. The director adds that the library often searches beyond the profession for ideas on
different approaches to services, effectiveness, efficiency, and areas to improve within the
library. The director explains that the library paired its entrepreneurial activities and services
with design thinking,1 which focuses on how companies innovate through processes in a speedy
fashion, including the concept of failing fast.2 According to the director, design thinking is
popular with technology companies, and in the geographical area where the library is located,
and is taught at a nearby university.3 The library is adopting this process as it makes changes in
operations and services that will benefit the library and community. The director adds, “The
changes that we make … we want to make sure they are worthwhile.” If a service is not worth
continuing, it is better to discontinue it as soon as possible rather than pursuing an impractical
practice.
Innovation and Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
The director at library A thinks innovation exists in the library within entrepreneurial
services in two specific areas. The first area is the Friends of the Library bookshop. The director
describes the manager of the bookshop as “very innovative and willing to try out ideas even to

1

Design thinking can be viewed as “a philosophy or a way of thinking” or “as a specific process for innovation or
problem solving” (Rauth, Cargren, & Elmquist, 2014, p. 48). There are multiple models of design thinking
processes. One model includes six phases: problem finding, observation, visualization and sense making, ideation,
prototyping and testing, and the design of a business model enacting the innovation (Glen, Sucia, Baughn, & Ansun,
2015).
2
Failing fast is testing out a product, idea, or service and determining whether it is feasible and worthwhile to
continue pursuing. The benefit of failing fast is to stop wasting additional resources on something that is not
working, figuring out problems with a project early on, and being able to move on to another goal more quickly. It
also decreases the pressure to continue with the project because there is not a large investment of time (McGrath,
2011).
3
Library D was one of three libraries to receive a grant from a regional library consortium. The three grant recipient
libraries are teaching design thinking curriculum to their staff.

155

the point of making some volunteers uncomfortable.” The bookshop manager has previous
experience working at a well-known book retailer. She therefore ensures that the bookshop
includes retail style displays related to library events, seasonal events, or topics of current
interest. The director believes that, sometimes, innovation can be simple. For example, the
manager of the bookshop implemented and installed software to be able to review the inventory
of the bookshop at the main library as well as at the branch location. However, the bookshop
volunteers were uncomfortable with the idea of new software because they would be forced to
deal with a change in operations. Despite their discomfort, this change turned out to be positive;
now, volunteers can check inventory at both locations, which provides better service to the
customers. This change, the director reveals, could have backfired, but in the end, it was
successful.
The second area focuses on the passport service. Due to government regulations, the
library no longer renews passports for individuals 16 years of age and older, though it can still
issue new passports. During the last year, the library experienced a revenue decrease of 10-14
percent because of this change in regulations. In the geographic location where the library is
located, approximately 41 percent of the passport applicants speak English as a second language.
This, paired with a large backlog in naturalization services and a community desire for the
library to offer citizenship classes and naturalization ceremonies, prompted the library to fill that
void by offering those services. In July and August 2015, the library held a naturalization
ceremony, which sparked an idea from a staff member to increase passport revenue. Since newly
naturalized citizens must submit their old passports after the ceremony, the idea was to
encourage these new citizens to walk across the hall at the library and use the passport service to
apply for a new U.S. passport. This innovative idea failed because the naturalization ceremony

156

was lengthy, and people traveling from nearby areas preferred to return home after the event
instead of taking the extra time to apply for a passport at the library. Another reason this plan
collapsed was because the judiciary branch of government objected to holding naturalization
ceremonies outside of the courthouse. Ultimately, the library stopped offering naturalization
ceremonies at its location. The director said that even though the idea failed, the process of
coming up with the idea, implementing it, and evaluating it was a good experience for staff
because it gave them an opportunity to try an entrepreneurial idea. Despite the library’s desire to
increase revenue while addressing the community’s needs and a staff member’s specific idea to
accommodate that need, the plan did not succeed. However, the library still continues to offer
citizenship classes.
At library B, innovation exists in the library within entrepreneurial activities or services
and in other areas of the library. According to the director, it was innovative for the library to
have a college access center that helps individuals, often from underserved populations, with the
college application process. Such centers are not typically located in public libraries and this
effort offered something different at the time the library began to provide the service. The
director also believes it was innovative to have a discovery space for small businesses and
entrepreneurs4 and for the library to create a makerspace despite a lack of funds, staff, and
materials and equipment.
The director at library D said that if innovation and entrepreneurship are two different,
but interrelated concepts, innovation exists as part of entrepreneurship because the library is

4

The discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs resembles a co-working space; it offers fact finding
services, resources, programs, and workshops designed to help small business owners and entrepreneurs achieve
their goals.

157

seeking to do something differently. Innovation bypasses traditional barriers and, in some
situations, removes them completely.
According to the director at library E, innovation exists at the library regarding
entrepreneurial services, and offers the multi-modal interactive exhibits as an example. The
director describes this service as “somewhat innovative,” and as “getting outside of our box and
doing something other libraries were not doing.” It is important to search outside the library
profession for ideas. The director compared the multi-modal interactive exhibits to interactive
exhibits at a children’s museum. Interactive play is considered to be an important part of early
childhood literacy.
Library D created a product that benefits both that library and other libraries that have
borrowed or purchased the multi-modal interactive exhibits. In an effort to create this product,
the staff explored and looked beyond the library profession for ideas. However, because the plan
for the multi-modal interactive exhibits started a long time ago, the director did not think it was
innovative at the time. She adds, “The word innovation gets attached to [something] … as people
start to see it as being innovative. It is society that defines it as innovative.” Reflecting back, the
director now considers looking outside the library profession for ideas as an innovative
component of the process of creating the multi-modal interactive exhibits.
Innovation in Other Areas
Innovation exists at library A outside of entrepreneurial activities and services. The
Friends of the Library bookshop example applies here because it operates on its own, even
though it is located within the library. Another example the director mentioned is the library
exploring the concept of a makerspace for adults. The director and staff wanted the space to
focus on the entrepreneurial and business community, with the intent of the space being

158

distinctly different from the makerspace for children. They explored whether the library could
charge for this type of service, and then generate revenue. To help determine whether the
makerspace for adults could be a revenue generator, the library had a graduate student from a
master’s of business administration program conduct a financial analysis. The analysis revealed
that the library would not lose money, but the space would not constitute a new revenue stream.
This finding prompted the director’s decision to purchase a cheaper 3-D printer, instead of the
originally intended $25,000 version. In relation to the makerspace, the director indicates that the
library sought community input. Seeking input is a simple idea, she notes, but it speaks to how
the library culture is changing. In the past, the library did not invite input from the community
before launching new services. In seeking that input from the community, the library discovered
that the artistic community wants to use the makerspace, thereby expanding the original intent of
the space, which was to focus only on entrepreneurs and businesses. The director adds that
pursuing input from the community before the library builds and offers a service is a new
approach for this library, one that will likely result in more successful end products.
Library B attracts volunteers and partners because it reacts to what the community needs.
The director says, “We are very innovative in the way we are making those things happen.” This
library depends heavily on partnerships and volunteers for its entrepreneurial services. Another
example the director provides is working with a couple of partner libraries to catalog records,
process materials, and provide training to their staff. The records are available through the
library’s catalog. In some cases, the library charges for this service, but the director did not
specify amounts. The director mentions a future activity that she describes as an innovative
entrepreneurial activity: to open a café in the library. The director wants to accomplish this by
attracting a nonprofit agency that can run the café as a job skills training program while

159

delivering a service to library customers. The library already has a café space; in the past, a café
operated there for a brief period. This new attempt, according to the director, “would achieve a
higher good and social service.” The director mentions that the library would not generate
revenue from this, but that operating the café as a job skills training program5 is an innovative
way to solve the problem of using empty space. According to her, café services housed within
libraries are generally not financially lucrative. Using the café space as a job skills training
program is another approach to offering a café service; however, it is not the same as hiring a
vendor. The director adds that innovation is evident outside of entrepreneurial activities and
services in the library by striving to find ways to streamline and improve processes.
When asked whether innovation occurs in the library beyond entrepreneurial activities
and services, the director at library D answered “absolutely.” The library is always seeking to
improve internal operations. Innovation is about challenging staff to view processes differently.
It can be as simple as examining how the library checks in books and discovering a way to
improve the process. The director states, “The process of being innovative is challenging
assumptions.” The library conducted an audit to determine how staff process materials to save
time and money. The purpose of this audit was to achieve savings and efficiency in order to
expand service hours. The director concludes, “Change for the good [of all] is important in all
aspects of what we do.” Often, change involves some type of innovation at this library.
Innovation also exists outside of entrepreneurial activities and services at library E. Five
years ago, the library started offering robotics related programs. At one robotics workshop,
children learned about building and programming LEGO robots. This included putting together
physical components and learning programming skills in specialized software to make the robots
5

The job skills training program can help individuals learn practical skills, such as cash handling and customer
service, that will help them find employment.

160

move. According to the director, this is not the first library to offer such programs, but this type
of program was considered innovative at that time.
Another example of innovation outside of entrepreneurial activities and services at library
E is the library’s participation in job fairs. During the so-called Great Recession, the library
participated in job fairs. The library staffed a designated space at job fairs and offered classes
every half an hour on creating résumés and conducting online job searches. The director,
reflecting on this service, describes it as innovative. However, at the time the library offered this
service, she did not view the service as innovative. Instead, she thought it was something the
library should offer because there was a community need. Innovation, she believes, exists in
everything, and hopes the entire organization is thinking about it as everyone performs everyday
work duties.
The director at library E discusses an innovation fund for staff at the library. The library
created a training program five years ago called the staff innovation fund, which serves two
purposes. The first purpose is to offer training that teaches individuals how to obtain grants,
manage a project, market and brand that project, and effectively communicate and conduct a
presentation on it. The library takes a comprehensive approach to project management training
that enables staff members to execute a project from start to finish once they have completed
their training. The second purpose of the innovation fund is to allow staff to apply for financial
resources to finance a specific project. The fund, which supports creative ideas, started as a grant
through the state library, and library E continues to offer it. The state library considered the fund
as a valuable resource to employees and an immense benefit for the state’s greater library
community. The state library contracted with library E to offer the program to other libraries.
According to the director, 25 libraries, to date, have participated in this program throughout the

161

state, with approximately 400 staff members participating. The director believes that if money is
the only barrier to achieving goals, then that is the easiest problem to solve. It is more
challenging to generate ideas, be motivated to accomplish something, and possess enthusiasm for
one’s job. The money the library receives from the state library goes towards the director’s salary
(to compensate her for the time she spends conducting the training)6 and the expenses to travel to
the various libraries to provide the training workshops.
General Comments of the Directors About Innovation
The directors at libraries A and D referred to innovation when addressing questions not
directly focused on the topic. The comments are worth mentioning because they further highlight
how the directors view innovation as it relates to entrepreneurship and the organization. When
the director at library A described entrepreneurship, she indicated that engaging in innovation
and demonstrating a flair for risk taking are major characteristics of an entrepreneur. This
director also mentioned innovation when responding to a question about whether the library is
more entrepreneurial now than when she first started in the position. She noted that the library is
not more entrepreneurial if one were to consider the number of additional activities. However,
“If you look at it in terms of initiative and risk then we are more innovative and more
entrepreneurial.”
The director at library D mentions innovation in several contexts. First, she includes
innovation as part of her definition of leadership, stating “Another element of leadership is being
able to take steps without permission and being innovative.” Next, she discusses engaging in
innovative projects7 when she first started at the library as a way to “jump start the spirit of the

6

This presumably compensates the library director for providing training to librarians within the state, that is,
individuals employed in other library systems.
7
The director did not specify what the innovative projects were.

162

organization.” In the past, the library was known as an innovative entity. The innovation element
stagnated during the recent recession and under the leadership of the interim director. When the
director first started working at the library, she interviewed every middle manager; the top
themes that emerged from those interviews revolved around innovating, wanting to be
innovative, and having been identified in the past as an innovative library. Staff members
indicated that they wanted to be known for innovation again and the new director acknowledged
this appeal, using it to build momentum and excitement within the organization. In restructuring
the library, she created an office of innovation and the position of innovation projects manager.8
According to the director, the scope of this position differs from jobs at other libraries because it
is designed to support innovation and entrepreneurship. Finally, she describes library D as being
the “most comfortable with a faster pace of innovation and change and partnerships” out of the
three urban libraries for which she has worked. She adds that she has developed systems for
innovation (via the office of innovation) and that the library staff are comfortable with
implementing groundbreaking ideas because there is a structure to support innovation within the
organization. In summary, the library is most comfortable with the concept of innovation and
engages in it both as a part of entrepreneurial services and in other areas of the library.
Manager General Comments About Innovation
A few managers mention innovation when answering questions. Manager A3 describes
the previous library director as extremely entrepreneurial and “a big proponent of being as
innovative as possible with services” offered. He reveals that the library is not particularly
innovative now, and that he is unsatisfied with the level of innovation among current staff. For

8

The office of innovation includes the division manager of technology and innovation and the technology and
innovation projects manager (now titled innovations manager). The innovations manager focuses on project
management and partnerships by working with library staff to manager entrepreneurial and innovative projects
including creating project timelines, seeking partners, identifying resources, and guiding the project team.

163

years, the library was known for its technological leadership and, now, manager A3 does not see
innovative applications of technology within the library. He would like for this to improve. Still,
he contends that the library’s recent participation in an institute on re-envisioning public libraries
speaks to trends and innovations within the library profession. Consequently, discussions have
emerged on innovation because of the library’s participation in the institute.
Manager B4 referred to innovation when asked whether the library is more
entrepreneurial. This manager believes the main library, but not the library system as a whole, is
more entrepreneurial. She indicates that innovation is occurring “in pockets,” adding “I want to
emphasize that we are a very innovative system and that we do a lot with very little because we
come from a conservative state.” The library relies on partnerships, volunteers, and grants to
support some of the entrepreneurial activities in which it engages. Also, staffing levels have not
returned to pre-recession levels and this is unlikely to change in the near future.
Even before he began working there, manager D2 viewed the library as an innovative
institution. Currently, he is the library’s division manager for technology and innovation. In this
division, “the innovation piece,” he contends, is where a great deal of entrepreneurship occurs.
He helped to define the new position of innovation project manager, and this position supports
entrepreneurship in the organization. Manager D2 discusses a period when the culture of
entrepreneurship and innovation lagged in the organization; now, entrepreneurship and
innovation are “coming back from a place of lower prominence.” This lag occurred during the
Great Recession when the library was under interim leadership. Now, there is more attention to
details and processes because of the existence of an innovation unit including an innovation
projects manager and a team focused on exploring the future of innovative projects at the library.

164

Linkage of Findings to the Literature
All of the directors agree that innovation can be a component of entrepreneurship.
Associating entrepreneurship with innovation began with Schumpeter (1934a; 1934b), and other
authors have concurred in recent decades (Drucker, 1985; Sharma & Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson
& Jarillo, 1990, p. 19). Baregheh, Rowley, and Sambrook (2009) describe innovation as playing
a “central role in creating value and sustaining competitive advantage” (p. 1324). The
entrepreneurial activities and services that the libraries engage in create value for their users and
for the community. Although the directors do not consider it as competitive advantage,
innovation has played a considerable role in the creation of unique services that make libraries
more attractive to the public.
All of the libraries exploit opportunities to engage in entrepreneurial activities and
services. Some even describe the services they offer as “innovative for libraries.” This supports
Drucker’s (1985) view of innovation as “the specific tool of entrepreneurs, the means by which
they exploit change as an opportunity for a different business or a different service” (p. 19). The
discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs, and the college access center at library B
are examples of the library exploiting opportunities at different points in time to create a type of
service not typical for public libraries. This idea of developing a service that contrasts what the
organization typically engages in fits Johnson’s (2001) special category of innovation, which
involves an organization developing a core business model that differs from a current or a
previous business model.9 A library offering a college access and reengagement center is an
example of a library providing a service that is aligned with the library’s mission, but this is also

9

Johnson provides an example of organizations other than banks trying to generate revenue by providing financial
services.

165

outside the scope of past services. At the time when library A started offering the passport
service, the service was something new and unusual for a library to implement.
The directors were not asked to define innovation. However, their use of the word echoes
components of definitions provided by researchers. For example, Zhao (2005) defines innovation
as “new products, new processes, new services (including new uses of established products,
processes and services), new forms of organization, new markets, and the development of new
skills and human capital” (pp. 27-28). Library E has created a new product with the multi-modal
interactive exhibits. The directors at libraries B and D mentioned innovation as a method used to
improve processes at the libraries.
Some of the libraries have created new services, and some of them require the
development of new skills from staff. For example, the makerspace at library B required staff to
learn how to use a 3-D printer and some of the other technology offered in the space. Rowley
(2011) defines innovation as a change in a product, service, process, or an organization rather
than necessarily something new. This definition is aligned with how the libraries in this study
apply innovation in the organization in areas other than the entrepreneurial activities and
services. Some of the library directors have changed the organizational structure to improve their
support of entrepreneurship. The directors and staff are also continuously striving to make
processes more efficient and to enhance the services the libraries offer.
Baregheh, Rowley, and Sambrook (2009) offer a more complete definition of innovation
by explaining that it is “the multi-stage process whereby organizations transform ideas into
new/improved products, services or processes, in order to advance, compete and differentiate
themselves successfully in their marketplace” (p. 1334). The entrepreneurial services the
libraries offer differentiate them from neighboring libraries that do not offer the same types of

166

services. These authors also provide a visual description of innovation (Figure 1.1), which
reflects how the libraries in this study apply the innovation process. For example, at library B,
library employees (social) created (stages) a new (nature) service (type) using ideas (means) to
distinguish themselves from other libraries and succeed (aim). At library D, library employees
(social) used volunteers from a technology company to create (stages) a new (nature) product10
(type) using technology (means) to differentiate themselves and succeed (aim).
Drucker’s (1985) discussion of systematic innovation is most closely associated with
library D’s efforts to engage in design thinking. This also applies to the three other libraries, but
the staff members are not as systematic in applying innovation within the organization. Drucker
proposes that areas of change that offer entrepreneurial opportunities should be systematically
examined. Of his seven sources11 for innovative opportunity that organizations which engage in
systematic innovation should monitor, the libraries in this study focus on innovation based on
process need, demographics, “changes in perception mood and meaning,” and “new knowledge,
both scientific and nonscientific” (p. 35). It is also worth noting that innovation is not always
structured. According to Rowley (2011), innovation can be triggered by evidence from staff or
users that there is room for quality enhancement of a product or service. One example of this is
the expansion of the college access center to include a re-engagement component. This center
was created as a result of staff observing a need within the community and the desire on the part
of parents of college access users to get help obtaining a high school diploma or passing the
General Educational Development (GED) test (becoming re-engaged) to obtain better jobs or

10

This library partnered with a technology company to create a mobile summer reading application.
Drucker’s (1985) seven sources for innovative opportunity that organizations engaging in systematic innovation
should monitor are: the unexpected, the incongruity, innovation based on process need, changes in industry structure
or market structure that “catch everyone unawares,” demographics, “changes in perception, mood, and meaning,”
and “new knowledge, both scientific and nonscientific” (pp. 34-35).
11

167

continue their education. This resulted in the expansion of the college access center space and the
services offered.
Both Drucker (1985) and Rowley (2011) acknowledge that innovation is more difficult to
accomplish in public service organizations due to a number of factors: constrained budgets, lack
of revenue generation, less flexibility, lower comfort with risk taking, resistance to change, and
the need to partner with other organizations. Manager B4 underlines this view: “In government
circles, we are much more risk averse and that is partly because we are playing with public
funds.” This manager adds that libraries do not want to take big risks, even if they result in
substantial changes. While this may be true for many libraries, the four libraries in this study are
distinguished from them by the types of and the nature of their activities and services. The
libraries studied certainly confront many of the obstacles that other libraries encounter, but they
have persevered in their pursuit of entrepreneurship and innovation.
In presenting a proposition about the relationship between entrepreneurship and
innovation, Zhao (2005) views innovation as the source of entrepreneurship and entrepreneurship
as enabling innovation to flourish and realize its economic value. In the libraries studied,
innovation is a part of entrepreneurship in all cases and it is present within the organization and
outside the scope of entrepreneurship. However, innovation does not necessarily have economic
value because not all of the entrepreneurial services generate revenue.
McFadzean, O’Loughlin, and Shaw (2005) support the concept that innovation depends
on entrepreneurship, writing that “without the presence of some form of entrepreneurial activity
to exploit opportunities as they arise within organizations, innovation remains little more than an
aspirational, rather than a tangible destination” (p. 353). In the libraries studied, innovative ideas
manifest themselves in entrepreneurial activities and services. However, sometimes it is a case of

168

innovation being much simpler and being applied to improve a work process rather than creating
something new. In these cases, innovation helps to achieve efficiencies within an organization.
An example is evaluating a process and finding an innovative way to complete it that decreases
the time required. This approach makes the process more efficient and frees up time for staff to
focus on other tasks or activities.
Conclusion
Study findings support the literature on entrepreneurship that presents innovation as a
component of entrepreneurship. All of the library directors consider innovation to be a part of
entrepreneurship. Although some of them indicate that entrepreneurship can be separate or
broader within the libraries that they direct, innovation is a part of the entrepreneurial activities
and services. The findings also support the view found in the literature that sees innovation as a
separate concept. The directors do not view innovation as something solely confined to
entrepreneurship, but they believe it can have a broader role in the organization. In essence, these
findings portray how public library directors view innovation, how innovation exists as a part of
entrepreneurship, and where it resides within the organization, both within and outside the scope
of entrepreneurial activities and services.
The findings on innovation are important because they indicate how innovation is applied
in the four libraries studied, both within and outside the scope of entrepreneurial activities and
services. The implication is that innovation is a critical component of entrepreneurship, as it is
present in the entrepreneurial activities and services in which the libraries engage. Further,
innovation in the organization is necessary for improving library operations, coming up with new
services, and creating new programs, not all of which may be entrepreneurial in nature but are
valuable in keeping libraries relevant and vital institutions within the community. That is not to

169

say that there are not areas for improvement where innovation in concerned. Drucker (1985) and
Rowley (2011) acknowledge that innovation can be more difficult to accomplish in public
service organizations. Although the four libraries studied engage in innovation, there are areas
for improvement. For example, manager A3 would like to see improved innovative applications
of technology, and manager B4 indicated that while the main library is innovative, there is room
for improvement in the application of innovation in the library system as a whole. Finally, the
findings on innovation are important because they indicate that the services resulting from both
entrepreneurship and innovation require staff with specialized skill sets, and in many cases do
not require someone with a master’s degree in library and information science. Rather, the skills
required are specific to the service offered. This affects library hiring practices, and may hold
implications for curriculum LIS schools.
The next chapter provides details on the entrepreneurial activities and services in which
the libraries engage. The chapter indicates what makes each activity or service entrepreneurial. It
also provides details about why the library engages in them, the benefits derived from them, the
staff required, and whether the activities and services have enough support within the
organization.

170

References
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of
innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Glen, R., Suciu, C., Baughn, C. C., & Anson, R. (2015). Teaching design thinking in business
schools. International Journal off Management Education, 13(2), 182-192.
Johnson, D. (2001). What is innovation and entrepreneurship? Lessons for larger organisations.
Industrial and Commercial Training, 33(4), 135-140.
McFadzean, E., O’Loughlin, A., & Shaw, E. (2005). Corporate entrepreneurship and innovation
part 1: The missing link. European Journal of Innovation Management, 8(3), 350-372.
McGrath, R. G. (2011). Failing by design. Harvard Business Review, 89(4), 76-83.
Rauth, I., Carlgren, L., & Elmquist, M. (2014). Making it happen: Legitimizing design thinking
in large organizations. Design Management Journal, 9(1), 47-60.
Rowley, J. (2011). Should your library have an innovation strategy? Library Management, 32
(4/5), 251-265.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934a). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. London, UK: Ruskin House.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934b). The theory of economic development (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, C. J. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5), 17-27.

171
171

Zhao, F. (2005). Exploring the synergy between entrepreneurship and innovation. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 11(1), 25-41.

172

Chapter 5
ENTREPRENEURIAL ACTIVITIES AND SERVICES

This chapter provides detailed information on the entrepreneurial activities and services
offered by the four libraries in this study. The first section highlights the qualities that explain
why each activity or service is entrepreneurial, and the second section details the entrepreneurial
activities and services. The third section covers additional activities and services mentioned by
the library directors or managers. Remaining sections look at the similarities and differences
among the libraries, the success of the activities and services, the use of documents and physical
artifacts as evidence, and comments on the observed services.
Why the Various Activities and Services Are Entrepreneurial
Jusic (2013) determined that entrepreneurial activities fall into four categories: (1)
traditional library services funded by outside support, (2) activities that directly generate
revenue, (3) activities that do not generate revenue but provide a new product or service, and (4)
activities that are non-revenue generating but add value. Using these categories and Jusic’s
definition of entrepreneurial leadership1 as a framework, Table 5.1 lists the major entrepreneurial
activities and services in which the libraries engage, along with the applicable categories, and
why each entrepreneurial activity or service is entrepreneurial.

1

Entrepreneurial leadership is defined as “creating a vision and leading the organization through a process of
discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services
or lead to new services and/or funding models” (Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31).

173

Table 5.1
Why activities and services offered by libraries are entrepreneurial
Entrepreneurial activity

Category

Why activities or services are

or service
Celebrity author program

considered entrepreneurial
•

Traditional library services

•

Generates revenue

funded by outside support
•

Activity or service that
directly generates revenue

Café

•

Activity or service that

•

directly generates revenue

Generates revenue (library
receives revenue from rental
of space where café is
located)

College access and

•

reengagement center

Activity or service that

•

Organization went through a

does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service

•

Activity or service that is
non-revenue generating but
adds value

Corporate sponsorship for
Sunday hours

•

Activity or service that
directly generates revenue

•

Generates revenue (library
displays banner of corporate
sponsor in front of library

174

and uses money to fund the
library being open on
Sundays)
Discovery space for small

•

Activity or service that

•

Organization went through a

businesses and

does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

entrepreneurs

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service

•

Activity or service that is
non-revenue generating,
but adds value

Friends of the Library

•

bookshop
Makerspace

Activity or service that

•

Generates revenue

•

Organization went through a

directly generates revenue
•

Activity or service that
does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service

•

Activity or services that is
non-revenue generating,
but adds value

175

Multi-modal interactive

•

exhibits

Activity or service that

•

directly generates revenue

Generates revenue (via sales
of multi modal interactive
exhibits to other libraries)

•

Organization went through a
process of discovery,
evaluation, and exploitation
of opportunities to create a
new service (and a new
product)

Summer reading mobile

•

application

Activity or service that

•

Organization went through a

does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service (and a new
product)

•

Activity or services that is
non-revenue generating,
but adds value

Passport service (offered by •

Activity or service that

two libraries)

directly generates revenue

•

Generates revenue

The Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
This section examines the entrepreneurial activities and services at the four libraries. It
provides details for each activity or service, such as how long the library has engaged in it, why
176

the library engages in it, whether the activity or service generates revenue, what types of benefits
the library derives from it, whether special skills or training are required for the staff, and
whether there is sufficient support2 in the organization for the activity or service. Both library
directors and managers answered questions related to the entrepreneurial activities and services.
The investigator also used documentation, physical artifacts, and observation of some services to
gain a better understanding of how the activities and services work at each library.
Celebrity Author Program (Library A)
In 2010, the Friends of the Library started a program which the library director describes
as featuring “celebrity authors.” This is a special event where the Friends of the Library bring in
more prominent authors than those usually featured at free author programs at the library. A $15
fee is charged for admissions and the event is considered as an experience rather than a regular
library author program. According to the library director, attendees dress up, treat the event like a
night out, and enjoy the wine and food donated by local restaurants.
Fundraising became a necessary revenue stream in 2010 because the library could not
sustain operations and was forced to make budget cuts. In order to continue offering the same
level of service, the library needs to raise $1.1 million a year. According to manager A3, that
money is raised via three categories: fundraising activities,3 revenue generated from
entrepreneurial activities and services,4 and general solicitations and grants.5 The celebrity author
program is one of the fundraising activities. It generates between $160,000 and $170,000 in

2

Sufficient support is defined in terms of time allotted, resources, and importance placed on entrepreneurial
activities and services within an organization.
3
Manager A3 said the fundraising activities fall into three categories: Sunday hours funded by corporate sponsors
($130,000 per year), annual appeal to households making more than $50,000 (the amount raised was not specified),
and the celebrity author program (approximate net revenue of $120,000).
4
The library generated approximately $275,000 in revenue from the passport service, $34,000 from renting the
library space to the café, and approximately $100,000 from the Friends of the Library bookshop.
5
The amount of money received form general solicitations and grants was not specified.

177

revenue, with a net amount of $120,000.6 The primary benefit of the program to the library is
financial, since the event is organized by the Friends of the Library, and the volunteers do not
have to have any special skills to help with the program.
Café (Library A) 7
The café, which is part of a nationally recognized chain, has resided within the library for
more than 15 years. Initially, the space was used for periodicals and a reading area. When the
previous director learned that this particular café chain was searching for a space in the
surrounding area, he actively pursued the business. According to manager A3, the “courtship
between the library and the coffee chain went on for at least three to four years before the lease
was executed.” At that time, libraries were starting to offer cafés and other amenity services. The
library had the perfect space for a café on a street corner with sidewalk access.
Initially, the previous director thought that there could be profit sharing between the café
and library. He also wanted all traffic to come through the library and for the café to conform to
library hours. However, the director was compelled to make some compromises. The café is
accessible from the street and its business hours differ from the library’s hours. In addition, the
café pays a fixed rent to the library. When the café first signed the lease, it had the option for two
additional five-year rental renewals with increasing rent. At the conclusion of the tenth year,
which was the peak of the Great Recession, the café was not performing the way management
had expected. Consequently, the café requested a lower rent in order to stay. According to
manager A3, an entrepreneur might have refused the café’s request, and then found a different
occupant. However, the library decided to alter the lease to accommodate some of the terms the

6

Although the wine and food for this event are donated by local restaurants, there are still costs associated with the
event such as those for bringing in the author.
7
The other libraries studied do not have a café. Library B had one in the past, and plans to partner with a non-profit
agency to operate a café as a job skills training center in the future.

178

café wanted, such as a flat rent fee and the option to leave at any time with a six-month notice.
The library gains approximately $34,000 per year from the rent. Although manager A3 admits
that the library should receive between $60,000 and $70,000 for the space, the café pays for its
electricity, and there is no direct cost associated with having the café on library premises.
Ultimately, there are several benefits library A derives from having the café. The
directors said that the café in the library “helps create a Barnes and Noble atmosphere,” creating
a value-added service for library customers. The library also derives financial benefit from the
revenue, which is used to supplement library activities. Manager A3 described the café as “a
good thing for the community.” He adds that there is prestige associated with featuring the café
in the library because of the brand name. The manager discusses the synergy among the library,
the Friends of the Library bookshop, and the café. The café allows the Friends of the Library to
display books for sale in its space and has increased foot traffic to the bookshop. After the café
opened in the previous periodical space, the library director relocated the Friends of the Library
space next to the café. Previously, the Friends of the Library generated approximately $25,000
per year. After the Friends of the Library moved to the more prominent space, and arranged the
space to resemble a bookstore, the Friends of the Library started making between $100,000 and
$200,000 per year due to higher visibility, more foot traffic, and appealing displays.
The library does not run the café; therefore, the only staff time spent on it occurs during
contract negotiations every five years. During the last contract negotiation, manager A3 spent a
lot of time on the contract and talking to the library board. Now, he will not have to spend time
on the café until the next round of contract negotiations. Manager A3 contends that many stores
that pay high rent do not necessarily survive. If the library increased the rent, it is possible the

179

café would have found another location. There is always a risk that it will leave. According to
the manger, if the café leaves, the library can always use the space for library operations.
College Access and Reengagement Center (Library B)
The primary focus of the college access center, which opened in mid-2009, is to help
high school students navigate the college admission process. The college access center is a free,
full-service center that has a team of college planning advisors and assistants who offer one-onone appointments and workshops on admissions, financial aid, and scholarships. According to
the director (library B), “It is unique to have a college access and reengagement center in a
library.” Place-based college access centers are typically connected to universities.
According to the director, “The library plays a huge role in assisting the education
system.” The college access center is another way to focus specifically on individuals to help
them achieve their goals. It also enhances the library’s broad goal of assisting education.
Manager B1, who manages the center, believes the library offers this service because there is a
community need. The underserved population of high school students, especially those who
would be first generation college students, need help with the college application process beyond
any services that the local high schools may offer. She considers the college access center as an
effective way to entice more teenagers to come to the library. She is pleased that the city
supports the library in this commitment, and she believes, “The more educated the workforce,
the stronger the community.”
When the college center first opened, it operated with private funding. Later, the library
made it part of the general fund so that all operational costs are supported by the city. According
to manager B1, that is a sustainable model. A small percentage of funding still comes from
outside support. The director estimates that 10 percent of costs are supported by private money,

180

which allows the library to go “over above and beyond the basic services.” The director,
speaking about the college access center as well as other entrepreneurial services in the library
states, “We are entrepreneurial because we are able to find outside funders to support these great
services.”
The center has grown over the past few years and expanded the services it offers. In
2014, the library added a reengagement aspect to the college access center that focuses on adults,
ages 19 and older, who are interested in returning to school. Although the staff are capable of
helping adults who wish to return to college (and may do so on occasion), the primary focus is
on helping adults return to high school. Often this involves helping the adults pass the General
Education Development (GED) test. More recently, the library started offering adults the
opportunity to obtain a fully-accredited high school diploma in an online environment. The
library completed a physical expansion of the center in May 2015, adding staff offices and a
larger workshop room.
The director expanded the college access center because of an expressed need in the
community to increase post-secondary education. The college access center had been seen to be
effective in helping first generation students acquire scholarships, and then enter higher
education. The director reveals, “Having a greater level of educational achievement improves
lives for individuals, families, and therefore the community. It is really one of the basic building
blocks to improving economic development in our city and individual lives. Raising someone’s
level of education has a ripple effect in the community.” According to manager B1, the college
access and reengagement center contributes to economic development. This is a benefit for both
the library and the larger community. The manager adds that the department of economic
development, along with city leadership (including the city manager), understand that education

181

is a driving force for economic development. The city manager is so supportive that he has asked
library staff members to reach out to city employees who do not have high school diplomas. This
is an opportunity for them to expand their education, and the city manager is willing to reimburse
the college access center for the costs.
The decision to add the reengagement component to the college access center stemmed
from several factors. As mentioned above, the component contributes to economic development.
However, the decision emerged from a particular report and community need. According to
manager B1, the report,8 which showcased the number of disconnected youth9 in the state,
indicated that the state had one of the highest rates of disconnected youth. Additionally, the
community expressed an interest in helping adults to become reengaged. According to manager
B1, the vast majority (80 percent) of students who use the college access center have parents
who have not completed college and sometimes not even high school. When students arrived at
the library to use the center with their parents, some of the parents communicated a desire to
continue their educational process. The report, paired with the expressed interest from parents
who use the college access center with their children, prompted the library to launch the service.
The manager describes the reengagement service as a “more proactive approach to the
disconnected youth problem.”
As of January 2015, the reengagement center offers the option for adults to obtain a high
school diploma through the online high school. Manager B1 states that the idea of providing an

8

Although the manager did not specify where the report came from, the investigator found information via a local
newspaper that a report prepared by Measure of America, a non-partisan and non-profit initiative of the Social
Science Research Council that aims to stimulate fact-based dialogue about human development issues in the United
States, indicated that the city where library B is located is among the 25 largest metro areas with a high rate of
disconnected youth.
9
Manager B1 defines “disconnected youth” as people between the ages of 16 and 24 who are not working or in
school.

182

online high school diploma through the library was an innovation started by a library system
located in another state. That public library system was the first in the country to provide online
high school diplomas to adults. The mayor and the library director at library B were both excited
about this opportunity. Manager B1 views the reengagement service, including the online high
school, as a pipeline to the college access center. According to the manager, the goal is to offer
individuals the opportunity to become reengaged in their education and to have the option to
continue by pursuing a college degree.
The library contracts with a vendor, and then pays the cost for students through grant
funding because the city does not provide funding for individual gain. At the time of the
interview, the library produced seven high school graduates with 70 out of the 75 available spots
filled. The manager states that is has been “gratifying to see students […] get [the] GED and
continue on.” So far, approximately 1,200 people have been served through the reengagement
service.
As part of the reengagement service, the library maintains databases that are updated
monthly with information on the GED test and the process of obtaining a high school diploma.
The library also offers one-on-one customized support for adults. There are trained staff
members at the center to help adults create their own educational plans, which sometimes start
with resources and preparation for the GED test or completing high school. As the center’s staff
members help users with their educational plans, they collect user information via Apricot
software.10 This software enables them to track the center users’ progress and success. It also
helps staff members determine when to track and follow up with individuals to establish how

10

Apricot software is a flexible and secure nonprofit software offering case management, outcomes management,
and client, donor, and volunteer tracking.

183

they are progressing or to offer encouragement. Manager B1 describes this process as “part
mentorship, part cheerleading, and part data tracking.”
The manager provided some additional information about the college access and
reengagement center. First, she emphasized that staff members conduct outcome-based
measurement in the center using the Apricot software program. They conduct a pre-test and posttest on all students. Other than tracking how many students get accepted to college, how many
students pass the GED, and how many students graduate from the online high school, the
manager did not specify what additional data the center collects (and what she considers to be a
measure of success). However, she does describe this intensive evaluation process as unique to
the center and something that is not applied to other library services; that is, other library
services do not track outcome-based measurement as closely as the center. The manager
indicated that the evaluation was necessary in the beginning for survival and to showcase the
effectiveness of the center for grant-writing purposes. She had to prove to supporters that the
center was a worthwhile investment. Now, staff members do not need to worry as much about
foundational support, but the evaluation is critical to track student progress and to ensure that the
staff members at the center continue providing a high level of service. The manager adds that she
still writes grants for the reengagement services and uses the outcomes to showcase the
effectiveness of the work she and her staff perform in the center.
According to the director, the library derives prestige within the state and nationally by
being one of two public libraries that offers a free college access and reengagement center to the
public. She comments, “It is a highly regarded service,” which recognizes that libraries can
provide formal help to someone looking at expanded access to education. The library also gains
visibility. Manager B1 mentions that a number of communities have approached the library to

184

replicate the concept. She provides an example of a nearby city that just created a college access
center and modeled it after the center at library B. However, this college access center is located
in a separate facility and not in a library. She adds that approximately one million people visit the
library per year and that the location of the center is an important factor because the staff
members at the center capture a lot of “walk-in interest.”
Manager B1 spends all of her time working in the college access and reengagement
center. In addition, there are five full-time staff, five part-time staff, and two AmeriCorps
volunteers, who work solely in the center and all of them have at least a bachelor’s degree. When
the reengagement service was added, the library hired a full-time employee with the appropriate
expertise for this service. Previously, this employee worked with a high school district dropout
program and was familiar with the requirements for “reengaging” students. He also helped crosstrain the other staff.
The full-time employees serve as case workers and the part-time employees are classified
as library assistants. The staff members who work there are considered contract employees.
According to manager B1, the most important quality for anyone working in the center is a
passion for helping underserved students. The other skills can be taught. The employees have
degrees in social work and manger B1 has a master’s degree in public administration. Manager
B1 emphasizes that several employees in the center are bilingual, which helps them better serve
the center’s users. An MLIS degree is not required to work in the college access and
reengagement center.
The college access center has become successful due to the dedication of the staff and
because the programming has evolved over the years. During the first few years, the staff spent a
lot of time conducting outreach in the community to introduce the services offered in the center

185

because the workshops and appointment slots were not being filled. Although it took time to
establish the center’s reputation within the community, the center is now busy and appointments
fill up in advance. Staff members are more responsive to the needs of the center’s users. For
example, the center’s users receive help with the mechanics of the college application process
and staff provide technical support. The center offers workshops with a “hands-on” component.
Making this change has resulted in higher use of resources and better program attendance. The
center, for example, offered workshops on the Free Application for Federal Student Aid
(FAFSA).11 After these workshops, the staff discovered that attendees had many questions about
the technical aspect of completing the application online or concerning specific, required
information in the application. Consequently, the staff changed the format of the workshops by
moving through the FAFSA application, line by line. Additionally, the center offers one-on-one
help to individuals who need to follow up on components of the application after they complete
the workshop. By offering changes that specifically respond to the college application process,
the center has improved the experience for its users.
Manager B1 believes that the college access and reengagement center has sufficient
support in terms of time allotted, resources, and importance placed on entrepreneurial activities
and services within the organization. The manager believes that adequate support for
entrepreneurial services is uncommon in libraries. It is worth noting that it took time for the
center to establish a good reputation within the community and for the manager to build support
for the center within the organization.

11

Students interested in financial aid for college must complete this application.

186

Corporate Sponsorship for Sunday Hours (Library A)
Library A is located on a busy street corner, with the façade clearly visible to passing
pedestrians and traffic. The library displays three banners on the front of the building, advertising
library events, programs, or services. One of the banners is reserved for corporate sponsors that
fund the library’s Sunday hours. This banner reads “Open 1-5 Sunday thanks to” and is followed
by the sponsor’s logo and name. The library generates approximately $130,000 from this service
per year, and it costs $2,500 to fund the library being open for one Sunday. Although the library
does not plan to change the corporate sponsorship for Sunday hours in the near future, it could
use the banners in front of the library to fund another library service if the library finds another
means of funding Sunday hours.
Discovery Space for Small Businesses and Entrepreneurs (Library B)
The discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs combines elements of a coworking space with expert library fact-finding services and resources. The space offers business
programs, workshops, access to free Wi-Fi, popular business books, and a meeting room
available for reservation. The purpose of opening the discovery space is to offer small business
owners and entrepreneurs the tools (e.g., workshops, resources, software, meeting spaces) they
need to achieve their goals.
The idea for the discovery space started with a university approaching the library three
years before the opening date. The original vision for the space, according to manager B2, was
for it to serve as an incubator for startups and entrepreneurs. According to the director, the
library engages in this service because “There was a huge focus within the city on creating jobs
and this was a way that the library could play a role in helping the community create jobs.” The
initial partnership with the university was intended to provide support for entrepreneurship in the

187

library by creating jobs within the city and having partners to support the idea and deliver
services.
The discovery space, a free service, attracts small business owners, Spanish speakers, and
people with minimal technology skills. The library has now dissolved its partnership with the
university, because the university had no bilingual curriculum for the discovery space or
programs that met the needs of people with smaller businesses and low technology skills.
Eventually, the library created specific programming to meet user needs.
The discovery center (but not the physical space) was initially funded through a Library
Services and Technology Act (LSTA) grant that ended in June 2015. The library negotiated
funding through the city’s economic development department and received money through a
workforce opportunity funding act. The library, which asked for enough funds to cover the
expenses of the programs, received $10,000 for the current fiscal year. The library also secured
an additional $33,000 in grant funding.
When the space first opened, the library treated it as a typical reference service.
According to manager B2, the library later discovered that the space “needed exceptional,
Nordstrom level customer service and staff … [who] ha[ve] initiative and problem-solving
skills.” This approach was necessary to build the reputation and brand for discovery space and to
ensure the service was useful for the users. The type of help people needed was usually more
involved than typical reference transactions. Furthermore, it was necessary for staff to take extra
steps and time to help people in the discovery space acquire the resources and skills they needed.
In the beginning, the discovery space was an open space without much activity (in terms
of use of space, use of resources, and program attendance). According to manager B2, it did not
have enough support. Now, there is sufficient support for the space. After the library received the

188

LSTA grant, it developed programs and a brand for the discovery space. Manager B2 believes
that it is important to have a vision, to be flexible, and to make changes when necessary. The
manager said that the space is performing well and is serving as a source of inspiration. In early
November 2015, a local community college opened an entrepreneurial space similar to the
discovery space at the library.
The library does not derive financial benefit from this service. Rather, the primary benefit
is attracting customers who have not previously visited the library. With the discovery space for
small business and entrepreneurs, the library has a concrete example of how it contributes to
economic development. According to the director, libraries have always contributed to economic
development, but this has not been recognized by others. Now, the city views the library as a part
of economic development. According to manager B2, another benefit the library gains from this
service comes in the form of prestige. The manager notes, “We’ve become an embedded
decision-making model,” and the library is now part of the decision-making process for policies,
workforce development, education, and other programs. Furthermore, through the discovery
space, the library helps customers use free resources to meet their small business needs. One
example of this is a small business owner learning how to market the business through one of the
programs offered at the library.
Manager B2 spends approximately 20 percent of her time working on this service. In
addition, one full-time librarian manages the space and two part-time library assistants spend half
of their time on the discovery center. An additional four to five library assistants help cover the
desk hours. The center is open 54 hours a week, the same as the library. An MLIS degree is not
required to work in the space. The librarian who manages the space does not have a library
degree. Instead, she has a background in nonprofits and leadership. Manager B2 states that the

189

library needed a manager and a person with contacts in the community and the person hired
already had established community contacts through involvement in other organizations. For this
particular position, the community connection was the specialty the library was seeking. All the
employees who work in the center are city funded. However, the library contracted with
someone to present a business series in the space. This service was funded by the city’s
economic development department. Community partners fund or present other programs offered
in the discovery space.
Friends of the Library Bookshop (Library A)
The bookshop at library A, operated by the Friends of the Library, has two locations: one
at the main library and the other at the library branch. The bookshop at the main library is
located to the right of the main entrance, next to the café. In the main library, which the
investigator visited, several retail-style displays promote seasonal events, books related to
upcoming library programs, or other activities of interest. The bookshop also has displays on the
built-in shelves located in the adjacent café.
The main benefit the library receives from the bookshop is the revenue generated. The
bookshop generates between $100,000 and $200,000 in revenue per year. Most of the money
earned, minus operating costs, returns to the library. The library submits a programming budget
to the Friends of the Library, which is always approved. Manager A3 describes the bookshop as
a “valued added service that is loved by the community.” According to manager A4, the library
gave prime space to the Friends of the Library to partner in book selling so the Friends of the
Library could get books to children cheaply, while maximizing efforts to raise money for library
programs. The bookshop started generating more revenue after it was moved to the more
prominent location next to the café. Manager A4 describes the bookshop as an effective way for

190

the library to gain exposure, reach additional demographics of users, and generate new interest.
She provides a recent example of the Friends of the Library collaborating with the library to
facilitate a literary pub crawl,12 which was a great way to generate more interest in the library.
The bookshop has only three paid employees: the manager, another full-time employee,
and a part-time employee who serves as the volunteer coordinator. Approximately 60 volunteers
spend their time in the bookshop at both locations. Some of them help with the special programs
such as the celebrity author event. When asked whether the volunteers need any special skills,
manager A4 mentions computer literacy, product knowledge, ability to handle inventory, file
books, and customer service as valuable skills.
Makerspace
The makerspace is a community-oriented space where people of all ages can innovate
and create within the fields of science, technology, engineering, art, and math (STEAM).13 The
space contains a variety of equipment, technology, and craft supplies. The director at library B
mentioned that the education community has been focused on STEAM learning and that the
library supports the education system. The library has explored the idea of offering STEAMbased activities within an informal learning setting for children and families. The director states,
“It was natural for the library to do this because of the huge focus on STEAM in the education
community. It is also a movement within libraries.” The director adds that there is much
discussion at the national level on what libraries can do to support STEAM, and she describes
the makerspace as a “very creative way to support learning and experimentation.” The service is

12

The tickets for this event were $10; the proceeds benefitted the library. Participants met at the library and
received a pub crawl passport. Participants who had their passports stamped at all three locations were entered to
win a $100 gift certificate. The three participating locations offered discounts on food and drinks to event
participants.
13
Sometimes libraries or other organizations focus only on Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM),
and not on the arts.

191

an interactive learning experience within the library. This type of service is an example of how
libraries are interactive and moving away from a passive role.
In the opinion of manager B3, the library is engaging in this service because libraries are
figuring out what types of services to offer as they seek to remain relevant to their communities.
This manager describes the traditional role of libraries as “curators of knowledge” and adds that
knowledge can come from sources other than books. The makerspace movement, according to
this manager, is rebranding rather than a new movement. She offers the example of craft
activities such as duct tape wallets.14 Libraries have offered similar crafts for a long time. Now,
those types of crafts are being branded as part of the makerspace, even though the library has
offered some of the craft activities in the past before the makerspace existed.
The makerspace takes this one step further by introducing cutting edge technology and by
serving as a “way of leveling the playing field.” The library does this by offering access to
technology and STEAM-based programs. The makerspace has technology such as 3-D printing,
3-D printing pens, using a breadboard15 to build and test electronic circuits, and Arduino.16 That
space, according to manager B3, shows anyone can visit and learn regardless of his or her
background. The makerspace gives people access to technology that would normally be
inaccessible. The makerspace provides the only access to this technology for some children. She
provides the example of the coding club17 aimed at lower income children who do not have a
computer at home. It is difficult for them and others to obtain high paying jobs in STEM fields if
they do not develop the necessary skills early.

14

Wallets made using solely duct tape, a strong waterproof cloth-backed tape.
A device used to test electronic circuits and experiment with electronic circuit design.
16
This is an open-sourced prototyping platform based on easy to use software and hardware.
17
An after school program where children have the opportunity to learn computer code programming.
15

192

The original concept for the makerspace room was to serve exclusively as a digital studio
for teenagers. The intent was to teach them to create a film by means of a curriculum based on a
six to eight-week program. According to manager B3, teenagers do not want to engage in formal
education after school. The library had a 5,000 square-foot space with 12 computers that
included Adobe Photoshop. The manager18 started researching makerspaces at a time when few
libraries had them. She made the best of the situation and worked with the limited resources
available to make this space functional. She adds that many families who have been regulars in
the community are saying that the types of activities provided in the makerspace are what they
want.
The library does not generate revenue from the makerspace. The Friends of the Library
help with funding. Additionally, the library received several small grants for the space, including
one from Google. The library received a $10,000 grant from Google that would not have
materialized if the library did not have the makerspace. Now, the library can use the Google
Chromebooks19 and start a coding club offsite. In the meantime, library employees are actively
pursuing other grant funding.
Manager B3 believes the main benefits the library gains from the space are prestige and
community involvement. The library reaches an entirely new section of the community with the
makerspace. An example is home school meet-ups,20 which consist of more affluent users of the
makerspace, who come to the space for the activities offered and to socialize. The makerspace
also serves as a space for mentoring. According to the manger, retired engineers mentor teens.

18

The manager came to the central library after the library did not receive grant funding for the digital studio.
A laptop running on Google’s Chrome operating system, as opposed to the latest version of the Microsoft
Windows or the Apple Mac operating systems. The Chromebook laptops are designed to be used primarily while
connected to the Internet.
20
Families who home school their children meet at the library to take advantage of services and programs. The meet
up is also a chance for the families and children to connect with one another.
19

193

The other customers are lower income children who do not have access to technology, sewing
machines, or art supplies at home. Families will spend two to four hours making different types
of crafts or projects.
When the manager directly oversaw the makerspace during the time when the space was
in the process of being launched, it occupied 75 percent of her time. A different manager, who is
now in charge of the makerspace, also has system-wide duties. The makerspace is under the
youth services department, which includes the children and teen department. Ideally, there
should be eight staff members assigned to the makerspace.
The employees who work in the makerspace spend 30-50 percent of their time on it. They
may also cover other areas of teen and children services. An MLIS degree is not required. The
staff members need special skill sets and training. The last person the library hired was hired
specifically for makerspace skills. Manager B3 mentions that it is necessary to hire someone
with the right attitude who is comfortable with being slightly more knowledgeable than program
attendees on makerspace technology, equipment, and software. The makerspace is considered
important to the library and there is a high level of support from the director. There are no
contracted staff members, but the library does rely on interns and volunteers to supplement the
staff, and it takes a staff person to interview and hire volunteers and maintain the relationships.
Unpaid volunteers conduct approximately 25 percent of the programming. A volunteer local
animation and design studio owner, for example, taught an animation and graphics software
class.
Manager B3 does not believe there is sufficient support (in terms of time allotted,
resources, and importance placed on entrepreneurial activities and services) within the
organization for this service. She states that more resources are needed, including staff dedicated

194

to the makerspace. There is also a need for more furniture and equipment. This manager now
reports to the programming administrator because one of the long-term goals is to separate the
makerspace from the youth services department and have a dedicated staff. This change will also
help achieve better communication between makerspace staff and other departments. The space
is intended for all ages to use. She adds that many members of the library staff refer to the
makerspace as “a teen space.” Improved communication, more staff, and more resources would
help resolve the communication problems and expand the programs offered.
Multi-Modal Interactive Exhibits (Library E)
The description for this service, located on library E’s website, states that babies and
children learn through play and the multi-modal interactive exhibits help young children build
skills for learning and literacy through play. The library started offering this service in the spring
of 2010, with four different themed exhibits, which “incorporate problem solving, sorting,
sharing, early literacy skills, design and testing, and collaboration.” They have a colorful design
and are scaled for young children. The exhibits include board books to incorporate literacy and
the variety of activities appeals to a range of ages and families. The multi-modal interactive
exhibits are located within the children’s area at each library in the system and the library also
displays the exhibits at special library and community events.
When asked why the library engages in this service, the manager at library E revealed
that it resulted from a community needs assessment conducted in 2009. Families wanted
something that was hands on and interactive. The exhibits offer an additional service that
supports early childhood literacy by offering interactive play. Play incorporates discovery, which
occurs in different ways. All of this helps convey the value of the library to the community.

195

The manager says, “This really shifted our whole organization. Now play has become a
learning tool with different organizations pushing it.” The manager adds that the library is at the
forefront of using play as a learning tool and a developmental aspect. All of the library
employees understand the importance of this approach. The library has marketed play as
beneficial to a child’s development, and now families also recognize its importance.
This service is also a predecessor to what the library has planned for the second floor
space, which is currently empty. At the time the library launched this service, there was a
downturn in the economy and the library did not have the budget to proceed with the completion
of the second floor space. The exhibits are intended to offer a preview of some of the eventual
offerings on that floor.
The manager describes the benefits derived from this service as financial as well as a
direct benefit to the community resulting from a new service and product. When a multi-modal
exhibit is temporarily removed from the library, users demand its return. The children look
forward to interacting with the exhibits and the exhibits continue to draw them to the library. The
director adds prestige to the list of benefits. According to her, the library did not set out to gain
prestige, but people associate the multi-modal exhibits with the library. She adds, “It is a great
activity and service for our public.” This library offers 22 programs a week for children. It is
difficult for the library to offer more programs due to time constraints.
The multi-modal interactive exhibits are unstructured, but are designed for children to
engage in even if there is not a scheduled program in the library at the time; they are an activity
that is available at all times. The director adds that she has received positive comments from
other libraries that have purchased the same multi-modal interactive exhibits.

196

The library sells the exhibits to other libraries; currently, there are five different exhibits
with the recent addition of the renewable energy exhibit. The original four themes are building,
discovery, healthy living and nutrition, and art. The interactive toys and materials in the exhibit,
depending on the exhibit, can help to enhance a child’s ability to perform the following:
•

design, test, and re-design;

•

collect, sort, and catalog;

•

problem solve;

•

recognize letters, words, and numbers;

•

share with others;

•

count, identify colors, and differentiate weight; and

•

learn about the specific topic of focus such as healthy living and nutrition.

The manager states that the library has been successful with the service thus far and that there is
enough support. The library employees have shared what they have learned with others in their
profession and they will continue to do so. After the library developed the multi-modal
interactive exhibits, staff presented at conferences to share with others in the profession. Since
service operations are running smoothly, the library just has to deal with sales, delivery, and
logistics.
During the last year and a half, the library generated approximately $150,000 from
exhibit sales. The director views this as positive, adding that the money allows the library to keep
the exhibits fresh. Furthermore, the revenue offsets the costs associated with the exhibits, the
display of the exhibits at conferences, and marketing materials. The revenue generated does not
return to the library’s budget. Instead, it remains in a special fund for the exhibits.

197

When the library first started considering this service, all the full-time staff members
were involved, which facilitated overall buy-in from staff for the service. The staff members are
now more specialized and are individuals who possess MLIS degrees; however, there is no
degree requirement. This group of staff is centered in the children’s department. The manager,
who is primarily responsible for the service, spends about two hours a week on this service. For
the operation of the exhibits, there are other staff members (e.g., pages and reference desk staff)
who have been trained to maintain the exhibits, set them up, and make sure the interactive
components (e.g., building blocks, toys) are cleaned regularly. They spend approximately 10
percent of their work day on this service. All of the staff members involved with this service are
internal.
According to manager E, it is important that general library staff understand the library’s
goals within the community and its rationale for offering this service. The manager wants to
ensure that the entire staff possess a good understanding of play as a way of learning, which
encourages children to be loud and active as they interact with their families in the space.
Passport Service (Libraries A and E)
Library A has offered passport service at the main library since 1998 and at a branch
location since 2007. In 1998, the state passport agency was located across the street from the
library and it was overwhelmed. The state passport agency approached the former library
director to determine whether the library could help with routine applications (e.g., renewals and
expeditions). The director agreed and, since that time, the library has been engaged in this
service.
Individuals must write out a check payable to the U.S. Department of State for the
appropriate amount (depending on what the type of application) and one to the library in the

198

amount of $25 for an application only, or $37 for an application and photo. There is also a fee
associated with the mailing costs. Due to a change in federal regulations, the library can no
longer renew passports for individuals 16 and older. Individuals who are younger when they
received their most recent passport must still renew in person.
This particular library was one of the first to offer passport service. According to
manager A2, at that time it generated a large amount of revenue. The amount of revenue is
declining because more places now offer passport service due to the changes in federal
regulations. It was a value added service for library users. It also brings people into the library
who have never visited before. The director says that many new people apply for and receive
their citizenship and passports. The director says the services are “closely aligned with the
identity” of the library. The passport service has a huge revenue impact on the library and
generates approximately $270,000 per year. In the past, before the regulation change, the service
approached $500,000 in revenue generation. The revenue supplements the library budget and
enhances services.
When the service first started, only two people accepted applications. Now, manager A2,
an assistant, and five other staff members are certified to accept applications. In the library
administration offices, the applications are reviewed to ensure they have been properly
completed. Manager A2 now works at the library three days a week and spends a few hours on
each of those days in the passport service. The other passport staff devote to the passport service
an average of four hours per day, seven days a week, and three hours per evening on the three
nights that the library is open late.
Besides the manager and her assistant, the five part-time staff members work only for the
passport service, and they spend all of their time working on the passports. The passport office is

199

open during hours specified on the library website and accepts walk-ins. The passport employees
require special training and they are considered as internal library staff. They are required to
have a strong attention to detail, as well as clerical and cash/check handling experience. The
manager mentioned that the employees that she hires usually have clerical experience. In
addition to that, they must be certified21 once a year to ensure that they can accept applications.
At this time, there is adequate support for this service.
Library E offers passport services at two library locations: the main library and a branch.
One of the libraries in this system is a good place for the passport service because it is located in
a shopping district and has a robust travel section. The passport services are available by
appointment only during the hours specified on the library website. The director stated that the
public appreciates being able to make appointments, describing the service as “a big deal.” The
library started offering this service in 2010. The service is evolving as stricter travel rules
emerge, but there remains a high demand. The director said the library has good hours for the
passport service in comparison to other passport agencies.
According to the director, the library engages in this activity to generate revenue and to
provide a needed service to the community. The director estimates that the passport service is
expected to generate approximately $100,000 in revenue for the current fiscal year, some of
which returns to support the service. There are costs associated with the service, such as staff
time and mailing costs. The remaining revenue supports library programs.
Staff members need special training on how the passport process works. The director
indicated that multiple staff members are trained to offer the passport service at the two library
locations, but did not specify how many staff members have the training. The employees are
21

The purpose of the certification is to make sure the employees are up to date on any changes in government
regulations and procedures for passport services.

200

internal and working with the passport service is a part of their regular work duties. There is
sufficient support for the passport services at library E.
Summer Reading Mobile Application (Library D)
This service started with the director at library D attending a technology company
hackathon and delivering a presentation. At the hackathon where the director presented,
organizations and individuals had the opportunity to present an idea they would like the
technology company engineers to attempt to create a prototype for in a day. The library asked the
company to create a digital version of the paper-based bingo summer reading game the library
used during the previous summer. As a result, the company built a summer reading mobile
application for the library for free.
Although this project took longer than a day to complete, the library worked diligently
with the developers to create a mobile application, website, and back-end program to register
users. The use of the mobile summer reading application lasted for two years. This effort,
according to manager D2, “Taught us a lot about working with technology companies and
volunteers on a large scale project.” The application was frequently used, but the managers did
not provide statistics.
The mobile application received a great deal of media attention (and also attention in the
library profession); the city in which the library is located touts this service as an effective
partnership with a technology company. The mobile summer reading application does not
generate revenue. However, the library received positive publicity, which resulted in other
companies reaching out to the library for possible partnerships.
When asked why the library engages in this service, manager D1 explained that summer
reading is a core service that most public libraries offer to the community. The planning for next

201

year’s summer reading program begins almost immediately after the current summer reading
program ends. The library was searching for new ways to connect with the wider population by
making it easier for people to participate. Library staff started by asking this question: “How do
you create a system where … [the community] can easily access the content and activities?” The
answer is by creating an online website and mobile application. One of the managers referred to
a Pew Research Center study,22 which revealed that many people’s access to the Internet is
through mobile devices. The library also engaged in this service to attract new users.
The application changed from year one to year two because the library wanted to make
improvements in the application. The library is not planning to use the mobile application for a
third year due to its limitations. For this year’s summer reading, the library plans to work with an
open source program because one of the library’s goals is to create a platform that is open source
and can be shared freely with other libraries. In the second year of the summer reading mobile
application, the library moved closer to that goal because it tried to include another library;
however, the library failed to complete and deliver all of the necessary changes to the mobile
application in a timely manner. Also, the mobile application was not a product that could be
shared widely with other libraries because it was customized for Library D.
When asked about the benefits the library derives from this service, one of the managers
noted that it was a good learning experience and that the library would not have been able to
create a mobile reading application without the technology company’s volunteers because it did
not have the budget to contract the necessary work. Manager D1 adds that the library benefits
when customers do. The general goal of summer reading is to help prevent summer slide.23 The

22

The report the manager referenced finds that home broadband adoption has plateaued while there has been an
increase in adults “who own a smartphone that they can use to access the Internet, but do not have traditional
broadband service at home” (Horrigan & Duggan, 2015, p. 2).
23
Children who do not read during the summer can lose up to three months of reading progress.

202

library wanted to evaluate whether the library program prevented summer slide; however, the
staff never had the opportunity to determine this. The new application will have an assessment
feature built in, possibly one that measures reading skills at the beginning and end of the
summer. This approach enables the library to obtain a better sense of whether the customers
benefit and whether the library is achieving its goal of preventing summer slide.
Manager D1 spent about 70 percent of her time working on various aspects of the mobile
application during the busiest stages of development. During the remainder of the year, she spent
approximately 20 percent of her time on the mobile application. This manager adds that different
employees were involved and that the library experienced some issues with the application not
functioning properly immediately before launch. A total of five employees were assigned to the
project and spent 10 percent of their time on it during the busiest phase of development. This
involved enduring and testing iterations of the design, bug reports,24 design meetings, and then
trying to contact volunteers. This was a particularly challenging issue since volunteers were not
paid; therefore, at times, it was difficult for them to complete tasks because they had other
priorities. During this project, five volunteers from the technology company worked on this
application.
Both managers agree that there was enough support for this activity. The library
marketing staff made the graphics and the design work both on the website and application.
During one of the years that the library worked on the application, the technology company had a
security breach. Fixing the security breach became a high priority for the company. As a result,

24

A report used in software testing that details problems with functionality or performance of the software.

203

working on the mobile application became a low priority for the company; however, it was
“mission critical” for the library. The library needed the mobile application to be completed in
time for the summer reading program.
Other Activities and Services
There are a few other activities and services that the directors or managers mentioned
when discussing entrepreneurial activities and services at the libraries. Some of these activities
and services have entrepreneurial components, but the others do not fit the definition and
categories of entrepreneurial leadership presented in Table 5.1. However, these additional
activities and services are worth mentioning because the directors and managers identified them
during the interviews.
The directors and managers, when discussing entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial
leadership, do not define the two concepts as precisely as the investigator did because they do
not draw their definitions from the literature (business and library and information science).
Rather, they derive their understanding from personal background, experience, observing
entrepreneurship in the library and other organizations, and definitions of entrepreneurship they
have been exposed to in the past. Jusic’s (2013) definition of entrepreneurial leadership is new to
them. It is also worth mentioning that some of the activities and services described below are
innovative. Although innovation can be viewed as a component of entrepreneurship, being
innovative alone does not make an activity or service entrepreneurial.
In the literature, there is no clear agreement on the meaning of the terms “entrepreneur”
and “entrepreneurship” and no unanimously accepted definitions exist (Cunningham &
Lischeron, 1991; Drucker, 1985; Gartner, 1990). There is also no clearly agreed upon definition
of entrepreneurial leadership and the study of entrepreneurial leadership in its nascent stages

204

(Kempster & Cope, 2010, p. 9). Thus, the terms “entrepreneurship” and “entrepreneurial
leadership” can have slightly different meanings to people. The description of the additional
activities and services below includes comments on possible entrepreneurial characteristics of
the additional activities and services.
The director at library A stated that the library organizes an annual appeal as part of its
fundraising efforts. She did not specify how much the library raised from this effort. This activity
generates revenue and may be the reason the director described it as entrepreneurial. Manager
A1 discusses partnering with several organizations and the local innovation center to curate
small business and entrepreneurial collections that were housed at each of the locations. The
organizations also provided Skype sessions on business references for their clients. The library
collaborated with the organizations on several different programs that were held at the library
and, by doing so, introduced the library to different users. Manager A1 describes this as creating
cross-promotional opportunities for the library. This activity is an example of the library
exploiting an opportunity to connect with the business community. Although it has not yet
resulted in a new service or funding model, it may have the potential to do so in the future.
Manager A1 participates in a local business council that has a young leaders’ network.
She has met small business owners and entrepreneurs and used leverage to bring them into the
library to share information about the library’s resources. When asked why the library is
engaging in this, the manager answered by mentioning the number of people who lost jobs
during the recession, and the library’s subsequent increase in people seeking information on
working independently and re-careering. The library staff wanted to do something on their own.
According to manager A1, “The library really tapped into that sentiment at the time.” She adds,
“This is our moment and opportunity to serve that need.” The library derives prestige from this

205

and from the fact that it was recognized for its efforts. The library received attention from
different organizations, which recognized what the library has to offer. According to the
manager, this is relatively new. The library has not generated revenue from this service, but there
is a stronger user base and more engagement in services and facilities. Certain services are
offered at a low cost, such as document delivery using a high-end printer. Small businesses can
use this printer to create flyers. This derives little income, but it is more about generating good
will.
Manager A1 spent almost 80percent of her time working with the business community
last year. Now, that the service is more established, she spends approximately 40percent of her
time on it. Currently, she is the only staff member working on this. Other staff members help in
other aspects to connect with the business community. This work requires someone with an
MLIS degree, strong technical skills, and strong research skills. The manager states that there is
adequate support for this service at this time. The connection with entrepreneurs and business
owners is an excellent example of the library’s outreach efforts. The document delivery service
generates revenue, but it is not much.
The director at library B discussed an early literacy outreach and reading on grade level
initiative. According to the director, early literacy focus is a core mission for the library. She
states, “If you can help kids be successful in kindergarten and learn to read, then read on grade
level, that is some of the most important work you can do.” The library’s focus on early outreach
and reading on grade level is putting the core skills in place that help a child succeed. It also
involves helping parents understand how important that is. It models behavior for parents and
caregivers. Children learn from the person with whom they spend the most time. Thus, it is
important for caregivers to understand early literacy principles and how to work with children to

206

teach them early literacy skills. The director emphasizes that the library’s focus on early literacy
outreach and reading on grade level “is the most important thing we could be doing.” The library
is modeling the right behavior for children to acquire those skills.
According to manager B4, the library received a $375,000 grant from a foundation
dedicated to strengthening families. The grant funds must be used only to serve the north region
of the city, where library B is located. A staff of 11 people, including part-time employees and
one full-time program manager, serve the northern region with early literacy outreach. Thanks to
grant funding, the library conducts a multitude of presentations in the community, reaching
approximately 20,000 adults per year. The programs focus on parent education. This group of
staff members, according to manager B4, has performed phenomenal work for five years. Yet,
the manager is frustrated because the grant only allows for the library to focus on the northern
area of the city. She is actively trying to find other grants so that the library can offer the same
type of service and outreach in other areas with a higher need.
The library hired two part-time positions with state grant money. The library also used
money received from a sports team and the library foundation to hire a specialist who provides
school readiness programming. There is also a grant from the state community foundation and a
newspaper. The whole point of this is to work on school readiness, which serves children from
birth to five years of age. This manager spends most of her time focusing on school readiness.
The library has a long history of supporting literacy. What is different now is that the library is
venturing out into the community to inform, and then bringing people back to the library to learn.
The library derives the following benefits from this effort: engaging people, bringing in new
users, and publicizing other services the library offers. The 11 employees assigned to this project
spend all of their time working on this. They need a great deal of training. The grant funding

207

allows the library to provide training to these staff members that other staff members within the
library system do not receive. For example, there is training available to teach individuals about
learning along the birth to five continuum, brain development, and baby sign language. The staff
members are internal and an MLIS degree is not required.
Manager B4 reveals, “Part of the problem with the way the library is funded is we bounce
from grant to grant. We aren’t funded to do much beyond the basics.” She allows that it would be
nice to have steady funding and not have to focus on pursuing grants all the time. There is
support in that the organization recognizes that early literacy is an area where the library needs to
improve. The problem is that the funding structure at the library only allows the library to offer
basic services.
This activity is also an excellent example of the library’s outreach efforts. It is an
example of traditional library services funded by outside support. Perhaps the reason the
manager identified it as entrepreneurial is that it is funded through grants, instead of the library.
The library staff had to pursue additional funding actively to make this service possible. Also,
the service definitely adds value to the northern region of the city, where it is offered.
The director at library D briefly mentioned the mobile makerspace pop up that the library
offered in the past. A pop up is a temporary project which, in this case, consisted of events in
multiple locations where members of the public were encouraged to share their vision for public
spaces using design thinking and prototyping. The mobile makerspace pop up was an exploration
of how to engage a wide range of citizens, discuss urban public space design, and invigorate
underutilized public spaces. This project was envisioned by a local artist. Although the project
was temporary, it was an interesting experiment and partnership opportunity for the library.

208

The mobile makerspace pop up is innovative and creative. To some extent, it is also an
example of the library engaging in a risk-taking effort. It has components of entrepreneurship,
but does not clearly fit the definition. However, the new service that is partially a result of this
experiment, the makerspace mobile (like a bookmobile, but with technology) that is in progress,
is something that will be an entrepreneurial service. Chapter 7 offers more details.
The director also mentioned the library’s new program guide as “a beautiful piece that
has created a lot of interest in stuff that we do.” Almost everything in the program guide is fairly
new. One of the highlighted areas is citizenship. The focus on citizenship is a relatively new
community service. The director describes it as essential to the city. The director also mentions
the new teen space and a workforce center that will open later in 2016. Finally, the library is
working on a new partnership that is focused on providing coding and HTML classes to people.
Similarities and Differences among Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
The activities and services offered by the libraries are all different; there is no set
formula. However, it is evident that they are offered with specific community needs in mind. For
example, the passport services at libraries A and E help fulfill a need and are a value added
service for the communities. The discovery space at library B helps connect entrepreneurs and
small business owners to resources and programs that can help them with activities like starting
or running a business. The mobile summer reading application and the multi-modal interactive
exhibits are examples of activities that allowed the libraries to introduce something new to
customers. Most of the entrepreneurial services do not require staff with MLIS degrees. Instead,
they typically require a specialized skill set or training. It is worth noting that several of the
services were initially funded by outside support such as grants, Friends of the Library,
foundations, or private funding. While some of the entrepreneurial services are a part of the

209

library’s general fund, others still rely on other sources of funding and volunteers to sustain the
services.
Success of Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
Most of the entrepreneurial activities and services that the libraries offer are successful.
Their success appears to emerge from perseverance, active outreach, allowing for time to
become established, have continual evaluation, engaged staff, having staff flexibility, and
support from the leaders of the organization. For example, the college access and reengagement
center and the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs initially did not have high
use or program attendance. Staff members had to work actively to conduct outreach and build the
brand of each in order to establish both services in the community. The manager of the college
access and reengagement center worked with her staff to change the programming offered over
time so that it truly provides users with the kind of service they are seeking. An example is
making the Free Application for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) workshop more interactive by
helping users to navigate the application step-by-step. Sometimes being successful means
discontinuing a service in order to create a better product. The managers at library D discussed
the mobile summer reading application. It was successful, but the library’s leadership had a
desire to design an even better product. They discontinued the mobile application and are
working on an entirely new product that will incorporate more items, such as an assessment
component.
Without support from the organization’s leadership as well as factors such as outreach,
perseverance, evaluation, and flexibility, the entrepreneurial activities and services would not be
regarded as successful. The support of the directors is essential to the survival of the services.
They support the services by making them a priority (often as part of the library’s strategic plan)

210

and securing resources. Equally important is the dedication of the managers who are responsible
for the implementation of the services, establishing the reputation of the new services,
conducting community outreach, providing constant evaluation to ensure that the services are
meeting the community’s needs, and making changes to the services as needed. The managers
are also responsible for making sure staff, contract employees, or volunteers involved with the
services are providing excellent customer service and programing. It is the support, dedication,
and efforts of multiple people that makes the entrepreneurial activities and services not only a
possibility, but a success.
Documents and Physical Artifacts
The investigator used documents available on the entrepreneurial activities and services
to attain a better understanding of how the activities or services function. The review of
documents also provided context for the entrepreneurial activities or services and, in some cases,
information on when the services were launched. The investigator used information available on
the libraries’ websites, documents directors and managers were willing to share, newspaper
articles, and articles available through databases or the Internet. The preliminary review of this
information allowed the investigator to have a basic understanding of most of the entrepreneurial
activities and services, and seek clarification during interviews where needed. The investigator
also used physical artifacts, in the case of library E, because the service the library provides
(multi-modal interactive exhibit) resulted in a physical artifact. The examination of the physical
artifacts, paired with documents, and observation, helped the investigator understand this
particular service more completely.

211

Observation
The investigator observed the college access and reengagement center, the discovery
space for small businesses and entrepreneurs, the multi-modal interactive exhibits, the passport
service at both libraries, and the bookshop. Library D did not include any activities that the
investigator could observe at the time of data collection. The summer reading mobile application
has been discontinued and the other entrepreneurial activities and services were in the
development phase at the time of the visit. Observation of the various services helped the
investigator gain a better understanding of how the services worked and confirmed that the
descriptions of the services provided via documentation and the library directors and managers
were accurate. For example, while observing the college access and reengagement center, the
investigator saw a teenager come in with a parent for a scheduled appointment to get help with
the college application process. While observing activity in the discovery space for small
businesses and entrepreneurs, the investigator observed a workshop in progress and individuals
actively engaged in discussion. Overall, the observation was useful as part of the data gathering
for the study.
Conclusion
Details on the entrepreneurial activities and services may be valuable to library directors,
managers, and those interested in the different types of entrepreneurial activities and services in
which public libraries are engaged. This study provides specific information that explains the
reasoning behind decisions to engage in the activities and services, the amount of revenue some
of the activities and services generate, and the types of benefits, other than financial, the libraries
derive from the activities and services. Details on why the activities are successful as well as the
types of training staff need and the percentage of time staff needed may be especially useful to

212

directors considering implementing such activities and services in their libraries. Such details
may help the directors decide whether engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services is
something that could be beneficial for their libraries and communities.
The findings indicate that by engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services, these
libraries are moving away from a passive role. There is much more effort to meet specific
community needs, to engage with the community, and to do outreach. The findings also indicate
that most of the services require specialized skills but not necessarily an MLIS degree. This may
have an effect on library hiring trends, curricula and programming in LIS degree programs, and
also types of workshops, training, or programs offered at conferences. Also of interest is the fact
that despite diminished budgets (in the case of three of the four libraries studied), the directors
persevere in finding ways to provide new services to the public. The libraries are pursuing
different types of grant funding, engaging in fundraising, using sponsorship opportunities to fund
specific services, and engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services, in some cases, as a
means of revenue generation. The revenue generated supplements the library budget, enabling
the library to provide additional services or programs to the public.
The next chapter, which focuses on the organizational culture at the four libraries,
examines organizational culture using different frameworks and explores how the organizational
culture has changed with the current directors at each library. The chapter explores
organizational culture both from the perspectives of the directors and the managers. The chapter
also asks directors and managers to determine to what extent entrepreneurship is engrained in the
organizational culture of the library.

213

References
Cunningham, J. B., & Lischeron, J. (1991). Defining entrepreneurship. Journal of Small
Business Management, 29(1), 45-61.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Horrigan, J. B., & Duggan, M. (2015). Home broadband 2015. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/12/Broadband-adoption-full.pdf
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Kempster, S., & Cope, J. (2010). Learning to lead in the entrepreneurial context. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research, 16(1), 5-34.

214

Chapter 6
FOUR FRAMES PERSPECTIVE ON MANAGERIAL LEADERSHIP AND A FOCUS ON
ORGANIZATIONAL CULTURE

This chapter presents the findings on organizational culture as it relates to
entrepreneurship at the four libraries, using Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four frames, Cornwall and
Perlman’s (1990) ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial organizational, and Neal’s (2001)
typology, which Jusic (2013) adapted for public libraries. The first section of this chapter
discusses the context of the four frames at the libraries studied. In the second and third sections
of this chapter, the directors and managers provided a general description of organizational
culture in the library and commented on whether the organizational culture is the same for the
entrepreneurial activities and services as it is within the entire organization. The fourth section
links the findings to the scholarly literature and expands on Table 6.1.
Table 6.1 indicates whether the director was an internal or external candidate for the
position, the approximate amount of time in the position at time of the data collection interviews,
and the number of library branches in the library system, including the main library. This
information is important to consider when examining the four frames and organizational culture
(in relation to entrepreneurship) at the four libraries because it has an impact on how directors
have changed the organizational culture and how they support entrepreneurship in the
organization. Directors at libraries B and D, for example, have been in their organizations longer,
and have had more time to implement their vision and add entrepreneurial activities and services.
Directors at libraries A and E, both of who have served as directors for approximately one year at

215

the time of the data collection interviews, have had less time to make changes to the
organizational culture.
Table 6.1
Directors and the number of libraries in the system
Director

Type of Candidate

Years in Position

Number of Libraries in System

A

Internal

1

4

B

External

5

17

D

External

3

23

E

Internal

1

2

Context of Four Frames in the Libraries
The directors first reviewed a brief description of Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four frames
(Appendix A), and discussed which frames the library must address as it continues to move in
(or attempts to develop) a more entrepreneurial direction. Bolman and Deal describe the essence
of the four frames as follows:
•

The structural approach focuses on the architecture of the organization – the design of
units and subunits, rules and roles, goals and policies.

•

The human resource lens emphasizes understanding people – their strengths and foibles,
reason and emotion, desires and fears.

•

The political view sees organizations as competitive arenas of scarce resources,
competing interests, and struggles for power and advantage.

•

Finally, the symbolic frame focuses on issues of meaning and faith. It puts ritual,
ceremony, story, play, and culture at the heart of organizational life. (pp. 21-22)

216

Using this framework, managerial leaders can view the organization through different lenses, or
frames, and develop a more complete understanding of areas to change in the organization. This
discussion provides a setting for a deeper exploration of entrepreneurship as it relates to
organizational culture.
Library A
Although all four frames are important, the director revealed that the structural frame is
the one that “weighs most heavily for her” due to her desire to make the hierarchical structure
flatter. This director, an internal candidate, transitioned from managing operations to leading the
library. She explained that she might not be present at some decision making occasions as she
was in her previous capacity as the head of public operations. The hierarchical structure, she
finds, has distinct advantages and disadvantages. An advantage is that everyone in the
organization has a role to fulfill and understands his or her place within the organizational
structure. Still, the director does not believe that the hierarchical style of organizational structure
works well with Millennials1 as they prefer a flatter organizational structure.2 Another
disadvantage in a hierarchical organization is that the director is removed from what the frontline staff members say and do, stating: “We might agree on strategies in the strategic plan but
when I read the program newsletter, it may be the first I am hearing about a program.” The

1

The Millennials, or Millennial Generation, is the demographic cohort following Generation X. Generally, birth
years ranging from the early 1980s to 2000 are used. However, there are no precise dates or agreement as to when
the generation starts and ends.
2
Millennials have different expectations in the workplace. Myers and Sadaghiani (2010) note that they “are likely to
have different, often broader, perspectives about the world marketplace, supervisor-subordinate relations, cultural
diversity, performance of tasks, and ways that communication and information technologies can be used to enhance
organizational performance and to maximize productivity” (p. 235). They point out that Millennial preferences are
different from those of other generations. Millennials expect “close relationships and frequent feedback from
supervisors;” they prefer “open communication from … supervisors and managers, even about matters normally
reserved for more senior employees,” and they prefer to work in teams (p. 229). These expectations, especially the
desire for more open communication, regardless of seniority and position in organization, may explain why
Millennials prefer a flatter organizational structure.

217

director further emphasizes the importance of entrepreneurship, risk taking, and buy-in within an
organization. According to her, buy-in occurs more effortlessly when an idea originates from
staff other than administrators.
The director asserts that the political landscape (political frame) has changed. She
identifies a couple of projects that are occurring in the city where the library is located that will
ultimately have an impact on the library. One example is the governor’s efforts to change how
the community approaches housing. These endeavors occurred at the same time that the local
hospitals, which sought funding, began to focus on the concept of healthy communities.
Subsequently, the housing community partnered with the local hospitals with the goal of helping
to transform the west side of the city into a healthy place to live. Part of this effort included
sending social workers to select homes in the area to teach people how to become better parents,
how to read to a child, and how to deliver good nutrition. The library’s role in this endeavor is in
the area of early childhood literacy. The library is teaching social workers about Every Child
Ready to Read.3 The director states that the various organizations are working well together and
receive funding because of the successful collaborations. She states: “We are not engaged in
conflict and competition with some of these other organizations. We are working together for
collective impact.” The external political environment created an opportunity for the library to
participate and be an asset in the larger community goal of creating a healthy community. The
director did not address the human resource or the symbolic frames.
The change in the political landscape (political frame) has affected the library’s
organizational culture. The director is, according to managers, more involved in the community
than the previous director. She is emphasizing community involvement and partnerships as an
3

This is an initiative that helps parents or caregivers promote early literacy skills in children in the birth to five year
age group.

218

area of importance to the staff. The library, according to the director, must have partnerships
with other organizations if it is going to be entrepreneurial. This increased focus and reliance on
partnerships has, according to the director, “almost lead to an assumption that if the library offers
a new service it will have to be a partnership with another organization.” Library staff have to
place a great focus on community engagement and partnerships than before. Thus, partnerships
with other organizations are not only important because this helps the library build support
within the community, but also because the partnerships enable the library to offer more to its
users in the area of programs or services.
Library B
The director asserts that all four frames relate to problems the library must overcome as it
continues its entrepreneurial direction. However, she considers three of the frames (structural,
human resource, and political)4 as the most important. The library has changed its organizational
structure over the last few years.5 Most of the changes occurred when the director first started in
the position. In her opinion, the human resources frame “can be dealt with very succinctly and
accurately,” presumably because there are straightforward policies and procedures directed at
employees. Job descriptions help clarify expectations for different types of positions, which
addresses the structural frame. The director believes that the creative aspect of the development
of library services requires a specific type of leader, one who understands what organizational
changes are needed to support new library services better. She indicates that she made this clear
when she altered the organizational structure (structural frame) to have managers in place who
“focus very much on innovation and delivery of service, [which] helps a great deal with being

4

The director does not provide any comments specifically related to the political and symbolic frames.
The director did not provide details about the specific changes to the organizational structure. The changes were
most likely implemented to increase efficiency within the organization and in order for the library to meet strategic
priorities better.
5

219

entrepreneurial.” With the changes to the organizational structure, the director made sure that the
manager for each entrepreneurial service had the needed background, skills, training, and an
understanding of community needs to assure the best “delivery of service” to the library users.
When asked whether she has made any other changes based on her understanding of the
four frames to support entrepreneurship better in the library, the director states: “The other
emphasis that we all vocalize is that the only way we can expand services is by creating
partnerships. That has been a mantra we have repeated to all managers.” This approach is
included in a manager’s work goals: to create partnerships within a community. According to the
director, the partnerships have helped the library expand programming and service delivery
exponentially. She conveys this goal to the managers, and together they reinforce it. She added,
“We celebrate successes when partnerships work out. I think we do this continuously to help
reinforce that entrepreneurial spirit.”
Library D
The director, when asked which of the four frames relate to problems the library needs to
confront as it continues its entrepreneurial direction, stated: “They are all involved in
successfully implementing entrepreneurship in the culture and the organization.”6 The structural
frame applies when projects are interdisciplinary or cross-functional, exemplified in the
collaboration between information technology and the youth services departments. According to
the director, no matter how she structures the organization, there is always the need to overcome
the challenge of people working in silos. She believes it is important to work in cross-functional
teams. The challenge is to eliminate artificial walls that emerge when employees work with
different divisions within an organization. She insists that it is critical to facilitate an

6

The director did not discuss the symbolic frame.

220

environment that allows employees to engage freely with each other. For this reason, the library
has a single set of goals (the strategic priorities) that guide the organization. Everyone has work
to accomplish and that work centers on serving the public. Other departments in the city perform
functions for the good of government, but they do not serve the public on a daily basis. Library
staff focus on the public.
When asked if she has implemented any other changes based on her understanding of the
four frames to improve support of entrepreneurship in the library, the director provides a couple
of examples. First, there was the restructuring around the new strategic priorities. The library has
eight strategic priorities around which it focuses programming and services. Second, the
restructuring of the library resulted in the creation of the innovations office. The director reveals
that several new units are innovative and entrepreneurial in their own way (e.g., the early
childhood unit, the instruction and programming unit, and a new project for the library that
focuses on workforce development).
The emphasis on workforce development (political frame) supports the goals of city
leadership. There is a need within the community for workforce development services and the
library aims to fill that void by offering a variety of services7 in its business and career center,
that will open in 2016. By focusing on an area important to city and local political leaders, this
type of service, will help the library build further political support and be attractive to external
supporters.8 The director contends, “For staff, it is a constant conversation around what do the
staff need to do their jobs and aligning passions staff have around services and roles they have to

7

The library will offer a variety of career and business resources including training, workshops, classes, technology,
productivity tools, and specialized collections to help community members with a variety of career and business
needs.
8
External supporters include, but are not limited to, political supporters, financial supporters, and possible partners.

221

play. If you do it all together it works. [It is a] constant kind of nuancing.” In other words, it is a
constant balancing of library resources to best meet strategic priorities and community needs.
Library E
The director, when considering the four frames, declared: “I don’t see that we have to
overcome any of these.” She ensures that the library’s efforts are thoroughly understood and
communicated to “just about everyone you can imagine,” including staff, political leaders,
boards, and commissions. She has made changes based on her understanding of the four frames
to support improved entrepreneurship within the library but did not elaborate. She has continued
many of the library’s past programs and services such as the programs calendar (a physical
calendar), which reflects programming that is planned for a complete year. Much of the
programming and services are continuations of the previous director’s agenda. Each year, the
library evaluates the types of programs offered to ensure they are still relevant to the community.
This approach helps the library to determine whether any adjustments are needed and to
incorporate any new programs. If a program has high attendance and is often at capacity, then the
library may need to add more time slots. When this occurs, it may be necessary to consider
making changes in the structure. As an example, she notes that three of the library’s top five
high-level positions became vacant last year and that the library was in process of hiring
replacements. If any of the three positions are filled with internal candidates, this will create
vacancies elsewhere in the organization. Filling these positions will have an impact on the
library’s organizational culture.
The Directors’ Perspectives on Organizational Culture
The directors described their current organizational cultures. The director at library A
portrayed it as “confused,” indicating that the culture is changing. At the time of data collection,

222

the director had been in the position for approximately 15 months. Organizational cultures take
time to change and, as the director mentioned, staff need time to adjust to a different type of
leader. She described the previous director as a visionary leader, who possessed a strong vision
and personality, but one who valued hierarchy, ensuring that all staff members within the
organization understood how and where they fit into the organization. The current director
describes herself as a different kind of leader, one with a vision but a more understated
personality. She believes she is more apt to listen, for instance, to circulation staff as well as their
supervisors. This approach, she admits, confuses staff because it differs from the previous
director’s behavior. In the past, she notes, a librarian could recommend a book, however a
circulation attendant could not offer a recommendation. This is something the director is trying
to change, and it is confusing for staff because they have not fully adjusted to the difference in
leadership styles between the previous and current directors.
Looking at organizational culture in the context of the structural frame, the director at
library A thinks the culture is slowly changing under her leadership as she adjusts to her new role
as director. She mentioned the importance of entrepreneurship and risk taking in the library. She
is supportive of entrepreneurship and encourages staff to engage in it, as well as to be risk taking
and innovative; both of which are components of entrepreneurship. Staff need to be able to share
ideas, for example, without fear of the ideas being immediately dismissed by senior-level
leadership in the organization. If senior-level managerial leaders are not open to the ideas and
react negatively, staff would not want to take the risk of sharing ideas in the future. This director
hopes that with time, staff members at all levels of the organization will become more
comfortable with risk taking, innovation, and entrepreneurship.

223

The director at library B described the organizational culture as “one of teamwork,
valuing employees across the organization, celebrating employee accomplishments, and
[creating] an organization that has a deep emotional commitment to delivering excellent
service.” She discusses conducting a staff job satisfaction survey every year. This survey is a tool
used to measure staff satisfaction which, according to the director, addresses the culture by
providing some indication of whether the culture is positive or negative based on employee
morale. Over the years, the director has observed improvements in morale but she did not
provide specific examples. Morale is important to this director, who places great emphasis on
keeping morale high. She also believes that this emphasis on employee morale addresses
organizational culture at the library:
We care about employees and their experience in this organization. We work
people hard and have high expectations of performance, so it is really
important for us to focus on the factors that help improve morale and those are
things like communication (this is huge!), acknowledgement of
accomplishments, providing training and skills development, and opportunities
for growth. These are some of the main factors we have focused on.
Low employee job satisfaction, especially among a large number of employees, might
suggest problems within the organization.
The director at library D looks at the library’s organizational culture partially in terms of
partnerships, one of which involves collaboration with other city departments. In this regard, the
director examines where community needs exist and how the library can support other city
leaders’ efforts. The director believes that the library’s culture differs from other city
departments. She describes the library as the “good news department,” stating that staff members
work at the library because they care about serving the public through the delivery of
information and ideas.

224

The director describes staff as “very positive and nimble,” even though the city has
experienced enormous budget cuts. She believes the library employees strive to adapt to what the
community needs while providing access to knowledge and excellent customer service.
According to the director, this approach encourages them to be forward thinking and to want to
find ways to transform the lives of community residents.
The director at library D discusses staff engagement. Every year, the city conducts an
employee engagement survey. City employees expected low scores because of the budget cuts
the city had faced. The library, instead, received a high score, with 70 percent of them indicating
they were engaged; this score places the library at the 70th percentile nationally. The director
thinks that this rating is “quite good for a large department,” adding that some library branches
scored in the 98th percentile. She firmly believes that the score represents the staff’s efforts. They
are energetic, serve the public, and have opportunities to implement their ideas. She describes the
library’s culture as “positive … and not averse to change.” The director adds that she would like
to have more staff but, regardless of the number, the library cannot do everything it wants to do.
Strategic priorities help the library focus on what is most important to serving the community,
and the director’s job is to ensure the library has sufficient resources; however, she worries that
the library will not always be able to obtain those resources.
The director’s mention of the human resource and structural frames in the earlier
discussion of the four frames relates to aspects of organizational culture. The director explains
that, “culturally, things you have to overcome are helping people to understand being
comfortable with working on projects. Being entrepreneurial requires that people step out of
where they are super comfortable.” Even though the organizational structure is hierarchical, at
the library, “anyone can talk to anyone.” Staff members are not required to talk to their

225

supervisors first if they have an idea to share. The director emphasizes that many organizations
consider such behavior insubordinate. She changed this structural feature by striving to emulate
technology companies, that are typically more supportive of communication across all levels of
the organization, rather than being impeded by hierarchy. One of the views expressed during
team building encourages staff members to take responsibility by acquiring information and
becoming more involved, instead of feeling excluded from the process. According to the
director, if someone is omitted, it is not intentional, it is just because everyone is busy. She
explains, “Lines of authority are very much embedded and to allow people to break them for the
right reason is definitely a cultural shift.” The director describes the library as being open to this
cultural transformation as evidenced by people caring about their jobs.
The director at library E described the current organizational culture as “a real team
culture” that is focused on services. This director has tried to build a culture of learning.
According to her, “That is what is going to take us to the next level and keep us relevant and up
to date.” She adds that the library has invested many resources in staff training and development
to guarantee the application of skills, which are needed to implement innovative programs and
services.
The Entrepreneurial Organization
The library directors reviewed Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization and selected which ones apply to the library. Table 6.2 provides an
overview of the directors’ views of entrepreneurial characteristics at the libraries. When the
directors selected the characteristics that apply to the libraries, they also offered comments on
some of the characteristics and how they relate to the organization. Additionally, they

226

commented on whether the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity or service, or whether
they are the same for the entire library.
Table 6.2
Directors’ views of entrepreneurial characteristics that apply to the library
Characteristics

Library A

Allowing people at all levels of the
organization to lead
An attitude among staff that work is fun

Library B Library D Library E
x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Effectiveness and efficiency

x

x

x

Emotional commitment

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Earned respect within the organization

x

Including people in what is considered
important to the organization
Integrity, trust, and credibility
Relentless attention to details, people,
structure, and process
Risk taking (this includes innovation)

x

The sense that everything the organization
does has value for its customers and workers

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Although the culture in library A does not address, at this time, the first characteristic,
allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead, the director states that the library is in
the process of transitioning to address that issue. She is striving to change the culture to
encourage staff leadership and participation across all levels of the organization, and to promote
entrepreneurship by encouraging innovation and risk taking. The second characteristic, an
attitude among staff that work is fun, does not apply to all staff. The director describes the library
as effective, but currently it is trying to become more efficient and to have more staff engaged
with the community. An emotional commitment does not exist among all staff. The director

227

believes some staff are disengaged, and she is working to remedy this. One example is the
library’s involvement in a pilot project9 which served as an opportunity to get some disengaged
staff involved in discussions on the library’s future. While integrity, trust, and credibility are a
part of the library’s culture, the community views the library as an institution that has integrity, is
trustworthy, and has credibility. Although the director acknowledges that the staff is responsible
for this accomplishment, she does not believe there is enough relentless attention to details,
people, structure, and process, but she did not provide specific examples.
The director at library A commented that which items on the list are applicable varies by
entrepreneurial activity or service. This may be due to a number of factors, one of which is the
library’s loss of six full-time positions since 2010. As a result, some staff members feel
overwhelmed, creating an attitude among some that work is not fun. The director is uncertain
about the existence of an emotional commitment among all employees. She believes that some
employees are no longer emotionally committed, but thinks it is only 1 to 5 percent. However,
she adds, she considers employees important to the organization. That is why she is making
efforts to address the problem of employees who are no longer emotionally committed by
providing more opportunities for employees to provide input and encouraging entrepreneurship
across all levels of the organization.
The director at library B views all ten characteristics as applicable to the library. She
believes the first characteristic, allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead, applies
to the organization. She offers examples such as career development opportunities, succession
planning, cross-functional teams, work exchanges, opportunities to lead a team, and temporary

9

The pilot project was conducted by an international non-profit organization which held a multi-stakeholder forum,
focusing the dialogue on re-envisioning public libraries for the future.

228

promotions10 to lead a branch library, all of which allow an employee to gain experience. The
library respects all employees’ contributions. The director believes, “the emotional commitment
is clearly there on the part of managers and employees,” and that the employees are emotionally
committed to helping. The director states that the library has a “tremendous amount of credibility
within the community” as well as deep support within the community. She views employees
within the organization as paying relentless attention to details, people, structure, and process;
she adds that library policies, structures, and processes are well documented. The library takes
risks, but the director emphasizes that the staff members conduct research11 before taking a risk
with a service or program. She believes there is a sense that everything the library does has value
for its customers and staff, adding that everyone is focused on customer service. According to
the director, “That is why we are here and everyone on staff knows that.” The director thinks that
all ten characteristics also apply to entrepreneurial activities and services at the library.
At library D, the director believes that almost all of the ten characteristics apply. She
notes that most staff members embrace the attitude that work is fun and believe there is earned
respect within the organization, but with some exceptions; however, the director did not
elaborate on this point. As a whole, the library is committed to effectiveness, and is constantly
working to improve. When asked about including people in what is considered important to the
organization, the director said that, for the majority of staff members, it is easy to do. In the
library’s previous culture, decisions were made at a high level. Now, the culture is different, but

10

When there are vacancies in the library system for a library branch or department manager position, an employee
at the level below the vacant position may be given an opportunity to manage the library branch or department
temporarily, usually for a set period of time. This allows the individual to gain practical experience, which may help
when applying for the vacant position or a different position at a later point in time. If the employee is not selected
to fill the vacant position, her or she simply returns to work in their previous capacity, thus the use of the term
“temporary promotion.”
11
The research conducted is likely in the form of feasibility analyses, reviewing reports of experiences with services
or programs, and community analysis. It is not in the form of formal research studies.

229

it is easy for some employees to forget that changes have occurred because it takes time to adjust
to a different culture. One area the director believes the library could improve is its attention to
details, people, structure, and process as an organization. She believes that there is a sense
among employees that everything the organization does has value for its customers and workers,
but that there are cases in which employees question why the library engages in a particular
activity or service.
The director at library D believes that the list of characteristics varies by entrepreneurial
activities and services, depending on the activity or service. Generally, she believes that people
who are engaged in some of the higher priority or higher visibility projects are much more
committed to all the characteristics in Table 6.2. Furthermore, front-line staff members may not
be as engaged, especially at branch library locations, where staff are not necessarily a part of the
more innovative and exciting projects in which the library engages.
The director at library E did not indicate that the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial
activity and service; instead, she simply states that the characteristics “are things we really
embody and are important to us and the filter we use for everything we do.” In regards to earned
respect within the organization, she stated that the library demonstrates mutual respect among
colleagues. The library is efficient, but it is always searching for ways to be more so. The
director believes many employees are emotionally committed, and she refers to the library’s
hiring practices as a way to retain that attitude. When the library recruits and hires new
employees, of course, they must be passionate about serving the community. The director
describes the recruitment process as “rigorous,” adding that the three or four finalist candidates
are interviewed by the entire full-time staff. When discussing employees’ inclusion in issues

230

considered important to the organization, the director emphasizes that if staff members want to
be involved, they can be.
At library E, the library brand and image are elements everyone seeks to elevate. All staff
members recognize that they represent the organization, especially when conducting outreach
outside of the library, and they understand the importance of representing it well. According to
the director, “If you do that, it builds trust and shows integrity,” and this is something she values.
The library demonstrates attention to details, people, structure, and process; however, the
director declares that service will never be pushed aside to ensure details and process. While the
library encourages risk taking, if staff members fail, that failure is deemed a learning
opportunity. The director encourages staff members to discover what went wrong and how to
improve it next time. She states: “There is no firing line if you take a risk and it doesn’t work
out.” There is a strong sense that everything the organization does has value for its customers
and employees.
Changes to Organizational Culture
The directors commented on whether they made any changes to the organizational culture
in regards to entrepreneurial activities and services since assuming the directorship, and whether
the changes had any noticeable impact on the organizational culture in terms of change in beliefs,
attitudes, values, norms, and assumptions. The director at library A said that she is “building a
safe place for entrepreneurship, engaging staff, [and] reaching out more in terms of
partnerships.” She is seeking more staff input and encouraging innovation and risk taking. She
wants to convey that the staff can engage in entrepreneurship without fear of consequence if an
idea is not successful.

231

Next, the directors addressed whether the changes had any noticeable impact on the
organizational culture in terms of change in beliefs, attitudes, values, norms, and assumptions.
The director at library A mentions two changes that have resulted from staff discussions:
1. “being less prescriptive and looking outward and asking the community what they
want,” and
2. if the library starts a new service, it must involve a partnership with another
organization.
The director describes this as a big change, but one that staff members have embraced.
The director at library B has made changes to the organizational culture since assuming
the position, identifying the implementation of the discovery space for small businesses and
entrepreneurs as well as the makerspace. She also notes the physical expansion of the college
access center and the addition of the reengagement service to the center. This director believes
that these changes have had a noticeable impact on organizational culture (as defined by change
in beliefs, attitudes, values, norms, and assumptions). She reveals that the changes are “positive
impacts in that they are all services that we can be very proud of and that have a positive impact
on our customers.” She explains that the services are a “great way to show people that we can do
something non-traditional for a library and be very successful and make a difference for people
within the community. Anytime you can be successful at something that’s new and different
people notice and we can all celebrate that success.”
The director at library B believes that the entrepreneurial services require a “slightly
different culture because they are focused on a very single purpose.” The discovery space, for
example, focuses on providing resources for small businesses and entrepreneurs, not necessarily
all library users. The makerspace is another entrepreneurial service that has a specific purpose. It

232

specializes in “making, tinkering, and STEAM activities.” The director believes the makerspace
needs a “certain type of personality” and that is not a type of personality that works elsewhere in
the library. She reveals that the makerspace attracts a specialist due to the technology and types
of activities offered within the space. The staff members are creative, participating in a different
way and style of working, as they experiment with the work.
In the college access and reengagement center, some staff members are case workers,
who have a unique set of skills to help people develop and implement education plans. In the
discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs, there is the same type of need for
specialized skills. Employees must possess an understanding of what small businesses and
entrepreneurs need. According to the director, the population each service is attempting to serve
influences the culture.
The director at library D restructured the library around strategic priorities, and believes
the restructuring influenced the organizational culture.12 She says, “Our case may be special
because there was this stagnation13 of the library.” The staff members have embraced the new
direction because they were happy to move forward after waiting for a new director. The director
is unaware of the library’s past culture. She states,
We have a ton of movement. Positive momentum and staff feeling good about
being supported. We are still having some ‘storming’ around the role of the
innovations office and how it relates to other areas of the library and the other
initiatives. That’s healthy though.
The culture at the library is changing and although there are some challenges, it seems
that staff are embracing the changes.

12

Now, the director is working with the library foundation to ensure that the foundation’s priorities align with the
library’s priorities. Recently, the foundation hired a new executive director; and the library director is working with
this individual to help the foundation create tools and messages.
13
This library suffered budget cuts and had interim leadership for approximately two years, which resulted in the
stagnation.

233

When asked whether the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for
the entire library, the director at library D replied that it should be the same and that there are
elements that are the same. She indicated that the question recognizes the existing tension
between entrepreneurial services and other library operations, and speculates that the tension is
worse at other libraries. She is satisfied with the situation at the library and describes the tension
as “the healthy tension that you need.” The director adds that this type of tension is similar to
what would be present in a business environment that focuses on competition. The director
explained that there can be discomfort among staff when there is change. According to her,
engaging in innovation challenges people’s assumptions. There are people who become
emotional and defensive when they are challenged. She adds, “Library culture can be about
respecting individual beliefs, talents, knowledge, and if you challenge that it can seem
disrespectful.” She emphasizes that library D does not experience that problem to the extent that
other libraries might. It is important to have a culture that is open to challenges and change. The
director concludes that the cultures of entrepreneurial services and the entire library are
“different in some ways but should be the same.”
The director at library E has not modified the organizational culture in regards to
entrepreneurial activities and services since becoming the director. At the time of the interview,
she had been in the position for only one year. The director noted that the culture for
entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for the entire library system, adding that staff
members, “give it all regardless of what we are doing.” Users receive the same service whether it
is their first passport or a subsequent one.

234

Extent to Which Entrepreneurship is Engrained
The directors reviewed Neal’s (2001) typology adapted by Jusic (2013) for public
libraries (Table 1.1), and, considering the items listed in the typology, they discussed the extent
to which entrepreneurship is engrained in the organizational culture. The director at library A
believes entrepreneurship is “very engrained,” adding that she gives 90 percent of the credit to
the previous library director. She states: “He was an entrepreneurial leader at heart.” The director
also mentions that there is an assumption among employees that entrepreneurship is a part of the
organization and that she, as the director, brings a collaboration component to this.
Regarding whether there is anything in the typology that the library should engage in
more or improve, the director at library A said that the library does not do enough marketing.
The library is surrounded by other great libraries in the area, but the director does not believe the
library adequately tells its own story. She adds that the library does a great job working with
local businesses to acquire in-kind contributions, but that the library needs to improve its efforts
to secure private funding. Some libraries have a long history of the community giving to the
library, perhaps dating back to the library’s establishment. Library A, on the other hand, has
engaged in this effort for approximately eight years.
After reviewing the typology, the director at library B said that entrepreneurship is
engrained in the organization and that most of the characteristics apply. The director would like
to continue to focus on community and corporate collaboration, insisting that there is always
more the library can do in that area. She would like to see the library focus more on
capitalization and marketing. The director states that keeping staff engaged is a high priority for
the library and that it is something the library must work on continuously by interacting with
them, communicating with them, and asking them to provide input.

235

The director at library D also believes entrepreneurship is engrained in the organizational
culture. According to her, tension will always exist between traditional models and services, and
what it means to be entrepreneurial. Considering the categories in the typology, the director
indicates that the library does well with the items in the first category14 and that it spends a lot of
time studying trends and exploring opportunities. The director thinks the library can always do
more, for instance, in focusing on how people use information to make decision. When dealing
with more traditional support, such as the Friends of the Library (FOL), there is a sense among
the FOL that the library is the same institution that they have used for their entire lives. The
director believes it is important to respect the traditional roles and customs as those are what
some people want to preserve. It is also important to identify areas where one can push advances
forward. The director indicates that the library foundation is something the library did not have
for the first two years the director was at the library, due to other structural priorities. Now the
foundation is working on how it solicits private funding. The director also states that
capitalization is not a focus at this time. She wants to offer services that do not charge a fee or
that are not privatized in any way.
When asked to review the typology and comment on how engrained entrepreneurship is
in the organizational culture, the director at library E answered that it depends on what aspect a
person is considering. With the multi-modal interactive exhibits, she believes that everything in
the typology applies. Likewise, with the staff innovation fund, everything applies. However,
everything in the typology does not apply to the passport service. The director indicates that
upper-level staff and long-time employees probably understand the items in the typology better.

14

The items listed in the first category are: active community participation; active library board participation; active
staff engagement and support; and active stakeholder engagement (includes volunteers, community leaders, elected
officials, foundations, Friends of the Library, and the corporate community).

236

Newer employees may understand some of the items; however, they may not yet understand why
the library engages in some projects, but is not involved in others. The director views
entrepreneurship as a mean to serving the community better (by providing additional services)
rather than as a primary area of focus for the library. When asked if there is anything in the
typology that the library should engage in more or improve, the director said that the library
could do more to enhance corporate collaboration and sponsorships. At the time of data
collection, the library was not engaged in any partnerships or sponsorships with corporations.
Organizational Culture from the Perspective of Managers
The managers described the current organizational culture as it relates to those engaged
in entrepreneurial activities and services. Next, they reviewed Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990)
ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial organization and indicated the characteristics that apply
to the library’s entrepreneurial activities and services, and commented on whether they see a
difference among the set of entrepreneurial activities and services regarding which
characteristics are emphasized. The managers then discussed whether the culture for
entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for the entire library, or whether the
entrepreneurial activities and services create their own culture. The managers also commented on
any changes to the organizational culture since the new director started. Finally, they reviewed
Neal’s (2001) typology, which was adapted for public libraries by Jusic (2013), and the extent to
which entrepreneurship is engrained in the organizational culture.
Manager A1, discussing the organizational culture as it relates to those engaged in
entrepreneurial activities and services, said, “It’s a vital part of our mission and our goals.”
Manager A2 described the organizational culture as one where employees are excited about
anything new, including technology and children’s programming. This manager adds that she

237

was excited when the library first launched the passport service. Initially, staff members were
concerned about the noise and crowds. Over time, staff have come to accept that the service
generates extra revenue for the library.
Manager A3 states, “Three principal activities and services15 are givens now after all the
years the library has operated them.” The manager asserts that beyond the three main activities
and services for the library, there “isn’t a great entrepreneurial culture” and that staff members
do not consider the culture as entrepreneurial. Staff instead, look at the culture as an opportunity
to offer new services and be responsive to the community. Manager A4, the manager of the
Friends of the Library bookshop, described its culture as customer service oriented.
Manager B1 described the organizational culture as “absolutely excited and supportive”
of the college access and reengagement center. The library director embraced the center, which
became part of the library’s ongoing budget. The service is now a part of the library. Manager
B2 discussed how the background of the employees in the discovery space for small businesses
and entrepreneurs affects the culture. Every one of them has worked in other industries, and that,
in turn, brings a broader and richer experience to the library. Since they come from different
backgrounds and do not necessarily have library experience, the employees may have different
values, beliefs, and expectations, which affects the culture of the service. However, this is not
negative. According to manager B2, these employees are more open to new ideas and change
than other library staff.
Manager B3 thinks that the culture in the makerspace is positive, but adds that many
people in the organization do not understand the purpose of the makerspace. According to her, a
part of the reason they want to separate the space from the youth services department is to

15

These are the café, Friends of the Library bookshop, and the passport services.

238

improve communication and increase staff understanding. Some staff members refer to the
makerspace as a teen space, but, in fact, it is a space for all ages. Apart from this lack of
understanding, employees within the organization are generally positive. This is a messaging
problem, but there are not enough time or staff to address it.
Manager B4, when asked about the organizational culture, says, “I think, by and large, it
is somewhat random and reflected by individuals who have specific agendas and goals and the
drive to make them happen.” She does not believe the organizational culture is “necessarily
entrepreneurial,” nor does she believe that library employees generally think that way. The
manager’s comment is not intended to be negative; she states that entrepreneurship “is just not
what you expect in a library.” She describes the library as having pockets of entrepreneurship,
but does not think the entire organization has an entrepreneurial culture.
Manager D2 describes the current organizational culture as “courageous” because there is
a willingness to try new things. The library is connected to the community it serves, including
nonprofit organizations, museums, and private connections. There are also connections with the
professional community, innovation in libraries in general, and internationally. Manager D1
described the library as a “benchmark library” ten years ago because other libraries tried to
emulate the customer service model the library had created at that time. A few years ago, during
the Great Recession, the library reduced hours of being open, experienced severe budget cuts,
and did not have funding to offer anything beyond basic services. The library director was “able
to restart the culture and spirit of innovation,” by engaging in innovative projects16 which helped
to build morale and excitement in the organization. She also secured more funding for the library

16

Neither the director nor the manager specified what the innovative projects were.

239

by getting a ballot measure passed. Now, the library is open for more hours, and the staff
members are, according to manager D1, “invigorated.”
The staff members have opportunities to implement their ideas. According to manager
D1, in other libraries, if an employee is a shelver, his or her job is solely to shelve books. The
position is defined, rigid, and straightforward, and the employee does not engage in other
activities. At library D, that is not necessarily the case. Manager D1 states, “We encourage
people to better themselves and take those risks, especially people in library school.” The goal is
to foster creativity and entrepreneurship. The manager adds that in the library, when managers
see staff taking risks (in terms of innovation and entrepreneurship), they strive to offer the
employees resources and means to implement their ideas.
The manager at library E discusses the organizational culture by, first, referring to the
importance of staff input. The previous director and the assistant director welcomed all staff
members to present their ideas concerning what the second floor of the library would look like if
it were developed to resemble a children’s museum space. The presentations resulted in
additional discussions and follow-up ideas. This is just one example of staff providing input, and
it is a part of today’s organizational culture. According to the manager, “Everyone feels free to
share ideas we think will be successful and benefit the community.” He also emphasizes that the
library practices an open door policy: “Staff feel like they are heard and like their opinion counts.
There is an underlying understanding that we are here to serve the community.”
The Entrepreneurial Organization
Table 6.3 provides an overview of which of the ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organization (Cornwall & Pearlman, 1990), the managers though apply to their library. The
managers also provided comments on the characteristics as they related to their library.

240

Table 6.3
Managers’ views of entrepreneurial characteristics that apply to the library

Characteristics

Library A
Manager A1 Manager A2

Allowing people at all levels of
the organization to lead
An attitude among staff that
work is fun
Earned respect within the
organization
Effectiveness and efficiency

x

Manager A3

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Emotional commitment

x

x

Including people in what is
considered important to the
organization
Integrity, trust, and credibility

x

x

x

x

x

x

Relentless attention to details,
people, structure, and process
Risk taking (this includes
innovation)
The sense that everything the
organization does has value for
its customers and workers

x

x

Characteristics

x

Library B
Manager B1 Manager B2

x

x

x
x

Manager A4

x

x
x

x

Manager B3

Manager B4

Allowing people at all levels of
the organization to lead
An attitude among staff that
work is fun
Earned respect within the
organization
Effectiveness and efficiency

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Emotional commitment

x

x

x

x

Including people in what is
considered important to the
organization

x

x

241

Integrity, trust, and credibility

x

x

x

Relentless attention to details,
people, structure, and process
Risk taking (this includes
innovation)
The sense that everything the
organization does has value for
its customers and workers

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Library D and Library E
Characteristics

Manager D1

Manager D2

Manager E

Allowing people at all levels of
the organization to lead
An attitude among staff that
work is fun
Earned respect within the
organization
Effectiveness and efficiency

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Emotional commitment

x

x

x

Including people in what is
considered important to the
organization
Integrity, trust, and credibility

x

x

x

x

x

x

Relentless attention to details,
people, structure, and process
Risk taking (this includes
innovation)
The sense that everything the
organization does has value for
its customers and workers

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

x

Manager A1 is not sure that all staff members believe work is fun. She believes
effectiveness applies to the library, to an extent, as does including people in determining what is
considered to be important to the organization. She believes many long-term employees have an
emotional commitment to the organization. However, some of them are afraid of risk and
innovation. Manager A1 does not believe that the characteristics on the list vary by

242

entrepreneurial activity. She does not recognize differences among the entrepreneurial activities
and services with respect to which characteristics are emphasized. This manager believes the
culture for entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for the entire library “because it all
comes from one place and that place is value and trust and commitment.” Although she does not
believe the entrepreneurial activities and services create their own culture in regards to revenue
generation, she says, “People generally have a feeling that anything you pay for has more quality
added.”
Manager A2 did not address entrepreneurial services other than the passport service, and
she noted that the first characteristic would not apply. She sees differences among the set of
entrepreneurial activities and services with respect to which characteristics are emphasized, but
did not elaborate. This manager thinks that staff have an attitude that work is enjoyable, but not
fun. In terms of emotional commitment, most staff members contend that they are committed to
their positions. She adds, “People appreciate that they have a job and when you have a job you
have to be dedicated.” This manager believes the culture for the passport services is the same for
the entire library, adding that passport employees are dedicated and committed to the
organization. Although she cannot speak for employees in other areas of the organization, she
believes that the passport staff members offer a high level of customer service and that “they will
do anything to help the customer.”
Manager A3 only mentioned selected characteristics. The library’s participation in the
pilot project and the creation of the most recent strategic plan included, according to this
manager, huge involvement from staff from multiple levels of the organization. He believes there
is a sense among staff that everyone can lead. This was especially important during the library’s
pilot project participation. There is an attitude among staff that work is fun some of the time, but

243

he does not believe there is emotional commitment beyond himself and the director. He believes
integrity, trust, and credibility are among the most important attributes on the list, stating: “We
operate at the senior level knowing that integrity, trust, and credibility are essential at dealing
with our community. We having nothing to offer except accuracy and the fact that they trust us.”
That was also a part of the culture under the leadership of the previous director.
When asked about differences among the set of entrepreneurial activities and services
with respect to which characteristics are emphasized, the manager contends that it is “harder to
say.” According to manager A3, staff frequently believe there is too much emphasis on the
passport operations. Specifically, they think that it interferes too much with the library’s
operation. However, the passport service has the largest revenue impact. The passport service
was once located in a place where it hindered other public service activities by creating long
waiting lines that included 20 to 30 people on busy days. He describes the passport staff as
“outsiders” and adds that there was not an “earned respect” for that service within the
organization. This manager also adds that the passport staff members are part-time employees
who work for only a part of the day and they do not attend staff meetings. In this regard, the
culture for the passport service differs from the rest of the library. He states: “We are collegial
but in some ways separate.” He adds that the passport employees are loyal to their manager, and
that a couple of employees have the training and skills to assume her position when she fully
retires.
Initially, library staff members considered the passport service more harmful than
beneficial. Manager A3 claims, “What we tried to do to overcome ‘us versus them’ was train
public service staff on how passport operation worked, why we had this crowd of people, and
why it created a volume of activity.” To accomplish this, the passport service manager (A2),

244

developed a training program to explain passports better, and it was a worthwhile effort because
it improved other library staff members’ understanding of the passport service.
Manager A3 adds that there may be a different culture at the Friends of the Library
bookshop. They are all volunteers and are not involved with the library in any other way at this
time. Generally, the volunteers do not interact with the library staff. Manager A4, who manages
the bookshop, only selected some of the characteristics because she has not observed all aspects
of the library’s organizational culture. As a result, she is uncertain whether the characteristics
vary by entrepreneurial activity. When asked whether the culture for entrepreneurial activities
and services is the same for the entire library, she asserts, “If the library is providing the same
things, basics of library service, then yes the culture is different for [entrepreneurial] activities.”
She admits the bookshop is different. The services of the library are entrepreneurial, but differ
from a traditional library. She states: “Entrepreneurial activities within the library, bookshop,
coffee shop, passport will have different cultures based on the nature of what they are doing.”
She does not believe that the different culture the activities and services create is enhanced by
revenue generation. She contends, “achieving the end result is what is important, not necessarily
money.”
Manager B1 selected all the characteristics, but did not provide comments on specific
ones. Instead, she provided some background on the college access and reengagement center.
According to her, the planning committee worked for three years before opening the center. She
recalls that they worked hard to ensure the existence of an inclusive culture and “to make sure
we have the right people at the table.” She believes the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial
activity, stating: “Naturally there is more entrepreneurship and fun and commitment to an
exciting service.” She adds that she presumes that there are differences among the set of

245

entrepreneurial activities and services regarding which characteristics are emphasized; however,
she could not speak specifically about the other services.
Manager B1 answered “probably a little of both,” when asked whether the culture for
entrepreneurial activities and services is the same for the entire library or whether the
entrepreneurial activities and services create their own culture. She states:
We feed off the energy from administration but have our own culture within
the team. Especially because the people on the team know students by face and
name. They celebrate successes as a team and that’s specific to [the college
access and reengagement center] … culture.
This manager says that revenue generation would probably change the culture and she is pleased
that the library does not charge for the services, stating:
I think it creates an incredible public trust. People don’t question whether we
gain anything and are willing to put lives in our hands. Going back to school is
a trust exercise. It helps tremendously that we don’t charge anything. There
are private college counselors that charge. Our mission is to serve
underprivileged students.
Manager B2 selected most of the characteristics for the library and believes the
characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity. She recognizes differences among the set of
entrepreneurial services regarding which characteristics are emphasized. All the characteristics
apply to the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs. For this space, risk taking is
important because it is a different type of service compared to other library services. Emotional
commitment is also important because the employees lead by example. She believes the culture
for entrepreneurial activities and services differs from the culture for the entire library.
According to her, the different services, “create their own culture – at least they try to. They get
reigned in a lot. The type of activities and staff [for entrepreneurial services] are a challenge
sometimes.” The discovery space does not generate revenue. According to the manager, if there
were revenue generation, “it would create a competitive, more intense entrepreneurial spirit.”

246

Using the library to generate revenue, she adds, “goes against the pillars of librarianship.”
However, it can have the potential to create a “more positive experience for customer and
entrepreneurial spaces.” The manager contends that staff members want to provide the best
service possible.
Manager B3 selected all the characteristics for the library. She believes the characteristics
vary by entrepreneurial activity, especially within her department and a few others. Almost all of
the characteristics apply to the makerspace. She describes the library as a large organization that
has silos, and in some of these work is not considered to be fun. She thinks all the characteristics
apply at some level, but that some features are more pervasive than others. People are
encouraged to take risks. There are differences among the set of entrepreneurial activities and
services regarding which characteristics are emphasized, but she did not go into detail.
Manager B3 believes the makerspace and the college access and reengagement center
have their own cultures. In the makerspace, staff members are encouraged and expected to lead
and create programming. If a program has low attendance, the staff must be proactive by
determining why so few people attended the program, and then identifying a remedy or coming
up with a new program. There is a “high level of expectation in regard to customer service,
creativity, [and] integrity within the youth services department and the makerspace.” The
manager believes if revenue generation were present that it would change the culture. A large
part of the library “leveling the playing field” for people is that it does not charge for services.
The manager adds that an individual should be dedicated to securing grants in the makerspace.
She contends that revenue generation would not be a good solution. If there was an expectation
for the library to add or generate revenue, that idea would place a great deal of pressure on the
library, with the ongoing need for city budget cuts. The manager adds, “No one wants fines but

247

the city sees it as revenue generation.” In fact, the city leadership was not pleased when the
revenue generated by fines decreased.
Manager B4 mentioned the fewest number of characteristics, because she believes the
library’s rigid hierarchical structure prevents people’s ability to lead at all levels of the
organization. She states, “We say that we do but I don’t think we do.” The attitude among staff
that work is fun only occurs in pockets. There are areas of the organization in which morale is
poor. She does not believe the library demonstrates relentless attention to details, people,
structure, and process like a corporation does. Furthermore, she does not believe the library
encourages risk taking.
The characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity, according to manager B4, within
entrepreneurial units. She does believe there are differences among the set of entrepreneurial
activities and services regarding which characteristics are emphasized. This manager recognizes
that it is different for the college access and reengagement center, but she is not familiar enough
with the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs to speak to that service. She
indicates, “They are high performing teams, they are engaged and focused and relentless because
they have the support to fail.” According to the manager, the culture for entrepreneurial activities
and services is not the same for the entire library. She states, “I think it has to do with a united
sense of purpose.” The services create their own culture, and people wholeheartedly embrace
their purpose because they understand the services’ goals. The manager commented that
although the library does not generate revenue at this time there is a “greater sense of
accountability when money is involved.”
Both managers D1 and D2 believe all of the characteristics reflect library D. Manager D2
says, “There was a period of time where the culture of entrepreneurship and innovation lagged a

248

little and now [it’s] coming back again.” The library is improving its attention to details and
process, and emotional commitment among employees is better. Manager D1 contends that
although the library makes an effort to include people in determining what is important to the
organization, this is something upon which to improve. It is also important to make sure
everyone in the organization is aware of the strategic priorities. This manager emphasizes that
employees are aware of what goes on in administration and that there is not a disconnect due to
communication between administration and library employees. She adds that this communication
is “a hard bridge to build in any organization.” The challenge is to ensure that branch staff know
what is happening and why. This manager indicated that the library is making progress
concerning its efforts to communicate why changes are implemented and what the benefits are to
the public so staff have a better understanding of changes that occur in the library. When asked
whether the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity, manager D2 said that the library
aligns all activities with the strategic priorities so that the characteristics would be the same. He
states: “We decide what level to support them based on how much they align with the strategic
priorities. Everything [the] organization does ties into strategic priorities.”
When asked if there are differences among the set of entrepreneurial activities and
services concerning which characteristics are emphasized, manager D2 indicates that the library
always attempts to make sure the items on the checklist are all in place and it helps the library
decide whether to engage in a particular entrepreneurial activity. Manager D2 states, “I think
even the attitude among staff that work is fun applies.” The city conducted an employee
satisfaction survey to determine whether they were engaged in their work, and whether work was
considered fun and meaningful to them. The library has secured those results and is working to

249

correct any areas that reveal challenges. Manager D1 says, “Staff and the development team try
to really work on that and also come up with fun activities.”
Manger D2, when asked whether the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services is
the same for the entire library or whether the entrepreneurial activities and services create their
own culture said, “A little bit of both.” Manager D2 offers the examples of an innovative futures
team that is combined with a design thinking team at the library. That group has its own cultural
identity due to how it functions. For example, that group can create a new idea and the group is
“free from the burden of coming up with funding.” The group has that flexibility to come up with
“big and bold” ideas without having to worry about performing in a certain way or securing
funding. The manger adds that the library is adding a new system within a month that will teach
three new staff members every three months about design thinking. The group will include staff
from almost all job classifications, which ensures that a variety of people are heard, enabling
them to capture the culture within the innovations futures team and disperse it to their
departments or branch libraries.
None of the activities at library D generate revenue at this time. When the managers were
asked whether the activities and services that create their own culture(s) are enhanced by revenue
generation, manager D2 mentioned grants, saying, “It seems like grant projects are maybe
heightened on this level a little bit because you go into it with a competitive spirit to try and get
the grant.” He also reveals that, with grant-funded projects, there is a certain level of
commitment that is enhanced by “the energy of those activities because they are high profile and
very well structured.”
The manager at library E said that all the characteristics apply to the library. The manager
states: “A lot of these values, the things we want all our staff to feel, encompass our morale here.

250

We have a sense of duty to this community.” The city has a new staff orientation where new staff
members learn why certain values (e.g., integrity and trust) are important. The manager contends
that the way staff members present themselves to the community is important. Values such as
integrity and trust originate from the top down, and new employees need to embrace them
because the values are important to developing effective connections with families and the
community.
When asked whether the items on the list vary by entrepreneurial activity, the manager
says that they all apply to the multi-modal interactive exhibits. The passport service provides a
different type of service to the community; it is more “cut and dried.” He does not specifically
mention what the differences are, but the comment implies that different characteristics could be
emphasized for the two services. When asked whether the culture for entrepreneurial activities
and services is the same as the culture for the entire library, the manager states that he does not
“believe that there are sub-cultures because we tackle this as a team.” There are so many facets
within a team that are influenced. He offers the example of the multi-modal exhibits. Even
though he manages this service, he contends that staff members are always involved and they do
not usually tackle projects on their own; they work with other staff members. As a result, one
person’s actions affect the action of another.
Changes to Organizational Culture
Manager A1 indicates that it is too soon to determine whether there have been changes to
the organizational culture since the new director started because the library has not made any
major changes in the first year. However, staff have started to discuss other revenue streams.
Manager A2 does not agree with this. According to her, there have been changes to the
organizational culture since the new director started. The new director, who is active in

251

professional associations, continues to conduct community outreach similar to the previous
director. The new director has encouraged staff members to become more active in programs and
interactions with the community. As an example, she points to supervisors holding a retreat
outside the library. The library also participated in the pilot project on re-envisioning public
libraries, which was something different for the library. According to this manager, the director
is “doing a fantastic job working up new ideas and programs.”
Manager A2 believes those changes are related to beliefs, values, norms, and/or
assumptions, but thinks the library has shifted to embrace new ideas concerning issues such as
the public area and librarians’ positions. For example, it is, now, acceptable to display library
books in the foyer. The previous director did not allow this. This manager adds that she has
worked for the library for 40 years and that librarian positions are so different now because of
the use of new technology, the librarians’ ability to attend meetings and interact with peers, and
their ability to engage in activities with other libraries throughout the community.
According to manager A3, the new director is extremely community focused. She
supports collaborating with other community organizations to offer services to the community,
mostly in regards to programing. The manager emphasizes that the library is taking a creative
approach to fundraising by engaging in targeted fundraising. For example, the library works with
two family foundations that each contributed $25,000 to the library to enable the bookmobile to
cover its routes on the road two more days a week. The manager asserts that the new director is
extraordinarily plan driven; the strategic plan dictates the library’s programming efforts.
Furthermore, the manager revealed that much time is spent at the management level navigating
elements of the strategic plan, an approach that has facilitated management’s decision making
and progress. The manager describes the director as a planner; the library board drove prior

252

plans, and now she is driving them. Consequently, there is much broader staff involvement that
produces “a feeling that the plan is ours, not hers.” There is staff involvement in development
and execution. The manager states: “There are things we needed two years ago and now I can see
us working on this.” When asked whether those changes are related to beliefs, values, norms,
and/or assumptions, manager A3 answered: “Yes, no doubt in my mind.” The new director
established new priorities. As an internal candidate and someone who worked for the previous
director, she pushed for the strategic plan, and now she is the executor of the plan. The manager
adds: “It is a terrific thing to be able to tell community leadership about all the things we are
doing in the community.” The manager also describes the director as mission driven.
Manager A4, the bookshop manager, states that physically things are different as the new
director allows displays in the foyer, which was previously an empty space. The previous
director had “a firm hand on the way things operated. Things are a little more flexible and
forgiving now.” She is uncertain whether the changes are related to beliefs, values, norms, and/or
assumptions because she is somewhat removed from the library and the library staff.
According to manager B1, changes to the organizational culture occurred when the new
director started. The previous director was entrepreneurial and a risk taker. It was a risk to take
on the college access center when it was a different department outside the library. The previous
director started the service, but the new director embraced it when she started working at the
library. The manager admits that the center could be in a completely different situation if it did
not have support and acceptance from the new director. The new director took a risk in
institutionalizing the center and making the operating cost a part of the library budget. The two
directors are different leaders and types of people. The current director is more detail oriented
and more involved, which is evident when she conducts site visits. The manager says that she

253

likes the director’s involvement and her support. The director, who leads by example,
demonstrates her personal commitment to the center’s mission by attending advisory committee
meetings and by expressing her value for the work, even though she is busy. According to the
manager, the library director
broadened the value for education among the whole department by making it a
strategic planning pillar. We were a novelty and now we are part of the value
system and strategic guide and library system as a whole. She’s declared
education as a focal point for the entire system. Education is a critical piece
that we do.
According to manager B2, the culture, under the new director, is similar to the one under
the previous director. The manager describes the organization as a large bureaucracy. What has
changed is that the library is more embedded in the community, with important partners. The
new director has brought a higher level of risk taking, which is beneficial for the discovery space
for small businesses and entrepreneurs as well as for the library as a whole. The norms for staff
have changed. The manager reveals:
In the old days, staffing levels were hearty and robust and we did a lot of
programming. We have now just come to a point where programming has
come back and superseded what we did in the last year. We are doing much
more with much less.
This was the situation when the director assumed the position and what she has to cope with. The
manager says that the values at the library are the same; however, the library is trying new things
in terms of services and programming. Currently, the library has fewer staff members and is
attempting to implement a variety of programs or projects to make the library a trend setter.
She believes that the library is “on the cutting edge,” emphasizing that this was truly the situation
when the library had more staff.
Although it has been a few years, manager B2 says that there have been a number of
changes to the organizational culture since the director started. However, he asserts that the core

254

beliefs and values have not changed much. For example, early literacy is the library’s “bread and
butter” and that was important to the previous director as well. Likewise, customer service
remains a major priority. The previous director was vocal about the direction the library was
headed and specific about what she wanted to achieve. In contrast, the new director is “softer,
quieter, and works more internally.” She adds that over time the city council has changed due to
the limited terms elected officials serve. Thus, with different individuals serving on city council,
the way they influence policies affects the library. There have been some modifications in the
way the library operates, but the manager did not identify any specific changes. She does not
believe the changes at the library are related to beliefs, values, norms, or assumptions.
According to manager B4, there has been a change in organizational culture since the
new director started. The new director is more open. The previous director decided what she
wanted to do. However, she was not open to others’ ideas. She says, “I think we’ve had a lot
more soul searching” as a library. The manager is working on her second three-year strategic
plan cycle. She was not involved in strategic planning with the previous director, but states, “the
sense I got was that she figured it out and we were doing it her way.” The changes are related to
beliefs, values, norms, and assumptions. One change is that the library as an organization is more
inclusive. All the deputy directors are new. Manager B4 states, “As a group the senior
management is much more open to figuring things out collectively.” She says that senior
managers “come in a little bit more humble in acknowledging they don’t have all the answers
and are willing to participate in a collective analysis of the issues.”
The managers at library D indicate that the organizational culture has changed since the
new director started. Manager D2 says that, during that time, there was no permanent director at
the library, which diminished the spirit of innovation. This coincided with the downturn in the

255

economy and there were low staffing levels. When the current director started, she did a lot of
positioning of the library in order to gain political support for a ballot issue. Furthermore, she did
a lot of work to obtain community support by intentionally ensuring that the library engaged in
activities that would produce positive images within the community and to make sure that these
efforts would generate support at the ballot box for the ballot initiative at that time as well as for
future initiatives. This, in turn, also helped the director facilitate the ability to build and further
employ more entrepreneurial activities.
According to manager D1, when the director started, she created several new positions
and hired people for them. She strategically hired people who would implement the new vision,
be forward thinking, and become spokespersons within the greater community; she did not want
people who were rigid and stuck in the old traditional, library mindset. As a result of the
organizational changes, many employees retired and others simply left. A new cultural identity
emerged as new employees were hired, including a number of new librarians just graduated from
library school. These librarians, according to manager D1, are full of energy and want to make
meaningful changes. The manager adds that it is great to “Bring in employees who will motivate
older people and create new enthusiasm about new library services.” It also contributes to
creating a different organizational culture.
Manager D2 adds that, when the library got the hours of service expanded in July 2015, it
hired more than 100 new employees, about half of whom are librarians. However, the library is
still short staffed and there is still a great deal of turnover. A new branch is scheduled to open in
2016. The manager adds that the new hires in the organization contribute to the creation of a new
culture. The director has had a lot to do with this, and it has shifted the culture quite a bit. New

256

librarians have a two-week onboarding process17 to help them learn about the organization; this
did not exist before the director’s arrival. Manager B2 adds that the current director is “very
intentional on making sure new people understand the organization and priorities.” Neither of the
managers was employed at the library when the previous director was there; therefore, they are
unfamiliar with the old beliefs, values, norms, and/or assumptions and are unable to offer
comments.
The culture at library E, according to the manger, has remained the same. There have
been several shifts in positions due to retirements. At the time of the data collection interviews,
the library was undergoing some changes as three of the top five senior-level position employees
had retired. The manager states: “Morale is high, people feel heard, their input matters so in that
sense nothing has really changed.” The staff members want to continue to provide the best
service to the community.
Extent to Which Entrepreneurship Is Engrained
Managers reviewed Neal’s typology (2001) adapted by Jusic (2013) for public libraries
(Table 1.1), and commented on the extent to which entrepreneurship is engrained in the current
organizational culture. Manager A1 said that all the characteristics apply to the library and that
entrepreneurship is engrained in the organization. However, she contends that the issue is the
speed at which change occurs. Nonprofit organizations, generally, she thinks, do not move
quickly when implementing change or new services. The manager would like the library to
implement changes more quickly. She believes the library’s structure is too hierarchical and
convoluted, requiring multiple people to approve projects or decisions, and this can delay

17

The onboarding process helps new employees learn about the city and the library, including policies, procedures,
and about the library’s strategic plan and direction.

257

decision making and sometimes progress. Manager A2 insists all the characteristics apply to this
library, and that entrepreneurship is engrained in the organization.
Manager A3 believes that the bullets in the first category18 of the typology are universally
applicable. The bullets in the next category19 apply as well. The library’s involvement in the pilot
project on re-envisioning public libraries focuses on trends and innovation. For years, the library
was known for its technological leadership, but the staff members are not particularly up-to-date
in this area now. There is no one at the senior level who is a technology expert. The manager
would like the library to address the technology gap, noting that the library needs to improve in
the innovative applications of technology category.
There is community and corporate collaboration on fundraising at library A. Due to
budget cuts, the library must raise approximately $1.1 million each year in order to maintain its
current level of service, part of which comes from fundraising activities.20 According to manager
A3, if a library loses a donor, at this time there is not an effective means of replacing that donor
with another donor. It is important for the library to place more focus on this area in the future.
The library does well with community and nonprofit organizations and the city and state
relationships, according to the manager, are outstanding. Manager A3 discusses the importance
of building those relationships and states: “You want to be so essential to community fabric
because they wouldn’t dream of cutting your budget. That is a twelve-month process and not a
one-time ask during budget time.” Manager A4 was unable to offer any comment on whether

18

The items in the first category in the typology are: active community participation; active library board
participation; active staff engagement and support; and active stakeholder engagement (includes volunteers,
community leaders, elected officials, foundations, Friends of the Library, and the corporate community).
19
The items in the second category of the typology are: focus on community needs and relevance; focus on library
trends and innovation; innovation, capital requirements, and efficiency; relevance to services being offered; and
tracking of societal and professional trends.
20
Money is also raised via entrepreneurial activities and services, general solicitations, and grants.

258

entrepreneurship is engrained in the library based on the typology because she manages the
Friends of the Library bookshop and is not involved in library decision-making.
In reviewing the typology, manager B1 contends entrepreneurship is engrained in the
library, stating that most of the characteristics apply to both the library and the college access
and reengagement center. Manager B2 believes entrepreneurship is engrained “about 50-50
because we are a large bureaucratic organization with many rules.” The community, library, and
stakeholder participation, according to this manager, depend on staff engagement and manager
support. She adds that the library could improve on some of the characteristics in the typology,
such as the “application and integration of technology,” stating that the technology is not updated
as frequently as it should be. Technology was one of the areas cut during the Great Recession
and the library is just beginning to catch up with getting more current computer equipment and
software in place. Another area of improvement manager B2 mentioned is “a potential for
capitalization and marketing.” She believes the city’s policies on social media and publicity
hinder this. There are, according to the manager, many social media platforms that the library
cannot use, thereby limiting what the library can do. Consequently, “We lose a lot of marketing
visibility, but I understand why it has to be this way.”
Manager B3, who believes entrepreneurship is engrained, says that the library is
addressing many of the characteristics listed in the typology. Some categories require
improvements, for example in staff engagement and support. According to this manager, “It is
hard for staff, especially part-time staff, to remember all the details related to various library
services.” This manager also sees a need to improve the focus on community needs and
relevance, adding that the library staff sometime make assumptions about what the community
needs without actually asking the community. The manager did not offer specific examples of

259

this. The third area of improvement this manager identifies is funding. Currently, no one
individual specializes in grants, but this manager believes there should be one staff member
devoted to this because the library is a large organization. Although entrepreneurship is
engrained, the manager asserts that it could be more so if the aforementioned improvements are
made.
Manager B4 believes the library does well with the following categories in the typology:
research and development, information technology, corporate partnership, foundations, and
federal funding. While Manager B2 believes the library needs to improve in the area of
information technology, Manager B4 disagrees and lists information technology among the
categories that do not need improvement. She believes the library could improve in active
participation. The library, she adds, is not as active as it should be in all the items listed in the
first category of the typology. She would like to see more community and stakeholder
engagement. She mentions that she was a stakeholder manager in a corporate setting, and that the
engagement is “happening in pockets but we don’t quantify it, track it, or fully understand it to
be able to leverage it.” Another area of improvement that this manager identifies is capitalization
and marketing. The manager said that the library includes a small group of four or five people
who do everything, and she describes them as a great team. However, the library is not doing
enough. She would like to see advertising on billboards and an advertising budget used yearround. There is some funding for advertising summer reading, but it is a small amount.
After reviewing the typology, both managers D1 and D2 assert that entrepreneurship is
engrained at library D based on the items in the typology. They both offered additional
comments. Manager D1 believes the library does well in the active community participation and
active stakeholder engagement categories, especially with volunteer engagement. She provides

260

the example of a large team-lead volunteer network where teenagers create their own programs,
market them, and engage in coding and robotics programming. She mentions this volunteer
network as an opportunity for teenagers to build leadership skills. Manager D2 provided
examples of the library’s partnerships with a university, a technology museum, corporations and
a number of local partners as evidence of the library’s strength in the category of partnerships
with community, corporate, and non-profit organizations. However, he believes the library needs
to improve in the area of foundation and federal funding.
Manager E believes that entrepreneurship is engrained in the organizational culture, but
contends that there is always potential to do more. For example, the library could market the
multi-modal interactive exhibits more if the goal was to generate a larger amount of revenue. He
does not identify any other specific areas for improvement, but emphasized that there is always
room for improvement as far as the categories in the typology are concerned.
Director Versus Manager Perspectives on Organizational Culture
When commenting on organizational culture, there are instances where the directors and
managers agree. With the exception of manager A1, the directors and managers at libraries A, B,
and D agree that the organizational culture as a whole is changing or that it has changed since the
director assumed the position. The director and manager at library E both agree that there have
not been changes to the organizational culture at the time of the interviews. Both directors and
managers identified areas for improvement in relation to Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten
characteristics of an entrepreneurial organization and Neal’s (2001) typology adapted by Jusic
(2013) for public libraries, and it is in examining the organizational culture based on these two
frameworks that disagreement is evident between the directors and managers.

261

The disagreement on which of the ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial organization
apply to the library and which categories in the adapted typology the libraries needs to improve
stems from the fact that directors and managers serve the library in different capacities and that
their roles affect their perspectives on organizational culture. Directors must consider how the
organization operates from a more holistic perspective, taking into account things such as
whether the organizational structure helps the library effectively meet its strategic priorities,
whether all of the library services (both entrepreneurial and non-entrepreneurial) meet
community needs, employee morale and engagement, the external political environment, and
funding levels for the library. When commenting on the ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organization and the adapted typology, the directors do so with these factors (and more) in mind.
Managers understand the operational challenges, especially as related to their area of
responsibility, better and interact with library employees in ways that the directors do not. This
gives them a different perspective as to what the library does well and what it may need to
improve. However, it is probable that the managers are more invested in the area or service they
oversee, and that their perception of the organization as a whole is, at times, influenced by that.
The manager comments also surface tensions between entrepreneurial activities and services and
the rest of the organization. Manager B2, for example, believes the ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization apply to a greater extent to the discovery space for small businesses
and entrepreneurs than to the organization as a whole, recognizing that this service creates its
own culture within the organization. Manager A3 also commented on how the passport service
was not viewed favorably by staff initially and that it took time for staff to accept it.
It is also important to mention that the directors at libraries A, B, and D have worked (or
are actively working) on changing and shaping the organizational culture. This also affects their

262

perspective because the directors must contend with the challenges of actively working to change
the culture whereas managers can contribute to this change, but do not lead it in the same way
the directors do. Both directors and manager can benefit from an increased understanding of the
others’ perspectives on the organizational culture and areas for improvement. Communication
between parties in regards to the areas for improvement will be essential to making those
improvements, especially related to entrepreneurial activities and services, if the libraries are to
continue supporting and improve entrepreneurship in the organization over time.
Linkage of Findings to the Literature
Four Frames
Only the directors were asked to comment on the organizational culture in terms of the
four frames. All of them mentioned the structural frame in some way. The directors at libraries B
and D restructured the organization. In the case of both libraries, the restructuring efforts focused
on creating greater effectiveness and developing a structure that was more conducive to the
libraries meeting strategic priorities. According to Bolman and Deal (2013), “the structural
perspective argues for putting people in the right roles and relationships. Properly designed,
these formal arrangements can accommodate both collective goals and individual difference” (p.
45). In both these libraries, restructuring helped move the organization forward.
The director at library A is considering restructuring, but had not made any changes at the
time of the data collection interviews. The director at library E does not believe the library needs
to address any of the frames, but did mention that, due to retirements, reorganization was in
process at the time of the data collection. The director at library D mentions the challenges of
getting people to work on cross-functional teams and to move beyond the silos of their
departments. Employees communicate across different levels of the organization, which,

263

according to this director, is an approach that is usually considered unacceptable within
hierarchical organizations.
In the political frame, organizations are viewed as “competitive arenas” where resources
are scarce and individuals struggle for power. Bolman and Deal (2013) consider organizations as
allowing political contest and having active political players or actors. However, the political
frame is not just limited to the organization. According to Bolman and Deal (2013),
“organizations depend on their environment for resources they need to survive, they are
inevitably enmeshed with external constituents whose expectations or demands must be heeded”
(p. 231). In their discussion of the political frame, the directors offer comments on how it applies
to the libraries as active political players in the external environment only, and none of them
discusses the political frame as it relates to the organization internally. The libraries depend on
external political support and funding, and the directors’ comments in relation to the political
frame reflect that reliance. Furthermore, “As political actors, organizations need to master many
of the basic skills of individual managers as politicians: develop an agenda, map the
environment, manage relationships with both allies and enemies, and negotiate compacts,
accords, and alliances” (Bolman & Deal, 2013, pp. 231-232). The directors are aware of this
need. For example, when she first started in the position, the director at library D spent a lot of
time positioning the library and building political support.
The directors at libraries A and D directly discuss the political landscape. The director at
library B mentions it, but does not offer additional comments. The director at library A, who
notes that the political landscape has changed, discusses issues coming up in the city that affect
the library. The library engages in strong partnerships rather than competing with other
organizations. This undoubtedly helps to build political support for the library. The director at

264

library D says the library politically supports the goals of city leadership by focusing on
workforce development. Although she did not mention the ballot measure that needed to pass
when she first started in the position, she responded to questions related to the four frames, and
the director mentioned it while answering other questions. The building of political support was
a necessary step in getting the ballot measure passed.
The director at library B mentions the human resource frame, and emphasized that it “can
be dealt with very succinctly and accurately.” Perhaps she means in regards to the policies and
procedures aspects of dealing with human resource-related issues. Other than that, she discusses
employee engagement, the satisfaction survey, and the importance of employee morale. The
director at library B considers employee morale to be important and makes an effort to create a
culture that supports employees. As mentioned earlier, she reviews the yearly employee
satisfaction survey and strives to makes improvements in areas if the survey indicates there is a
problem. She also supports employee development via training, temporary promotions, and
advancement opportunities within the organization. The importance of a happy and skilled
workforce is stressed by Bolman and Deal (2013), who write, “Many highly successful
organizations … Invest[…] in people on the premise that a highly motivated and skilled
workforce is a powerful competitive advantage” (p. 135). Although the director at library D did
not specifically mention the human resource frame when answering the question, she recognizes
the importance of employee engagement and development. During the interview, she discusses
employee engagement in relation to an employee satisfaction survey and her efforts to break
down barriers so that anyone within the organization, regardless of position, can share ideas with
others without having to go through their supervisor first. She is striving to create a culture in
which participation and employee engagement is encouraged. The human resource frame is

265

important because, “When individuals find satisfaction and meaning in work, organizations
profit from the effective use of their talent and energy” (Bolman & Deal, 2013, p. 159). It is not
something that should be overlooked. The directors at libraries A and D did not mention this.
None of the directors mentioned the symbolic frame.21 This was surprising because this
frame “focuses on how humans make sense of the chaotic, ambiguous world in which they live.
Meaning, belief, and faith are its central concerns” (Bolman & Deal, 2013, p. 244). Considering
that some of the libraries have gone through changes such as restructuring and the
implementation of new entrepreneurial activities or services, the investigator expected some
mention of the symbolic frame in relation to those changes.
Organizational Culture
In the literature, there is no agreement regarding what culture is or how it should be
studied (Schneider, Ehrhart, & Macey, 2013). Despite this lack of agreement, Schein’s (1983,
2010) framework of organizational culture is one of the most commonly recognized (Schneider,
Ehrhart, & Macey, 2013). He describes culture as shared norms, values, and assumptions,
believing that the culture of an organization manifests itself at three levels: artifacts, espoused
beliefs and values, and basic underlying assumptions. Cornwall and Pearlman (1990)
acknowledge that “culture is a complex phenomenon and often is difficult to isolate and clearly
define” (p. 77). Both the directors and managers described the current organizational culture as it
relates to entrepreneurship. The descriptions from the directors and managers were inconsistent,
which is understandable since organizational culture is difficult to describe unless people are
working within a specific framework.

21

It is possible that the directors did not discuss the symbolic frame because they are not as familiar with it as they
are with the other three frames, they are currently focused on the other three frames in their work, or they consider it
secondary to what they mentioned with the other frames.

266

The directors and managers indicated that the organizational culture has changed at
libraries B and D. At the time of the interviews, director B had worked for the organization for
approximately five years and director D for approximately three. The passage of time has given
the directors more time to make changes, add entrepreneurial activities and services, and shape
the culture. Both directors restructured the organization to meet strategic priorities better, added
entrepreneurial activities or services in the past couple of years, and have plans to engage in
additional entrepreneurial activities and services in the future.
The director at library A has made changes to the organizational culture. While three of
the four managers at the library provide examples of how the culture is changing under her
leadership, one manager believes it is “too soon to say” whether the culture has changed. At the
time of data collection, the director at library A had been in the position approximately fifteen
months. Although she is an internal hire and has started making changes to the organizational
culture, it is likely that the culture will change to a greater extent as more time passes. Cornwall
and Pearlman (1990) support the notion that cultures are slow to change: “Culture is not easily
altered. Many managers underestimate the amount of time it takes to achieve real and lasting
change in an organization’s culture” (p. 78). The director acknowledges that changing the culture
takes time, and staff members are still getting used to her personality and style of leadership,
which differed from those of the previous director.
Both the director and manager at library E agreed that the culture has not changed, due to
several factors. The director at library E, an internal candidate at the time of data collection, was
in the position for only one year. She worked closely with the previous director and has not made
any changes at the library. However, due to retirements and a restructuring that was in process at
the time of data collection, it is possible that the organizational culture will change over a longer

267

period as new employees are hired, as the library develops new strategic priorities, and after the
second floor space (which will have an additional entrepreneurial service) is completed.
There was no clear agreement among the directors and managers as to whether the
entrepreneurial activities and services create their own culture or whether the culture of the
activities and services is the same as the organization as a whole. The reasons for the different
answers could be that some of the activities and services create their own culture, while others do
not. For example, the college access and reengagement center, the discovery space for small
businesses and entrepreneurs, and the makerspace at library B have different cultures due to the
nature of the services and because they have separate physical spaces within the library. They
also happen to be located at the main library of a large urban public library system. In contrast,
the multi-modal interactive exhibits do not create their own culture. They are located in a much
smaller, two-library system. They are integral to the library; they do not operate as a service
separated by physical barriers or a service that requires specialized staff. Located in the
children’s area of the library, all of the staff members are familiar with them. Many different
staff members are also responsible for their maintenance. The multi-modal interactive exhibits
are integral to the library; they do not operate as a service separated by physical barriers or a
service that requires specialized staff.
The fact that entrepreneurial activities and services can create their own cultures is
supported by the idea of multiple cultures or sub-cultures existing within an organization (Cooke
& Rousseau, 1988). Cornwall and Pearlman (1990) acknowledge that “Entrepreneurial
organizations struggle with multiple cultures all the time.” It is interesting to note that different
cultures exist for entrepreneurial activities and services when there are physical barriers in terms
of where the activities or services are located, and even more so when the organization is larger.

268

Although this is outside the scope of this study, it is possible that the branch libraries at libraries
B and D have different cultures than the main library due to the physical separation.
Additionally, most of the entrepreneurial activities and services at libraries B and D are at the
main libraries, and not at the library branch locations.
Cornwall and Pearlman (1990) also note that “Managers in an entrepreneurial
organization want all its multiple cultures to serve an entrepreneurial strategy.” In the libraries
studied, the entrepreneurial activities and services are part of the libraries’ strategic directions.22
The entrepreneurial activities and services help the libraries meet either specific or broader goals
on their strategic plans. Also, all four libraries are planning to engage in entrepreneurial activities
and services in the future.
Entrepreneurship in the Organization
The overarching question of whether the libraries have an entrepreneurial organizational
culture is more difficult to answer. Although the libraries do not necessarily have an
entrepreneurial organizational culture throughout the entire system, they do have organizational
cultures that support entrepreneurship. The directors and managers differed on which
characteristics they selected from Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) list of ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization. The answers among managers at libraries A and B differed the
most from each other due to the fact that they serve the library in different capacities (but all
cover entrepreneurship) and view the organization from different perspectives. They observe the
characteristics through the lens of their area of responsibility or through the departments that
they manage. The two managers at library D are part of the same department, work together

22

This is true for libraries A, B, and D. At the time of data collection, the director at library E declined to share a
strategic plan because the library was working on a new plan. At this time, the updated strategic plan is still not
available on the library website.

269

closely, and view the organization through a similar lens. The investigator interviewed only one
manager at library E and did not have a comparison.
According to Cornwall and Pearlman (1990), culture is a key determinant of
entrepreneurial activity within an organization. Based on the characteristics selected by directors
and managers, the four libraries have many, if not all, of the ten characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization. In addition, management style is also a critical factor in the
development of innovation and entrepreneurial behavior in an organization (Zhao, 2005).
According to this author, the drive for innovation usually comes from senior-level management.
Further, managers help foster innovation and an entrepreneurial culture by doing things such as
rewarding innovative efforts, allocating necessary resources for projects, encouraging and
nurturing new product development, and being accepting of innovation and entrepreneurship
within the organization.
All the directors support entrepreneurship, and all of the managers also help to support
entrepreneurship within the organization. Slevin and Covin (1990) note that a supportive
organizational structure and culture are necessary “to back up […] risk taking, proactivity, and
innovation” (p. 44) that often accompanies entrepreneurship. In the interviews with both the
directors and managers, discussion of risk taking, innovation, and the need for staff to be
proactive came up multiple times. Other authors (Cornwall & Perlman, 1990; Zhao, 2005)
emphasize that engaging in entrepreneurship is difficult without an organizational culture that
supports entrepreneurship. This is true especially if entrepreneurship is viewed as revenue
generating. Although some of the directors and managers identified areas for improvement, all of
the libraries have organizational cultures supportive of entrepreneurship.

270

Based on Neal’s (2001) typology adapted for public libraries by Jusic (2013), all of the
directors and managers agree that entrepreneurship is engrained in the organization, to some
extent. They identified some categories from the typology in which they believe the library
should improve. Their answers may be influenced by the type of work each individual engages in
within the organization and the types of challenges her or she encounters as the person oversee
the entrepreneurial activities and services. For example, the perspectives of the directors are
different than those of managers. Directors must often consider the “bigger picture,” taking into
account the library’s mission, vision, and whether the library is meeting strategic priorities.
Additionally, directors have to contend with the external political landscape and how support,
lack of support, budget cuts, or changes in policies affect the library system. Managers often
focus on the work of their department or unit, and view the challenges in relation to that and to
the specific entrepreneurial activities or services they oversee. They do not have to consider
whether the library is meeting all of its strategic priorities. Thus, they see the challenges and
areas for improvement, especially as related to the typology, from a different perspective than the
directors.
Conclusion
Although each library has unique challenges in continuing an entrepreneurial direction,
and some of the libraries have areas in which to improve, entrepreneurship continues to flourish
at each library due to director support and an organizational culture that supports
entrepreneurship. The findings linking organizational culture to entrepreneurship indicate the
types of changes the directors have made since starting in the position to support
entrepreneurship better, and the types of challenges they face at the libraries. All of them have
continued to support entrepreneurship in the libraries and have created or continued a culture that

271

supports entrepreneurship by encouraging innovation, risk taking, and staff being proactive and
accepting failure.
The managers’ perspectives, offer a deeper understanding of entrepreneurship at each
library as it relates to organizational cultures. The challenges faced by the managers who oversee
the entrepreneurial activities and services are viewed from an operational level. They indicate
areas for improvement related to the entrepreneurial activities and services and recognize that, at
times, there are tensions between entrepreneurial activities and services and the rest of the
organization. In the case of some libraries, the entrepreneurial activities and services create their
own culture, which differs from the culture of the organization as a whole. The managers also
observe areas for improvement in a different way from the directors, and their comments
enhance the understanding of the entrepreneurial activities and services at the libraries.
The next chapter provides details on plans that the directors have for future engagement
in entrepreneurship, including adding new entrepreneurial activities and services. In some
instances, the entrepreneurial activities or services will be revenue generating. The chapter also
examines how the library’s plans to engage in entrepreneurship in the future relate to the
libraries’ strategic priorities, including whether entrepreneurship is explicitly or implicitly a part
of the libraries’ strategic plans, and what this may mean for the future of entrepreneurial
activities and services at the libraries.

272

References
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2013). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership
(5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral norms and expectations: A quantitative
approach to the assessment of organizational culture. Group & Organization Studies,
13(3), 245-273.
Cornwall, J. R., & Perlman, B. (1990). Organizational entrepreneurship. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Myers, K., & Sadaghiani, K. (2010). Millennials in the workplace: A communication perspective
on Millennials’ organizational relationships and performance. Journal of Business &
Psychology, 25(2), 225-238.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1, 1-13.
Schein, E. H. (2010). Organizational culture and leadership (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Schein, E. H. (1983). The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational
Dynamics, 12(1), 13-28.
Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M. G., & Macey, W. H. (2013). Organizational climate and culture.
Annual Review of Psychology, 64(1), 361-388.
Slevin, D. P., & Covin, J. G. (1990). Juggling entrepreneurial style and organizational structure:
How to get your act together. Sloan Management Review, 31(2), 43-53.
Zhao, F. (2005). Exploring the synergy between entrepreneurship and innovation. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 11(1), 25-41.

273

Chapter 7
STRATEGIC PLANS AND PRIORITIES AND THE FUTURE OF ENTREPRENEURIAL
ACTIVITIES AND SERVICES AT THE FOUR LIBRARIES

This chapter discusses plans for future entrepreneurial activities and services at the
libraries studied, whether those activities align with the libraries’ strategic plans or priorities, and
why the future activities or services are entrepreneurial. Discussion then moves to comments that
managers shared about any changes to the entrepreneurial activities and services in which the
libraries are currently engaged over the next two to three years to make them more effective (to
better accomplish organizational goals) and efficient (better use of library resources). The last
section links the chapter’s findings to the professional literature.
Plans for Future Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
All the directors intend to continue to engage in entrepreneurial activities and services in
the future. Some of them were vague, merely expressing a desire for additional activities or
services, while others provided details about specific activities or services that will be
implemented in the near future. This discussion was approached through a focus on plans, an
important step in creating new entrepreneurial activities and services “so that the future does not
develop arbitrarily but in the way it was planned” (Pacios, 2004, p. 260). A “concern about
controlling the future of an organisation,” according to Pacios, might take the form of strategic or
long-range planning (p. 260). This section also examines whether the plans for future
entrepreneurial activities and services align with the libraries’ formal strategic plans or priorities.

274

Strategic Plans and Priorities
In libraries, strategic plans “focus on the community serviced by the library, and include,
among other elements, defining priorities and long-terms objectives: i.e., the priority action lines
where the library intends to focus its efforts – and therefore allocate its resources – during the
years covered by the plan” (Pacios, 2007, p. 416). Pacios goes on to explain that the library’s
priorities show the relationships between the needs of the community, services the library intends
to provide to meet those needs, and the resources necessary to achieve those needs. The library’s
priorities can vary and depend on what the library wishes to focus on in a specific time period.
Thus, the priorities might change when the library develops a new strategic plan.
Bielavitz (2011) describes strategic plans as “an organization’s formal articulation of its
priorities and activities,” (pp. 2-3) while Saunders (2016) writes that strategic plans “set the
direction of an organization for the near term, outlining priority areas and perhaps objectives or
action steps for accomplishing goals” (p. 3). A library’s strategic priorities are a component of its
strategic plan. It is also worth noting that, since there is no standard definition for a strategic
plan, the terminology, content, and structure differ (Buchanan & Cousins, 2012).
The directors at libraries A and B shared their library’s strategic plans. The formats for
both plans are not the same. Library A’s plan presents the library’s vision, mission, core values,
and core services. Next, it contains five overarching goals, which in this case are the library’s
strategic priorities. Each written goal has specific objectives and each objective has action items.
The plan concludes with information on the process the library used to develop the plan. Library
B’s plan outlines three strategic directions for the library, which are its strategic priorities. Each
strategic direction has a number of written goals and there are action items listed under each
goal. The director at library D provided eight strategic priorities in lieu of a detailed strategic

275

plan. According to the director, everything the library does has to relate to the strategic priorities.
Library E was in the process of developing a new strategic plan at the time of the data collection
interviews; the director did not share the plan with the investigator because it was not yet
complete.
Library A
The director contends that there will be either the same or a greater level of emphasis on
entrepreneurial activities and services over the next couple of years. She would like to find
another stable revenue stream similar to the passport service or café. At this time, the library
does not have any concrete plans for future entrepreneurial activities or services. However, the
director is continuously exploring options, evaluating possibilities, and listening to staff feedback
where entrepreneurship is concerned.
The director, an internal candidate, was involved with the creation of the current strategic
plan while in her previous position. Appointed director in late 2014, at the time of data collection
she had served as director for approximately 15 months. The library’s strategic plan is in effect
until 2017. Entrepreneurship is aligned with the library’s strategic plan in the areas of innovation
and revenue generation. Two of the three entrepreneurial activities and services in which the
library currently engages (Friends of the Library bookshop and the passport services) are listed
as core library services in the plan. Further, the strategic plan aspires to engage in
entrepreneurship through two of the library’s written goals: (1) “promoting learning at all ages
and all stages of life,” and (2) “pursuing the library’s financial sustainability.” One of the items
listed under the first written goal is for the library to “serve as an incubator for ideas and
innovation.” This item supports engaging in innovation as a component of entrepreneurship. The
second written goal addresses revenue generation. One of the items listed here is to “seek new

276

and innovative sources of revenues that are appropriate for a public library.” This supports the
desire to find another stable revenue stream. A second item is to support the Friends of the
Library and their bookshop, which serves as a current revenue stream1 for the library.
Library B
The director plans to implement three new entrepreneurial activities and services. The
first is leasing space for a storefront to a nationally-recognized cell phone retailer within the
main library. The necessary contracts have already been signed and the library is awaiting the
installation. The second is a café. The library already has an empty space, where a café
previously operated. In the future, the director plans to work with a nonprofit agency to operate
the café as a job skills training program, while delivering service to library customers. According
to the director, this would comprise a social good. The director does not anticipate revenue
generation from this activity; as she explained, café services inside public libraries are not
usually lucrative.2 She views this service as an innovative way to solve the empty space problem.
Third, the director is pursuing the expansion of a library space into a large auditorium that can
seat 800 people. While the library already rents meeting rooms to the public, this expansion
would create a location that could be used for hosting conferences and major events, and this
would be a revenue generator for the library. The director believes the library could generate a
greater amount of revenue by charging groups or organizations to use the large space than by
renting smaller meeting rooms to the public.

1

The Friends of the Library support the library via funds raised from the celebrity author program and the
bookshop. This funding supports library programs.
2
Luis Herrera and Jan Sanders, both public library directors, confirmed this. The cafés at their libraries are a value
added service for library users, add to the users’ overall library experience, and help make the library a destination
(L. Herrera, personal communication, April 30, 2016; J. Sanders, personal communication, April 30, 2016).

277

This director was an external candidate, who, at the time of data collection, had been in
the position for approximately five years. She participated in the creation of the current strategic
plan, which expires in mid-2016; at the time of data collection, the plan had approximately six
months left before expiring. The plan has specific goals related to the entrepreneurial activities
and services in which the library currently engages. However, it does not reflect thinking about
new entrepreneurial activities and services. The current strategic plan has one broad goal that can
be reflective of future entrepreneurial endeavors, which is to “continue to improve services,
programs and processes to better meet the needs of our customers.” This can be applied in broad
terms because the library will be “improving services” by the addition of a café. The director
mentioned that the library is working on a new strategic plan, which will include updated
mission and vision statements, and will address entrepreneurship.
Library D
The library is planning to open a business and career center and to create a makerspace
mobile, which will be a portable makerspace that travels to different communities. Both of these
services will attract sponsorships, but will not generate direct revenue. The business and career
center, with completion expected in 2016, will be located at the main library, with satellite
locations at the branch libraries. This service features classes and workshops, specialized
collections focused on business resources, and collaborative workspaces and meeting rooms
equipped with technology, productivity software, and laptops and tablets for checkout.
The planning for the makerspace service started in 2015, and at the time of data
collection, the library was planning to seek a bid. Manager D1 estimated that it is likely to be
ready by early 2017. This manager describes the makerspace vehicle as a “21st century
bookmobile” and the “biggest endeavor in a line of activities” the library offers focused on

278

STEAM programming. It will provide hands-on technology learning for all ages. In addition, the
makerspace mobile will allow the library to offer programing and activities in locations that do
not have a library nearby or for customers who are uncomfortable traveling to the library.
Manager D1 adds that there is a need for “hands on technology learning,” especially in
the geographic location where this library is located, “in order [for people] to be able to
participate in the heavily technology-focused economy of this area.” She adds that the library
uses design thinking practices for the makerspace mobile. This includes brainstorming,
prototyping potential programming in the community that would be offered on the vehicle, and
testing concepts, which will be used to inform the final design of the vehicle. She reveals that
this is the opposite of many design processes because the library focuses on programming needs
and how the makerspace mobile meets the community’s needs, which will be considered during
the final design of the vehicle.
The makerspace mobile is intended to reach underserved, lower-income neighborhoods,
English as a Second Language learners, first generation Americans, the homeless, and seniors.
Manager D1 said the city is opening homeless housing and engaging these individuals in realworld skill building. Using the makerspace mobile service, the library can travel to this homeless
housing area to offer STEAM-based programming and activities. Another idea is to take the
makerspace mobile to a school in an underserved area, and then encourage teachers to use the
space for their students. The library would provide the access to the technology and equipment
that the students do not have access to at the school, and teachers can use this opportunity to
create interactive STEAM-based lessons.
The director indicated that this service is being funded “through other resources,” which
are not coming directly from the library budget. However, she did not specifically identify those

279

resources. There is a proposal in the next budget planning process to fund the makerspace mobile
to support staffing, equipment, instruction, and programming. The library’s goal is to make this
service sustainable in the long-term, which may require reallocation of staff from other
departments and/or the addition of staff. The library will also rely on sponsorships from the
private sector. According to Manager D2, the library plans to allocate a space on the vehicle to
feature sponsor names. This additional support will help the library provide the type of service
with the makerspace mobile that it would be unable to provide with city funding for the project,
which is likely to be limited.
Managers D1 and D2 would like to hire a full-time librarian (with an MLIS degree), a
bilingual staff member, and support staff for the makerspace mobile. Manager D1 identified
several ideal attributes that the makerspace mobile staff should possess: programming
experience, ability to teach technology-related classes to small groups, sharp, fast learning
abilities, a flexible and patient attitude, and technology troubleshooting expertise. In addition to
deploying staff on the makerspace mobile, the managers would also like to engage volunteers to
help with programming.
The director noted that everything the library does must align with the library’s strategic
priorities. The library’s entrepreneurial service, the summer reading mobile application (now
discontinued), aligned with three priorities: (1) increas[ing] access by “try[ing] new methods to
access content,” (2) “enrich[ing] life-long learning programs and services for all ages,” and (3)
“connect[ing] people to current technology and tools.” Future entrepreneurial activities and
services also align with those priorities and may align with the additional priority of seeking and
strengthening partnerships that enhance services if the library finds suitable partners for the
business and career center and the makerspace mobile.

280

Library E
When the library was constructed, the 16,000 square-foot second floor of the library was
left as an empty and unfinished space which would be filled in the future. The library now plans
to use that area as a children’s discovery space, which would be a “highly intense interactive
learning experience” that is a “combination of a children’s museum meets public library.” At the
time of data collection, the library had just started phase one of construction: tenant
improvements and creation of the first part of the children’s discovery experience. This will
include an open programming space, art room, classroom, STEAM lab, and early learning center.
The director hopes that the spaces created during the first stage “will evoke a feeling of what is
to come in the future.” She adds that some of the programs the library plans to offer on the
second floor in the future, such as multi-week art classes or a robotics camp, will be fee based.
This revenue generation will allow the library to offer a variety of programs and activities and
refresh the space as needed. For instance, the library can add new components to the space3 and
offer new programs. This will ensure that the space meets community needs but also offers
something new and exciting to users over time.
The director did not provide access to the library’s current strategic plan, which is not
available on the library’s website. She mentioned that the library, at the time of data collection,
was working on an updated strategic plan which she could not share because it was in progress.
Throughout the data collection interview, the director mentioned that the library engages in
entrepreneurship as a means of serving the community better and that meeting the community’s
needs was a priority for the library. She also added that entrepreneurship will be included in the
new strategic plan in some capacity.
3

The new components could include changing the physical layout of a section of the second floor, adding a new
interactive area, or designing a new space for a specific activity or program.

281

Why the Future Activities and Services Are Entrepreneurial
Table 7.1, which lists the entrepreneurial activities and services that the libraries might
introduce in the near future, indicates how the categories apply to each of the activities or
services, and explains why each entrepreneurial activity or service is entrepreneurial.
Table 7.1
Future entrepreneurial activities and services
Entrepreneurial activity

Category

Why activities or services are

or service
Business and career center

considered entrepreneurial
•

Activity and service that

•

Organization went through a

does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service

•

Activity and service that is
non-revenue generating,
but adds value

Café operates as a job skills •

Activity and service that is

training program

non-revenue generating,

process of discovery,

but adds value

evaluation, and exploitation

•

Organization went through a

of opportunities to create a
new service
Children’s discovery space
on second floor of library

•

Activity and service that
directly generates revenue

282

•

Organization went through a
process of discovery,

evaluation, and exploitation
of opportunities to create a
new service
•

Generates revenue (library
will charge for some
programs, classes, or
activities)

Expand space within

•

library to create large

Activity and service that

•

directly generates revenue

Generates revenue (library
receives revenue from space

auditorium that can seat up

rental)

to 800 people
Makerspace mobile

•

Activity and service that

•

Organization went through a

does not generate revenue,

process of discovery,

but provides a new product

evaluation, and exploitation

or service

of opportunities to create a
new service

•

Activity and services that
is non-revenue generating,
but adds value

Rental of library space to
nationally-recognized cell

•

Activity and service that
directly generates revenue

phone retailer

•

Generates revenue (library
receives revenue from space
rental)

283

Three of the new entrepreneurial activities and services will generate revenue for two
libraries. Library B, which does not currently generate revenue from any of its entrepreneurial
services, plans to add two activities or services that will generate direct revenue for the library.
The first is the expansion of an area within the main library into an auditorium which can seat up
to 800 people. This has the potential to be a good source of revenue for the library because it is
located downtown in a large metropolitan area and a number of different entities can potentially
rent the space, including businesses, nonprofit organizations, conferences, or even nearby
universities. The second activity, which is the rental of a library space to a nationally-recognized
cell phone retailer, will provide the library with a steady and predictable revenue source from the
rent.
Library E, which generates revenue from the sale of its multi-modal interactive exhibits
and from its passport service, plans to generate revenue from charging for selected programs,
classes, or activities which will be offered in the children’s discovery space on the second floor.
The director’s comments suggest that the main use for the additional revenue will be to offer new
programs and activities in the space, and the space will be updated as necessary. However, it is
too early to predict the amount of revenue that will be generated. If the amount generated
exceeds what is needed to support the space, it is possible that the library would use some of the
money to support other library programs and services.
Library D does not intend to generate revenue from future entrepreneurial activities and
services, and the director is firm in her belief that library customers should not be charged for
any services. However, she recognizes that city funding alone is insufficient for the types of
services the library wants to offer, especially for the two planned entrepreneurial services: the

284

business and career center and the makerspace mobile. For this reason, the library plans to offer
sponsorship opportunities as a way to partially fund the two services.
Managers’ Comments Related to Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
The managers commented on whether there is a need for any changes over the next two
to three years to the entrepreneurial activities and services in which the libraries currently
engage, to make them more effective (accomplish organizational goals) and efficient (better use
of library resources). Manager A1 is not sure that existing services require any changes. The café
is established, and the library cannot make any changes to the passport service due to
government regulations. This manager adds that in the next few years, the library needs to add
more services that will generate revenue. Manager A2 does not identify specific areas for
improving current entrepreneurial activities and services but recognizes the need for the library
to monitor community needs and trends, as those may require making changes to entrepreneurial
activities and services in the future.
Manager A3 would like to see more employees think entrepreneurially about library
services. He believes that manager A1 is a great model of this, indicating that she has been hiring
“terrific people in the last year and is transforming her department.” Perhaps the new employees
with help the library develop with new revenue generating activities or services, something with
which the library is currently struggling. Another revenue generating activity or service would
help the library by decreasing the need for fundraising. The administration prefers that the library
generate revenue from entrepreneurial activities and services rather than via fundraising by
asking for donations. A revenue generating activity or service is not as one-sided as asking for a
donation because it offers an amenity or service to library users. Manager A3 contends that the
library seeks to “offer something and get money that is sustainable and more long-term.” He

285

would like to see sustained revenue from an entrepreneurial activity or services “outside the
traditional library box,” but believes this will be a challenge.
Manager A4, the manager of the Friends of the Library bookshop, would like to improve
the volunteer management system. She describes this as the “weakest link” in the way the
bookshop operates. Not everyone receives a guidebook, instructions, and a solid understanding
of the goals, which is something that can affect business. The manager intends to improve this in
the future. She would also like for volunteers to become empowered and flexible. Finally, this
manager wants the library to promote the bookshop more, perhaps at the end of library programs
such as storytime. These improvements could potentially help the Friends of the Library
bookshop generate more revenue.
Manager B1 believes that no changes are needed for the college access center. However,
now that the pilot of the reengagement service is complete, she believes the next steps are to
expand this service, execute a press launch, and market the service to attract more users.
Manager B2 would like to see less bureaucracy in the organization overall. She would like to
expand the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs to one or two branch libraries
on a smaller scale. She states: “The library is all about access to services and 50% of patrons live
at [the] poverty level. They rely on public transportation so we have to take services to them.”
Manager B3 believes the makerspace requires dedicated staff to improve communication about
what this space offers to staff and the public, and to be able to offer more programs. Manager B4
believes there is room for improvement, but does not offer any specific details. In general, she
thinks the library should always strive for improvement and to be more effective and efficient.
Within the next few years, manager D1 believes the library should make sure that it
evaluates pilot programs, including those applying to future entrepreneurial activities and

286

services, to determine “when to stop and when to expand […]. Something can be successful but
doesn’t need to continue. You can take learning aspects from that and use it to start something
else.” A new service may start as a pilot program, and, after careful evaluation, the library may
decide to discontinue it based on a number of factors. As entrepreneurial activities or services
require the investment of resources and staff time, it is important to consider whether they truly
meet a community need or achieve a desired goal over a long period of time, and, thus, whether
it is worthwhile for the library to continue engaging in the activity or offering the service.
Manager D1 believes the library must develop its approach to sponsorships, including
corporate sponsorships, because this will be essential to funding the entrepreneurial services the
library plans to offer in the future. According to this manager, the library’s funding per capita is
much lower than comparable public libraries. He states:
We do a lot with those modest resources for a huge population over a million
people over a great number of square miles. In order to do more of this, I think
… [the library] will really have to engage in a focused effort to develop
corporate sponsorships within the organization. In libraries in the past there has
been resistance to corporate partnerships, but it will be essential.
The library has taken steps in this direction, but does not have ongoing or large-scale
sponsorships.
Manager E asserts, “Entrepreneurial activities are going to manifest themselves in
different ways.” He believes that the library continually focuses on its rationale for engaging in
an activity, which is meeting community needs, because any activity must benefit the
community, and not necessarily generate revenue. Over the next few years, the library will focus
on the second floor space. The manager says the space will be “more of an attraction rather than
a typical library service.” The library has a great deal of work to do with the space, but it will be

287

an exciting addition for both the library and the community. The manager did not specify
improvements to the current entrepreneurial activities and services in which the library engages.
Linkage to Literature
The libraries’ strategic plans articulate or outline priority areas (Bielavitz, 2011;
Saunders, 2016). The strategic plans for libraries A and B feature strategic priorities, although in
the written plans they are identified as goals for library A and a strategic direction for library B.
Library D only has eight identified strategic priorities, rather than a comprehensive strategic
plan.4 These three libraries use the strategic plans and/or identified priorities to focus on the
library’s future. Strategic plans and strategic priorities “recognize the importance of focusing on
the relationships between an organization and its environment and stakeholders” (Dougherty,
2002, p. 38), as well as add a future orientation and the ability to respond to rapidly changing and
uncertain environments (Bednarz, 2007).
Pacios (2007) describes the priorities as showing the relationship between the needs of
the community and services the library intends to provide to meet those needs.5 This is evident in
all three libraries. For example, one of the goals listed in the strategic plan for library B is to
expand access for youth to activities that promote 21st century skills. The library intends to
accomplish this by developing and implementing STEAM-based programs, some of which are
directly tied to the makerspace in the main library. As identified by Manager B3, the library
needs a dedicated staff for the makerspace to provide more programming, and this is something
the library needs to improve in the future to meet the needs for STEAM-based programs better.
One of the strategic priorities at library D is to “connect people to current technology and tools.”

4

The strategic plan for library E was unavailable.
According to Pacios (2007), the relationship also includes the resourced needed to provide the services. However,
the strategic plans for libraries A and B, and the strategic priorities for library D do not identify needed the specific
resources needed to provide services to the community.
5

288

The makerspace mobile currently under development is an example of a service that will help
connect people to current technology and tools that will be available on the vehicle.
Saunders (2016) mentions that strategic plans sometimes include objectives and action
steps and Buchanan and Cousins (2012) outline the core components of a strategic plan.6 Library
A follows this general outline of a strategic plan most closely. The strategic plan for library B
excludes the vision and mission, but lists a strategic direction (the library’s strategic priorities),
along with goals, and action items. The way goals are used in the strategic plans of libraries B
and D differs. At library A, the written goals are general and seem to be strategic priorities,
whereas at library B the written goals are more specific. Library D has only strategic priorities.
The strategic plans and/or strategic priorities at all three libraries relate to current, and, in the
case of libraries A and D, future entrepreneurial activities and services. The strategic plan at
library B expires in at the end of June 2016, but the director indicated the next strategic plan will
include entrepreneurship in some form.
Revenue Generation
Although some directors expressed reservations about revenue generation as part of
Jusic’s (2013) definition of entrepreneurial leadership, libraries B and E are planning future
activities and services which will generate revenue. Library A has no concrete plans for
additional activities and services, but the director specified that revenue generation is highly
desired and that she is actively searching for an activity or service that will be revenue
generating. The directors at libraries A, B, and E recognize the need for additional funds for the
library via revenue generation. The director at library D does not plan to pursue any revenue
generating activities but acknowledges the need for the library to obtain additional resources,

6

The core components of a strategic plan, according to Buchanan and Cousins (2012), are vision, mission, goals,
objectives, and action plans.

289

which it plans to do via partnerships and sponsorships for specific entrepreneurial activities and
services.
The director at library D does not favor activities or services which directly generate
revenue. This reaction is consistent with the literature, which indicates that there is less focus on
revenue generation when entrepreneurship applies to the public sector (Drucker, 1985; Gartner,
1990). Nonprofit organizations can use entrepreneurship to look for non-traditional means of
funding, such as library D which plans to seek sponsorship opportunities. Although there is less
focus on revenue generation in the public sector, it is not uncommon. According to Foster and
Bradach (2005), earned-income initiatives are becoming increasingly common in nonprofit
organizations. However, “earned income accounts for only a small share of funding in most
nonprofit domains and few of the ventures that have been launched actually make money”
(Foster & Bradach, 2005, p. 94). The authors provide an example of two nonprofit organizations
that were successful in their income earning endeavors, but caution that the organizations are
exceptions. While it is possible for a nonprofit organization to have good financial returns, it is
not always the case.
Foster & Bradach (2005) acknowledge that non-profit organizations must focus on both
financial and non-financial concerns and must consider a number of factors, such as whether the
venture the organization wants to engage in contributes to the organization’s core mission and
what resources are required for the venture. Non-profit organizations that engage in ventures to
generate revenue must carefully consider if the revenue generating activity is worthwhile.
Innovation
Innovation is a characteristic of entrepreneurship (Drucker, 1985; Schumpeter 1934a;
1934b, Sharma & Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990), and some of the future

290

entrepreneurial activities and services include innovation. Library A specifically mentions
innovation in its strategic plan. For libraries B, D, and E, innovation is a component of some of
the future entrepreneurial activities and services. Zhao (2005) defines innovation as including
“new products, new processes, new services (including new uses of established products,
processes and services), new forms of organization, new markets, and the development of new
skills and human capital” (pp. 27-28). This definition of innovation applies to all the future
entrepreneurial activities and services that the libraries have planned in some capacity.
Baregheh et al. (2009) provide a cross-disciplinary definition of innovation7 as well as a
diagrammatic definition (see Figure 1.1). The diagrammatic definition consists of six attributes8
which they identified as being common in the various cross-discipline definitions of innovation.
The authors define the attributes as follows:
•

Nature of innovation refers to the form of innovation as in something new or
improved.

•

Type of innovation refers to the kind of innovation as in the type of output or the
result of innovation, e.g. product or service.

•

Stages of innovation refers to all the steps taken during an innovation process which
usually start from idea generation and end with commercialization.

•

Social context refers to any social entity, system or group of people involved in the
innovation process or environmental factors affecting it.

7

Baregheh et al. (2009) define innovation as “the multi-stage process whereby organizations transform ideas into
new/improved products, services or processes, in order to advance, compete and differentiate themselves
successfully in their marketplace” (p. 1334).
8
The six attributes are: nature of innovation, type of innovation, stages of innovation, social context, means of
innovation, and aim of innovation.

291

•

Means of innovation refers to the necessary resources (e.g. technical, creative,
financial) that need to be in place for innovation.

•

Aim of innovation is the overall result that the organizations want to achieve through
innovation. (pp. 1331-1332)

Both the cross-disciplinary and the diagrammatic definitions of innovation apply to some of the
future activities and services in which the libraries plan to engage. For example, library B as an
organization (social) is creating (stage) a new (nature) product and service (type) using ideas,
creativity, and technology (means) to differentiate themselves and succeed (aim). It is important
to mention that the model is meant to capture the essence of innovation and present a possible
flow for the process of innovation, but it is not necessarily linear. That is, the attributes do not
have to be listed in a specific order.
Innovation applies to some of the future entrepreneurial activities and services to a
greater extent than others. However, all of the future activities and services in which the libraries
might engage are entrepreneurial. Table 7.1 details why each activity or service is
entrepreneurial. Each activity either generates revenue or is the result of the organization going
through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to create a new
service. The makerspace mobile will not generate revenue, but it is an example of the library
developing a new service. The creation of this service required the library to go through a
process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities. The library is meeting a
community need by providing the service, the design of the vehicle will undergo constant
evaluation (as will the finished product), and the library must take advantage of sponsorship
opportunities to help fund the service.

292

Conclusion
All of the libraries plan to continue their involvement in entrepreneurial activities and
services, with three of them having plans for additional activities and services, some of which
might be revenue generating. The future entrepreneurial activities and services are already a part
of the strategic plans or priorities at libraries A and D. Libraries B and D are in the process of
creating new strategic plans, and both directors indicated that entrepreneurship will be a part of
the new strategic plans in some capacity. This inclusion is not only an important factor in
supporting entrepreneurship in the organization, but also emphasizes its importance to staff and
other stakeholders.
Entrepreneurial activities and services that the libraries plan to engage in the future such
as the makerspace mobile or the children’s discovery space may be indicative of the types of
services other libraries may want to provide in the future. The services meet the needs of each
library’s community and will provide interactive STEAM-based programming. Although
information about the services is useful, it is notable that current and future entrepreneurial
activities and services are a part of the library’s strategic plan and/or strategic priorities. Strategic
plans and priorities are important because they “identify the current focus of the institution,
determine future directions, and establish strategies for achieving goals” (Saunders, 2016, p. 5).
It is critical for the libraries to link entrepreneurial activities and services to a strategic plan or
strategic priorities because it demonstrates that entrepreneurship is a current focus for the
institution, that entrepreneurship will be included in the future directions, and because a strategic
plan will help the library establish strategies for achieving their goals of implementing new
entrepreneurial activities or services. Including entrepreneurship in the library’s strategic plan

293

indicates to the staff, community, and other stakeholders that entrepreneurship is and will be a
part of the library’s future.
The next chapter expands on five major themes that emerged from the research: customer
service, community needs and focus, the definition of entrepreneurial leadership, innovation, and
organizational culture as it relates to entrepreneurship. The chapter also suggest areas for further
research and concludes the dissertation.

294

References
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of
innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.
Bednarz, J. J. (2007). The future of planning. Library Administration & Management, 21(2), 6569.
Bielavitz, T. (2011). A content analysis of the strategic plans of the coalition of urban serving
universities' academic libraries. Urban Library Journal, 17(1), 1-19.
Buchanan, S. S., & Cousins, F. (2012). Evaluating the strategic plans of public libraries: An
inspection-based approach. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 125-130.
Dougherty, R. M. (2002). Planning for new library futures. Library Journal, 127(9), 38-41.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Foster, W., & Bradach, J. (2005). Should nonprofits seek profits? Harvard Business Review,
83(2), 92-100.
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Pacios, A. R. (2007). The priorities of public libraries at the onset of the third millennium.
Library Management, 28(6/7), 416-427.
Pacios, A. R. (2004). Strategic plans and long-range plans: Is there a difference? Library
Management, 25(6/7), 259-269.
Saunders, L. (2016). Room for improvement: Priorities in academic libraries’ strategic plans.
Journal of Library Administration, 56(1), 1-16.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934a). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. London, UK: Ruskin House.

295

Schumpeter, J. A. (1934b). The theory of economic development (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, C. J. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5), 17-27.
Zhao, F. (2005). Exploring the synergy between entrepreneurship and innovation. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 11(1), 25-41.

296

Chapter 8
CONCLUSION

The previous chapters explore entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial leadership,
innovation, the entrepreneurial activities and services in which the four libraries engage, a
changing organizational culture, and the libraries’ future plans for engaging in entrepreneurial
activities and services. This chapter provides a brief overview of the findings and examines
themes that underscore the libraries’ approaches to serving their communities via the
entrepreneurial activities and services in which they engage. It also reflects on study
implications, recommends areas for further research, and reiterates the value of the study.
Brief Overview
The directors at all four libraries support and nurture entrepreneurship. The extent of that
support and the extent to which entrepreneurship increases vary due to a number of factors,
among which are changes in the organization since the director assumed the position, the size of
the organization, the organizational culture, and previous commitment to entrepreneurial
activities and services in the organization. The directors at libraries B and D have been at their
libraries for a longer period of time and, thus, have had more time to implement changes;
consequently entrepreneurship is manifested to a greater degree, in new activities and services.
Both of these directors lead large urban public library systems in which entrepreneurship and
innovation do not exist in all facets of the organization. These systems have a number of
departments and branch libraries, and multiple cultures or sub-cultures are more likely.
Entrepreneurship is engrained at each library, but not throughout the organization, and both the
directors and managers see areas for improvement (see Chapter 7). Still, innovation may occur

297

outside entrepreneurial activities and services. This is true, for instance, with circulation
departments, which are process oriented, where interactions with customers usually involve the
issuing of library cards, item check-out, item return, payment of fines, and item renewal.
Innovation within circulation departments is possible, but it would likely involve improving a
process. With a service such as the discovery space for small business and entrepreneurs,
customer interactions are usually more time intensive and involved, and there are opportunities
for creativity and innovation. Although the directors at libraries A and E support
entrepreneurship, they had not made many changes at the time of the interviews. Both of them
had been in the position for approximately one year, with director E having been there the
shortest amount of time.
All four directors view entrepreneurship as essential to the directions the libraries are
taking; entrepreneurship remains a focus of new activities and services, and, in some cases,
involves revenue generation. The role of being an entrepreneurial leader is not limited to the
director; some of the managers self-identify93 as entrepreneurial leaders or are so identified by
the director or other managers. Managers contribute by their dedication to entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial services, community outreach, and continual efforts to improve services.
The organizational cultures have changed at libraries B and D due to a number of
reasons, one of which is in order to support entrepreneurship better. At library A, the culture is
changing. The director at library B supports entrepreneurial activities in the organization, as
demonstrated by the addition of the discovery space for small business and entrepreneurs and the
makerspace. The director at library D, as part of a restructuring effort, created an office of
innovation, which includes an innovation projects manager. This position encourages and

93

This is likely due to the nature of their positions; the managers oversee the entrepreneurial activities or services.

298

supports entrepreneurship and innovation by creating and managing project teams and finding
resources, partnerships, and funding for projects. The director at library A encourages staff to
take initiative and be more comfortable with risk taking where entrepreneurship and innovation
are concerned. Although the organizational culture had not changed at library E at the time of the
interviews, there is a strong likelihood, based on director and manager comments, that it will
change as time passes.94 Libraries B and D are now more entrepreneurial, and libraries A and E
are about the same as under the leadership of the previous directors, with plans to become more
entrepreneurial in the next several years.
Common Themes
The following five themes emerge from the study’s findings: (1) customer service is a
priority at each library, (2) each library is focused on community needs and the entrepreneurial
activities and services are often a response to specific community needs, (3) a revision of the
definition of entrepreneurial leadership that addresses partnerships and the need for external
resources to support the entrepreneurial services is necessary, (4) innovation is present at the
libraries within entrepreneurial activities and services and also in other areas of the organization,
and, (5) despite changes in leadership, which had a direct effect on organizational structure and
culture, entrepreneurship still flourishes. The next five sections expand on these themes.
Customer Service
All of the directors and managers view customer service as a high priority, and believe it
shapes the organizational culture. The director at library A allows circulation staff to make book
recommendations to library users, a change from the previous director. The circulation staff also

94

At the time of the data collection interviews, library E was in the process of restructuring the organization and
hiring new managers due to retirements for three of the senior level management positions. The library is also
working on creating a children’s discovery space in the previously empty second floor space; this will include
revenue generation. These things have the potential to influence the organizational culture over time.

299

share with the users which items circulate most frequently. The circulation staff do not have to
redirect users to a librarian as they did in the past. These changes empower the circulation staff
and may improve the customer experience.
The customer service emphasis extends to entrepreneurial activities and services.
Manager A2, who manages the passport service, states: “Customer service is highly valued,” and
stresses that the passport employees do what they can to help customers. Manager A3, who
manages the Friends of the Library bookshop, describes the bookshop as “very customer
oriented.” The focus on customer service is embedded in the culture of both entrepreneurial
services.
Another factor affecting customer service at the libraries is that the directors and
managers understand the importance of providing a positive experience for library users,
recognize the library’s role in serving the public, and understand the necessity of building
positive relationships within the community. The director at library B states: “Everyone is
focused on customer service. That is why we are here. Everyone knows that.” The director
believes that the entrepreneurial services have a positive impact on library users, and make a
difference in their lives. Manager B4 mentions that it is important to provide customer service
training to staff to “make sure every customer experience is a great one,” whether it is during a
summer reading program, using one of the entrepreneurial services, or at the various branch
library locations.
Manager B2, speaking about the discovery space for small business and entrepreneurs,
mentions that library staff created programs to meet customer needs and that the space, due to
the nature of the services it is designed to provide, requires “exceptional, Nordstrom-level
customer service and staff who ha[ve] initiative and problem-solving skills.” Customers are not

300

used to this type of customer service from libraries, and libraries, in the past, have not been
known for their customer service. This attention to detail related to the type of customer service
library users expect to receive, the manager explains, helps ensure that users get the resources
and assistance they need, and return to use the service again. This manager believes the greatest
benefit of the service is helping entrepreneurs and small business owners who have limited
access to resources. Focusing on providing a positive customer service experience and building
relationships with the community are important when launching a new service and establishing a
reputation for that service.
The makerspace at library B is another example of an entrepreneurial service where
providing good customer service is essential, both to build a reputation for the service and to
attract new customers. Manager B3 mentions that there is a “high level expectation in regard to
customer service, creativity, [and] integrity” in the youth services department, within which the
makerspace currently operates. This manager adds that customer service was a priority under the
previous director, and continues to be a priority for the current director and the entire
organization.
Part of the focus on customer service at library D manifests itself through changes in the
types of services the library offers. As the director states, “We have to really evolve the services
that we offer that benefit customers […] to accomplish our mission.” She further states that
library staff “believe in adapting to [what] the community [needs] and providing excellent
customer service.” An example of this is making sure the services the library provides benefit
customers and that the staff continually evaluate the services to determine where improvement is
needed. In some cases, it may be appropriate to discontinue a service. One of the expectations for
the entrepreneurial activities and services is that they attract new library users. The library

301

actively strives to reach customers who do not have a library nearby or who are not comfortable
going to the library. One service that will help achieve this is the makerspace mobile, which
enables service to underserved areas.
The director at library E mentioned that library users like being able to make
appointments for the passport service and that the library offers this option because it works well
for the customers in that community.95 The multi-modal interactive exhibits partially resulted
from a desire from families to have an interactive activity for their children in the library. The
multi-modal interactive exhibits are also an attraction for families and something the children
can use when not attending a scheduled library program. Staff maintain the multi-modal
interactive exhibits by cleaning them regularly and may have to tidy the exhibits several times a
day to ready them for the next group of users. The focus on customer service at this library stems
from staff understanding their role in serving the community and designing services that are
customer oriented.
The directors and managers view change as a part of providing good customer service.
As manager B2 states, “If we don’t transform and meet the customer needs people will go
elsewhere for those services and information.” Engaging in entrepreneurship helps the libraries
achieve change and to make the transformation necessary to meet community needs better.
Further, the library has to establish the reputation of the service within the community, and, in
some cases, the library depends on external partners or sponsors for service provision.
One of Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial
organization is the sense that everything the organization does has value for customers and staff.

95

Not all passport services at libraries accept appointments. The passport service at library A, for example, has
specific hours during which it is open and the passport service hours differ at the main library and the branch library.
At library A, the ability to walk-in for passport service during the specified hours works best for the customers.

302

All of the directors and managers interviewed stressed the value of this characteristic, and
believe that it is important that users get what they need from the service and that staff are
courteous and helpful.
Community Needs
The directors and managers frequently mentioned the communities they serve, often
discussing specific community needs. As they create services, the libraries make connections to
the community by reaching new customers and creating new partnerships. In some cases, these
partnerships make the services possible. For example, library B relies on partnerships to provide
some of the programs in the discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs. This service
does not generate revenue, and the library’s budget is limited. Without the partnership, the type
of programs the library offers to the public as part of the discovery space would be limited.
The libraries’ limited budgets do not provide sufficient funding for all of the
entrepreneurial services and partnering with other organizations helps to offset some of the costs
of providing the services. The directors and managers believe the role of the library is to serve
the community, beyond providing basic services such as access to collections, computers and the
Internet, and programs (e.g., storytime and author programs). The role is to provide services
specific to addressing community needs. Most of the entrepreneurial activities or services in
which the libraries engage are linked to a specific community need, and, if not linked, the library
engages in the activity or service with the expectation the community will benefit in some way.
For example, the passport services offered by libraries A and E meet a specific community need.
The café at library A does not necessarily meet a community need but is an amenity and a valueadded experience for library customers.

303

The director at library A states “Even though we monitor societal and library trends we
need to do what is right for our community.” This director recognizes the importance of
monitoring trends and evaluating potential new services, but also understands “Our community
needs always come first,” adding that she always considers how a service or activity fits the
library’s strategic plan and what the community needs before implementing new activities or
services, including entrepreneurial ones. When the library started offering naturalization
ceremonies, one of the goals was to increase revenue for the passport service, since new citizens
might want to get a U.S. passport. However, the library did not start offering naturalization
ceremonies just to increase revenue. There was a backlog in naturalization services in the city
and a desire from the community for citizenship classes. The library met this need by offering
both. Ultimately, the library discontinued this service, but continues to offer citizenship courses.
The director at library B mentions that the library constantly looks for “new and better
ways to deliver services to our community.” Being entrepreneurial helps the library achieve this.
Another important element in meeting community needs is adaptability. The community
demographics can change over time, and, thus, the types of service needed might change.
Manager B1 describes the library as “having the desire and willingness to change according to
the current needs of the community,” which is important, as is anticipating community needs.
New services are implemented, according to manager B1, because “the library sees the need in
the community.” Manager B2 states that “Any successful organization changes and tries new
things and adapts to the community.” An example of this is the makerspace. According to
manager B3, many families who regularly use the library expressed a desire for some of the
activities the makerspace now offers. This not only met a need for a specific service, but it also

304

brought new users to the library. Now, according to manager B3, some segments of the
community engage with the library “that normally wouldn’t.”
Library D also meets community needs in a variety of ways, one of which is the focus on
citizenship services. There is a large population of Spanish and Vietnamese speakers in the
community who need ESL classes as well as citizenship related resources and programs. This is
an example of a non-entrepreneurial service that the library offers. In terms of the entrepreneurial
services, the best example is the makerspace mobile, which represents a way for the library to
reach underserved populations and provide STEM-based programs. Not only will the vehicle be
able to visit schools that may not have access to the type of technology provided on the vehicle,
but it will also be able to go to locations such as homeless shelters.
The director at library E stated that the services the library offers focus directly on what
the community needs. The director mentioned that many entrepreneurial activities and services
would not happen if they did not serve community needs. The multi-modal interactive exhibits,
for example, are a result of the library “trying to do something good for the community,”
according to the director, and not because the library intended to generate revenue. The director
sees engaging in entrepreneurship as a way to do more for the community and described the
community as “our driving force.” Manager E, speaking of services, said that the library always
makes sure that the services the library offers are “meaningful and impactful for the
community.” Both the director and manager at that library frequently mentioned the community,
with the manager stating “There is an underlying understanding that we are here to serve the
community.”

305

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership
When discussing entrepreneurial activities and services (see Chapter 5), some of the
directors and managers mentioned other activities and services that have entrepreneurial
components, but these do not fit the definition and categories of entrepreneurial leadership as
presented in Table 5.1. The directors and manager do not define entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial leadership in the same way as the investigator; they do not draw their definitions
from the business and library and information science literatures. Rather, their understanding
comes from experience, personal background, observing entrepreneurship in organizations, and
definitions to which they have been exposed in the past. Some of these other activities and
services are innovative, but innovation can be viewed as a component of entrepreneurship and
innovation alone does not make an activity or service entrepreneurial. Directors and managers
are not typically very familiar with the literature on entrepreneurship and, thus, the way they
define activities or services as entrepreneurial differs from that of the investigator.
For this study, entrepreneurial leadership was defined as
creating a vision and leading the organization through a process of discovery,
evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to generate revenue streams that
reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or funding models.
(Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31)
Although all four directors concurred with the definition, two of them offered changes. The
director at library A believes a person can be an entrepreneurial leader without the funding
aspect, and the director at library D concurs, adding that being entrepreneurial can be about
generating resources rather than generating revenue. This reluctance regarding revenue
generation likely stems from several factors. First, the purpose of libraries is not to generate

306

revenue. Other than from collecting fines96, libraries have traditionally not engaged in revenue
generating activities. Second, as confirmed in the literature, there is less focus on revenue
generation in non-profit organizations (Drucker 1985; Gartner, 1990). Third, revenue generation
can place extra pressure on libraries to come up with the same amount each year in order to
continue funding services and programs at the same level.
During the Great Recession, many libraries suffered budget cuts, resulting in reduced
resources, staff, and library services or programs. For some libraries, funding has not returned to
pre-recession levels. The director at library A mentioned that, in 2010, the library could no
longer sustain the level of service and since then has had to raise $1.1 million each year in order
to offer the same level of service to the community. The director at library B acknowledged that
both funding and staff levels are unlikely to return to pre-recession levels in the foreseeable
future and that the library is trying to do more with less. Library D also suffered from budgetary
issues during the recession and had to reduce the branch library schedule to operating only four
days a week. It has only been since July 2015 that branch operations have been expanded to a
six-day schedule. At library E, the director mentioned that due to the recession the library was
unable to complete the empty second floor space as planned.
These types of budget related challenges place extra pressure on libraries to provide
much needed services with diminished resources. The directors use the funds from revenue
generating activities to supplement library programs and services, or the generated revenue goes
back into operating a specific service. Although none of the directors mentioned this, perhaps
some of the reluctance to include revenue generation in the definition comes from the possibility

96

In some public libraries, the revenue generated from fines goes into the city’s general fund, and not directly into
the library budget as a revenue source. In contract, fines collected at a library district go into the library district’s
budget as a revenue source.

307

that, if libraries were expected to generate revenue, this could result in reduced funding from the
city or an unrealistic expectation for libraries to supplement budgets on their own. According to
Foster and Bradach (2005), earned income ventures account for only a small share of funding in
most nonprofit organizations. Further, such ventures can detract from an organization’s core
mission, which can have negative effects on the services the organization offers to its customers.
Although some of the entrepreneurial activities and services generate revenue, a number
of them do not (e.g., college access and reengagement center, discovery space for small business
and entrepreneurs, makerspace, and summer reading mobile application). To make these services
possible the libraries depend on community partners and other external resources. The summer
reading mobile application, for example, would not have been possible without the volunteers
from a technology company who designed the product. The dependence on revenue generation,
external resources, and partners may create challenges for libraries, especially if they have a
decrease in generated revenue or lose a partner. This places extra pressure on them to
compensate for the lost funding and resources in order to keep providing the same level of
service to the community.
Based on this discussion, it is necessary to revise Jusic’s (2013) definition of
entrepreneurial leadership. (The original definition appears on p. 306.) Some of the libraries in
this study do indeed go “through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of
opportunities to generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services […] and/or funding
models” (Jusic, 2013, pp. 30-31). This is evident with the activities that generate revenue, as the
funding supports library services and programs, or goes back to supporting a specific
entrepreneurial service. However, this is not applicable in all cases as not all the entrepreneurial
services generate revenue. In the case where there is no revenue generation, the part of the

308

definition that applies is that the library goes “through a process of discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities to […] lead to new services.” There are many examples of this at
the libraries. The college access and reengagement center, the discovery space for small business
and entrepreneurs, the makerspace, and the summer reading mobile application are new services
that do not generate revenue. Such services are often made possible through the library seeking
resources elsewhere, whether it is through grant funding, private donations, or community
partnerships. A revised definition needs to include the use of external resources and partnerships.
The proposed definition defines entrepreneurial leadership as
creating a vision and leading the organization through a process of discovery,
evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities to reinforce existing services or
lead to new services by generating revenue streams, developing new funding
models, identifying external resources, or fostering partnerships.
The revised definition includes the external resources and partnerships on which the libraries are
dependent to provide some of the entrepreneurial services at their locations.
The revised definition encompasses the means through which the libraries are engaging
in entrepreneurship. Without the added “external resources” and “partnerships,” the previous
definition was, in some ways, incomplete. Prior to implementing an entrepreneurial activity or
service the libraries go through discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities. This
does not always result in revenue generation for the library nor is revenue generation always a
focus. The process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities does lead to new
services, but the services are not always possible without some type of funding. In these cases,
the libraries must rely on external resources and partnerships with other organizations if they are
going to offer the service to the public.
Although there is a reluctance, at times, to generate revenue, it still merits inclusion in the
definition. Libraries A and E currently generate revenue. The director at library A wants to find

309

another revenue generating activity or service in which the library can engage in the future. The
administration would prefer to have another revenue generating activity and less focus on
fundraising. The directors at libraries B and E have plans for future revenue generating activities.
Although revenue generation is not a primary focus in libraries or nonprofit organizations in the
same way as it is in businesses, it will continue to be important for some nonprofit organizations.
Three of the four directors understand the need for the libraries to look for funding elsewhere. It
is unlikely they will get the funding needed from the city due to budgetary issues. The director at
library D, who opposes revenue generation, acknowledges the need for funding and using “other
resources” to fund library services. The other resources are in the form of grants, partnerships,
and sponsorships for future entrepreneurial services such as is the case with the makerspace
mobile and the business and career center.
Innovation
The approach to entrepreneurship at all four libraries includes innovation in some form.
This association of entrepreneurship with innovation is supported in the literature (Drucker,
1985; Schumpeter 1934a; 1934b; Sharma & Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990). At
library A, a manager had an innovative idea to increase passport revenue. The idea was to hold
naturalization services at the library with the hope that newly naturalized citizens would use the
library’s passport service. Ultimately, this was not successful, but it was an innovative approach
to attempting to increase revenue generation for an entrepreneurial service. The director at
library B believes it was innovative to have a college access center in a library as such centers
are typically not located in public libraries. At library D, an example of innovation includes the
library’s work with a technology company to create a mobile summer reading application. It is
possible that summer reading mobile applications may become common in public libraries in the

310

future, but at the time library D offered this service, it was innovative. At library E, the director
describes the multi-modal interactive exhibits as “somewhat innovative,” adding that the creation
of the exhibits was “getting outside of our box and doing something other libraries were not
doing.”
One way to view innovation is as a component of entrepreneurship; alternatively it can be
viewed as independent from innovation. As previously mentioned, a number of authors link
innovation with entrepreneurship (Drucker, 1985; Schumpeter 1934a; 1934b; Sharma &
Chrisman, 1999; Stevenson & Jarillo, 1990), and many of the entrepreneurial activities and
services in which the libraries in this study engage have an innovation component. Innovation as
an independent concept is defined differently in the literature. One definition describes
innovation as “the multi-stage process whereby organizations transform ideas into new/improved
products, services or processes, in order to advance, compete and differentiate themselves
successfully in their marketplace” (Baregheh, Rowley, & Sambrook, 2009, p. 1334). This
definition applies to the multi-modal interactive exhibits, for example, as the creation of the
exhibits allowed the library to provide a new service to the community. The exhibits are also a
new product that the library can sell. In this case, revenue generation makes this service
entrepreneurial. Further, the library went through a “process of discovery, evaluation, and
exploitation of opportunities” in creating the original exhibits, and those steps are also
components of entrepreneurship.
Innovation, when applied differently, is not necessarily entrepreneurial. All the directors
indicated that innovation exists within their libraries outside of the entrepreneurial activities and
services. The director at library B indicates that innovation can involve selecting a work process
and making it more efficient or finding a new way to complete the process. This looks at

311

innovation being used for purposes of efficiency, problem solving, and improvement of
processes. Innovation can extend beyond efficiency improvement and exist within nonentrepreneurial programs. Five years ago, library E offered robotics related programs. The
director acknowledges that these programs were not unique to library E, but that the library
offering the programs was considered innovative at the time.
Innovation and transformation. A report from an Aspen Institute Roundtable on
Library Innovation suggests “libraries have the potential to be platforms for innovation and
entrepreneurial activity in the community” (Garmer, 2016, p. 9). The statement is consistent with
this study’s findings. The four case study libraries are places for innovation and entrepreneurial
activity within the community due to the entrepreneurial services they offer. For example, the
discovery space for small businesses and entrepreneurs encourages and supports
entrepreneurship within the community. The makerspace is an example of a service that can
serve as a platform for innovation. An individual can design a new product using 3-D modeling
software and print the prototype on the library’s 3-D printer.
The report goes on to say that the idea of library innovation “reflects the potential for
libraries to drive innovation in communities while speaking to the need for transforming library
practice and library institutions themselves” (Garmer, 2016, p. 7). The libraries in this study offer
examples of the transformation of services and activities in public libraries. By engaging in
entrepreneurial activities and providing entrepreneurial services to the community, the four
libraries are not only fulfilling a community need, but also serving as models for other libraries
in becoming more user and community focused. Additionally, the entrepreneurial activities and
services in which the libraries engage often require risk taking and innovation, and are different
from what libraries have done in the past.

312

Garmer (2016) writes that the transformation of public libraries “will be driven by three
factors: (1) new narratives about the library’s role in society; (2) a culture of innovation that
promotes new relationships, new networks, and new forms of participation; and (3) committed,
transformative leadership within the library profession as well as from other community partners
including government, media, technology and civic stakeholder groups” (p. 4). This is also
reflected at the four case study libraries. Innovation, when it is a component of entrepreneurship,
promotes new relationships, new networks, and new forms of participation. The libraries are
making new connections within the community, drawing new customers to the library, and
fostering partnerships with outside organizations. The engagement in entrepreneurial activities
and services helps shape the conversation about the library’s role in society. The libraries studied
support entrepreneurship and innovation in the community, as well as learning and education
(via services such as the college access center and a focus on STEM-based programming), and
they continually consider what more they can do to meet specific needs in their communities.
Organizational Culture
Cornwall and Pearlman (1990) claim that culture is a key determinant of entrepreneurial
activity in an organization. They present ten characteristics of an entrepreneurial organizational
culture. (Chapter 6 explores the extent to which these characteristics apply to the four libraries.)
At libraries A, B, and D there is disagreement between the directors and managers as to which
characteristics apply. The director and manager at library E are in agreement about all the
characteristics.
All of the libraries have structural challenges. The director at library A is considering
reorganization to make the organizational structure less hierarchical. Two managers at library B
mentioned that the organization is hierarchical and bureaucratic. Library D underwent

313

reorganization when the new director started and, at the time of the interviews, one of the
managers mentioned that the library was still hiring to fill new positions and experiencing staff
turnover. At library E, three of the senior-level managers retired and the director was in the
process of a reorganization and filling the vacant positions. The libraries are not operating under
ideal conditions and some of the problems stem from budget cuts and reduced staffing levels. At
library A, one of the managers mentioned that some staff have increased workloads due to the
library choosing not to fulfill vacant positions (owing to budgetary restrictions). The director at
library B believes the library is unlikely to return to pre-recession staffing levels. At the time of
the interviews, library D was not fully staffed.
The lasting effects of budget cuts are seen in reduced staffing levels and an increased
workload for staff, both of which can affect morale. Further, changing the organizational
structure when the library is required to operate with limited resources is challenging and
potentially contributes to problems related to people, structures, and process. Managers
mentioned some problems associated with morale and lack of emotional commitment. For
example, manager B4 mentioned that there are “pockets [within the organization] where morale
is poor,” and manager A3 believes that apart from the director and himself, staff are not
emotionally committed to the organization. It is important to note that the directors and
managers, who are not always in agreement, identified the problems or areas that need
improvement. No other staff were interviewed for this study.
There were several of Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) characteristics of an
entrepreneurial organization that the directors and managers believe either do not apply to their
organizations, or need improvement. These are:
•

allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead;

314

•

an attitude among staff that work is fun;

•

effectiveness and efficiency;

•

emotional commitment;

•

including people in what is considered important to the organization;

•

relentless attention to details, people, structure, and process; and

•

risk taking (which includes innovation).

The difference in the answers from the director and manager perspectives indicates that the
characteristics are present within the organization, to some extent, but not necessarily within all
areas of the organization. One manager mentioned that the library’s hierarchical structure
prevents people leading across all levels of the organization, and another manager described the
library as a large bureaucracy, which makes it more difficult to implement change and engage in
entrepreneurship and innovation.
The four libraries do not necessarily have entrepreneurial organizational cultures
throughout the entire organization, but they do have organizational cultures that support
entrepreneurship. This, paired with the support of the directors, makes entrepreneurship possible
despite the challenges the libraries encounter. The libraries are limited as to how entrepreneurial
they can be due to elements such as their policies, mission statements, and strategic plans, which
largely focus on offering non-revenue generating services. Additionally, libraries are accountable
to different types of stakeholders (e.g., library users, elected officials, trustees, and city
managers) and usually hold different values97 than do businesses. It is not surprising that, from
the perspectives of both directors and managers, not all of Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten
97

The core values of librarianship, listed on the American Library Association website, are: access,
confidentiality/privacy, democracy, diversity, education and lifelong learning, intellectual freedom, preservation, the
public good, professionalism, service, and social responsibility (American Library Association, 2016). A business
focused on generating profit would not have the same set of values.

315

characteristics apply. In larger library systems such as those that libraries B and D represent, it is
more difficult to have entrepreneurship and innovation present throughout the entire
organization, especially when considering the variety of departments and the number of branch
libraries. Innovation is not necessarily present in all areas of the organization, but it is present
within the scope of most of the entrepreneurial services and activities. The exceptions to this are
services such as the café, which is not operated by the library, and the passport service, which is
fairly straightforward and government regulated.
The reduced staffing levels and resources resulting from budget cuts create limitations as
to what the libraries can do, both in terms of services offered and how the organizations can be
structured. The libraries continue to deliver core services while striving to create new services
that meet community needs and they do so by engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services.
Probing problems related to the libraries’ organizational structure and overall organizational
culture are beyond the scope of this study.
Topics for Further Research
Areas for further research are explored below. In some cases further research might
involve data collection after a set amount of time has passed (such as for libraries A and E). The
data collection might also be based on a set of performance metrics and gathered over regular
periods of time as investigators study the changes that libraries make and the extent to which
entrepreneurial activities and services presumably become more effective and efficient. The
topics for further research discussed below suggest areas of exploration which could help
provide deeper understanding of entrepreneurial libraries, and their directors, and their direct
reports as managerial leaders.

316

Entrepreneurship and Entrepreneurial Leadership
The revised definition of entrepreneurial leadership merits exploration. Further study
might gather insights from a larger number of directors and probe revenue generation and what
study participants think of the inclusion of “partnerships and external resources” in the
definition. It may be worthwhile to examine entrepreneurial libraries that did not change
directors. Do those directors still continue to support and grow entrepreneurship within the
organization? Are they engaging in additional entrepreneurial activities and services? Which of
Cornwall and Pearlman’s (1990) ten characteristics apply to those libraries and how engrained is
entrepreneurship in the organization? Such research could clarify whether directors who
supported entrepreneurship in the past continue to support and nurture it over a longer period of
time or whether they turn their attention to other priorities.
At the time of the interviews, the directors at libraries A and E have been in the position
for approximately one year. It would be worthwhile to study entrepreneurship at both places after
the directors have been in the position for three to five years. After more time has passed, are the
libraries more entrepreneurial and have they added the activities and services as planned? For
directors who were internal candidates, how long does it take before they start changing or
refining the organization rather than following or modifying the direction set by the previous
directors? Do staff have expectations from the directors who are internal candidates to keep
operating the library in the same way?
Another topic for further research might be to compare entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial leadership in academic and public libraries. Carpenter’s (2012) study on directors
of libraries with membership in the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) examines
entrepreneurial leadership and how it serves as a means for creating new organizational

317

structures, generating revenue, improving services, building new partnerships, and developing
information delivery and technology solutions in academic libraries. Using her study as a starting
point, one could examine whether academic library directors view entrepreneurship and
entrepreneurial leadership in a similar way to public library directors. What types of
entrepreneurial activities and services do academic libraries engage in and how does this
compare to what public libraries are doing? Do academic libraries engage in revenue generation,
and if so, how does the amount generated and use of revenue compare to public libraries? Do
academic library directors view revenue generation differently than public library directors?
Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
The four libraries in this study use performance metrics for some of their entrepreneurial
activities and services. The manager of the college access and reengagement center mentioned
“performance measures” but did not specifically mention what the library measures and how it
does so. Presumably, data are collected on the entrepreneurial activities and services at the four
libraries studied. However, such an inquiry was beyond the scope of this dissertation. A future
study might explore how the libraries (both in this study and those engaged in entrepreneurial
activities and services that have not had a change in leadership) evaluate entrepreneurial
activities and services and how the data collected are used for service improvement. Do they use
some type of performance metrics for all of the activities and services? What data do they collect
and how do they use them to evaluate the success of the services over time?
An investigator might use the public library dataset of the Institute of Museum and
Library Services (IMLS) to identify libraries engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services
by looking at “other operating revenue.” If this is greater than zero in the dataset, it may be a
starting place for an investigator to further examine non-government revenue at specific libraries.

318

Applying a filter, such as “other operating revenue greater than 20 percent” may help narrow the
list of libraries. It may not be possible to determine whether there is entrepreneurial activity at a
library by looking at library visits or total attendance at library programs alone. However, these
categories may be worth examining along with other operating revenue to help generate a list of
libraries that might be engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services.
An additional area for further study might be identifying the characteristics of being an
entrepreneurial library and surveying the library community to identify libraries that comply with
the characteristics. This could include criteria such as which libraries have makerspaces, centers
for small businesses and entrepreneurs, passport services, or any of the other entrepreneurial
activities or services mentioned in this study. This may help identify trends as well as create a list
of libraries engaging in these types of activities. Other libraries interested in a specific area can
follow up with a library offering a service they may be interested in providing in the future.
Another area for study is customer satisfaction, specifically related to customer use of
entrepreneurial activities and services. According to Hernon, Altman, and Dugan (2015),
“Satisfaction, which is subjective, is a sense of contentment that results from an actual
experience or set of experiences in relation to an expected experience” (p. 146). They
acknowledge that satisfaction contains multiple facets and that there are different ways to judge
satisfaction. Libraries interested in customer satisfaction can approach it from two perspectives:
(1) encounter satisfaction, the extent of customer satisfaction or dissatisfaction with a specific
service encounter, or (2) overall service satisfaction, the extent of “customer satisfaction or
dissatisfaction with an organization based on multiple encounters or experiences” (p. 146).
Entrepreneurial libraries might gather data on satisfaction based on a specific encounter with a
service such as the multi-modal interactive exhibits or they might examine customer satisfaction

319

based on multiple encounters or experiences. After gathering customer satisfaction data, do the
libraries then use the results to improve the service and if so, how?
An investigator might use the net promoter score (NPS)98 to compare different
entrepreneurial services in a library and to make general comparisons across such services in
other libraries. Viswanathan et al. (2013) describe NPS as a commonly used consumer metric
and add that many firms have adopted it as a benchmark. Matthews (2008) looked at the NPS
ratings for public libraries, and suggested that it might be worthwhile to look at the data at the
library branch level as this may provide insights into branches with problems. Matthews
recommends using additional means of gathering customer feedback if the percent of detractors
exceeds 10. The next step would be to determine why the percentage is high.
It should be noted that, with the exception of the passport service, the libraries do not
offer similar services. However, a comparison of the NPS is still worthwhile. For instance, which
entrepreneurial services have the highest NPS and what might others learn from the way a
particular service operates? Research might also compare the library NPS with the score for
other entrepreneurial services outside of libraries. For example, one could compare the NPS
score for a passport service in a library and a passport located in a post-office facility, assuming
such data were available. Another example might be to compare the college access center located
in a public library with one located elsewhere. It should be noted that the NPS should be
collected periodically, so that library directors or managers can compare the data over time.

98

The net promotor score is a loyalty metric used to track how customers represent a company to others (Hernon,
Altman, & Dugan, 2015; Reichheld, 2003). Customers are asked to respond to the question “How likely are you to
recommend our company to a colleague or friend?” on a ten-point scale. Respondents who choose 10 or 9 are
classified as promoters, those who choose 8 or 7 are classified as passives, and those who choose 6 through 0 are
classified as detractors. The following formula is used to calculate the net promoter score: NPS = ____% of
Promoters minus ____% of Detractors.

320

Studies of satisfaction might even focus on the partnerships that libraries engage in with
their entrepreneurial services. For instance, what types of entities do the libraries partner with,
and does the satisfaction vary among the different entities (e.g., nonprofit partner versus a
corporate partner)? How satisfied are the partners with the services in which the libraries engage
and what the libraries are trying to achieve?
Innovation
Innovation exists within the libraries as a component of entrepreneurial activities and
services and within other areas of the organization. A study focused on innovation in the libraries
might focus on areas of the organization that are outside the scope of the entrepreneurial
activities and services. How is innovation applied? How does it affect overall organizational
culture, and do innovative sub-cultures exist? What are the components of an innovative
organizational culture, and to what extent do they apply to individual libraries?
Innovation, like entrepreneurship, does not have a universally accepted definition and
there are different definitions of innovation offered in the literature. In this study, Baregheh,
Rowley, and Sambrook’s (2009) definition of an innovation model is used in the theoretical
framework. It would be worthwhile to explore innovation in libraries using other innovation
frameworks. Another approach would be to examine innovation in libraries outside the scope of
entrepreneurial activities and services, using Baregheh, Rowley, and Sambrook’s (2009)
framework.
Library and Information Science Education
No study has explored the curricula of master’s programs in LIS to determine whether
they evidence coursework related to entrepreneurship. An investigator might consult directors at
public and academic libraries engaged in entrepreneurial activities and services to see what types

321

of skills and educational preparation are necessary for supporting entrepreneurship at public
libraries. What implications do the data resulting from studying curricula suggest for LIS
curricula in the future? How might the data be used to enhance the students’ learning
experiences, and how are the data connected to student learning outcomes?
Directors and Managers as Managerial Leaders
Managerial leadership, described as the intersection of management and leadership,
“refers to that activity in which managers help an organization establish and achieve its purpose
and direction” (Hernon, 2010, p. 3). Managerial leadership has been studied in different contexts.
For example, Rubin’s (2014) study on organizational citizenship behavior has practical
implications for how managerial leaders should be expected to perform and for their hiring,
training, and development. Her study found that managerial leaders, especially immediate
supervisors, play a critical role in facilitating organizational citizenship behavior. This study
might be replicated with a focus on the managerial leaders at entrepreneurial public libraries to
examine whether the findings for managerial leaders at entrepreneurial libraries are similar to the
two public libraries Rubin studied.
Further study might involve the use of the leader member exchange (LMX) theory,
which, as Rubin (2014) explains, focuses on the dyadic relationships leaders and managers
develop with followers and team members, and how those relationships contribute or detract
from the advancement and growth of team members. Followers or team members are sorted
(often subconsciously) into either an in-group or an out-group. Individuals who are part of the ingroup have high quality exchanges with the leader or manager, often resulting in more attention,
opportunities, and the potential for advancement. Individuals in the out-group tend to have low
quality exchanges, usually meaning they have less access to the manager and fewer opportunities

322

for growth and advancement. High quality LMX relationships result in improved employee
performance while low quality relationships may negatively affect employee performance
(Rubin, 2014).
The number of employees involved in entrepreneurial activities and services in a library
is likely small, and, as a result, it may be impossible to limit a study to entrepreneurial activities
and services. However, research might include these activities and services as part of an
organization’s overall management so that entrepreneurial activities and services become a
subset of that examination. What type of relationships (low or high quality) do directors of
entrepreneurial libraries have with managers of entrepreneurial activities? How does this
compare with managers not involved with entrepreneurial activities and services?
The directors and managers at the entrepreneurial libraries can also be studied with
regard to the extent to which they are emotionally intelligent leaders. Goleman (2004) describes
emotional intelligence (EI) as the “sine qua non of leadership” (p. 82). It consists of four
domains: self-awareness, self-regulation, empathy, and social skill. Hernon and Rossiter (2006)
examine which EI traits library directors perceive as being most important to possess. A study
might look at directors of libraries engaging in entrepreneurial activities and services. Which EI
traits are perceived by this group as most important to possess and why? How do entrepreneurial
leaders apply EI in their work and does this differ from other library directors? This question
might be explored using narrative inquiry. Another possibility would be to conduct this kind of
EI study looking at both directors and mangers at entrepreneurial libraries.
Organizational Structure and Culture
Entrepreneurial activities and services often require a specialist to either manage or
operate the service due to its unique nature. For example, the college access and reengagement

323

center depends on employees who help individuals with both the college and financial aid
application process or who specialize in reconnecting those who have dropped out of school and
are now reentering the education system. None of the employees in the college access and
reengagement center have master’s degrees in library and information science. The manager has
a master’s degree in public administration and two other employees have degrees in social work.
One area to study might be what degrees and characteristics are essential for specific
entrepreneurial activities and services.
Neal (2006), writing about academic libraries, notes a trend of hiring individuals who do
not have an MLIS to fill professional librarian positions. These individuals have other
qualifications and abilities, such as specialized skills, technology expertise, or advanced degrees
in other fields. This, paired with an increase in online MLIS programs, creates “new professional
groups [that] have been ‘raised’ in other environments and bring to the academic library a ‘feral’
set of values, outlooks, styles, and expectations” (p. 42). The impact of these staffing strategies is
likely to affect areas such as employee relations, training, management, and leadership. This
trend extends to public libraries, especially those engaged in entrepreneurial activities and
services. Operation of most of the entrepreneurial activities and services in this study does not
require an MLIS degree. Many of the services require other expertise or specialized skill set.
What impact do these new types of employees have on the organization’s culture and strategic
direction? How does their presence in the organization affect the culture across the organization?
What implications might this have for professional values and the relevance of the MLIS degree?
Another area worth exploring would be a staff-wide view of entrepreneurship. How do
staff across different levels of the organization view entrepreneurship? To what extent (and in
what context) do they interact with entrepreneurial activities and services? From a staff-wide

324

view, does engaging in entrepreneurship influence the organizational culture positively or
negatively? Further, investigators might examine the entire library organization to compare
entrepreneurial and non-entrepreneurial organizational cultures. Investigators might also look at
the organizational culture at the entrepreneurial libraries that have not had a change in
leadership. Do those libraries have an entrepreneurial organizational culture or components of
one?
Finally, a study might explore some of the structural and organizational problems that the
libraries are experiencing, such as staff morale and lack of emotional commitment and the need
to improve effectiveness and efficiency throughout the organization. Additionally, risk taking
and innovation should be examined across all levels of the organization and not just in select
departments. These problems are outside the scope of entrepreneurship and this study, but might
be explored to understand better how the libraries cope with these problems and what types of
efforts they engage in to resolve them.
Strategic Plans and Priorities
A comparison of strategic plans and priorities among entrepreneurial libraries, both those
in this study and those that have not changed leadership, could be conducted. Such research
could provide insight into whether both groups of libraries include entrepreneurship in their
strategic plans and priorities. One way to accomplish this would be to conduct a content analysis
of libraries’ strategic plans and priorities to see whether entrepreneurship or any reference to
entrepreneurial activities and services is mentioned. Additionally, one might engage in a formal
evaluation of plans, goals and objectives, in relation to the entrepreneurial activities and services.
Saunders (2016) explores the extent to which academic libraries hold themselves accountable to
the goals covered in their strategic plans. A similar study might focus on entrepreneurial public

325

libraries. Do the libraries conduct formal evaluations? Do they use performance metrics to track
progress of goals? If yes, what types? Are these metrics quantifiable, valid and reliable? How do
the libraries determine whether they have successfully met their goals and objectives? How do
the libraries use these data to plan for the future or to improve existing services?
Conclusion
This study highlights participating directors’ commitment to entrepreneurship and
innovation in their organizations. Without their support, the entrepreneurial activities and
services would not be possible. The commitment and support of managers also contribute to the
successful operation of the activities and services. The directors’ views of entrepreneurship,
details on the entrepreneurial activities and services in which the libraries engage, and the
libraries’ plans for future entrepreneurial activities and services provide insight into
entrepreneurship at the four libraries and the forms it may take in the future if the libraries
implement additional planned activities and services. The benefits the libraries derive from
engaging in entrepreneurial activities and service show that prestige and financial gain are
associated with many of the services. However, the directors and managers are more focused on
how the activities and services benefit the community, and not how they benefit the library.
The challenges the libraries face, both in terms of providing entrepreneurial activities and
services, and with supporting entrepreneurship in the organization, suggest that engaging in
entrepreneurship is not always easy. The findings are valuable to directors and other managerial
leaders considering engaging in entrepreneurship and may indicate challenges other libraries
could face if they engage in entrepreneurial activities and services. The findings also provide
directors and managerial leaders with ideas for entrepreneurial activities and services that they
might implement at the libraries and examples of how innovation is used in the libraries (both

326

within and outside the scope of entrepreneurial activities and services). The findings emphasize
the importance of providing services that are community focused and meet specific community
needs. Other key insights include the emphasis some of the libraries place on revenue generation
and the focus placed on partnerships and acquiring external resources to make services possible.
The study helps directors and managerial leaders develop a better understanding of what
it takes to engage in successful entrepreneurial activities and services. It is necessary to align the
activities and services with the library strategic plans and priorities. Additionally, it is necessary
to have an organizational culture that supports entrepreneurship. Further, it is still possible to
engage in entrepreneurship, even when faced with structural and organizational problems.
The study has value for professional library associations and students in MLIS programs.
Professional associations might consider entrepreneurship as a topic around which they could
develop leadership training programs or workshops that cover types of entrepreneurial activities
and services libraries engage in, as well as the benefits and challenges of engaging in such
services. Professional associations can also provide training on the topic of entrepreneurial
leadership, perhaps in conjunction with other leadership programs. For MLIS students, this
research offers insight into possible future trends and the role that entrepreneurship can play in
public libraries. Students may want to consider possible applications of entrepreneurship at
future workplaces, and might want to explore what coursework in LIS programs could help them
prepare for this.
Engaging in entrepreneurship is not without challenges and it affects the organization in
many ways. Libraries that engage in revenue generating activities or services can use the revenue
to help fund other programs or supplement the library budget. Due to limited budgets, some
libraries rely on external resources and partnerships as a way to offer entrepreneurial services.

327

The focus on customer service and community needs, paired with engagement in entrepreneurial
activities and services, is a means for libraries to do more for their communities, despite
diminished budgets, and to provide services that have value for the library’s actual and potential
customers. The libraries’ engagement in entrepreneurial activities and services is also an
indication of how public libraries are transforming to meet the changing needs of the
communities they serve.

328

References
American Library Association. (2016). Core values of librarianship. Retrieved July 11, 2016
from http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/statementspols/corevalues
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of
innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.
Carpenter, M. T. H. (2012). Cheerleader, opportunity seeker, and master strategist: ARL
directors as entrepreneurial leaders. College & Research Libraries, 73, 11-32.
Cornwall, J. R., & Perlman, B. (1990). Organizational entrepreneurship. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Foster, W., & Bradach, J. (2005). Should nonprofits seek profits? Harvard Business Review,
83(2), 92-100.
Garmer, A. K. (2016). Libraries in the exponential age: Moving from the edge of innovation to
the center of community. Retrieved from
http://csreports.aspeninstitute.org/documents/Libraries_Exponential_Age.pdf
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Goleman, D. (2004). What makes a leader? Harvard Business Review, 82(1), 82-91.
Hernon, P. (Ed.) (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Hernon, P., Altman, E., & Dugan, R. E. (2015). Assessing service quality (3rd ed.). Chicago, IL:
ALA Editions.
Hernon, P., & Rossiter, N. (2006). Emotional intelligence: Which traits are most prized?. College
& Research Libraries, 67, 260-275.

329

Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Matthews, J. R. (2008). Customer satisfaction: A new perspective. Public Libraries, 47(6), 5255.
Neal, J. G. (2006). Raised by wolves. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Reichheld, F. F. (2003). The one number you need to grow. Harvard Business Review, 81(12),
46-54.
Rubin, R. G. (2014). Organizational citizenship behavior in the public library and its
relationship to leader-member exchange and perceived supervisor support (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from PQDT Open. (3586983)
Saunders, L. (2016). Room for improvement: Priorities in academic libraries’ strategic plans.
Journal of Library Administration, 56(1), 1-16.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934a). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. London, UK: Ruskin House.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934b). The theory of economic development (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, C. J. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5), 17-27.
Viswanathan, V., Block, M. R., Blood, A., Breiter, H., Calder, B., Raman, K., & Schultz, D. E.
(2013). Who is driving your NPS? International Journal of Integrated Marketing
Communications, 5(2), 23-32.

330

Bibliography
Acar, A. Z., & Acar, P. (2014). Organizational culture types and their effects on organizational
performance in Turkish hospitals. EMAJ: Emerging Markets Journal, 3(3),18-31.
American Library Association. (2016). Core values of librarianship. Retrieved July 11, 2016
from http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/statementspols/corevalues
Angrosino, M. (2007). Doing ethnographic and observational research. Los Angeles, CA: Sage
Publications.
Argyris, C., & Schon, D. A. (1978). Organizational learning. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley
Longman.
Austin, J., Stevenson, H., & Wei-Skillern, J. (2006). Social and commercial entrepreneurship:
Same, different, or both? Entrepreneurship: Theory & Practice, 30(1), 1-22.
Baregheh, A., Rowley, J., & Sambrook, S. (2009). Towards a multidisciplinary definition of
innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339.
Baumgartner, R. J. (2009). Organizational culture and leadership: Preconditions for the
development of a sustainable corporation. Sustainable Development, 17(2), 102-113.
Bednarz, J. J. (2007). The future of planning. Library Administration & Management, 21(2), 6569.
Bielavitz, T. (2011). A content analysis of the strategic plans of the coalition of urban serving
universities' academic libraries. Urban Library Journal, 17(1), 1-19.
Bessant, J., & Tidd, J. (2007). Innovation and entrepreneurship (3rd ed.). Chichester, UK: John
Wiley & Sons.
Bhattacharyya, S. (2006). Entrepreneurship and innovation: How leadership style makes
the difference? Vikalpa: The Journal for Decision Makers, 31(1), 107-115.

331

Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2013). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and leadership
(5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Buchanan, S. S., & Cousins, F. (2012). Evaluating the strategic plans of public libraries: An
inspection-based approach. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 125-130.
Cameron, K. S., & Quinn, R. E. (2011). Diagnosing and changing organizational culture: Based
on the competing values framework (3rd ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Carpenter, M. T. H. (2012). Cheerleader, opportunity seeker, and master strategist: ARL
directors as entrepreneurial leaders. College & Research Libraries, 73, 11-32.
Casson, M. (2010). Entrepreneurship: Theory, institutions and history. The Scandinavian
Economic History Review, 58(2), 139-170.
Casson, M., & Casson, C. (2014). The history of entrepreneurship: Medieval origins of a modern
phenomenon. Business History, 56, 1223-1242.
Cogliser, C. C., & Brigham, K. H. (2004). The intersection of leadership and entrepreneurship:
Mutual lessons to be learned. Leadership Quarterly, 15, 771-799.
Cooke, R. A., & Lafferty, J. C. (1983). Level V: Organizational cultural inventory-form I.
Plymouth, MI: Human Synergistics.
Cooke, R. A., & Rousseau, D. M. (1988). Behavioral norms and expectations: A quantitative
approach to the assessment of organizational culture. Group & Organization Studies,
13(3), 245-273.
Cornwall, J. R., & Perlman, B. (1990). Organizational entrepreneurship. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Cunningham, J. B., & Lischeron, J. (1991). Defining entrepreneurship. Journal of Small
Business Management, 29(1), 45-61.

332

Darling, J. R., & Beebe, S. A. (2007). Enhancing entrepreneurial leadership: A focus on key
communication priorities. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship, 20(2), 151167.
Darling, J. R., Keeffe, M. J., & Ross, J. K. (2007). Entrepreneurial leadership strategies and
values: Keys to operational excellence. Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship,
20(1), 41-54.
Deal, T. E., & Kennedy, A. A. (1982). Corporate cultures: The rites and rituals of organization
life. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Dempsey, B. (2004). Cashing in on service: Entrepreneurial ventures make money and extend
library’s mission. Library Journal, 129(18), 38-41.
Dennison, D. R. (1990). Corporate culture and organizational effectiveness. New York, NY:
Wiley.
deVries, J. (2003). Entrepreneurial librarians: Embracing innovation and motivation. Science &
Technology Libraries, 24(1), 209-217.
Dougherty, R. M. (2002). Planning for new library futures. Library Journal, 127(9), 38-41.
Drucker, P. (1985). Innovation and entrepreneurship. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Duobiene, J., & Pundziene, A. (2007). Development of entrepreneurial organizational culture.
Economics & Management, 5(3), 507-515.
Eggers, J. H., & Leahy, K. T. (1995). Entrepreneurial leadership. Business Quarterly, 59(4), 7176.
Eggers, J. H., & Smilor, R. W. (1996). Leadership skills of entrepreneurs: Resolving the
paradoxes and enhancing the practices of entrepreneurial growth. In R. Smilor, & D.

333

Sexton (Eds.), Leadership and Entrepreneurship: Personal and organizational
development in entrepreneurial ventures (pp. 100-110). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Emary, L. L. (2015). Librarians are already in the field: How and why to begin ethnographic
fieldwork. Bibliothek Forschung Und Praxis, 39(2), 138-142.
Fernald Jr., L. W., Solomon, G. T., & Tarabishy, A. (2005). A new paradigm: Entrepreneurial
leadership. Southern Business Review. 30(2), 1-10.
Foster, W., & Bradach, J. (2005). Should nonprofits seek profits? Harvard Business Review,
83(2), 92-100.
Garmer, A. K. (2016). Libraries in the exponential age: Moving from the edge of innovation to
the center of community. Retrieved from
http://csreports.aspeninstitute.org/documents/Libraries_Exponential_Age.pdf
Gartner, W. B. (1990). What are we talking about when we talk about entrepreneurship? Journal
of Business Venturing, 5(1), 15-28.
Goleman, D. (2004). What makes a leader? Harvard Business Review, 82(1), 82-91.
Glen, R., Suciu, C., Baughn, C. C., & Anson, R. (2015). Teaching design thinking in business
schools. International Journal off Management Education, 13(2), 182-192.
Gupta, V., MacMillan, I. C., & Surie, G. (2004). Entrepreneurial leadership: Developing and
measuring a cross-cultural construct. Journal of Business Venturing, 19(2), 241-260.
Hernon, P. (Ed.) (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership. Santa
Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Hernon, P., Altman, E., & Dugan, R. E. (2015). Assessing service quality (3rd ed.). Chicago, IL:
ALA Editions.

334

Hernon, P., & Rossiter, N. (2006). Emotional intelligence: Which traits are most prized?. College
& Research Libraries, 67, 260-275.
Hofstede, G., Neuijen, B., Ohavy, D. D., & Sanders, G. (1990). Measuring organizational
cultures: A quantitative and qualitative study across twenty cases. Administrative
Sciences Quarterly, 35(2), 286-316.
Horrigan, J. B., & Duggan, M. (2015). Home broadband 2015. Retrieved from
http://www.pewinternet.org/files/2015/12/Broadband-adoption-full.pdf
Institute of Museum and Library Services. (2013). IMLS library comparison: Compare public
libraries. Retrieved from: https://harvester.census.gov/imlscompare/
Johnson, D. (2001). What is innovation and entrepreneurship? Lessons for larger organisations.
Industrial and Commercial Training, 33(4), 135-140.
Jusic, J. (2013). Entrepreneurial leadership in public libraries. Public Libraries, 52(4), 28-36.
Kempster, S., & Cope, J. (2010). Learning to lead in the entrepreneurial context. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour & Research, 16(1), 5-34.
Khoo, M. K., Rozaklis, L., & Hall, C. (2012). A survey of the use of ethnographic methods in the
study of libraries and library users. Library & Information Science Research, 34, 82-91.
Kilgour, F. G. (1992). Entrepreneurial leadership. Library Trends, 40, 457-474.
Klenke, K. (2008). Qualitative research in the study of leadership. Bingley, UK: Emerald Group.
Kotter, J., & Heskett, J. (1992). Corporate culture and performance. New York, NY: Free Press.
Kuratko, D. F. (2007). Entrepreneurial leadership in the 21st century. Journal of Leadership &
Organizational Studies, 13(4), 1-11.

335

Lydon, S. R. (2001). Entrepreneurial leadership in high-technology firms: Toward a
competency-based model (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations
and Theses. (No. 3000444)
Matthews, J. R. (2008). Customer satisfaction: A new perspective. Public Libraries, 47(6), 5255.
McFadzean, E., O’Loughlin, A., & Shaw, E. (2005). Corporate entrepreneurship and innovation
part 1: The missing link. European Journal of Innovation Management, 8(3), 350-372.
McGrath, R. G. (2011). Failing by design. Harvard Business Review, 89(4), 76-83.
McGrath, R. G., & MacMillan, I. C. (2000). The entrepreneurial mindset. Boston, MA: Harvard
Business School Press.
Meyerson, D., & Martin, J. (1987). Cultural change: An integration of three different views.
Journal of Management Studies, 24(6), 623-647.
Myers, K., & Sadaghiani, K. (2010). Millennials in the workplace: A communication perspective
on Millennials’ organizational relationships and performance. Journal of Business &
Psychology, 25(2), 225-238.
Neal, J. G. (2001). The entrepreneurial imperative: Advancing from incremental to radical
change in the academic library. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 1, 1-13.
Neal, J. G. (2006). Raised by wolves. Library Journal, 131(3), 42-44.
Nicholson, N. (1998). Personality and entrepreneurial leadership: A study of the heads of the
UK's most successful independent companies. European Management Journal, 16(5),
529-539.
Nijboer, J. (2006). Cultural entrepreneurship in libraries. New Library World, 107(9), 434-443.
Northouse, P. G. (2015). Leadership: Theory and practice. Los Angeles, CA: Sage.

336

Pacios, A. R. (2007). The priorities of public libraries at the onset of the third millennium.
Library Management, 28(6/7), 416-427.
Pacios, A. R. (2004). Strategic plans and long-range plans: Is there a difference? Library
Management, 25(6/7), 259-269.
Peters, T. J., & Waterman, R. H. (1982). In search of excellence. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Pettigrew, A. M. (1979). On studying organizational cultures. Administrative Science Quarterly,
24(4), 570-581.
Rauth, I., Carlgren, L., & Elmquist, M. (2014). Making it happen: Legitimizing design thinking
in large organizations. Design Management Journal, 9(1), 47-60.
Reichheld, F. F. (2003). The one number you need to grow. Harvard Business Review, 81(12),
46-54.
Rowley, J. (2011). Should your library have an innovation strategy? Library Management, 32
(4/5), 251-265.
Rubin, R. G. (2014). Organizational citizenship behavior in the public library and its
relationship to leader-member exchange and perceived supervisor support (Doctoral
dissertation). Retrieved from PQDT Open. (3586983)
Saunders, L. (2016). Room for improvement: Priorities in academic libraries’ strategic plans.
Journal of Library Administration, 56(1), 1-16.
Schein, E. H. (2010). Organizational culture and leadership (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA:
Jossey-Bass.
Schein, E. H. (1983). The role of the founder in creating organizational culture. Organizational
Dynamics, 12(1), 13-28.

337

Schneider, B., Ehrhart, M. G., & Macey, W. H. (2013). Organizational climate and culture.
Annual Review of Psychology, 64(1), 361-388.
Schuman, P. G. (1994). Leaders manage the dream. Wilson Library Bulletin, 68(7), 41-44.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934a). Capitalism, socialism and democracy. London, UK: Ruskin House.
Schumpeter, J. A. (1934b). The theory of economic development (5th ed.). Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Shane, S., & Venkataraman, S. (2000). The promise of entrepreneurship as a field of research.
The Academy of Management Review, 25(1), 217-226.
Sharma, P., & Chrisman, J. (1999). Toward a reconciliation of the definitional issues in the field
of corporate entrepreneurship. Entrepreneurship Theory & Practice, 23(3), 11-27.
Slaughter, M. P. (1996). Seven keys to shaping the entrepreneurial organization. In R. Smilor &
D. Sexton (Eds.), Leadership and Entrepreneurship: Personal and organizational
development in entrepreneurial ventures (pp. 100-110). Westport, CT: Quorum Books.
Slevin, D. P., & Covin, J. G. (1990). Juggling entrepreneurial style and organizational structure:
How to get your act together. Sloan Management Review, 31(2), 43-53.
Smircich, L. (1983). Concepts of culture and organizational analysis. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 28(3), 339-358.
Stevenon, H. H., & Gumpert, D. E. (1985). The heart of entrepreneurship. Harvard Business
Review, 63(2), 85-94.
Stevenson, H. H., & Jarillo, C. J. (1990). A paradigm of entrepreneurship: Entrepreneurial
management. Strategic Management Journal, 11(5), 17-27.
Swiercz, P. M., & Lydon, S. R. (2002). Entrepreneurial leadership in high-tech firms: A field
study. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 23(7), 380-389.

338

Tarabishy, A., Solomon, G., Fernald Jr., L. W., & Sashkin, M. (2005). The entrepreneurial
leader's impact on the organization's performance in dynamic markets. Journal of Private
Equity, 8(4), 20-29.
Thornberry, N. (2006). Lead like an entrepreneur. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Program Evaluation and Methodology Division. (1990). Case
study evaluations (PEMD 10.1.9). Retrieved from http://www.gao.gov/assets/80/76069.pdf
Viswanathan, V., Block, M. R., Blood, A., Breiter, H., Calder, B., Raman, K., & Schultz, D. E.
(2013). Who is driving your NPS? International Journal of Integrated Marketing
Communications, 5(2), 23-32.
Wilson, A. M. (1997). The nature of corporate culture within a service delivery environment.
International Journal of Service Industry Management, 8(1), 87-102.
Wilson, A. M. (2001). Understanding organizational culture and implications for corporate
marketing. European Journal of Marketing, 35 (3/4), 353-367.
Yin, R. K. (2014). Case study research: Design and methods (5th ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Zhao, F. (2005). Exploring the synergy between entrepreneurship and innovation. International
Journal of Entrepreneurial Behavior & Research, 11(1), 25-41.

339

Appendix A
Interview Questions (Directors)
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this study and for letting me visit with you and
your managers. This interview will take approximately 90 minutes. During this interview, I look
forward to learning more about the library’s involvement with entrepreneurship. Although, in the
dissertation, I will exclude the name of the library, the names of those interviewed, and location
specifics in order to preserve confidentiality please be aware that some of the services offered are
unique and may be recognized by others. You will have the opportunity to review my write up
and offer suggestions for disguising the service or activity discussed. If you do not feel
comfortable answering any questions you may decline to do so or provide a general response.
General Questions about Leadership and Entrepreneurship
1. What is your definition of leadership?
2. Does entrepreneurship fit within that definition?
3. For this study, entrepreneurial leadership is defined as “creating a vision and leading the
organization through a process of discovery, evaluation, and exploitation of opportunities
to generate revenue streams that reinforce existing services or lead to new services and/or
funding models.” Do you concur with this definition or would you like to offer changes?
4. Does the definition apply to this library and what you are trying to accomplish over the
next several years? Discuss.
5. Please take a look at the following typology. Does it encompass your perspective on
entrepreneurship? Would you make any changes to it?

340

Typology for academic and public libraries
Academic Library
Active faculty participation

Public Library
•

Active community participation

•

Active library board participation

•

Active staff engagement and support

•

Active stakeholder engagement (includes
volunteers, community leaders, elected
officials, foundations, Friends of the Library,
and the corporate community)

Research and development focus

•

Focus on community needs and relevance

•

Focus on library trends and innovation

•

Innovation, capital requirements, and
efficiency

Innovative applications of technology

Academic and corporate partnerships

•

Relevance to services being offered

•

Tracking of societal and professional trends

•

Application and integration of technology

•

Innovative applications of technology

•

Community and corporate collaboration

•

Library and vendor partnerships

•

Partnerships with community, corporate, and
non-profit organizations

341

Foundation and federal funding

•

City, state, federal governments, foundations,
Friends of the Library, and private funding

•
A potential for capitalization and marketing •

Sponsorships and in kind contributions
A potential for capitalization and marketing

Adapted with permission from “Entrepreneurial Leadership in Public Libraries,” by J. Jusic, 2013, Public Libraries,
52, p. 31.

6. Do you consider any one set of bullets as most important?
Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
7. Do you agree with the statement: A library can be entrepreneurial but may not have a
single or central entrepreneur?
a. What makes a person an entrepreneur or an organization entrepreneurial?
i. How did you come to that conclusion?
ii. Is this library an entrepreneurial organization?
1. How do you come to that conclusion?
b. Would you characterize yourself or any of the upper level managers as being an
entrepreneurial leader?
i. If yes, how so?
ii. If no, what are the biggest barriers to achieving entrepreneurial
leadership?
Innovation
8. Do you consider innovation as part of entrepreneurship or as something separate?
a. If you do, how is it a part of entrepreneurship?
b. If you do not, how is it separate?

342

c. Does innovation exist in the library in regard to entrepreneurial activities/services,
and in what capacity?
i. Does innovation exist in the library outside of entrepreneurial
activities/services?
Four Frames
Bolman and Deal (2013) developed four frames for understanding organizations and leadership.
These frames allow managerial leaders to process information and view the organization from
multiple perspectives. The frames include:
Structural frame

Focuses on the organizational structure.
This includes the design of unit, authority,
rules, roles, goals and priorities.

Human resource frame

Focuses on the relationship between the
organization and its employees. It places
importance on understanding people.

Political frame

Emphasizes conflict and competition.
Resources within an organization are
viewed as scarce and conflict arises in the
completion for those resources and for
power.

Symbolic frame

Focuses on the organization’s culture. It
places importance on ritual, ceremony,
play, story, and meaning.

343

9. Do any of Bolman and Deal’s (2013) frames relate to matters that the library needs to
overcome as it continues its (or as it tries to develop a more) entrepreneurial direction?
a. If they mention human resource or structural frames, does their comments relate
to any aspect of organizational culture?
i. Does engagement in entrepreneurship influence their answer?
ii. If you are no longer supporting (or intend to decrease the focus on
entrepreneurship) what are the outstanding challenges related to these?
iii. Have you made any other changes based on your understanding of the four
frames in order to support entrepreneurship in the library better?
1. If you do not support entrepreneurship, have you made other
changes to better support your focus areas?
Organizational Culture
10. How would you describe the current organizational culture?
a. Which of the characteristics below are reflective of this library? (Check all that
apply and discuss)
__Allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead
__An attitude among staff that work is fun
__Earned respect within the organization
__Effectiveness and efficiency
__Emotional commitment
__Including people in what is considered important to the organization
__Integrity, trust, and credibility
__Relentless attention to details, people, structure, and process

344

__Risk taking (this includes innovation)
__The sense that everything the organization does has value for its customers and
workers
b. Do these characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity or service?
11. Have you made any changes to organizational culture in regard to entrepreneurial
activities and services since you became the director of the library?
a. Have those changes had any noticeable impact on organizational culture (change
in beliefs, attitudes, values, norms, assumptions)?
12. Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services the same as for the library as a
whole?
13. Going back to the typology for public libraries (question 5 and your answer to question
6), how engrained is entrepreneurship in the organizational culture?
a. Is there anything in the typology that your library should engage in more or
improve (e.g., more community and corporate collaboration, more sponsorships
and in kind contributions)?
Mission and Vision Statements (Your Library)
14. Have the mission and vision statement changed since you became director?
[Insert mission and vision statement for library here]
a. Does entrepreneurship fit those statements?
b. How essential is entrepreneurship to these statements?
c. How essential is entrepreneurship to the direction the library is heading?
15. Do you foresee any challenges related to the present library’s culture in achieving the
direction you have set for the library?

345

Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services1 Offered by the Library
Let’s now focus on the specific entrepreneurial activities or services that the library offers. We’ll
look at each one individually. First, please examine the list of entrepreneurial activities and
services in which the library is engaged. Is it complete?
[Insert list of activities and services for each library here]
16. If the library under your direction is moving away from entrepreneurship or some of
these activities and services, which one(s)?
a. Why?
17. Activity/service:
a. Please review the following description of the activity/service and how it works. I
compiled this from available documentation.
[Insert description here]
i. Is there anything else you would like to add to the description of the
activity/service?
ii. Did the activity/service begin in [insert year here]?
iii. Why is the library engaging in this activity/service?
iv. Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services the same as for the
library as a whole?
v. What benefits does the library derive from engaging in this activity/service
(e.g., prestige, financial)?
vi. Does this activity/service generate revenue?

1

An example of an entrepreneurial activity is a library partnering with a sports team to fund a summer reading
program. The act of obtaining funds is an activity and not a service. An example of an entrepreneurial service is
making it possible for the public to get passports at the library.

346

1. If yes, how much? It is fine to talk in terms of generalities.
2. How is that revenue used?
a. Is it used to support other entrepreneurial activities, to
supplement the library budget, or for another purpose?
Repeat question for each activity/service mentioned
18. If none of the entrepreneurial activities or services generates revenue, is revenue
generation a future goal?
a. If yes, what is the plan in the next 2-3 years for revenue generation?
19. Have you eliminated any entrepreneurial activities/services since assuming the
directorship?
a. If yes, why?
20. Do you think in the next couple of years there will be more or less focus on
entrepreneurial activities and services at this library?
a. If more, are there specific services or activities you have in mind?
i. If so, what are they?
b. If less, what are the other areas of focus (or priorities) for you?
i. Why are these more of a focus or priority?
Library Stakeholders
Please identify the key library stakeholders regarding the entrepreneurial activities and services.
Stakeholder list:
______________________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________________
For each of those stakeholders:

347

21. How is that stakeholder important to entrepreneurship?
22. Does the stakeholder:
a. Prefer any of the entrepreneurial activities/services in particular?
b. Offer suggestions for improving that activity/service?
c. See the library as an entrepreneurial organization?
d. Anything else?
Repeat question for all stakeholders
Wrap Up
23. Do you think the library is currently more entrepreneurial than when you first started in
this position (based on number of activities engaged in, revenue generated, and plans for
future activities)?
24. Based on this interview do you have anything else you want to add?

Thank you so much for taking the time to participate in this study. I will send you the notes from
this interview for your review. You will have the opportunity to add or make changes. If you
happen to have any questions in the meantime, please do not hesitate to contact me at
jasmina.jusic@simmons.edu or [phone number omitted].

348

Appendix B
Interview Questions (Managers)
Thank you for taking the time to participate in this study and for letting me visit with you. This
interview will take approximately 60 minutes. During this interview, I look forward to learning
more about the library’s involvement with entrepreneurship. Although, in the dissertation, I will
exclude the name of the library, the names of those interviewed, and location specifics in order to
preserve confidentiality please be aware that some of the services offered are unique and may be
recognized by others. You will have the opportunity to review my write up and offer suggestions
for disguising the service or activity discussed. If you do not feel comfortable answering any
questions you may decline to do so or provide a general response.
Individual Versus Organizational Entrepreneurship
1. Do you agree with the following statement: A library can be entrepreneurial but may not
have a single or central entrepreneur?
2. Do you view yourself or anyone within the organization as an entrepreneurial leader?
3. What makes a person an entrepreneur or an organization entrepreneurial?
a. How does one come to that conclusion?
Specific Entrepreneurial Activities and Services1 Offered by the Library
Please answer the series of questions for each entrepreneurial activity or service in which you are
engaged unless otherwise indicated. The entrepreneurial activities and services identified for
your library are:
[Insert list of activities/services here]

1

An example of an entrepreneurial activity is a library partnering with a sports team to fund a summer reading
program. The act of obtaining funds is an activity and not a service. An example of an entrepreneurial service is
making it possible for the public to get passports at the library.

349

4. Do you have any to add?
5. Activity/service:
a. Please review the following description of the activity/service in which you are
engaged and how it works. I compiled this from available documentation.
[Insert description here]
i. Is there anything else you would like to add to the description of the
activity/service?
ii. Why is the library engaging in this activity/service?
iii. What benefits does the library derive from engaging in this activity/service
(e.g., prestige, financial)?
iv. What percentage of your time do you spend on this activity/service?
v. How many staff are assigned to this activity/service?
1. What percentage of their time do they spend working on it?
2. Do staff engaged in this activity/service need any special skill set,
educational background, or training?
vi. Are the staff contracted or internal?
1. If internal, do the staff have a Master’s degree in library and
information science, or is a library background not necessary?
vii. Is there enough support (in terms of time allotted, resources, importance
placed on entrepreneurial activities and services) within the organization
to accomplish this activity/service?
Repeat question for each activity/service mentioned

350

Organizational Culture
6. How would you describe the current organizational culture related to those engaged in
entrepreneurial activities/services?
a. Which of the characteristics below are reflective of this library? (Check all that
apply and discuss.)
__ Allowing people at all levels of the organization to lead
__ An attitude among staff that work is fun
__ Earned respect within the organization
__ Effectiveness and efficiency
__ Emotional commitment
__ Including people in what is considered important to the organization
__ Integrity, trust, and credibility
__ Relentless attention to details, people, structure, and process
__ Risk taking (this includes innovation)
__ The sense that everything the organization does has value for its customers and
workers
b. Do the characteristics vary by entrepreneurial activity?
7. Do you see differences among the set of entrepreneurial activities/services as to which
characteristics you emphasize?
8. Is the culture for entrepreneurial activities and services the same as for the library as a
whole or do the entrepreneurial activities and services create their own culture(s)?
a. If the activities and services create their own culture(s), is this enhanced by
revenue generation?

351

9. Have there been any changes in the organizational culture since the new director started?
a. If yes, are those changes related to beliefs, values, norms, and/or assumptions?
10. Please take a look at the following typology. Taking the typology into consideration, to
what extent is entrepreneurship engrained in the current organizational culture? In
answering the question you may not consider all of the components as having equal
importance.
Typology for academic and public libraries
Academic Library
Active faculty participation

Public Library
•

Active community participation

•

Active library board participation

•

Active staff engagement and support

•

Active stakeholder engagement (includes
volunteers, community leaders, elected
officials, foundations, Friends of the Library,
and the corporate community)

Research and development focus

•

Focus on community needs and relevance

•

Focus on library trends and innovation

•

Innovation, capital requirements, and
efficiency

Innovative applications of technology

•

Relevance to services being offered

•

Tracking of societal and professional trends

•

Application and integration of technology

•

Innovative applications of technology

352

Academic and corporate partnerships

•

Community and corporate collaboration

•

Library and vendor partnerships

•

Partnerships with community, corporate, and
non-profit organizations

Foundation and federal funding

•

City, state, federal governments, foundations,
Friends of the Library, and private funding

•
A potential for capitalization and marketing •

Sponsorships and in kind contributions
A potential for capitalization and marketing

Adapted with permission from “Entrepreneurial Leadership in Public Libraries,” by J. Jusic, 2013, Public Libraries,
52, p. 31.

Wrap Up
11. Do you see the need for any changes to the entrepreneurial activities/services over the
next 2-3 years to make them more effective (accomplish organizational goals) and
efficient (better use of library resources)?
12. Is the library now more entrepreneurial, the same, or less entrepreneurial?
13. Based on this interview do you have anything else you want to add?

Thank you so much for taking the time to participate in this study. I will send you the notes from
this interview for your review. You will have the opportunity to add or make changes. If you
happen to have any questions in the meantime, please do not hesitate to contact me at
jasmina.jusic@simmons.edu or [phone number omitted].

353

Appendix C
Informed Consent Form
I volunteer to participate in a dissertation research study conducted by Jasmina Jusic, a Ph.D.
student from the Simmons College School of Library and Information Science. The research
study is titled:
Changing Directors in Public Libraries Engaged in Entrepreneurial Activities and Services.
I understand the study is designed to gather data about entrepreneurship and entrepreneurial
activities and services in public libraries that meet the scope of the study using documents,
interviews, observation, and physical artifacts. I have read the explanation of the study provided
and have had my questions answered.
I understand that participation in the study consists of one of the following, depending on my
position:
a) Participation in the study for directors consists of providing the investigator with
appropriate documents related to entrepreneurial activities and services at the library,
participating in an interview that will last approximately 90 minutes, and allowing the
investigator access to observe entrepreneurial activities and/or services within the library.
b) Participation for managers consists of participating in an interview that will last
approximately 60 minutes.
I understand that the investigator will take notes during the interviews and that I will have an
opportunity to read through those notes and make corrections if necessary. The investigator will
also provide me with a copy of the case study, and I will have an additional opportunity to
review this and offer comments and/or clarification.
I understand that the investigator may contact me after the interviews, while writing the case
study, or finalizing the dissertation in the case where additional clarification may be needed.
My participation in this study is voluntary. I understand that I may withdraw and discontinue
participation at any time without penalty.
I understand that there are no direct personal benefits to me for participating in this study and
that I will not be paid or compensated in any way.
I understand that the investigator will exclude library names, the names of those interviewed, and
location specifics in order to preserve confidentiality. Due to the unique nature of the services
offered by some libraries, I understand that it is possible for a library to be recognized by others.
In the study, libraries and subjects interviewed will be identified by a randomly assigned letter
from the alphabet or number. The investigator will destroy notes within a year of publishing the
results of the study. I have the opportunity to ask questions about any risks and the investigator
will take necessary steps to reduce risks.
If I feel uncomfortable in any way during the interview session, I have the right to decline to
answer any questions or to end the interview at any time.

354

I understand that this research has been reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review
Board of Simmons College.

____________________

______________________

___________

Printed Name

Signature

Date

______________________

___________

Signature

Date

Jasmina Jusic
Printed Name (Investigator)

For further information please contact Jasmina Jusic at jasmina.jusic@simmons.edu or [phone
number omitted]. If you have questions about your rights as a research subject please contact the
Simmons College Human Protections Administrator in the Office of Sponsored Programs at
(617) 521-2415 or Dr. Peter Hernon at [phone number omitted] or peter.hernon@simmons.edu.

355

Appendix D
Observation Data Collection Instrument

Library – General Observations
Date:

Library:

Time of observation:

Description of library environment:

Entrepreneurial Activities and Services
Date:

Library:

Time of observation:

Activity/service being observed:
Description of setting (include all material objects, as much detail as possible):
Description of how each activity is run/how it works based on observation:
Participants:
Number of people engaging in activity/using service:
Chronology of events (describe in detail what is happening):
Descriptions of behaviors and interactions (avoid interpretations):
Notes on any conversations or verbal interactions:
Description of how the public used the entrepreneurial service:
Description of how staff work on entrepreneurial activity/services:
Anything about organizational culture related to entrepreneurial activities/services evident from
observations:

356

