THE POETRY OF WILMER MILLS
by
Rachael Acheson
Bachelor of Arts
Hillsdale College, 2012

Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements
For the Degree of Master of Arts in
English
College of Arts and Sciences
University of South Carolina
2016
Accepted by:
Patrick Scott, Director of Thesis
Anthony Jarrells, Reader
Paul Allen Miller, Vice Provost and Interim Dean of Graduate Studies

ProQuest Number: 10165185

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10165185
Published by ProQuest LLC ( 2016 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by Rachael Acheson, 2016
All Rights Reserved.

ii

DEDICATION
I would like to dedicate this project to my mother, Kathy Sue Acheson, who never
had the opportunity to attend college, but who devoted over fifteen years of her life to my
education in the hope that I would. She was diagnosed with stage VI cancer the same
year Mr. Mills died from it, but she continues to this day to prove a well of fathomless
inspiration, support, and love. This paper, and the degree it seeks to culminate, would not
exist without her.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank John N. Somerville, Jr. of Hillsdale College for introducing
me to Wilmer Mills through his Visiting Writers Program, and Kathryn Oliver Mills for
her correspondence. I would also like to thank Tara Powell of USC, under whose
direction I began this thesis, Patrick Scott, under whose direction I completed it, as well
as Anthony Jarrells, Brian Simmons, Laura Thorp, and Sara Holmes for all of their help.

iv

ABSTRACT
This paper seeks to contextualize the work of Wilmer Mills, a late, minor
Southeastern American poet, within the complex and frequently misread tradition of New
Formalism, as this manifested in the United States shortly after World War II. The
analysis places Mills‟s work in conversation with the formalist philosophy of former U.S.
Poet Laureate Richard Wilbur, and it suggests that both Mills‟s poetry and his reception
amongst fellow academics who adhered to a more progressive philosophy demonstrates
the continued relevance of this older, less-often discussed strain of formalism in
American poetry. An appendix presents the first checklist of Mills‟s published writings
since his initialmajor publication in 1998.

v

TABLE OF CONTENTS
DEDICATION ....................................................................................................................... iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................................................................................ iv
ABSTRACT ............................................................................................................................v
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................. vi
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WILMER MILLS....................................1
CHAPTER 2: THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MODERN SOUTHERN WRITER ...................................5
CHAPTER 3: WILMER MILLS AND POETIC FORMALISM .......................................................12
3.1 WHAT IS NEW FORMALISM? ................................................................................12
3.2 RICHARD WILBUR: THE FACE OF OLD NEW FORMALISM ....................................23
CHAPTER 4: WRITING THE SOUTHERN VALUES ..................................................................28
CHAPTER 5: CONCLUSION: POETIC SELF-AWARENESS FROMCOMMUNAL CONSCIOUSNESS46
WORKS CITED .....................................................................................................................54
APPENDIX A – CHECKLIST OF PUBLICATIONS BY WILMER MILLS,1998-2016 ....................62

vi

CHAPTER 1
INTRODUCTION: THE SIGNIFICANCE OF WILMER MILLS
Wilmer Mills‟s wife Kathryn wrote posthumously of him that her very first
impression of the man, upon sighting him in the lobby of a conference, had been that of
“a very young, very persistent, and slightly archaic Southern gentleman” (K. Mills,
Afterword 123). He was indeed, as she would discover over the course of their all-tooshort but luminous life together, more-or-less in character and upbringing exactly what an
initial glance could have labeled him: a “very uptight and conservative Christian” (125),
quite unlike herself, an academic and a “native of Berkeley” (124-25). Kathryn noted,
“[a]nyone who met Wil knows that his religion was generally couched in the staunch,
fundamental terms of his evangelical and agricultural background” (128). But, in
conjunction with these traits, he was, apparently, in person and in his writing, imbued
with “a real eagerness to learn about, if not always embrace, worlds other than his own”
(125), which dual nature made him both “simple and complex” (128), so that Kathryn
Mills describes the poet she fell in love with as, “so conservative that he sometimes went
backwards to a point that joined the other extreme” (125). Indeed, his minimalist, antimaterialist, borderline-socialist philosophy, as well as his lifelong interest in agrarianism
and the kinds of sustainable farming practices that Wendell Berry advocates, mark him as
being progressive, almost prophetic, to the same extent that they underscore his
traditionalism. This comfortably reconciled duality, which pervaded his entire personality
and his career, then, places him in the unique position of representing, less a relic of rigid,

1

stereotypical attitudes from either extreme of the political spectrum, than a hopeful hint
about how we as a culture might begin bridging this schism, if not in terms of
compromising the principles or ideals, deeply held on either side, then at least in terms of
appreciating unique individuals who earnestly and genuinely embody and speak to ideals
from both sides.
Both as an artist and as a human being, Mills led a varied and interesting career.
In addition to having his work published in numerous, acclaimed literary journals -among them The Hudson Review, The New Republic, The Southern Review, Poetry, The
New Criterion, Shenandoah, Literary Imagination, Image, andYale Review -- he was
included in two prominent anthologies, the Penguin/Longman Contemporary American
Poetry (2004) and The Swallow Anthology of New American Poets (2009) (Martin).
Before his early death from cancer in 2011, he had also published a stand-alone chapbook
of poetry entitled Right as Rain (1999) and his own small volume of narrative poems
entitled Light for the Orphans (2002), partial contents from which would re-appear in a
larger, posthumous volume of Selected Poems (2013. Of almost equal significance,
particularly to his students, colleagues, and lifelong friends at various poetry conferences,
was his accompanying talent for folk music, which once, in a bizarre twist of fate,
introduced him to British celebrity Stephen Fry (Vernon 6). On the recommendation of
friends, Fry‟s producers contacted Mills about performing in a clip for a BBC
documentary entitled The Great American Oil Spill (Ghidon666666). During the filming,
Fry, a “militant atheist” (Vernon 7), and Mills, graduate of a theology master‟s program,
became engrossed in a heated debate about religion, within the course of which they
somehow uncovering one another‟s mutual admiration for “traditional versification” in

2

English literature, and then, not only parted friends, but later corresponded at some length
(6). Like Fry, Mills‟s affinity for less-fashionable, antiquated forms was driven, not by a
political agenda, but by pure personal enjoyment and delight in verse, which he describes
as having an “explosive impact” and “hitting me as powerful writing should: like a truck”
(W. Mills, “Farming Versus Poetry”). He writes that while “I have been associated with
new formalism because I came along at a point when it was developing in the late 80s
and early 90s. . . . I would rather think of myself as an old formalist. I‟m writing with the
same tools that Richard Wilber used all through the heyday of free verse, and he used the
same tools that Robert Frost was using, and Frost used the same tools that Yeats and
Keats were using. There‟s nothing new about formalism” (Vernon 7). It was primarily,
then, a tradition of powerful poetic resonance with which he hoped to align himself, more
than a particular method of achieving it, though both the consistency of his method and
its promising, if short-lived, pattern of success for him can hardly be overlooked.
The nature of Mills‟s work clearly represents the continued, if not necessarily
universally applauded, relevance of this older, less-often-discussed strain of New
Formalism, which preceded the resurgence of Reagan/Bush-era neo-conservatism and,
indeed, developed as a direct reaction against the often-termed elitist opacity which had
characterized much twentieth century literature in the age of close reading. The more
recent manifestations of the formalist movement have, or course, been widely criticized
for their insistence that forms and/or conventions of metrical order are, on some level,
either inherently natural or somehow an automatic blueprint towards linguistic merit -notions which many of the stauncher advocates of freeverse hold to be archaic, imposed,
and perhaps even indicative of a blatantly dishonest or politically oppressive agenda.

3

However, the modest, open-minded work and person of individualist poets like Wilmer
Mills lend a certain amount of credence to the suggestion. Indeed, his documented
lifelong affinity for, and natural facility with, form suggests that perhaps the aesthetic
power of such forms lies, not so much in the universal merit of their application, but
rather in their value to the revelatory process of a specific kind of individual: a person,
whether poet or reader, whose temperament compels them to come into themselves, into
a fuller sense of what we might call self-actualization, by means of seeking communion
with a sense of order outside of themselves – that is, within externally-ordered systems
and tangible patterns, like tradition, community, established methods or routines, and
tenents of organized religion.

4

CHAPTER 2
THE DEVELOPMENT OF A MODERN SOUTHERN WRITER
Wilmer Hastings Mills was born on October 1, 1969 in Baton Rouge, Louisiana
(Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1), just miles away from family-owned land in “the Plains”
near St. Francisville, Louisiana (K. Mills, Afterward 123), which would inhabit the soul
of his poetry for the rest of his life. Wilmer states in an interview for the Carolina
Quarterly on August 11, 2011 that this region of southern Louisiana was named “the
Plains” because “it used to be like the Midwest . . . . very flat, and it was all grasslands.
There were actually buffalo there when the first settlers came” (Vernon 2). The family
farm-land itself could be traced back multiple generations to the late eighteenth century,
(Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1), when Wilmer‟s ancestor John Mills received a grant
from the King of Spain to establish a port city called Bayou Sarah (Vernon 2). The land
itself was apparently too acidic for most crops and has since been used primarily for
cattle, though Wilmer‟s father and grandfather had also discovered that pasture grass seed
grew well on it and single-handedly introduced modern farming equipment into their
area, growing seed and establishing a cleaning mill (2). The family farm itself, however,
has by all accounts to this day retained an uncanny ability to transport one outside of a
sense of time. Mills‟s wife Kathryn describes the place as she saw it the first time Wilmer
brought her to meet his family, describing, “the storybook heritage of a family,” as “like
stepping into another world” (K. Mills, Afterword 123). She writes that Mills “took me to
the family cemetery, where he told me he would be buried. He was related to people

5

everywhere we went . . . . His family‟s home was filled with antique furniture . . . . There
was an alligator in their pond, and there was no air conditioning” (123-124). The relevant
entry in KnowLA: The Encyclopedia of Louisiana History states that Wilmer‟s extended
family had included other writers and artists, as well as farmers, and that figures such as
Jim Bowie, Elemore Morgan Sr., and Elemore Morgan Jr. had numbered among its more
distant members (Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1). In short, then, Wilmer had been born
into a little world that in every respect perfectly encapsulated both his own ties to the past
and the actual and metaphorical shape of his own future.
When Wilmer was only three years old, his parents, Wilmer and Betsy, felt a
calling to join the mission field (K. Mills, Afterword 123). Sponsored by the Presbyterian
Church, an organization called Land for the Landless, and another called World Vision
International, Wilmer‟s parents took him, his brother, and his two sisters to Brazil where
they subsequently served for eight years as “agricultural missionaries” (Vernon 8;
Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1; K. Mills, Afterward 123). With the prompting of Zackery
Veron, via a telephone interview, Mills had described in some detail what this mission
trip involved, and, interestingly, he did so in a way which hints at the period‟s formative
contribution towards the later, contentious valuing of community in conjunction with the
material world, and the conservative/preservationist instincts, which pervade his poetry:
Half of the mission was helping with gardening and farming techniques, and the
other half was spiritual and social, like building schools, churches. The bulk of
our time there we were in the Amazon Basin on a tributary of the Amazon River.
There was a large tract of land that had been purchased, and it was my parents
[sic] responsibility to find poor Brazilians who had no land and wanted to be
6

colonists. . . . That was the good part of it, helping poor, disenfranchised
Brazilians own their own land; the bad part of it was that all of this land was
Amazon jungle that we bulldozed to give poor people their own farms; in the
1970s that was considered progress and a really good thing to do. Some of my
early memories are of riding on a bulldozer and pushing over very large trees in
the Amazon and then watching them burn in large rows so rice could be planted.
(Vernon 8)
Complementing this more straight-forward, first-hand account, Ashley Ramsey points to
these early experiences as being the basis for Mills‟s “affection for manual labor,”
through which he “developed an appreciation for hard work, as well as a slowing-down
of time” (Ramsey 1). Later, his wife also remarks on his aforementioned “eagerness to
learn about, if not always embrace, worlds other than his own” (K. Mills, Afterword
125). Not only, then, was young Wilmer‟s consciousness, his foundational and structural
memories (in addition to his family legacy), deeply intertwined with both a sense of
utilitarian obligation towards land as a viable resource, and a respect for land as a
centripetal power around which communities and social progress could take shape, but
his internal sense of these values was already fluid, complex, and open to experiential
transformation or revision. This duality of instincts, a simultaneous predilection towards
established structures -- what we might quantify as a kind of predictable solidness -- and
also towards a transcendence of boxed-in thought patterns, established habits of thinking,
is interesting, because it suggests, if only very quietly at first, that something in Mills‟s
own nature, and not only in his work, aligned with principles espoused by formalism in
general – that is, a notion that one should be able to open oneself to encounters with

7

Edmund Burke‟s “sublime” through direct engagement with, rather than escape from,
materially-imposed limitations. We might even go so far as to characterize this
phenomenological, closed-but-open tendency as a kind of philosophically bilingual
mindset – which is, of course, strangely fitting when we recall that Mills‟s childhood
language, owed to both the missionary work itself and to what his wife terms his
“Azorean father” (K. Mills, Afterword 125), was Portuguese (Middleton, “Wilmer
Mills,” 1).
Interestingly, this concept of a dualist or “bilingual” mentality takes on even more
relevance when we consider Mills‟s unusually eclectic, almost Renaissance-man
approach to art, not only in the later stages of his career, but, indeed, from the first,
adolescent inklings of talent, or even interest, he displayed in adopting an artistic career.
After the family returned to Louisiana in 1980 (Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1), following
bouts of malaria and rheumatic fever (Vernon 1), Mills attended first a public high school
in Zachary and then a well-known Southern prep school, McCallie in Chattanooga
(Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1). His mother began sensing his predilection for poetry,
discovering scraps of verse in the pockets of his laundry (W. Mills, “Farming Versus
Poetry” 2), and she began to take him to prestigious poetry readings (Ramsey 1). Mills
writes in his essay for PoetryNet.org, “Farming Versus Poetry: The Making of a Rebel,”
that, after earning a BA in English from the University of the South in Sewanee,
Tennessee (where he won numerous prizes for his creative work) (Middleton, “Wilmer
Mills”, 1), he communicated his career choice to his parents. The situation implied that
“Farming versus poetry seemed like an either/or proposition. . . . It meant that I would not
live and farm in the area where my people have been since the earliest ones received the

8

land as grants from the king of Spain in 1797. I knew how much I was giving up to write
poetry” (W. Mills, “Farming Versus Poetry” 1). Yet, while he initially paints his progress
towards this vocation as foreseeable, almost inevitable, writing, “It was almost as if
language chose me” (1), he later doubles back within this same essay and clarifies that
“Unknown to my mother, my dominant creative outlet at the time was not poetry but
painting, and not so much what I drew or painted on my own as how I thought about art.
Whatever interest I had in poetry was purely that it seemed to be a compatible medium to
painting” (2). In keeping with a more varied assortment of interests, he also received his
M.A. in Theology from Sewanee in 2005 (Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1), Subsequently,
he was a Kenan Fellow at U.N.C. Chapel Hill (2008-2010) and a Writer-in-Residence at
Covenant College, Chattangooga (2011) (K. Mills, Afterword 127). However, unlike
many contemporary poets, instead of devoting his non-writing career exclusively to
teaching, he supported his family by working professionally, at various points in his life,
as “an artisan bread baker, woodworker and a sawmill operator” (Ramsey 1). He also
coupled these skills with talents in folk music and songwriting, fishing, and furnituremaking, in general sustaining a lifestyle that Kathryn Mills describes as “a handmade life
that was beautiful and full of meaning” (K. Mills, Afterword 125). Ashley Ramsey even
mentions that “He and his family also built a bungalow from salvaged building materials,
which was featured in a 2007 Southern Living issue” (Ramsey 1).
Wilmer Mills met his beloved wife, Kathryn Oliver Mills, the focal inspiration for
many of his most poignant poems, at a West Chester conference in 1995. They married
within the same year after courting on Dauphin Island (K. Mills, Afterword 124-125).
She was, and remains to this day, a professor of French, who, while raised in Berkeley,

9

traces most of her immediate family back to the Deep South (Alabama). She spent a
significant amount of time in France as a child, and returned there with Wilmer and her
family for a year on sabbatical after they were married (125). They had two children,
Benjamin and Phoebe-Agnès, whose names, activities, and lives also found their way into
many of Wilmer‟s poems, particularly from what Kathryn terms the “middle period of
our time as a family” between 2002-2008. These are collected in a section of his
posthumous Selected Poems entitled “The Heart‟s Arithmetic” (W. Mills “The Heart‟s
Arithmetic”). In short, their family life was blessed and deeply happy.
Unfortunately, it was also short-lived. Mills was diagnosed with liver
cancer in May 2011, and, after some radiation treatment that proved fruitless, died at
home on his family farm in Louisiana on July 25, 2011 at age forty-one (Middleton,
“Wilmer Mills,” 2). Characteristically, he chose to be buried in a handcrafted coffin (the
work of his cousin) (K. Mills, Afterword 132), and he left a poetic final letter to the world
in the form of an essay entitled “Living in Eternity”, which was posted first on his
CaringBridge.org donation website, and then on the Tennessee poets‟ Chapter16.org, and
was also distributed amongst family and friends (W. Mills “Living in Eternity”). Fellow
poet and friend Jeff Hardin describes this essay as “a stunning distillation of what Wil
had been trying to say for years,” and claims to have reassured the dying Mills that his
“words will be a consolation for many, as they have been for me” (Hardin, “A Gift for
Adoration”, 1). His certainty of this appears to have been well-grounded, too. Despite
Wilmer Mills‟s status as a minor, at most up-and-coming poet, he was widely mourned
by those who knew both him and his work. The West Chester University Poetry
Conference in 2011 held a “Wilmer Mills” panel to pay tribute to their lost friend (Reeser

10

“Wil Mills Panel Part 2 -- WCU Poetry Conference 2011”; rockingemma‟s channel).
Hillsdale College, where Mills had delivered a two-day series of lectures and workshops
mere months before his diagnosis, not only delivered a tribute to Mills, but incorporated a
“Wilmer H. Mills Visiting Writers” series into the established, semesterly visiting writers
program in 2013 (Wood). Robert B. Shaw published a poem entitled “On the Death of
Wilmer Mills” in the Alabama Literary Review (Shaw 93), whileX. J. Kennedy published
a versified tribute entitled “The Poems of Wilmer Mills” in The Sewanee Review
(Middleton, “Wilmer Mills”, 1). It is clear that his influence is still in effect and that his
memory will linger on.

11

CHAPTER 3
WILMER MILLS AND POETIC FORMALISM
3.1 What is New Formalism?
For a movement whose name suggests both linkage to historically popular modes
of interpretation and also an emphasis on such fundamental and heuristic aspects of
poetry, the New Formalism embraced by Wilmer Mills requires more explanation than
one might expect. This has less to do with any particularly ambiguous or contentious
elements in its formation than because of how it has been received by the poetic world at
large. Partly because Mills‟s New Formalism was, and continues to be, such a niche
movement – one which never fully took hold in the academy in the first place, and one
which has certainly never challenged the institutional pre-dominance of New Historicism,
in any of this movement‟s many, discursive variations, in the time elapsed since – and
also partly because the term itself implies juxtaposition to the academy‟s cherished New
Historicism, the fairest and most productive route by which to go about introducing and
unpacking any of the nuances that surround New Formalism necessarily involves
confronting a few of the more common criticisms leveled at this movement. Indeed,
many of these criticisms themselves seem to arise either from ignorance about the
movement‟s core vision or else from largely unfounded assumptions about the
movement‟s tangential affiliations or ulterior motives, and so are best gotten out of the
way as soon as possible. In no particular order of significance, then, we will briefly
proceed to explore what New Formalism is through what it is not: namely, by defense

12

against its alleged congruence with the politically-charged New Criticism, against its
alleged socially and creatively oppressive elitism.
It is important to note, however, that in this discussion I am concerned with
explicating formalism as Mills expressed and experienced it, that is, from the viewpoint
of a practicing poet. Different considerations would apply in discussion if through literary
theoretical terms, and Marjorie Levinson, in particular, has mapped the interrelations
between a literary-theoretical New Formalism and New Historicism in quite different
terms (Levinson). But for the purpose of discussing Mills‟s work, a broader, less
systematized approach may provide a suitable background.
In these more simplified terms, New Formalism is not, and cannot accurately be
considered, merely a rebranding or continuation of American New Criticism, because it
originally arose as a direct reaction against the poetic precedents set by Eliot and Pound
in the early part of the twentieth century. The misunderstanding most likely stems, at
least in part, from the movement‟s resurgence into the public eye around the 1980s and
1990s, when poets and critics like Brad Leithauser, Mary Jo Salter, Yvor Winters, and J.
V. Cunningham were at large in such notable institutions as Harvard, Stanford, and
Brandeis (McPhillips 77). Even then, the movement did not garner much attention on a
broader scale until around the time the Bush administration, among other things,
appointed Dana Gioia, a formalist poet, as Chairman of the National Endowment of the
Arts (DiPiero 2/14). As a consequence, the vast majority of contemporary scholarly
objections to New Formalism address only Formalist thinking from these decades and
end up either ranting primarily against the neo-conservative politics of the era or else
against the implicit assumption that New Formalism only gained footing within this
13

political climate because it presented a far-too-convenient alternative route which might
permit traditionally-minded scholars to ignore or discount the importance of New
Historicism. As such, it represented, if not exactly a threat, at least an impudent challenge
to the relevance of more liberal establishments within the academia. Nicholas Birns states
candidly in his essay “The Distribution of Argument: New Formalism of/on the
Contemporary” that “being formalist in Anglophone criticism [was] associated with the
Right . . . the „Tory Formalism‟ of the New Critics . . . . taking an aesthetic approach to
literature often seemed to embody a hostility to academic theory and its advocacy of
various political agendas: feminist, post-colonial, African Americanist, queer” (Birns 7).
Operating on a similarly defensive level, Peter Sinnot, Jr., writing for Philosophy and
Literature in 2013, off-sets his own argument by describing, “a reductive strain in new
formalism, which only establishes an aesthetic object by ignoring or reducing to
caricature arguments rooted in other disciplines” (Sinnot 258), similar to Levinson‟s
“normative new formalism” (Levinson 560), while Don Hoyt‟s “Interrupted Forms: The
Case against the „New Formalism‟” brushes repeatedly up against ad hominem attacks,
such as when he remarks that “[d]espite their poses as revolutionaries, new formalists
embody the negative results of all historical reconstructions: a nostalgia for what is
believe to be lost values, an insularity from non-indigenous, hence marginal, concerns,
and the cooptation of diverse ideologies” (Hoyt 8). Still other skeptics, then, avoid
confronting the movement on its own terms by seeking to establish indirect or default
connections back to New Criticism, usually based on complaints about what New
Formalism has not succeeded in bringing to the table, rather than what it has. Dana Gioia
notes that “[s]ince there was no open conflict between the older and younger generations,

14

some critics have conflated the two schools. There has been a common criticism by
detractors that the New Formalists are doing nothing new” (Gioia, “The Poet in an Age of
Prose”, 35). However, Thomas Cable of the University of Texas at Austin reminds us,
however, in his essay “Connoisseurs of Sound and the New Formalism” both that “New
Formalists take pains to distinguish current developments from the older formalism of the
1940s and 1960s,” which in and of itself implies nuances of philosophy and practice
amongst the various strains of the movement, and that “the history of any movement is
usually less linear than its motivators see it, and the rise of the New Formalism throws a
clarifying light over swings of the pendulum for the whole century” (Cable 49). Dana
Gioia reiterates this notion of the complex swing of history (Gioia 32). Then, too, Alan
Shapiro, in his sharp and clear-sighted essay entitled simply “The New Formalism” not
only establishes the “mid-eighties” trend as “an opposite movement” (Shapiro 200) to
that perpetuated by the new much-loathed New Critics, but also points out that “[i]f freeverse experimentation necessarily entailed allegiance to progressive thinking, what are
we to make of Pound and Eliot, the great twentieth-century free-verse innovators, whose
right-wing authoritarian politics makes Reagan seem like a wishy-washy liberal” (212).
In short, the conflation of New Formalism with 1980s neo-conservative politics, while
obviously not groundless, is itself simplistic, reductive.
One of the more easily-dispelled myths about New Formalism, then, revolves
around its naysayers‟ fear of a kind of stiff, oppressive, impersonal elitism born, or so
they claim, of clinging to conventions without cause, or else of imposing arbitrary
restrictions on modes of self-expression and then insisting that these are somehow
“natural”; for indeed, if one can rise above implications enough to examine the actual

15

fall-out, there is a great deal of evidence that this was neither the original motivation of
the New Formalists nor the result, as experienced in Mills‟s generation. For one thing,
both formalist poets of the 1950s and 1960s, as well as many later adherers from outside
of the academy, placed strong emphasis on the inherent artistic value of common, or what
we now might even call “popular,” art, which they believed that the close reading craze,
and subsequent, Joycean inaccessibility of “high” and “serious” art had unjustly
obscured. Paul Lake speaks to this issue when he writes in his essay “Verse that Print
Bred”:
Formal poetry is not elitist but a popular art form. Urban African-American rap
musicians don‟t use couplets in their songs so often because they have read their
Dryden and Pope; nor do they use an emphatic meter because they have read
Eliot‟s „Tradition and the Individual Talent.‟ Like all writers of popular songs
they use those devices because they give pleasure, bound as they are to the
lyricism of memory and hope. Any formal resource that can exist in the work of
artist as diverse as Eliot, John Lennon, and the Fat Boys has roots that are both
thick and deep. (Lake, “Verses that Print Bred”, 30)
Following this same line of thinking, Lake‟s essay “Towards a Liberal Poetics” clarifies
that “[w]hat the new formalists know that the advocates of „projective verse‟ and „open
form‟ don‟t is that though the electric guitar might have replaced the lyre, lyric poetry
was never meant to be strictly a spoken art, but something far more musical . . . . Song
lyrics, whether of Rock or Country or Pop music, still have meter and rhyme – and
millions of listeners” (Lake, “Towards liberal Poetics” 12). Then, too, in an interview
from 1990, Richard Wilbur notes that he had in the past frequently begun his creative
16

writing classes by offering students the following piece of advice: “You probably were
brought up to feel that poetry should be ennobling, that therefore streetlights should be
compared to stars, rather than stars to streetlights. Try comparing stars to streetlights, or
making similar comparisons between supposedly high things and things supposedly low”
(Curry 7-8). These sorts of democratic alignments also serve a more self-interested
purpose, insofar as they root loudly for New Formalism‟s underlying philosophy that the
concept, if not necessarily the manifested constructs, of form is inherent to creative
endeavors, that it represents a kind of Romantic triumph of nature over nurture. The
invocation of popular art as a valid tool with which to make such a serious point is an
admirable and progressive salute in its own right and suggests that the sentiment of
community which the movement claims to embody is truly genuine. Whereas New
Criticism attempted to claim the concept of universality in theme and internal
significance for the sake of its own, preferred poetry, early New Formalism, as it
influenced Mills, attempted, with mixed-success, to reclaim the concept of poetry for the
sake of universal access and appeal.
Perhaps precisely for this reason, the universality and pedagogical simplicity of
fixed forms was often seen as unusually open to and inclusive of women and other
minority writers from the 1950s and beyond, even at a time when many strongly felt –
and were finally beginning to contest – the exclusion of their voices from “high” and
canonically-inclined literary circles. Indeed, numerous minority, and even a few
decidedly left-wing, proponents of traditional forms insist to this day that they view freeverse and the many theoretical attitudes and stances behind it to be in and of themselves
symptomatic of privilege (primarily on the grounds that a lack of attention to form tends

17

to legitimize historical illiteracy and glorify self-absorption), rather than a means of
intellectual liberation from genuinely oppressive standards. The popular British comedian
and documentary narrator Stephen Fry, whose work (outside of his brief and incidental
acquaintance with Wilmer Mills) has repeatedly referenced his famous obsession with
literature and language, explains in his humorous (and also highly informative)
beginner‟s guide to scansion and traditional English poetic forms, entitled The Ode Less
Travelled, that full-on rejection of form in the name of intellectual progress is, from his
perspective, insulting to the very people it claims to uplift: “It is as if we have been
encouraged to believe that form is a kind of fascism and that to acquire knowledge is to
drive a jackboot into the face of those poor souls who are too incurious, dull-witted or
idle to find out what poetry can be. Surely better to use another word for such free-form
meanderings: „prose-therapy‟ about covers it, „emotional masturbation‟, perhaps” (Fry
175). Echoing this sentiment in more objectively factual terms, poet Adrienne Rich notes
that “‟Avant-garde‟ has historically meant the rebellions of new groups of younger white
men (and a few women) against the complacencies and sterilities of older men of their
own culture. . . . [A]mong poets . . . the „great modernists,‟ were privileged by gender and
class and were defenders of privilege” (Rich 6-7), which statement complements Molly
Peacock‟s observation that “New Formalism is often practiced by outsiders . . . . Pattern
and predictability of sound allow for a feeling of safety that can release a variety of
emotions, not the careful one-note emotion that over-control of a free verse line break can
engender” (Peacock 84). Three-time National Book Award finalist Marilyn Nelson‟s protraditionalist essay “Owning the Masters”, frames her own internal sense of this truth of
the human experience‟s invocation of inherent, underlying structure in even more

18

theoretical terms. In the process of analyzing Phillis Wheatley‟s poetic argument –
penned when Wheatley was only fourteen years old – against “The Atheist” by way of
example, Nelson writes, “[r]emember: This child was a slave. Think about what atheism
would have meant to a slave: The complete meaninglessness of creation and of existence.
Nihilism. The Great Nada. How differently the slave must have felt God‟s hand every
day than the smug, blind white atheist whom Phillis addressed” (Nelson 12). While
Nelson admits that “I hesitate to become involved in the current debate between the socalled new formalists (the singers) and the organic poets (the conversationalists). I cannot
in good conscience take either side. Certainly free-verse poems can sing. Yet I hear the
music more clearly, more compellingly, when I write with an ear to tradition: Hearing
either the music of my people, or the rhyme and meter of the master‟s tradition”, she goes
on to clarify that she believes, “[o]ne of their [minority writer‟s] problems with tradition
is that they believe we‟re born into tradition the way we‟re born into gender and race. . . .
Maya is right: Shakespeare did write for her. Just as I write for a 51-year-old white
Oklahoma farmer” (13). She then further clarifies this point by stating, “I don‟t believe
the pleasures of poetry can be dissected and explained. But one of the pleasures of poetry
must surely be its ability to give us a sense of community” (15). This sentiment she also
presently defines in even more concrete, if reluctantly anti-New Historicist, terms: “I‟m
convinced our inclination to create race-, gender- and ethnic-specific literary enclaves is
dangerous; that it disinvites us from community. The Angloamerican tradition belongs to
all of us . . . . That means the metrical tradition, too” (15). Finally, she brings her point
home with a very clearly-articulated rendition of the New Formalist philosophy: “[w]e
must not, however; as we widen the course of the canon, make its bed shallow. Despite

19

the labor necessary to recognize the wisdom which made generations consider those dead
white guys great, they are great. Sometimes in spite of themselves” (14). Nelson‟s
powerful rhetoric here resonates on purely logical levels, too. If, after all, one cannot
fully acknowledge, engage with, and potentially embrace even positive aspects of a
tradition with which one disagrees, then who can justifiably criticize even the most elitist
proponents of this tradition for ignoring or belittling writers they personally dislike? A
widening of access and appeal necessitates coming to terms with the full-range of voices
to whom, and against whom, one is writing – a consciousness of the complete and
complex community from which self is born.
If, then, we are to understand a writer such as Mills on his own terms, and not
merely through a filter of distaste for what traditionalist poetryseems to represent, it is
important to consider the manner in which traditionally-oriented poets and theorists
themselves tend to interpret the elements of the past which they seek so ardently to
resurrect. James Matthew Wilson‟s 2015 essay entitled “Ancient Beauty, Modern Verse:
Romanticism and Classicism from Plato to T. S. Eliot and the New Formalism” provides
both an in-depth and scholarly explanation of this precise topic. The division between
more recent Western schools of thought regarding the optimal way to teach or write
poetry is, according to Wilson, much more complicated than a mere divide in the political
orientation (so far as contemporary politics are defined) of each school‟s proponents. The
more relevant division, he claims, stems back to the intellectual influence of historical
Romanticism and Classicism, both of which he here defines in very particular, though
perhaps idiosyncratic, ways. With regard to Romanticism, Wilson writes, “this weighty
theory actually refers to the origin or creation of the work rather than anything inhering in

20

the work itself. It is the theory of art as process and expression that stands more in
reference to the psychology of the artist than to art as a particular kind of thing made”
(Wilson 3). By contrast, Wilson writes that Classicism “says something other about
artworks, without obvious reference to their origin. Namely, a work of art may be an
organic unity that transcends the sum of its parts, but it is made up of parts nonetheless,
and the difference between the better and worse work of art lies in how fully those parts
have been dominated and brought under the rule of a formal logic” (3). This particular
application of formal logic, which seeks to define the “parts” of Beauty itself, according
to a study by Umberto Eco (whom Wilson cites extensively) situates the concept of
Beauty as existing between a Plotinean property that Eco terms “Aesthetics of Light” and
a Platonic/Aristotelean/Pythagorean property that Eco terms “Aesthetics of Proportion”
(13-14). “Proportion” here, of course, refers to the objective, factual, formal existence or
manifestation of a thing, while the more elusive “Light” seeks to quantify a
comparatively subjective internal experience or response – for example, a sense of
awakening or recognition, much like what Edmund Burke‟s “sublime” is meant to evoke
(Burke). In fact, Fordham University‟s professor of theology, Richard Viladesau, clarifies
that “‟light‟ and „luminosity‟ for medieval thought symbolizes the nature of being an
„intelligible‟ and – at its higher levels – self-conscious. „Form,‟ in turn, is the intelligible
quality that gives actual existence to a substance” (Viladesau 114). The traditional
Western concept of Beauty, then, is not merely, or at least not exclusively, an arbitrary
imposition of “things I personally like” onto “things I personally dislike or find socially
unacceptable.” Rather, it conveys what Wilson terms an essential “property of being”
(Wilson 15). It is a sum of parts, a whole -- an interaction or experience of a human mind,

21

of a human nature, with something manifested intelligibly outside of itself. It is, in part of
its whole, then, an event, an action in the immediate present. And actions, even exercises
in medieval Christian mysticism (The Cloud of Unknowing) necessarily either imitate or
invent method in order to achieve this transcendent state of communion with other minds,
souls, and extrapersonal experiences. Method, order, and traditions surrounding these,
then, are purportedly a path towards a freedom of and from self that is something like
transcendence, and not merely a shameful covering up and/or overblown glorification of
one‟s individuality.
Interestingly, though, Wilson‟s argument turns against the New Formalists in the
end, accusing them of straying too far from Eliot‟s purer Classicist principles, and insists
that it would be far more accurate to trace even the better-known “academic” formalists
like Richard Wilbur and Anthony Hecht – those whose reputations have not been rooted
exclusively in regionalism or recognizably “folk” or “popular” art – back to Robert
Frost‟s legacy of mixed Romanticism (33). New Formalists, in the later sense of the term,
although they obviously understand and admire the traditional Western conception of
Beauty after a Classicist fashion, have also incorporated a distinctly Romantic awareness
of self and of the internal process of composition into their overarching philosophy, in
addition to a more democratic conception of audience, and a “true” traditionalist like
Wilson (unlike a practitioner such as Mills) sees this as a bad thing. Another way to
conceptualize it, of course, would be as an experiment (if perhaps failed) in combining
the best of both of these traditions into something entirely new, while retaining ties to a
more ancient claim of mystique and profundity. At the very least, they cannot, once
again, rightly be understood, even by an opposing viewpoint, as mere elitist, stiff-necked

22

enforcers of dead, oppressive regiments. Because there is still so much controversy over
this point, however, it is debatable whether, for all the ideals their rhetoric purports, they
actually accomplished any of their aims, so much as touted them. And for many, of
course, this is still their primary and most objectionable fault.
In a more positive light, however, what much New Formalism does seem to signal
is a return to a consciousness of one‟s audience – a, perhaps strained, suggested means of
compromising between the inseparability of self and circumstance from the product of
one‟s pen, which both Wilson‟s disdained “Romanticism” and most strains of New
Historicism emphasize, and the need to move objectively outside of what Nelson
identifies as overly-restrictive conceptions of self, like identify and rightful heritability, in
order to discover what is truly possible in and for one‟s work. In short, it advocates,
ideally, placing less emphasis on the politics of what one is saying, or the intellectual
originality of how one says it, and more on the community one intends to reach, and how
this peripherally-extroverted consciousness in turn changes and deepens one‟s awareness
of self.
3.2 Richard Wilbur: The Face of Old New Formalism
Because Wilmer Mills died so young, and left behind so little commentary on his
work, or even his philosophy of work, it is necessary to approach analysis via a mediator
whose philosophy and poetry are known to have greatly influenced Mills‟s work. Richard
Wilbur is an excellent candidate for this, not only because he is so frequently tied to the
vein of “old” New Formalism with which Mills felt his interests aligned most closely, but
because nearly every interview with Mills or extensive biographical piece on his life
emphasizes that Mills looked up to Wilbur himself as a major source of inspiration. Jeff

23

Hardin writes that “[i]n late March, Will gave the introduction when I read at Covenant
College. . . . To my astonishment and embarrassment, he said that his own writing moved
back and forth between two pillars of influence: Richard Wilbur and me” (Hardin, “A
Gift for Adoration”). Mills states in his interview for the Carolina Quarterly that “I‟m
writing with the same tools that Richard Wilbur used” (Vernon 7). The Poetry
Foundation cites Richard Wilbur beside Robert Frost as one of Mills‟s two main
influences (“Wilmer Mills: Biography”), and Kathryn Mills claims that “[h]is next
significant move [upon meeting her] was to hand me a stack of his poems on our way to
hear Richard Wilbur‟s keynote reading” (K. Mills 123). Nor did the admiration flow just
one way. The Encyclopedia of Louisiana entry on Wilmer Mills relates that “[f]ormer US
Poet Laureate Richard Wilbur praised Mills‟s earlier poems for their „emotional density‟
and said of Mills‟s writing, „There is pain and darkness in it; and there is a continual
relief and gaiety as the right words are found‟” (Middleton, “Wilmer Mills” 3). Footage
from the West Chester Poetry conference, which paid tribute to Mills the summer he
died, includes a video of Jennifer Reeser reading Mills‟s poem “The Poet Playing Chess”
for Richard Wilbur at his 90th birthday celebration (Reeser, “The Poet Playing Chess-Wil Mills”). An ongoing linking of an comparison between their opinions and their works
seems appropriate, then.
In many respects, the work of Richard Wilbur epitomizes the early conception of
New Formalism in that his work ventured openly into the then-contemptible realm of
preference for traditional English forms (or even just rhyme and meter) while still ever
maintaining a non-committal and decidedly Romantic rhetoric of individual preference
with regards to the creative process. Many sources, in fact, cite Wilbur himself as the

24

primary instigator of New Formalism, particularly where the term is more casually
defined, for example on open access websites (Holcombe). In some ways, this claim
makes sense, as Wilbur is clearly invested in many of the later recurrent themes of
formalism and also, for better or worse, personifies many of its stereotypes. Peter Harris,
for example, describes the nature of his interests in terms of stiffness, as having “always
been an equilibrist, up on a tightrope performing feats of association in the process of his
search for an equilibrium between apparently opposed objects of desire. . . . for a formal
perfection beyond the depredations of time and an equally strong impulse to harrow the
pleasures of the physical world” (Harris 413). Also commenting on Wilbur‟s preoccupation with the poetic possibilities inherent in solid, discernable forms in materiality,
Philip White calls Wilbur “an inveterate dualist” wherein Wilbur is “advocating a poetic
of rationality, order, balance, and commitment to others and to the natural world,”
though, in addition, he apparently “is not immune to the temptation to use poetry as an
escape” (White 249). This staunch, perfectionistic investment in affirmation of the value
– specifically, if somewhat paradoxically, the abstract, spiritual, or metaphysical value -of the material world, in both its beauty and mundanity, traces, of course, back to Robert
Frost, and so speaks to the strong elements of regionalism, which were important for
Mills and which pervade New Formalism at large, even if regionalism itself is not exactly
Wilbur‟s defining characteristic.
In other ways, however, this claim that Wilbur‟s example must have served as the
primary fuel for the movement, is in and of itself a little far-fetched, given both the
numerous other prominent formalist writers contemporary to Wilbur and also his own
careful neutrality on the subject of free verse. Monroe K. Spears writes that “Richard

25

Wilbur stresses the similarities, rather than the differences, between his procedures and
those of the writers of free verse” (Spears 557). Wilbur himself openly acknowledges that
his personal preference for traditional forms stems, not from any intentions to make a
rebellious statement about accepted standards or politics, but rather from his not having
“been able to please myself in my efforts to write free verse,” and that “I agree with Ezra
Pound when he says that free verse is harder to write than formal verse” (Frank and
Mitchell 27). Interestingly, however, the tones in which Wilbur presents these kinds of
peaceable admissions seem, at least in his interviews, to align him philosophically with
James Matthew Wilson‟s definition of “Classicism”; that is, it lays an emphasis on the
value of an overall, measurable, final quality of the end product over any quibble about
an exact method by which one could, or ought, to arrive at this level of quality. He spends
a great deal more time talking about his own process, of course, and never even implicitly
raises this as a model to be imitated, and yet invariably makes it felt that he himself takes
for granted the need to hold oneself to a measurable internal standard, and believes other
so-called “great” poets invariably do the same (Cummins 44; Hutton 46). His own more
democratic conception of audience, then, seems to extend to, and perhaps even solicit the
approval of, the same, elitist community of free verse writers that the nature of his work
and his affiliated movement claim to be challenging – perhaps, if we stretch a bit,
unearthing the very paradox that eventually led to this movement‟s over-politicization,
subsequent misinterpretation, and eventual dissolution of idealistic focus.
In fairness, though, it would have been difficult for Richard Wilbur to ignore, or
even downplay, the relevance of the established literary climate of his day, even in the
immediate wake of Eliot and Pound. This is due to widespread approval of, if occasional

26

bemusement with, him is one of the reasons he is, to this day, well-known enough to
serve as a focal point from which to mark the early turning points towards twentiethcentury formalist thinking, or even to have exercised any kind of influence over the styles
or philosophies of younger poets like Wilmer Mills. The highlights of Wilbur‟s career
included such accolades as two Pulitzer prizes, a National Book Award, the Wallace
Stevens Award, the Frost Medal, and the Prix de Rome Fellowship, just to name a few.
He also succeeded Robert Penn Warren as the second poet laureate of the United States
and won a number of awards for his translations of classic French authors, like Voltaire,
Moliere, and Racine, into English verse. (“Richard Wilbur: Biography”). Even before
Wilbur had become famous, he had attended Amherst College in the early 1940s, and
then, much later, Harvard University. Born in 1921 in New York City to a family of
editors (“Richard Wilbur: Poet”), Wilbur had originally shown interest in entering
journalism. His experiences serving in the U.S. Army during World War II, however,
bent his ambitions toward a need to reconcile the chaos of the world around him into
verse. On this subject, he noted, “One does not use poetry for its major purposes, as a
means to organize oneself and the world, until one‟s world somehow gets out of hand”
(“Richard Wilbur: Biography”). The career which followed stressed these principles of
quantification through a rather detached rational order and consistent affirmation of life,
for which qualities he was both disdained and widely imitated, and these qualities made
him famous enough for an aspiring young poet like Wilmer Mills to have encountered his
work in the first place. It would be far too easy to claim that Mills‟s work represents a
mere youthful imitation of Wilbur, though, as we will see, Mills‟s poetry cannot be
reduced quite so simply to a knock-off crowd-pleaser, for all his nods to traditionalism.

27

CHAPTER 4
WRITING THE SOUTHERN VALUES
Mills‟s poetry seems on first glance to set out in his poetry to meet the tastes of a
more traditional audience – one which seems to wish to feel included and comforted,
rather than challenged by its encounter with literature – is that of going out of his way to
create a clear, straight-forward, and natural-sounding human voice to speak each of his
poems, rather than experimenting with trickier techniques that invoke imagistic narrative
or fragmented internal dialog. If this were only the case with his narrative ballads, like
those comprising Light for the Orphans or the first section of Selected Poems, it could be
written off as a necessity of genre; however, this is not the case. Even Mills‟s deeply
personal and contemplative poems, such as those from “Arriving on Time” (W. Mills,
“Arriving on Time” 37-70) or “The World That isn‟t There” (“The World That isn‟t
There” 93-122) employ an approachable storyteller‟s voice with its own, distinctive
sound. A review by David Middleton of the posthumously-published Selected Poems,
entitled “Tell Me a Story”, suggests of Mills‟s typical, overarching style that “[t]o
[Robert Penn] Warren‟s subject matter Mills added Robert‟s [sic] Frosts‟s traditional
style,” and even quotes Mills as saying, “‟I wanted to write about characters with the
uncooked energy of Warren but felt a visceral need to do so in the formal manner of
Frost‟” (Middleton, “Tell Me A Story” xii). By contrast, however, Dick Davis, author of
the introduction to the Selected Poems, feels that this convenient categorization of voice
based on literary ancestry is not nuanced enough to be accurate, insisting that “Wil‟s

28

language is usually a more heightened affair than Frost‟s; it rarely has the relaxed
conversational tone that Frost so often seems to aim for” (Davis, Introduction xiv). He
does, though, later concede that “Will‟s voice is his own – honest and hard-won, tender
and angry, self-questioning and affirming, always pushing for purity of observation and
record” (xv), in short, that it is earnest and unaffected. Unfortunately, the few interviews
that Mills gave in his lifetime do not elicit an elaborate philosophy on clarity of delivery;
yet his poetry itself, coupled with these commentators‟ observations, suggest that he
aligns very much with Richard Wilbur on this matter. Wilbur asserts that “Of course you
try to be as simple as you can. You do this for the sake of making yourself clear to
yourself. And so some kind of availability to the general public ought to be a by-product”
(Curry 11). But Wilbur is also careful to re-state, several times, his belief that this kind of
accessibility, what might in a less favorable light be thought of as selling-out to popular
taste, is actually a natural result of the poet‟s being more deeply attuned to his or her own
inner voice and scope of reference, of trusting that the audience will simply meet them
half-way, as opposed to insisting that the readers do all the work themselves: “I think that
when you write, as when you talk, you‟re not really choosing your words according to
your audience – unless you‟re talking, say, to children. You talk the way it seems natural
for you to talk. . . . I refuse to be done out of the privilege of referring to Hephaestus if I
like” (11). Mills concurs, offering up his own transcendent epiphany as a listener, an
experiencer of poetry, that “‟Joy‟ is being caught in the act / Of never asking what it
means” (W. Mills, “Benjamin Shooting Skeet”), though he is equally conscious of a
poet‟s inevitable short-comings when it comes to clarifying meaning on the first try,
“afraid / That I would disappoint the obvious” (“Fallen Fruit” 95). This is a recurrent

29

motif in his thought, and he and valiantly attempts to locate regardless “what angels do,
the extra- / Ordinary in the ordinary, / The supernatural made natural” (“Ice Cream
Angel” 76). What this seems to imply is that, while the naturalizing of voice is certainly a
conscious move on Mills‟s part, and less of an accidental “by-product” than Wilbur
would have it, the action of invoking it drives at the very heart of something in Mills
spirituality. The very external limiting of his own creative choices and modes of
expression in the interest of popular appeal, almost by default opens up another, very
personal, well of meanings and possibilities within his work.
Similarly, this intentional self-restriction within the composition process in terms
of New Formalism‟s better-known tenents, and the subscription to elements like fixed
rhyme schemes and meter may seem, on a surface level, merely to pay homage to a
newly-established norm, or merely to conform to the expectations of the sorts of people,
at Sewanee or elsewhere, who wished to have their expectations confirmed that these
traditional forms must indeed prove superior conveyers of affect than anything more
new-fangled trends; but we can see, both from Mills‟s often loose and arbitrary adherence
to regimens of rhyme or meter and his very personal connection to the concept of an
inherently structured framework in which reality plays out that this is not the case, at least
for Mills. Granted, there is some unspoken debate on this front. We can see from several
of Mills‟s would-be-biographers, scattered as these are across the internet, that even a
few of his most ardent admirers remained too suspicious of his open affiliation with the
New Formalists to see Mills or his work beyond it, except to label his poetry as a
refreshing exeption from what they had come to expect. An example of this comes from
what appears to be a former student, named Louis T. Mayeux on a website called

30

Southern Bookman: A Literary Blog for All Seasons. This blogger condescendingly, if
perhaps unwittingly, states that “Wilmer‟s poems remained true to the traditional
disciplines of meter and rhyme, and like many in the so called new traditionalist
movement trumpeted at Sewanee, used verse for narrative,” before he amends that to say,
“Wilmer‟s poems give new energy to old forms, which drag some new traditionalists into
shopworn metaphors and tedious language” (Mayeux). These kinds of built-in prejudices,
which we have discussed at some length in the previous chapter, have, then, the
unfortunate tendency to obscure rather than to clarify what scant hints Mills interjects on
his own behalf through the shroud of history that is rapidly growing up around his work.
What little he does say, however, strongly suggests that his own conception of formal
rhyme and rhythm, and their merit and/or function within poetry, were tied more closely
to a deep, internal consciousness of time, and of the inescapably recognizable patterns
embedded within the passage of time, as a tangible dimension of human experience. He
writes that “Prophecy is not about / The future; it isn‟t fortune telling. / It‟s more the ache
of déjà-vu / Expanded as an open window / That lets you see the obvious” (W. Mills,
“For the Unemployed Man at Forty”). In one poem, a naïve, young priest‟s wife in one
poem describes a retrospective comprehension of her husband‟s clandestine pedophilia
with the remark, “I see the pattern” (“A Young Priest‟s Wife Begins to Think” 99), while
Mills concludes an intimate, and very subtly erotic, love letter to his own wife with the
insight that “My Dear, we sense / How poetry can smolder into prose / When life and art
resist a confluence. / But love attaches passages then grows / To conjugate the parts. Our
lives combine / With art, converse in prose, and fall in line” (“Fondue Analysis”). He
insists, displaying the first of his later much-remarked-upon influence from Wendell

31

Berry (Vernon 5), that what he understands to be “[t]he art is seeing nature as an order. /
Like farmer-artists, we give it shape and border” (“Stanzas for Kathryn” 65), so that, in
response to Wallace Steven‟s “Anecdote of a Jar”, he can “grow the rhyme / And reason
of its nameless place and time / In every word and syllable I sing / To keep their meaning
from meandering” (“The Jar Garden” 60). He exclaims in “Diary of a Piano-Tuner‟s
Wife” that already “everything in life is made of lines” (9). Mills‟s views on the
conjointly symbolic process of crafting a poem and that of cultivating a farm, distilling
meaning from strategic repetition of, and the relationship of this to the application of
poetic forms, are highly relevant to the discussion, and I will return to them presently.
The first thing to notice, however, is that Mills clearly experiences the concept of
inherent order in the natural world, and in the lives of its inhabitants, not as an academic
theory or an abstract political talking point, but as a visceral fact. To him, it is a thing,
like a mystic‟s faith, that can be evidenced, and potentially even reproduced, if only one
could learn, or be taught how to “see” “the pattern”. Perhaps, more accurately, Mills saw
it as a means to center oneself in such a way that would permit experiential awareness of
this measured, and measuring, inertia which is time.
Richard Wilbur actually speaks to this pedagogical nature of form as well, in
relation to its guiding or suggesting influence over the reading experience of the audience
with which it purports to commune, though nowhere does he even implicitly frame the
purpose of formal verse as either morally or spiritually instructive; and it seems plausible
that Mills, who echoes a Wilbur-esque philosophy on the function of form in his own
interviews, did not intentionally set out to carry the concept so far in practice. On the
contrary, far from condescending to his readers like a pre-Romantic, or perhaps

32

Victorian-era children‟s tale, as if he were the Elsie Dinsmore of Southern Agrarian/New
Formalism, Mills seems to take the general view that a writer has a contractual obligation
to fulfill with regard to representing reality as truthfully as possible, and that he can fulfil
this duty best through listening to his own instinct and allowing the poem to grow
organically. He writes about meter, then, as if it were primarily an aid to help the poet
through this process of listening truthfully, and not a device meant to sucker in potential
readers or to teach them how they ought to understand the world from which the poem
claims to have grown. In a 2009 interview with blogger and speaker LeAnne Martin, on
her blog Christians in the Arts, Mills describes his creative process:
Then, ironically, what writes a poem is the syntax. Once I latch onto the right
syntactical pattern (a tone, a pacing of clause, subject, and verb), the poem
basically writes itself, pulling the subject matter along through the meter,
sometimes in rhyme. It is important not to force the language to go where you
want it to go, but to listen to it and let it guide you. The word “author” is
descended from the same word as “augur,” meaning “seer.” A poet‟s job is to see
things, to point out the obvious that other people don‟t see, not to reinvent reality
with some hokus-pokus romantic notion of “inspiration” or creativity. That‟s
called disappointing the obvious. Once I have a draft of a poem, I sometimes
spend years revising it. That‟s when the real writing takes place. (Martin)
Wilbur, while in some respects clearly the germ of this train of thought, actually takes a
much more cynical, pragmatic view of meter‟s function as a “guide” to the poet‟s
creative process. He writes, “It‟s very clear that however much one masters the formal
elements in a formal poem, however much one makes them do just what one wants, they
33

are a little bit of a crutch and a comfort. They may not end by looking so. . . . But at any
rate, they feel so during the process of composition” (Frank and Mitchell 27).
Interestingly, then, what Wilmer Mills describes as an intuitive, almost mystical,
process, Richard Wilbur apologizes for as an insufficient an insufficient amount of
intuition, as rules and habits taking the place of intuition: “[b]ut with free verse, you have
to have a kind of intuitive assurance that what you‟ve done is right. . . . because, however
difficult it may be, formal verse is in some ways emotionally comfortable. It requires
fewer arbitrary decisions, fewer intuitive conclusions that one is somehow mysteriously
right” (27). One conclusion we could draw from this is, of course, that Mills‟s
understanding of his own process still bordered on naïve romanticism, partly because of
the secluded life he lived, and partly because he did not live long enough to grow
accustomed to being successful, or to have his motives scrutinized and mercilessly
deconstructed, as Wilbur had by this point. Another way to interpret this disparity in
optimism, however, might be that Mills, in his perpetual preoccupation with time, simply
placed more importance on the second part of his statement, concerning the centrality of
the revision process, in practice than he did the more interview-worthy-sounding
declaration about insight. In this aspect, too, he is, of course, following in Wilbur‟s
footsteps, though Wilbur takes the time to spell it out a little more articulately: “[f]inding
the right rhyme can slow you down. . . . And since you are slowed down by these
technical difficulties, you are also likely to be slowed down in your choosing of words”
(28). Wilbur goes on in this passage to speak in slightly more objectionable terms about
employing this slowness, this embedding of repetition into the writing process so as to
avoid cumbersome repetition in the finished product, as allowing one to control, not only

34

the precision of the poem, but of the “reader‟s voice” (28). But it is unclear whether by
this he means, as objectors to formalism would have it, that he wishes to exercise control
over the mind and will of “the reader” themselves, or whether, by “voice”, he means he
wishes to exercise control over the connection he is forging with an anticipated audience
that reacts in real time inside his head while he tries on and discards phraseology in the
process of writing a poem.
As we will discuss, again, presently, both Wilbur and Mills held complicated
philosophies about the relationship between concepts of “community” and “self”, with
which background, it becomes clear that slowing down enough to acquire such control
might more accurately be construed as an act of perfectionism – the desire to perfectly
actualize or manifest an internally-held ideal in the real world in such a way that it is
completely recognizable to and worthy of affirmation from another human being – as
opposed to a kind of under-handed manipulation. Again, it is not clear precisely where
Wilbur stands on this issue, but it is obvious from Mills‟s commentary that he places a
weighty responsibility on the “augur” author, both as a craftsman and as a person, and
that, in his eyes, adherence to form is a means to fulfill this ideal of being, of living, and
teaching how to live, in a slowed-down time, both for the sake of his community of
readers and for himself.
Another area in which Mills‟s more casual critics seem to assume he is merely
pandering to a worn cliché, but from which it is evident that he is, in fact, writing
earnestly and authentically, affirming and transforming awareness of self through the
externalization of self, is in his subject-matter – his perennial fascination with rural
Southern environments, farming metaphors, and recollections in contemporary literature
35

or media of the kinds of idyllic and old-fashioned boyhood activities that one scarcely
ever finds outside re-runs of The Waltons. His wife Kathryn seems to have anticipated
this highly understandable assumption, because she was quick to defend him in her
afterword to Selected Poems: “[t]he worlds he invoked – the rural Old South, the lives of
the marginalized, the realm of faith – are foreign to most people, but not quaint or
irrelevant because Wil lived, breathed, and grew them from the ground up” (K. Mills,
Afterword, 129). Wilmer himself confirms that “[u]p until the eleventh grade in high
school, my life, other than going to church and going to school, consisted largely of
baling hay, de-horning and castrating young bulls, mowing pasture, harvesting grass
seed, and a lot of hunting and fishing” (Mills, “Farming Versus Poetry” 1). One could
therefore certainly, in this particular instance, even imagine Mills delivering Richard
Wilbur‟s exact response to a query about why, literary ancestry and “tradition” of Robert
Frost and older, British Romantics aside, this subject-matter appealed to him so much: “I
use natural imagery because I was raised on a farm. . . . I attribute my own natural
imagery to simple affection and long acquaintance” (Curry 13).
Despite the readily apparent fact that Wilbur devotes so much of his interview and
non-fiction essay time to discussion of his personal history, emphasizing each and every
time the centrality of this personal history to his work, thought and very being, however,
his reasons for so consistently employing these sorts of metaphors runs deeper than a
mere making-do with following the even more clichéd advice to “write what you know.”
By the account of his close friend and fellow poet Jeff Hardin, Mills seems to have had a
natural tendency to process objects and activities in the world around him in terms of
their histories. Hardin writes about a time he helped Mills make his famous artesian bread

36

that “I had no clue what I was doing, but Wil loved to teach me how to do such things, all
the while explaining elaborate histories about wheat, yeast, and ancient processes long
forgotten in today‟s fast-paced world. Sometimes I thought he was just making stuff up,
but it all sounded so interesting that I didn‟t challenge him” (Hardin, “A Gift for
Adoration,” 2).
These past-oriented metaphors, derived from etymology, were apparently
something that lived very much at the core of Mills‟s writing, as they crop up often, and
are indeed part of what fueled his attraction to formal verses. In his essay “Farming
Versus Poetry”, he writes that “[t]he world „Verse‟ comes from the Latin, versus, as it
was used to describe how the hors-drawn plow was turned at the end of each furrow to
begin a new one. Writing stories in verse . . . . keeps me aware of the arbitrary margins of
my field, so that I know where to turn, not leaving any ground untilled, and not crossing
over into my neighbor‟s trees or through his fence” (W. Mills, “Farming Versus Poetry”
6). He elaborates on this further in his interview for the Carolina Quarterly, stating that
“[t]he word Boustrophedon means „bull turning,‟ so the idea was that the lines of a poem
turned in the same way that a bull does at it pulls a plow through a field, the same way I
used to pull my grandfather through his garden even,” and then picking up these same
threads a little further on by explaining:
That agriculture metaphor informed our idea of lines on the page which, for the
poet and farmer, have arbitrary breaks, arbitrary because when the poet or farmer
gets to the end of a furrow he has no choice but to turn. . . . [H]e wouldn‟t stop
half way across his own field and sniff the wind and say that he had some kind of

37

hocus pocusy feeling that he was going to be an artistic farmer and start plowing a
new row right there. (Vernon 7)
Even with just a casual reading of these passages, we can easily note his repeated
use of “neighbors” (obviously recalling Frost‟s “Mending Fences”) and a strong,
ingrained concern for or consciousness of a kind of social norm, a desire not to encroach
on someone else‟s property (of time?), as a significant part of his rationalization for the
inherent necessity of lines, of borders and limitations, in one‟s life and one‟s poetry. In
short, his social consciousness, while not necessarily the primary governing force, is once
again inextricably intertwined with the choices he makes, and which in turn shape him as
a poet. A quote from his short story, “Thoughts from Port Royal, Kentucky,” published in
Image magazine in 2009, sums up this concept aptly: “Each word is like a story in itself
with histories and meanings. I love to see what words still mean and what they used to
mean. It‟s like a family tree of all the people on the earth and how the tribes have trickled
down to nothing but a word or two in someone else‟s speech” (W. Mills, “Thoughts from
Port Royal, Kentucky” 18). Farming, then, may be part of Wilmer Mills‟s fabric, his
“story with histories and meanings,” but its invocation in his thought, the way he shapes
his poetry, is an avenue by which to reach out to the world around him, to have “brought
a gift for adoration to everything he did” (Hardin, “A Gift for Adoration,” 2) as well as a
simply to look back on the cosmically insignificant wealth of personal experience.
The material, concrete world from which he gained this experience – experience
which led him to the level of religious devotedness upon which all of his commentators
remark – held a unique fascination for Mills, however, and his poetry made a point of
remarking upon the significance of insignificant detail, and demonstrating how the
38

observation of it became an opportunity, an avenue, for the deeper stillness and
awareness that afforded him spiritual insight – in short, how one came to transcend
materialism through awareness and appreciation of the material. While it is, once again,
entirely plausible that he borrowed some of this interest from the often seemingly cookiecutter, rural pre-occupations of his New Formalist predecessors, including Robert Frost,
Robert Penn Warren, and, of course, Richard Wilbur. Jeff Hardin also makes the case that
this intense awe of material existence upon which his dualism rests was an inborn and
entirely authentic personality trait, rather than a theoretical affectation. He writes, “Wil
cut a loaf open for us to „sample,‟ and there in the middle of the night we ate it as though
it were manna. When Wil liked something – the taste of figs, for instance, or a resonating,
rich line in a poem – he would shiver his whole body with visible delight” (Hardin, “A
Gift for Adoration” 2). This delight is visible, too, in his poetry, in the rich expanse of
detail he provides when speaking of the natural world. It allows him to describe how,
“[b]right filaments of dust well up, then fall / Below the shadowed sil, until twilight /
Consumes the room like water on a shore” (W. Mills, “A Dirge for Leaving” 20), or how
“[t]he running road above the curve / In violet flows of wet asphalt. / Rain is writhing on
the grass” (“A Codex for Killing” 21). Taking a cue, quite possibly, from frequentlytaught interpretations of the Anglo-Saxon elegiac poetry, he declares, “[t]he pleasures of
this world are hints / Of deeper feelings in the next / . . . Take aim and fire. Delight in
that. / Each gaffe you make can turn to good. / Remember how it feels to be, / And not
yet know that you‟ve become, / An artist of hamartia / And heart” (“Benjamin Shooting
Skeet” 91). It is equally clear, however, that while his work advocates a sense of full
presence in the moment, and the transcendent joy of “being” without fretting over

39

“becoming,” and that this brand of joy came quite naturally to him as a person outside of
his art, he was, it seems, also intelligent enough to appreciate the metaphorical weight of
this preference for the concrete, and he explores it in his Carolina Quarterly interview:
while I have little patience for all the New Agey stuff, I can‟t deny that those
people are really in tune with spiritual matters and with the realness of spiritual
things . . . . I‟m reading a book . . . with a very sophisticated, intellectual
perspective on how a human being interacts with the natural world in a
meaningful way, how to be fully sentient. (Vernon 4)
And lest one confuse what he means by “the realness of spiritual things” with any
element of New Age psychic practices or so-called spiritual goings on, he follows this up
with a remark that “I just wish everyone else would slow down and look at the tree, the
rock, the bird, and stop staring at the cell phone in his or her palm. People today are
constantly trying to check their „fortunes‟ in every sense of the world, but how we live
now, racing into the future, has broken our stories and also degraded our sense of words,
of text, of language” (5), though he does not go on to specify what exactly he means by
“degradation” of language, or how lack of present-moment focus stunts this ability.
Richard Wilbur, however, frames the emphasis of concrete materiality less as one of
elusive redemption from an equally elusive futility of lifestyle and presents it instead
more as a kind of iconographic aid or guide to the formation of a personal understanding
of the concepts one is trying to portray. Of his famous poem “Love Calls Us to the
Things of This World,” Wilbur writes, “[w]ell, I can believe in angels by way of and in
the laundry. I find laundry a great help to the conception of angels, and I suppose one
thing I‟m saying in that poem is that I don‟t really want to have much truck with angels
40

who aren‟t in the laundry, who aren‟t involved in the everyday world. It‟s a poem against
dissociated and abstracted spirituality” (Frank and Mitchell 25). Unlike Mills, however,
he admits that this might indicate a weakness in his own character and/or capacity for
conceptualizing non-physical elements of the world, rather than a heroic model on
display: “I don‟t know what inclination of mine is corrected by a passion for the concrete,
but there is an inclination I keep correcting. I‟m sure of that” (26). Another possibility is
that by “sense of language,” here, at least in this particular instance, what Mills is actually
referring to is his own, somewhat broader conception of “art,” and/or Burkeian sensibility
of what is sublime in art. For, indeed, Mills‟s own first steps into a creative field, as noted
in his biographical sketch, involved intimate interaction with non-verbal physical objects
through painting, and, later in life his carpentry and bread-making.
It is clear from his non-fiction essays, too, that this background in more hands-on
art-forms greatly influenced the manner in which he shaped his poetry, and that he saw
poetry as an extension of, a complement to, his painting and other creative endeavors,
rather than something new which detracted from or replaced the artistic experiences he
had enjoyed previously. He writes, “[t]he 19 century art critic, John Ruskin, in his book,
th

Modern Painters, stated that painting is a specialized kind of visual language, and I
believe that in a comparable way narrative poetry, as a distinct art form, is also a
language until itself” (W. Mills, “Farming Versus Poetry” 5). For Mills, then, it seems
that language, like spirituality, owns an inherently concrete form, to the extent that he
takes the validity of such comparisons completely for granted, to the point where he
describes his writing process itself as beginning with non-verbal image gathering, calling
himself “a linguistic bower bird . . . [who collects] words, bits of conversation, road

41

signs, etymologies, etc. . . . and these bits and pieces germinate in my mind . . . . Whole
poems grow out of certain images on their own” (Martin), and he manifests his
philosophy of duality in seemingly effortless poems about waitresses at Waffle House,
whose “broken pencil left a double line / On my tab, both legible as one design”
(“Double Vision”). Far from employing these kinds of visually-strong narratives in
poems about almost intentionally mundane characters by way of copying the community
of his forebearers, or by way of attempting to generate a kind of platitudinous ethos in
order to win the approval of a certain, pre-defined readership, both Mills and those who
knew him seem to claim that this subject-matter, and the very personal experiences he
attaches to them, were the sort of thing that genuinely inspired him to turn to poetry as a
means of artistic expression in the first place.
Even more tellingly, Mills‟s fascination with the concrete bears no stamp of
Naturalist objectivity whatsoever, as, even outside of his narrative poems, he has an
interesting tendency to superimpose a thinking self onto whatever scene is being
described – occasionally even interrupting the set-up of a scene to interject an “I” or
“my,” at points when he has not yet made it clear whether he himself is the speaker or
whether he is placing us inside another character‟s head. As we noted earlier, part of this
repeated use of a natural, consistently-human-sounding, storyteller‟s voice is a conscious,
genre-specific technique Mills is employing to signal the fictional, narrative element of
his poems, particularly in Light for the Orphans. In these poems, details about the
identity of the self-conscious/self-aware speaker are often front-loaded in the titles, while
the poem itself wastes no time burrowing into the psyche of the individual at hand with
the intentionality, if, perhaps, not always, the poignant subtlety of an Anton Chekhov

42

short story. However, throughout the poems, the very descriptions and images themselves
are almost invariably filtered through the light of an experience, whether present or past,
in a way that borders on synesthesia, so that objectivity is clearly being seen through the
mind of a thinking, comparing, remembering, and recording self. For instance, he aptly
describes the tent-delivery woman in one poem as “tangled” (W. Mills, “The TentDelivery Woman‟s Ride” 30), notes, presumably as himself, that “Some churches still
preserve a sense of trees” (“Chapel of the Cross”), and again speculates, while describing
the process of making his daughter‟s cradle, about whether it is possible to hear the stars:
“I‟ve heard it planning knots in oak where scenes / Of grain in radiating lines abound. /
Their patterns look like solar systems drawn / In books, elliptical by how they‟re sawn”
(“Making the Cradle”). Frequently, as ever, his parallel reminiscences are fraught with a
complicated array of etymologies, educational factoids, and a personal psychology
attentive to its own history. Consider the following:
And I have heard that rain stays underground
For twenty years or more before
It filters upward from the earth, unbound
And formless on the skyline‟s shore.
But I cannot remember being told
When my grandfather‟s well was drilled
Or where the piping rose to bend elbows
Of water in the house, and now I‟m filled

43

With questions. Rain when I was five years old
Could still be drinkable and cold.
Childhood gurgles up and overflows. (“Rain” 13)
Every image, then, ultimately serves to direct attention back to the character, life, and
breadth of knowledge of the person looking at it – constantly acknowledging and
exploring, as it were the insurmountable material existence of the very consciousness
which is seeking transcendence through engagement. We are given to understand,
therefore, that Mills‟s conception of spirituality, however fixed in rational order, and
however avowedly Presbyterian, is not in any way invested in the debasement, shaming,
or “getting past” of oneself, any more than his, at first seemingly paradoxical, fixation on
concrete reality, framed in old-fashioned scenes, has anything to do with mere
sentimentality or conformance to genre regionalism.
The only exceptions to his first-person-heavy poems are, in fact, those in which
he is affirming and instilling this same sense of fully-engaged self in some other, very
specific “you” – that is, an individual whom he is addressing within the poem, usually
either his wife or one of his children. This happens frequently in the poems from the
more intimate middle section of the book, for example in “Love Time, My Daughter!”
(89), “My Queen of Hearts” (82), or “Benjamin Shooting Skeet” (90). Jeff Hardin speaks
of an instance in which he observed the creation of such a moment in real life, while
Mills was showing his daughter how to lay bricks: “[b]ound by clocks, adults often want
only to get a task done as quickly as possible. In such a context, children are rarely
brought into learning and shared responsibility. . . . What is time, if not this space we

44

share together? What is time, if not our own creativity finding a space to flourish?”
(Hardin, “A Gift for Adoration,” 2). The act of seeing, touching, experiencing, and
remembering the “objective”, outside world becomes, then, in and of itself, an
introspective act – an act of discovering the components of self, and of building this into
a thing to be shared.

45

CHAPTER 5
CONCLUSION: POETIC SELF-AWARENESS
FROM COMMUNAL CONSCIOUSNESS
This framing of self as a thing with components to be discovered is central to
much of Mills‟s poetry, and presents itself as especially interesting when viewed in light
of Mills‟s tendency to loan his voice to the myriad of fictional outliers his poems portray.
This is also true of the communal-based historical references he sometimes draws on.
Austin MacRae, who reviews Wilmer Mills‟s Light for the Orphans, the collection of
narrative poems, for EP&M Online Review, seems especially fascinated by the sheer
openness of attitude and the subsequent variety of voices which find their way into
Mills‟s work, and he opens his review with this as the focal point: “[w]ith far too much of
modern poetry indulging in openly autobiographical experience, it‟s always refreshing to
read a collection of poetry that gives a voice to others. Whereas many modern poets limit
themselves to themselves . . . the true test of any poet is the breadth of his vision”
(MacRae 1). He follows this up later with the remark that “[t]his collection boldly speaks
to universal human experience (an overused yet apt phrase) when most first collections
only stutter. Or, as mentioned before, many poets are too fascinated by their own lives
and minds to think about creating a piece of unselfish art. For, in the end, unselfish works
of art stand the test of time” (MacRae 3). However, both MacRae and David Middleton,
in his review “Tell Me A Story” of Selected Poems for the Sewanee Review, remark upon

46

the pronounced loneliness and isolation of each narrator, pinning this on their out-dated
careers, lifestyles, and predilections towards religious faith having rendered them
“marginalized from society (MacRae 1) or the “orphans of modernity” (Middleton, “Tell
Me a Story” xiii). This interpretation certainly does make sense in light of Mills‟s
prominently-outspoken resistance to all things technological, and in light of his and his
support of Wendell Berry – whom, anecdotally, he once claimed to have written into a
ballot for an election (Vernon 5) However, this interpretation does not correlate at all
with accounts of Mills‟s real life relationships with progressivism in the academy or with
progressives as individuals. When asked about whether he felt out-of-place as a
conservative in contemporary academia, Mills joked that “I really don‟t think the
academy is that secular. Many professors don‟t go to church, but I‟ve found that there is a
certain type of personality that . . . . still have a kind of evangelical fervor for ideas. . . . a
lot of teachers who think their mission in life is to „reach‟ students instead of teach them”
(5). Mills himself, of course, adhered, both in philosophy in practice to an old-fashioned,
perhaps occasionally naïve, lifestyle, writing that he once thought of himself as
continuing the tradition of the Southern Agrarians (3).
Even though he self-identified as staunchly conservative within academic creative
writing circles – consequently permitting his many admirers there to brand him, with
tempered suspicion, as just another one of those quaint-minded New Formalists, if one
who was talented enough to break the mold with regard to quality – Millsnever seems to
have felt himself particularly lonely or isolated, as Middleton and MacRae‟s readings of
his work would have him painted. He wrote that “[m]ost of my friends are very liberal
and yet they seem to appreciate me. People who are truly liberal are more open to my

47

weirdness than conservative people are” (5). If anything, his bent towards an oldfashioned, naturalistic world of limited technology seems to indicate a longing for a kind
of solitude and capacity for focused, uncluttered communion which his childhood in
Brazil allowed him to glimpse, but which he felt notably lacking in his American adult
life. He writes, “I see in some Christian group that the social causes supplant the spiritual
ones. . . . Like I was saying, we should all live more like the Amish, and that means being
less prosperous. In other words, trying to eradicate poverty only creates the goal of being
prosperous, which is killing us. . . . All these things are bandwagons that distract people
too much from the message of loving one‟s neighbor” (Vernon 4). A better way to read
this, then, might involve not simply assuming that Mills‟s community of characters are a
mere extrapolation of his own, personal inner experience, a canvas for his own emotions,
and observe instead how similar Mills‟s understanding of an exterior community‟s
impact on one‟s sense of self, expressed in his short story “Thoughts from Port Royal,
Kentucky,” recalls Richard Wilbur‟s philosophy on the composition of the self. Mills, in
the voice of his narrator, a boy adopted into an interracial family, writes, “[t]hey say the
greatest thing God gives us is the freedom of the will to choose which way we are to go,
to heaven or to hell. But I have chosen nothing in my life. I didn‟t choose these people,
and I certainly didn‟t choose this Candy woman. . . . I‟m certainly not in control of
anything” (W. Mills, “Thoughts from Port Royal, Kentucky” 20). Richard Wilbur, then,
writes, “whatever the Self is, any proper definition of it is going to include the idea that
the Self is constituted of other people – of the influences of other people” (Frank and
Mitchell 23), and he writes of these people, whom he identifies simply as “other people

48

I‟d like to be understood by and would like to please,” as “the witnesses in my head”
(22).
Community then, for Mills, is both source and circumstance, and encounters with
the various, perhaps involuntary “parts” of oneself, shaped through the ongoing influence
of these circumstances, are sometimes merely patterns of exploration, rather than
necessarily some deep-rooted form of self-expression. Mills is conscious of speaking to
an audience of internally lost and isolated individuals from the perspective of an
individual who understands both these feelings and their universality from his own life
experience, and consequently feels no special claim to them. Jeff Hardin writes on his
blog, in the process of analyzing Mills‟s “The Last Castrato” that “[l]ike the castrato, we
have become „orphans‟ of ourselves and move deeper into a society that values not art
but imitation” (Hardin, “Wilmer Mills: „The Last Castrato”). Perhaps his lonely, isolated
speakers, then, are meant to constitute a form of affirmation, a common point of
connection and empathy, drawn from his reluctant engagement with, and subsequent
inculcation into, a non-agricultural, technology-saturated world, more than it stems from
any personal complaint about estrangement from this world. In short, it may be meant to
mirror an internal sense of a pre-existing, external phenomenon, a quality originating, or
so Mills feels, from the world into which he proposes to sing his poems, rather than from
some inherent phenomenon self of which could paradoxically precede this type of
engagement.
The solution Mills proposes to this pervasive sense of brokenness and isolation,
even if his proposal is never stated explicitly so much as implemented organically, has to
do with the well-ordered structure and tangible impact of sound as a vessel of
49

communication. In this, once again, his philosophy mirrors that of Richard Wilbur.
Wilbur insists repeatedly that he places high emphasis on the centrality of sound to his
own work, both in consideration of a finished product and as a significant factor in the
creation process itself. He writes, “I think I probably read everything aloud, and over and
over. . . . I notice how, quite often in them [his early poems], there are clots of consonants
that make some lines unpronounceable. It‟s clear that when I began I was a lot less
concerned with the ear than I am now” (Frank and Mitchell 29). He also later remarks, “If
you have some experience as a Broadway lyricist and then do a lot of running around the
country reading your poems aloud to people, it‟s going to modify your sense of words
and of poetry” (29). Without necessarily saying so, the implication is that Wilbur‟s
concern with sound as a distinct element revolves mainly around a desire to increase
accessibility – though there is, of course, also a marked inclination towards selfimprovement, for which consciousness and consequent use of sound provides a
measurement. Mills‟s view of this matter, on the other hand, while loosely similar, is
somewhat less pragmatic than it is introspective. Sound, employed as speech, after all, is
a measurable, concrete manifestation of thought, and thus belongs to the physical reality
through and in which Mills proposes to locate spiritual awareness. Interestingly, while it
might seem more intuitive to assume that Mills depicts sound as an element which
grounds one in the immediacy of the moment, Mills‟s relationship with sound is far more
often linked to a state of retrospection, within which his goal seems to be open-hearted
perception, rather than retroactive criticism, as Wilbur‟s was. Mills‟s poem “Time
Capsule”, for example, recalls a Thanksgiving Day from his own past within which
sound functions as the focal access point for memory, “[a] wax recording of the sing-

50

along” within which a clock informs “[t]hat time is soft of hearing; like a rock, / It listens
in the ground” (“Time Capsule”). Both of his collections, Light for the Orphans and
Selected Poems, also begin with two poems that paint a memory of sound – specifically
music, though, and not speech patterns – as possessing on-going formative powers. In
“Morning Song,” Mills describes a scene in which “we listen for the household sounds /
Of home: ice pouring from a jar, / Forks, knives, the flour sifter‟s rhythmic rounds. / Each
tone recalls our childhood‟s symphony / Of clanks and bangs that softened into notes /
We later learned to read” (3-4). “Mockingbird Boy,” then, speaks about a “quiet child”
who plays with birds in the garden and then picks out “[t]he untaught music of his
listening” on his mother‟s piano. The poem ends thus:
He holds his tiger lily tongue
And glides his hands across his arms
And chest, as if to show that music
Sounds like water being poured
All over him, as if to say
His music comes from listening
To mockingbirds reciting songs
That on his ears might well have been
The fossil calls of ancient birds
That only mockingbirds remember. (5-6)

51

In addition to the clear baptismal image, then, Mills returns us to the strong
impression of structured, ordered sound as being, not only organic and self-evident to an
open-hearted listener, but heritable – the wisdom of the past shaping, clarifying, and
transcending the present and all its chatter in order to transform the listener. The few
times that Mills does invoke the act of “listening” as something which points towards the
present, it functions more as a response to what he sees as an unhealthy desire to cast
around anxiously for knowledge of the future: “I‟m writing now because you‟re listening,
/ Entirely present, empty of desire / That gnaws you. . . . / You feel the sluggish cadences
of life, / And try to race ahead, impatiently, / To find the future and its holiday. / But then
it keeps elapsing into past, / Behind your back” (“A Letter to Myself as a Young Man”
42). The call of the past, the all-consuming nature of ordered sound, and the intricate,
demanding process of constructing this order, then, all function for Mills as a kind of
protective barricade against the unfiltered junk noise of a society obsessed, to its own
detriment, with technology, “progress”, and consumerism, and thus isolated from an
internal sense of well-being. In the course of reminiscing about his childhood in Brazil,
Mills states that “[w]henever there is a storm and the power goes off in the states, I just
love it because the air gets so clear and quiet. We don‟t realize how much the electricity
all around us is throbbing like a big electric blanket that is humming with the frequency
of 110 voltage. . . . I miss that kind of staticless experience of the world” (Vernon 1).
Conscientiously orderedpatterns of sound, and the process of ordering them, provide a
means of communicating, of connecting, with others in a way that this thoughtless,
pervasive noise tends to inhibit, rather than assist. But this tangibly controlled order also
provides a means of protecting oneself in a healthy way from an onslaught of external

52

information, and so enables one to see more fully, to process better, and perhaps to
understand anew, the layers of time that comprise one‟s identity. They create an avenue
from the external community of tradition directly towards a reclaiming of self.

53

WORKS CITED
Birns, Nicholas. “The Distribution of Argument: New Formalism of/on
TheContemporary.”Pennsylvania Literary Journal 4.1 (2012): 7-17. Academic
SearchComplete. Web. 11 May 2016.
Burke, Edmund. A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime
andBeautiful. London: R. and J. Dodsley, 1757. Internet Archive. Web. 4 July
2016.
Cable, Thomas. “Connoisseurs of Sound and the New Formalism.” Revue francaise
d’etudesamericaines 84 (2000): 48-60. Humanities Source. Web. 20 Jun 2016.
The Cloud of Unknowing. Great Britain. 1375. Online ed. Grand Rapids, MI: Calvin
College,n.d. Christian Classics Ethereal Library. Web. 4 July 2016. Kindle AWZ
file.
Cummins, Paul F. “Questionnaire to Mr. Wilbur”. Conversations with Richard Wilbur.
Ed.William Butts. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi, 1990.
42-45. Print.
Curry, David. “An Interview with Richard Wilbur”. Conversations with Richard Wilbur.
Ed.William Butts. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi, 1990. 316. Print.
Davis, Dick. Introduction. Selected Poems. By Wilmer Mills. Ed. Kathryn Oliver
Mills.Evansville, Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. xiii-xv. Print.

54

DiPiero, Thomas. “The form of formlessness.” Philological Quarterly 86.3 (2007):
205+.Biography in Context. Web. 20 March 2016.
Frank, Robert and Stephen Mitchell. “Richard Wilbur: An Interview”. Conversations
withRichard Wilbur. Ed. William Butts. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of
Mississippi,1990. 17-35. Print.
Fry, Stephen. The Ode Less Travelled: Unlocking the Poet Within. New York, NY:
Gotham,2006. Print.
Ghidon666666. “What‟s this song called?”. Online video clip. YouTube. YouTube, 9 Dec
2010.Web. 24 April 2016.
Gioia, Dana. “The Poet in an Age of Prose.” After New Formalism: Poets on Form,
Narrative,and Tradition. Ed. Annie Finch. Ashland, OR: Story Line Press. 1999.
31-41. Print.
Hardin, Jeff. “A Gift for Adoration: Celebrating the Life and Words of Wilmer Mills.”
Chapter16: A Community of Tennessee Writers, Readers, and Passersby, Vol. 1
(August 2011):1-8. Web. 11 February 2016.
---. “Wilmer Mills: „The Last Castrato‟”. Jeff Hardin. JeffHardin.Weebly.com, 10
January 2014.Web. 13 Mar 2016.
Holcombe, John C. “New Formalism”. Text Etc. TextEtc.com, 2015. Web. 2 Jul 2016.
Hoyt, Don A. “Interrupted Forms: The Case Against the „New Formalism‟.” The
RedneckReview of Literature 29.0 (1995): 7-11. Print.
Hutton, Joan. “Richard Wilbur”. Conversations with Richard Wilbur. Ed. William Butts.
Jackson,Mississippi: University Press of Mississippi, 1990. 46-55. Print.

55

Lake, Paul. "Toward a Liberal Poetics." The Threepenny Review 32 (1988): 12-14. Web.
28 May2016. Print.
---. “Verse That Print Bred.” After New Formalism: Poets on Form, Narrative, and
Tradition. Ed.Annie Finch. Ashland, OR: Story Line Press. 1999. 25-30. Print.
Levinson, Marjorie. “What is New Formalism?” PMLA 122.2 (March 2007): 558-569.
JSTOR. Web. 12 July 2016.
MacRae, Austin. “The Poet as Orphan”. Expansive Poetry and Music Online Review.
WebmasterArthur Mortensen. Somers Rock Press, 2003. 1-4. Web. 13 March
2016.
Martin, LeAnne. “Wilmer Mills, Part 2: Poet, Collector of Words”. Christians in the
Arts.ChristiansintheArts.blogspot, 14 May 2009. Web. 27 Feb 2016.
Mayeux, Louis T. “Wilmer Mills‟ Poetic Gift”. Southern Bookman: A Literary Blog for
AllSeasons. LouisMayeux.Typepad.com, 17 Mar 2014. Web. 13 Mar 2016.
McKnight, Paul and Gary Houston. “An Interview with Richard Wilbur”. Conversations
withRichard Wilbur. Ed. William Butts. Jackson, Mississippi: University Press of
Mississippi,1990. 36-41. Print.
McPhillips, Robert. "Reading the New Formalists." The Sewanee Review 97.1 (1989):
73-96.JSTOR. Web. 28 May 2016.
Middleton, David. "Tell Me A Story‟: The Poetry Of Wilmer Mills." Sewanee Review
122.1(2014): xi-xiv. Academic Search Complete. Web. 13 March 2016.
---. “Wilmer Mills” KnowLA Encyclopedia of Louisiana. Ed. David Johnson.Louisiana
Endowment for the Humanities, 19 Feb 2014. Web. 8 Feb 2016.

56

Mills, Kathryn Oliver. “Afterword: Wilmer Hastings Mills (1969-2011)”. Selected
Poems. ByWilmer Mills. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana: The
University ofEvansville Press, 2013. 123-132. Print.
Mills, Wilmer. “Arriving on Time”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 37. 39-70. Print.
---. “Benjamin Shooting Skeet”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana:The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 90. Print.
---. “Chapel of the Cross”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana: TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 118. Print.
---. “A Codex for Killing”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana: TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 21-24. Print.
---. “A Dirge for Leaving”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana: TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 18-20. Print.
---. “Diary of a Piano-Tuner‟s Wife”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 9-10. Print.
---. “Double Vision”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 111. Print.
---. “Fallen Fruit”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 95-96. Print.
---. “Farming Versus Poetry: The Making of a Rebel”. Poetry Net. PoetryNet.org, July
2006. 1-6.Web. 2 March 2016.
---. “Fondue Analysis”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 83. Print.

57

---. “For the Unemployed Man at Forty”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 105. Print.
---. “The Heart‟s Arithmetic”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana:The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 125-126. Print.
---. “Ice Cream Angel‟. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 75-76. Print.
---. “The Jar Garden”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 59-60. Print.
---. “A Letter to Myself as a Young Man”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 41-43. Print.
---. “Living in Eternity”. Chapter 16: A Community of Tennessee Writers, Readers,
andPassersby. Chapter16.org (8 June 2011): 1. Web. 13 Mar 2016.
---. “Making the Cradle”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 69. Print.
---. “Mockingbird Boy”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 5-6. Print.
---. “Morning Song”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 3-4. Print.
---. “Rain”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana: The
University ofEvansville Press, 2013. 11-13. Print.
---. “Stanzas for Kathryn”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville,
Indiana: TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 62-68. 30-31. Print.

58

---. “The Tent-Delivery Woman‟s Ride”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. Print.
---. “Thoughts from Port Royal, Kentucky”. Image: A Journal of the Arts & Religion. 61
(2009):17-28. Print.
---. “Time Capsule”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana:
TheUniversity of Evansville Press, 2013. 47. Print.
---. “The World That isn‟t There”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills.
Evansville,Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 93-122. Print.
---. “A Young Priest‟s Wife Begins to Think”. Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver
Mills.Evansville, Indiana: The University of Evansville Press, 2013. 98-99. Print.
Nelson, Marilyn. “Owning the Masters.” After New Formalism: Poets on Form,
Narrative, andTradition. Ed. Annie Finch. Ashland, OR: Story Line Press. 1999.
8-17. Print.
Peacock, Molly. “New Formalism at the Millennium.” Green Mountains Review 9-10.2-1
(1996):83-85. Humanities Source. Web. 20 Jun 2016.
Ramsey, Ashley. “Wilmer Mills (1969-2011)”. Chapter 16: A Community of Tennessee
Writers,Readers, and Passersby. Chapter16.org (2 Sept 2011): 1-2. Web. 13 Mar
2016.
Reeser, Jason. “Dick Davis reads for Wil Mills”. Online video clip. YouTube. YouTube,
20 Jun2011. Web. 24 April 2016.
---. “Wil Mills Panel Part 2 -- WCU Poetry Conference 2011”. Online video clip.
YouTube.YouTube, 20 Jun 2011. Web. 24 April 2016.

59

---. “Wil Mills Panel Part 3 -- WCU Poetry Conference 2011”. Online video clip.
YouTube.YouTube, 20 Jun 2011. Web. 24 April 2016.
---. “The Poet Playing Chess-- Wil Mills”. Online video clip. YouTube. Youtube, 20 Jun
2011.Web. 25 April 2016.
Rich, Adrienne. “Format and Form.” After New Formalism: Poets on Form, Narrative,
andTradition. Ed. Annie Finch. Ashland, OR: Story Line Press. 1999. 1-7. Print.
“Richard Wilbur: Biography”. Poetry Foundation. PoetryFoundation.org, n.d. Web. 13
Feb 2016.
“Richard Wilbur: Poet”. Poets.org. Poets.org, n.d. Web. 13 Feb 2016.
rockingemma‟s channel. “Wil Mills Tribute”. Online video clip. YouTube. YouTube, 25
Jul 2011.Web. 24 April 2016.
Shaw, Robert B. “On the Death of Wilmer Mills”. Alabama Literary Review (Troy, AL).
22.1(n.d.): 93. Web. 12 Feb 2016.
Sinnot Jr., Peter. “Morality, Historical Narrative, and Problems in New Formalism.”
Philosophyand Literature 37.1 (2013): 257-265. Print.
Vernon, Zackery. “An Interview with Wilmer Mills.” Carolina Quarterly 11 (August
2011): 1-9.Web. 2 Jan 2016.
Viladesau, Richard. Theological Aesthetics. New York: Oxford UP, 1999. Print.
“Wilmer Mills: Biography”. Poetry Foundation. PoetryFoundation.org, n.d. Web. 13 Feb
2016.
White, Philip. ""Walking to Sleep" and Richard Wilbur's Quest for a Rational
Imagination."Twentieth Century Literature 41.4 (1995): 249-65. Web.

60

Wilson, James Matthew. “Ancient Beauty, Modern Verse: Romanticism and Classicism
fromPlato to T. S. Eliot and the New Formalism.” REN 67.1 (2015): 3-40. Print.
Wood, Abi. “Poet Middleton to visit campus”. Hillsdale Collegian(Hillsdale, MI) 17 Oct
2013 n.p. Web. 20 Feb 2016

61

.

APPENDIX A –CHECKLIST OF PUBLICATIONS BY WILMER
MILLS, 1998-2016

Books
Light for the Orphans: Poems by Wilmer Mills. Ashland, Oregon: Story Line Press, 2002.
Print.
Right as Rain. Richland, Washington: Aurelia Press, 1999. Print.
Selected Poems. Ed. Kathryn Oliver Mills. Evansville, Indiana: The University of
Evansville Press, 2013. Print.

Anthologies
Contemporary American Poetry (Penguin Academics Series). Ed. R. S. Gwynn and April
Linder. Pearson Longman, 2004. Print.
“Ghost Story.”
The Swallow Anthology of New American Poets. Ed. David Yezzi. Athens, Ohio:
Swallow Press, 2009. Print.
“Berkeley Café,” p. 216-218
“The Dowser‟s Ear,” p. 218-219
“Morning Song,” p. 222-223
“Rain,” p. 220-222
“Rest Stop, Alabama,” p. 215-216

62

Periodicals
1998
The Hudson Review, Volume LI, Issue 3
“The Shoeshine Man‟s Romance”
“The Tent Delivery Woman‟s Ride”

2001
The New Criterion, Volume 20, Issue 4
“Remembering Grand Isle,” p. 52
New Republic, Volume 225, Issue 9/10
"Rest Stop, Alabama,” p. 55

2002
Critical Quarterly, Volume 44, Issue 1
"The Old Goat Breakfast Club,” p. 78
The New Criterion, Volume 20, Issue 6
“Black Skimmers on the Gulf Coast,” p. 34
The Hudson Review, Volume LV. Issue 3
“Stanzas for Kathryn,” p. 403-407
Literary Imagination, Volume 4, Issue 2
"Treow: An Etymology,” p. 263

63

2003
Louisiana Literature, Volume 20, Issue 2
"Déjá-Vu In New Orleans,” p. 46-49
Poetry, Volume 182, Issue 3
"An Equation For My Children,” p. 154
Tar River Poetry, Volume 43, Issue 1
"Making The Cradle (Poem),” p. 33

2005
Poetry, Volume 187, Issue 1
"At Dauphin Island, 1997,” p. 16

2007
Anglican Theological Review, Volume 89, Issue 2
"Carol and Apology,” p. 289-290

2008
Carolina Quarterly, Volume 59, Issue 1
"Nascar Poster Boy,” p. 44-45
"A Young Priest's Wife Begins To Think,” 41-43
Modern Age, Volume 50, Issue 4
“Monteagle Farmer,” p. 355-356
Shenandoah, Volume 58, Issue 3

64

"Walter Anderson On The Chandelleurs,” p. 5-6
Southern Review, Volume 44, Issue 4
"The Genius Of Hardin County,” p. 764-765

2009
Image: A Journal of the Arts & Religion, Volume 61
“Thoughts from Port Royal, Kentucky,” p. 17-28
Literary Imagination, Volume 11, Issue 1
"After The Fact,” p. 50-51

2010
First Things: A Monthly Journal of Religion and Public Life, Volume 208
“Near Starbucks,” p. 38
Modern Age, Volume 52, Issue 3
“Pop‟s Happy Land and Truck Stop,” p. 219-220
Poetry, Volume 196, Issue 4
"Nigella,” p. 276
Sewanee Review, Volume 118, Issue 2
"The Flower Beds Of War,” p. 191

2011
Carolina Quarterly, Volume 61. Issue 1
"Contingo,” p. 36

65

"Tangere,” p. 40
"Telos,” p. 39
The New Criterion, Volume 30, Issue 1
"From Odi Barbare,” p. 81-82
“Snowman Argument,” p. 84
First Things: A Monthly Journal of Religion and Public Life, Volume 219
“Dream Vocation,” p. 7

2012
Alabama Literary Review
"Buying Your Perfume,” p. 79
"Ice Cream Angel,” p. 77-78
"Light For The Laundromat,” p. 74-75
"Monorhyme For My Wife At Forty,” p. 76
The Hudson Review, Volume LXV, Issue 2
“Fallen Fruit,” p. 245-246
“From Lookout Mountain at Night,” p. 243-245
Yale Review, Volume 100, Issue 1
"A Letter To Myself As A Young Man,” p. 87-89

2013
The New Criterion, Volume 31, Issue 7
“Ruach,” p. 23

66

First Things: A Monthly Journal of Religion and Public Life, Volume 230
“Crosswalk,” p. 52

Other
“Farming Versus Poetry: The Making of a Rebel”. Poetry Net. PoetryNet.org, July 2006.
1-6. Web. 2 March 2016.
“Living in Eternity”. Chapter 16: A Community of Tennessee Writers, Readers, and
Passersby. Chapter16.org (8 June 2011): 1.

67

