CONSTRUCTING AND DECONSTRUCTING ARCHIVAL MEMORY IN BIRMINGHAM,
ALABAMA: THE ROLE OF LOCAL COLLECTING INSTITUTIONS IN FACILIATING
SOCIAL JUSTICE

by

JEFF HIRSCHY

ROBERT RITER, COMMITTEE CHAIR
MIRIAM SWEENEY
DIANE BRAGG

A THESIS

Submitted in partial fulfillment of the requirements
for the degree of Master Of Library And Information Science
in the Department Of Library And Information Studies
in the Graduate School of
The University Of Alabama

TUSCALOOSA, ALABAMA

2016

ProQuest Number: 10162718

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10162718
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright Jeffery Richard Hirschy 2016
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED

ABSTRACT
In 1992, the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute opened to the public after several years of
argument, construction, and development. Was it to remember the heroic events of the Civil
Rights Movement, to gain tourist dollars, to correct the historical record, educate the public, or a
combination of these ideas? No matter the reason both the Birmingham Civil Institute and the
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and created and
constructed for, both play an important and needed role in the story of Birmingham.
What is that role? Through education and research, collecting institutions like the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute shine a light on important, but dark chapters, of
Birmingham’s, the United States’, and the world’s history so that people can remember,
discover, and learn from those events. Whatever their size or affiliation, collecting institutions
play a needed role in the search for social justice and transitional justice. Thinking about this,
what roles have, and could, the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute and Birmingham Public
Library play in the search for social justice in Birmingham, Alabama?
This study will show that both the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute and the
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts have assisted Birmingham,
Alabama in that city’s search for social justice for fostering education and research. Education
and research allow the public to learn about the events that took place during Birmingham’s
Civil Rights movement and apply the lessons and documents from that Movement to their own
time and own location.

ii

LIST OF TERMS
Transitional Justice

Consists of judicial and non-judicial measures implemented in order to
redress legacies of human rights abuses.

Memory Institutions Is an organization maintaining a repository of public knowledge such as
libraries, archives, and museum.

Social Justice

Is the view that everyone deserves equal economics, political, and social
rights and opportunities.

Visual Memory

It is a form of memory which preserves some characteristics of our senses
pertaining to visual experience.

Written Memory

It is a form of memory which preserves important parts of history, culture,
or society through the written word.

Political Memory

It is the political means by which events are remembered and recorded, or
discarded.

Truth and
Reconciliation
Commission

Is a commission tasked with discovering and revealing past wrong doing
by a government (or, depending on the circumstances, non-state actors) in
the hope of resolving conflict left over from the past.

Community
Archives

Collections of material gathered primarily by members of a given
community and over whose use community member exercise some level of
control.

Counter-Narrative

Only makes sense in relation to something else, that which they are
countering. Is in tension with narrative.

iii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to thank Dr. Robert Riter, Dr. Miriam Sweeney, and Dr. Diane Bragg for serving on
my thesis committee and guiding me through this process. Without them I would still be staring
a blank page wondering what was I was going to write.

I would also like to thank all the professors and instructors who’ve pushed me throughout my
academic career. Without those pushes I would have never had made it this far. I am entirely
thankful for each and every one of those pushes.

I would also like to thank my Mom. She gave me my love of learn and through her life and her
heroic battle with cancer she taught me to never give up, fight hard, and always do your best.

Finally, I would like to thank my fiancée Laura. She put up with me as I researched, wrote, and
randomly told her random facts about restaurant collecting institutions. Without her listening
ability and her love this project would have never been finished.

iv

CONTENTS
ABSTRACT……………………….………………………………………………………...…... ii
LIST OF TERMS……………………………………………………………………………….. iii
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS…………………………………………………………..…………. iv
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………….……………. 1
METHODS……………………………………………………………………………..………... 5
LITERATURE REVIEW………………………………………………………………...……… 7
MEMORY & NARRATIVE………………………………………………………………...…. 11
Visual Memory…………………………………………………………………………. 15
Written Memory………………………………………………………………………… 21
Narrative………………………………………………………………………………... 28
COLLECTING INSTITUTION OVERVIEW………………………………………….……… 32
EDUCATION AND RESEARCH……….……..………………………………….………….... 35
CONCLUSIONS……………………………………………………...………………………... 47
The Social Justice Relationship………………………………………………………… 50
Future Research………………………………………………………………………… 52
REFERENCES………………..…………………………………………...…………………… 54
PHOTOGRAPHIC APPENDIX…………………..……………………………………………. 58

v

INTRODUCTION
In a speech delivered on October 1, 1939, Winston Churchill described the Soviet Union
as a “riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma”.1 Like the Soviet Union, Birmingham,
Alabama is also a land that is a riddle wrapped in a mystery inside an enigma. Instead of being a
land shrouded in the shadows of communism, Birmingham was a land shrouded in the shadows
of its Jim Crow master narrative. This master narrative made sure that only one story, the story
of Birmingham’s white citizens, was told and remembered. All other narratives were forgotten or
changed to serve the master narrative. This master narrative was a part of Birmingham for the
first 105 years of its existence.
In the aftermath of the Civil War, the people of the American South were beaten and
angry. They had lost their war for “freedom”, their slaves, and their society had been crushed on
the bayonets of the victorious Union Army. Everything that had made the South “great’ in their
eyes was now gone. For these angry and defeated whites, the only thing left to do was to rebuild
their civilization and get it as close to the one they had before the war. They were going to
reconstruct their civilization and the master narrative that supported that civilization the best they
could.
Moving fast after the rest of country lost interest in them in 1877, white southerners
retook control of the South and began the process of constructing a new master narrative that
would preserve and protect the reconstructed white civilization, keep outside influences at bay,

1

The Churchill Society. "The Russian Enigma." http://www.churchill-society
london.org.uk/RusnEnig.html.
1

and keep the newly freed slaves trapped in a new form of slavery and oppression. This new
civilization and narrative needed the ability to survive and thrive. One way for both to live was
for the South to become self-sufficient in ways that it had never been before the Civil War.
To construct this new world, new industrial cities had to be constructed to match the
abilities and output of the North. In 1871, John T. Milner was on such a quest in central
Alabama.2 Milner, the Chief Engineer of the North and South Railroad, had been assigned the
task of picking the crossing of his railroad and the Chattanooga and Alabama Railroad.3 The
hope of Milner and both companies was that they site chosen would give birth to a great southern
industrial city. After searching for several months, Milner selected the Jones Valley as the
crossing point.4 The Jones Valley had several things going in its favor. It was close to water, and
it had large deposits of iron ore, coal, and limestone.5 All the materials to smelt iron and produce
steel. This was a spot where a great industrial city could rise.
And a great city did rise there. Birmingham, Alabama was founded in 1871 but it was
founded on the back of a master narrative that would preach the exclusion of large portions of its
citizens for the next 100 years.6 One of the reasons that Birmingham was able to expand so
quickly after its formation was with the assistance once again of John T. Miler. The system that
Milner helped found and run was a new form of slavery. Instead of being agricultural slaves,
African-American men became industrial slaves. African-American men would be arrested for
petty crimes like jaywalking and sent to work in Birmingham’s steel mills, factories, and mines.7

2

Warren, Dorothea O. The Practical Dreamer: A Story of John T. Milner, His Family And
Forebears. Birmingham, AL: The Southern Family Press, 1959. Pg 154.
3
Ibid. Pg. 150-154.
4
Ibid. Pg. 157-159.
5
Ibid. Pg. 159-161.
6
Blackmon. Pg. 39.
7
Ibid. Pg. 39-48.
2

This new form of slavery helped to implement and continue the master narrative that
Birmingham was built on. That master narrative, or the only allowed narrative, or part of a
narrative, was the white man’s narrative. White history, and white civilization, was the only
thing that mattered. Everything else would be forgotten or never remembered in the first place.
It took Birmingham 105 years to realize that the master narrative they had been operating
under did not take into account the complete history of Birmingham. The events of 1963 and the
early 1960’s forced Birmingham to finally question the narrative they had been operating under
for decades. This questioning led to a revaluation of Birmingham’s history after the events of the
Civil Rights Movement. Birmingham finally begun the process of liberating itself from the
cultural and informational prison it had found itself in for most of its history.
This questioning led to a reorganization of the collecting institutions in Birmingham and
the reorientation of the missions of those institutions. No longer would they serve the Jim Crow
master narrative of the past. Now they would serve the open and welcoming future. It also led to
the founding of new collecting institutions to meet the challenges of the new future all the people
of Birmingham were supposed to build together. Out of this questioning came both the
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute. Both are restaurant collecting institutions, which Randall C. Jimerson in his
book, Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice, defines as institutions that
prize the power of interpretation and mediation of the records over anything else.8 Out of the
many facets that make up a restaurant collecting institution, one facet, that many such institutions
have is an ability to help the community they are located in and the wider world search for social

8

Jimerson, Randall C. Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice. Chicago:
Society of American Archivists, 2009.
3

justice. Both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute have the ability to help the city they are located in,
Birmingham, and the wider world search for and move towards social justice. Because they have
this ability, in what ways do collecting institutions like the Birmingham Public Library
Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute help cities
like Birmingham move towards social justice?

4

METHODS
There are three main ways that collecting institutions help the cities they are located in
and the wider world move towards social justice. The first is through the actions of a truth
commission. Truth commissions have taken place around the world in places like South Africa,
Guatemala, and Cambodia. These commissions have taken place when an investigation into what
happened during times of national and societal trouble are deemed necessary to understand what
happened, punish those who deserve to be punished, and for future generations to remember.
Priscilla B. Hayner’s Unspeakable Truths: Transitional Justice and the Challenge of Truth
Commissions. Unspeakable Truths examines the 40 truth commissions that have operated around
the world since 1974.9 Hayner tells a story of complex commissions, with positive and negative
issues and attributes, and countries, region, dealing with often complex issues. These
commissions are a struggle to start, a struggle to run, and a struggle to produce valuable results.
They work in some situations and don’t work in others.10
In the United States, for whatever reason, truth commissions have not caught on.11
Because of this, in the United States, collecting institutions like the Birmingham Public Library
Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute held move

9

Hayner, Priscalla B. Unspeakable Truths: Transitional Justice and the Challenge of Truth
Commissions. New York: Routledge, 2011. Pg xi-xii.
10
They fail to work in some situations because the lessons aren’t learned, another oppressive
event happens, or the nation wants to learn more. For example, Chile, South Korea, and
Argentina have all had multiple truth commissions.
11
While it has not happened in the United States, that doesn’t mean nothing has been happening.
Both https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/26/truth-and-reconciliation-iscoming-to-america and ow Americans are finally beginning to grapple with these issues.
5

Birmingham, the United States, and the wider world towards social justice through education
and research opportunities offered by each institution. Education and research opportunities
guide any potential relationship between collecting institution, community, and social justice in
the United States.12
This relationship, and its condition in the Birmingham Public Library Department of
Archives and Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute are at the heart of this
study. At both locations, the education and research opportunities available allow users,
researchers, and the public, to access the lessons of the Birmingham Civil Rights Movement and
apply them to present and future issues. Groups and movements from Black Lives Matter to
Greenpeace could learn from the lessons provided by both Birmingham collecting institutions.
To understand the full impact of the education and research opportunities provided by both
locations this study will examine the resources at each, the research conducted at each, the
results of that research, and educational options at both locations. Both institutions have mission
statements that allow for the most growth and movement towards social justice and can be
summed up as “Be open, be honest, and be willing to bring things to the table and listen”.

12

For an American example of education and research in action see Lisa Magarrell and Joya
Wesley’s Learning from Greensboro: Truth and Reconciliation in the United States. For a
Birmingham example see Gleen T. Eskew’s But for Birmingham: The Local and National
Movements in the Civil Rights Struggle.
6

LITERATURE REVIEW
Any investigation of collecting institutions and their relationship with social justice will
inevitable start with Randall C. Jimerson’s Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social
Justice. Jimerson’s book describes the actions archivists, curators, and other guardians of
information and memory, take to construct and then reconstruct memory.13 In Jimerson’s mind,
the archivist and informational professional should not be neutral but pick a side, the side of
social justice. Both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and
the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute would be perfect places for archivists and informational
professionals to pick the side of social justice and carry that torch into the future.
History, memory, narrative, and collecting institutions are all dangerous and powerful
weapons. The same information can be used to the preach the glories of Jim Crow and destroy
that system.14 This conflict is talked about in Margaret MacMillan’s Dangerous Games: The
Uses and Abuses of History. Dangerous Games examines several reasons why people, nations,
groups, and faiths all use history to tell the story they want people to see even though that story is
sometimes not the truth. MacMillan states that “The past can be used for almost anything you
want to do in the present. We abuse it when we create lies about the past or write histories that

13

Archives Power is Jimerson explaining in book form what he has spoken about and written
about in articles for years. In the last 15 years Jimerson has been at the forefront of the
investigation of the relationship between archives and social justice.
14
The Birmingham Police Surveillance Files are one such example.
7

show only one perspective.”15 This abuse was the seed from which the Jim Crow master
narrative came from.
Right now, international studies of the relationship between social justice and collecting
institutions are stronger than their American counterparts. Because of this, a lot of the literature
written about the issues and events of places like South Africa can be used as guides to examine
the American side of this relationship. South Africa and its Truth and Reconciliation
Commission are the example of the relationship between collecting institutions and social justice
coming together and producing results. Martin Meredith’s book Coming to Terms: South
Africa’s Search for Truth examines the work of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and its
effect on South African collecting institutions and society. In the book, both the supporters and
opponents of the apartheid government tell their stories, are judged, or forgiven, and punished.
Memory is reconstructed using the same tools used to oppress and abuse in the past.
Another example of the relationship working from South Africa is the actions of Verne
Harris. Harris, a well-known archivist across the world began his archival work in South
African’s State Archive Service, the collecting institution of Apartheid South Africa.16 After the
fall of apartheid, Harris became a strong supporter of collecting institutions helping to seek
social justice. First as a member of the Truth and Reconciliation Commission and for the last 12
years as the Director of the Memory Programme at the Nelson Mandela Foundation’s Centre of
Memory and Dialogue, Harris has been working to help collecting institutions help South
African society move towards social justice. His Centre for Memory:

15

MacMillan, Margaret. Dangerous Games: The Uses and Abuses of History. New York:
Modern Library Classics, 2008. Pg. xi.
16
https://www.nelsonmandela.org/content/page/the-team
8

“…..seeks to contribute to a just society by promoting the vision and work of its Founder
and convening dialogue around critical social issues.
Our Founder, the late Mr. Nelson Mandela, based his entire life on the principle of
dialogue and the art of listening and speaking to others; it is also the art of getting others
to listen and speak to each other.
Drawing on the contribution that he, his colleagues and his comrades made towards
creating our fledgling democracy, the Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory encourages
people to enter into dialogue – often about difficult subjects – in order to address the
challenges we face today.”17

Harris himself is an example of an archival agent changing allegiance. He started out as
an archival member of the apartheid regime and now finds himself in change of something that
would anger his former political masters. Now, Verne Harris is in charge of keeping Nelson
Mandela’s flame alive and making sure that Mandela’s message of inclusiveness remains the
bedrock of South Africa political and cultural life.
The United States, unlike South Africa, has never had a national truth and reconciliation
commission to actively drive the relationship between social justice and collecting institutions
forward. Because of this, the literature on this relationship in the United States is much weaken
than the South African literature. One of the best pieces of American literature, and an example
for any examination of the relationship in Birmingham, is Lisa Magerrell’s Learning from
Greensboro: Truth and Reconciliation in the United States.
Learning from Greensboro describes the most famous example of a truth commission in
the United States. It shows how a truth commission, or just an honest examination of the issues,
and a willingness to bring anything to the table, can help communities in the United States move

17

http://archive.nelsonmandela.org/
9

towards social justice. A willingness to have an honest examination of the issues and to bring
everything and anything to the table can work in the United States and can work in Birmingham.
The models of South Africa and Greensboro, North Carolina and the literature surrounding them
are strong models to begin any examination of the relationship between collecting institutions
and social justice in Birmingham from.

10

MEMORY AND NARRATIVE
“The horror of that moment,” the King went on, “I shall never, NEVER Forget!”
“You will, though,” the Queen said, “if you don’t make a memorandum of it.”
Alice looked on with great interest as the King took an enormous memorandum-book out of his
pocket, and began writing.18

The above scene from Alice in Wonderland represents information collecting for most of
human history. For most of human history, from the Kings of ancient Sumer to the Kings of
France in the 18th century, information collecting was a bureaucratic transaction. They, or the
dominate group, nation, empire, religion, ethnic group, or economic group, wanted to remember
the nuts and bolts that drove their business, religion, or empire. They wanted to preserve this
information because it would be helpful to the next generation and not because it was historical
important.
The historical importance of archives finally became a factor when Leopold von Ranke
helped to found the modern historical profession.19 Von Ranke’s history, based on primary
sources, could only be found at the time in the national archives of the states of Europe,
especially in nations like France, Spain the United Kingdom, and The Netherlands. All of these
nations had established national archives in the 16th-18th centuries that were rich in primary
source material.20 To successfully write this new history, the primary sources had to be

18

Jimerson. Pg. 26-27.
Von Ranke, Leopold, and Georg S. Iggers. The Theory and Practice of History. New York:
Routledge, 2010.
20
Ibid.
19

11

reconstructed from the archives. Bureaucratic transactions and historical importance had to find
a way to live in the same archival structure. Throughout the 19th and into the 20th century,
historians and collecting institutions focused on international politics and the “great men” of
history. This met a large portion of history, and the related primary sources, were never
reconstructed and left on the shelf to be forgotten or even eventually destroyed.21
Beginning in the early 20th century, the debate over the allocation and structure of
collecting institutions became defined by the writings of Sir Hilary Jenkinson and T.R.
Schellenberg. Both men, both well-known and well-argued over members of the archival
community, established the early rules/conflicts over what went into the archival box. In terms of
information collection, Jenkinson believed that it was the duty of the creators of documents and
other items to determine what they want sent to an archive while Schellenberg believed that the
information’s, and its potential place in an archive, value was based on uniqueness, form, and
importance.22 In both, the archivist is supposed to be a neutral monk basically protecting the
records but not interacting with them or bringing new parts of history out into the open. As long
as it met each of their rules, it could be included in the archive.23 But, as times changed and
archives and societies evolved, what about the historical narratives that didn’t meet each of their
sets of rules?

21

One such example of a historical narrative that was once on the “shelf” but know isn’t is the
material that the book The Edge of the World: A Cultural History of the North Sea and the
Transformation of Europe is based on. In that book, by Michael Pye, Pye reexamines the 1000
year history of the cultures around the North Sea focusing on the cultures and how they, they
being the average person, helped build the foundation for Europe’s great age of expansion.
“Great Men” are mentioned but they are supporting actors in the book and not the stars.
22
http://americanarchivist.org/doi/pdf/10.17723/aarc.65.2.920w65g3217706l1
23
For Schellenberg’s rules see: http://www.archives.gov/research/alic/reference/archivesresources/principles-of-arrangement.html. For Jenkinson’s rules see:
https://archive.org/stream/manualofarchivea00jenkuoft/manualofarchivea00jenkuoft_djvu.txt
12

In the late 20th century and into the early 21st century new technologies and new ideas
forced archivists and historians to reevaluate the contents of the archival box. Instead of just
bureaucratic transaction and historical importance being in the box, a new idea was placed in the
box: social justice. Archivists like Verne Harris and Randall C. Jimerson believed that archivists
and the collecting institutions they represent should not be neutral ground but they should stand
in the gap and choose a side, hopefully the side of social justice and societal advancement. The
idea of taking a stand helped drive the South African Truth and Reconciliation Commission in
the mid-1990’s, the United States Senate’s Report on Torture in 2014 and can drive the
relationship between the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts
and Birmingham Civil Rights Institute and social justice.24
To the supporters of archivists and collecting institutions taking a stand for social justice,
or another cause, the information contained within collecting institutions is the most valuable
tool they have.25 In Birmingham, the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files Collection located at
the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts was once used as a tool
to try to discredit civil rights leaders but is now used to tell the story of an abusive police
department that terrorized brave civil rights leaders and foot soldiers. This collection doesn’t tell
the story of the “glorious” police department anymore but tells the story of the civil rights
pioneers who successful overcame the corrupt police to win their rights and their place in history.

24

Both South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation Commission and the United States’ Senate’s
Report on Torture relied on documents changing sides and supporting those who wanted to get to
the bottom of things. For information about South Africa’s Truth and Reconciliation
Commission see: http://www.justice.gov.za/trc/. For the United States Senate Report on Torture
see: https://www.amnestyusa.org/pdfs/sscistudy1.pdf.
25
Supporters of this idea of the relationship between collecting institutions and social justice
include Randall C. Jimerson, Priscalla B. Hayner, Jim Wallis, Verne Harris, and Michelle
Caswell.
13

Memory and narrative are powerful tools available to collecting institutions in moving
their communities towards social justice. Each item has the ability to tell the story of the past, the
lessons of the past, and the warnings of the past. They effected and drove history when the they
were created will continue to have an effect on present and future generations. It is up to the
collecting institution to determine what this impact will be and whether it will be a positive
impact. They will remain one of collecting institutions’ most powerful and dangerous tools.

14

VISUAL MEMORY
Visual Memory is any representation of an event captured in a visual form.26 It can be a
poster, a photograph, or a video. Whatever its form, visual memory has the ability to cause great
social and political change. Visual Memory relies on viewer interpretation to generate results.
Viewer interpretation is key to this form of memory.27 This form of memory comes with great
power and great responsibility.
One of the most important pieces of visual memory from the struggle for Civil Rights in
Birmingham was the CBS documentary “Who Speaks for Birmingham?”. The documentary,
narrated and hosted by Howard K. Smith, aired on May 18, 1961, in the rest of the United States
but was never aired in Birmingham because of local outrage.28 Smith, who originally came to
Birmingham to report on the mob attacks on the Freedom Riders under the eyes of Bull Connor’s
police, was the only national media figure to do so. While he did report on the Freedom Riders
and their struggles he also created a documentary that became the first piece of visual memory
and narrative to show the rest of the world the massive racial divide that existed in the
Birmingham of the early 1960’s.29

26

For an example see: http://hyperstudio.mit.edu/projects/eurasian-memory/
The same piece of visual memory can have different effects on different people. For example,
take the photograph of a South Vietnamese police officer executing a Vietcong member in the
streets. (http://rarehistoricalphotos.com/saigon-execution-murder-vietcong-saigon-1968/). For
Americans this photograph made them question why they were fighting the Vietnam War. For
the Vietcong and North Vietnamese, it made them want to fight that war even harder. For more
information, see Christian G. Appy’s American Reckoning: The Vietnam War and Our National
Identity.
28
McWhorter. Pg. 181.
29
Ibid. Pg 165-167.
27

15

The racial divide of Birmingham was represented in the documentary by Reverend Fred
Shuttlesworth and Mrs. Eleanor Bridges.30 Shuttlesworth was an African-American Pastor who
founded the Alabama Christian Movement for Human Rights, worked with Dr. King’s Southern
Christian Leadership Conference, was beaten and bombed by the forces of white counterrevolution, and helped lead the struggle for civil rights in Birmingham.31 He spoke of being
beaten, bombed out of his own home, and bed, and attacked by whites in his civil rights work.
His story was the story of African-Americans all over Birmingham, from students at Miles
College, to elevator operators downtown. They, like their white neighbors had to go out and
make a living, but they also had to struggle with a whole society’s worth of racial oppression32
The other side of the story was represented by Mrs. Eleanor Bridges.33 Bridges was a
white socialite who really didn’t understand or believe that there was a racial divide in
Birmingham and what it met to be African-American in that society.34 She believed that AfricanAmericans were happy with their current status in Birmingham society, didn’t want any addition
rights, and were treated well by her fellow white southerners. In actuality, she was tone deaf to
what was going in Birmingham as was the rest of the world along with her. To Mrs. Bridges and
whites all over the United States, it was hard to think that America was in the wrong when it
came to African-American civil rights. To them, at the height of the Cold War, the United States
was the supreme beacon of liberty and freedom in the world. The Civil Rights Movement had to
the workings of just a few angry and upset outsiders who did not represent the majority of
African-Americans.

30

Ibid. Pg. 206.
Ibid. Pg. 3-4.
32
Ibid. Pg. 166.
33
Ibid. Pg. 168-169.
34
http://www.bhamwiki.com/w/Eleanor_Bridges
31

16

“Who Speaks for Birmingham?” showed the people of the United States that their
country was not the supreme beacon of freedom in the world. It had a problem. Instead of being
met with freedom and opportunity, the African-Americans of Birmingham were met with
tyranny and violence. Howard K. Smith took the narrative, and the visual memory attached to it,
and told the world about the racial issues that were beginning to rock Birmingham.
A documentary had cracked the walls of Birmingham’s Jim Crow master narrative.
Photographs would destroy those walls and help user in a new world. In May 1963, the
Children’s March disrupted Birmingham. The March, which began as a peaceful protest soon
became violent when met by the Birmingham Police Department. The Department unleashed
dogs and fire hoses on children whose only transgressions were marching for the full civil rights.
Pictures and other images from these attacks were transmitted around the world and helped
change the course of history in the favor of the marchers.35
The Children’s March began on May 2, 1963, when hundreds of children left their
schools around Birmingham and entered the streets to peaceful march for their civil rights. The
children, organized by James Bevel, entered those streets to march on Birmingham City Hall to
demand their full civil rights and freedoms that had for so long been withheld from them.36 What
began as a peaceful protest soon met the Birmingham Police Department and Bull Connor.
Eugene “Bull” Connor was the Public Safety Commissioner of Birmingham, Alabama, in
charge of the Birmingham Police Department, Birmingham Fire Department, and the school

35

These photographs can be viewed at: http://zinnedproject.org/materials/the-childrens-march/,
http://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/28/republicans-party-of-civil-rights, and
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Birmingham_campaign.
36
Gilmore, Kim. "The Birmingham Children's Crusade of 1963." Bio.com. Accessed April 16,
2016. http://www.biography.com/news/black-history-birmingham-childrens-crusade-1963-video.
17

system. He served in the position from 1937-1954 and again from 1957 to 1963.37 In the
struggle for civil rights, he played the role of the “white knight”. Like men before him and men
after him, Connor did what he thought was right. He defended “white” Southern civilization
from “outside” and “foreign” influences. The whites who supported Connor believed that he was
the only thing standing between them and the end of their civilization as they knew it. To them,
he was fighting for “traditional” America.
White Birminghamians and Alabamians continued to support Connor and his actions
until it started to affect their pocketbooks and their financial bottom lines.38 The Children’s
March began to affect white citizens’ pocketbooks because of the visual memory produced by
the March and Bull Connor’s reaction to it. Images of children being arrested and beaten turned
the world against Birmingham and it’s white inhabitants. These pictures showed not a “valiant”
struggle to preserve “traditional” America but peaceful children being beaten by an overbearing
and violent police force. Bull Connor’s overreaction to the March began a day after it started.
This was the day he ordered his men to unleash the fore hoses and attack dogs on the marchers.
By May 7th, over 3000 marchers sat in Birmingham’s jails.39 By May 10th, the white business
leaders of Birmingham realized they were losing the wider war and destroying Birmingham’s
reputation in the world.40 Because they were losing the battle for visual memory, these same
business leaders met with Civil Rights leaders and reached an agreement to begin the

37

Ibid.
See Diane McWhorter’s Carry Me Home: Birmingham, Alabama: The Climactic Battle of the
Civil Rights Revolution for the full story of why the Big Mules and merchants of Birmingham
agreed to desegregate their stores and businesses in the aftermath of the Children’s March.
39
Ibid.
40
McWhorter. Pg. 380-389.
38

18

desegregation of Birmingham. There were many winners that day in Birmingham in 1963; Bull
Connor was not one of them.41
Bull Connor and his supports lost the battle of the Children’s March in part because they
lost the fight for control of visual memory. Instead of seeming like they were fighting against
“un-American” ideas and supporters and fighting for “traditional” America, they were shown to
be brutalizing innocent peaceful protesters, and sometimes children, marching for their civil
rights. Especially in the world environment of the 1960’s, with the Cold War raging, the United
States had to been seen as the beacon of freedom and liberty. In the eyes of many this could not
happen in the United States and if it was happening then it should change. These pictures made
the United States out to be no better than any of the states or groups it often spoke out against
throughout the Cold War and afterwards. Together with the political and economic factors, all
three finally forced Birmingham to being to desegregate.
Like the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files, visual memory has the ability to switch
sides. In both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute there are examples of visual memory that has switched sides
and now serves as a tool to educate the public towards social justice.
Take for example Photograph A in the photograph appendix.42 This photograph is part of
an exhibit at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute that describes the reactions of whites to the
Civil Rights Movement. The picture of Dr. King being hung in effigy was supposed to inspire

41

Because of his actions against the Project C, the Freedom Riders, and the Children’s March,
there was a growing sense of dissatisfaction with Bull’s leadership. When Birmingham switched
from a commissioner system to a mayor-council system, he tried to get it thrown out but lost the
case and was removed from office when his position ended. He ended his career as the President
of the Alabama Public Service Commission. For more information, see:
http://www.encyclopediaofalabama.org/article/h-1091.
42
See Photograph 1 in photographic appendix.
19

fear as a tool of the white counter-revolution but today it serves as a tool of social justice.
Visual Memory, in any of its forms, is just one part of relationship between social justice and
collecting institutions and one part of the building blocks that make up the education and
research opportunities at both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts and Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.

20

WRITTEN MEMORY
“Without memory, there is no culture. Without memory there would be no civilization, no
society, no future.”-Elie Wiesel43

The above quote sums up the power of the written word and written memory. Both sides
of the Civil Rights Movement used the written word and written memory to attempt to win the
battle they were waging. Like visual memory, written memory is all about attempting to
influence and control what people think or thought about a particular situation. This is what both
Alabama Governor George Wallace and Martin Luther King Jr. attempted to do on opposite
sides of the Civil Rights Movement.44
Governor George Wallace first came to national attention when he uttered the infamous
line “Segregation now, segregation tomorrow, segregation forever” in his inaugural address as
Alabama’s governor in 1963.45 To the white citizens of Alabama and the wider South, Wallace
performed the same duty as Bull Connor did for the white citizens of Birmingham. Wallace was
the white knight defending “white Southern” civilization from “outside” and “untraditional”

43

"Learning and Memory Presentation.pptx - Learning and Memory PSY/340." Learning and
Memory Presentation.pptx - Learning and Memory PSY/340. Accessed April 16, 2016.
https://www.coursehero.com/file/13402209/Learning-and-Memory-Presentationpptx/.
44
Both Dr. King and Governor Wallace were excellent speakers who delivered some of the most
memorable speeches of the 20th century in the United States. These speeches used words to paint
a picture of each of the worlds both men were fighting for. For Dr. King’s “I have a dream”
speech see: http://www.americanrhetoric.com/speeches/mlkihaveadream.htm. For Governor
Wallace’s “Segregation now, Segregation forever” see:
http://web.utk.edu/~mfitzge1/docs/374/wallace_seg63.pdf.
45
PBS. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/wallace/sfeature/quotes.html.
21

influences.46 He crusaded against the Civil Rights Movement in Alabama and would soon take
his crusade onto the national stage.
In 1964, Wallace decided to run for president of the United States as a Democrat in the
primaries against the sitting Democratic President, Lyndon Johnson. Wallace was angry at
Johnson for supporting and then signing the Civil Rights Act of 1964. To Wallace, Johnson, a
southerner, had betrayed his people to the outside and untraditional influences Wallace had been
fighting. In Wallace’s mind, President Johnson destroyed southern civilization with the stroke of
a pen. Southern civilization had to be restored and Wallace was the man to do that.
George Wallace announced his intentions to run for president on July 4, 1964. Wallace
knew that his ticket to the White House was the angry white southerner who may be worried
about, and may have believed, that their civilization and their way of life had just been destroyed
by Johnson and Washington. In his announcement speech, he attempted declare himself the
champion of these people and their way of life to outreach by declaring himself an enemy of
Johnson, civil rights and pledging to fight for the fallen civilization that had just been destroyed
by Johnson and the federal courts. He was going to restore the world to it’s “rightful” condition.
“We come here today in deference to the memory of those stalwart patriots who on July
4, 1776, pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to establish and defend
the proposition that governments are created by the people, empowered by the people,
derive their just powers from the consent of the people, and must forever remain
subservient to the will of the people.
Today, 188 years later, we celebrate that occasion and find inspiration and determination
and courage to preserve and protect the great principles of freedom enunciated in the
Declaration of Independence. It is therefore a cruel irony that the President of the United

46

Like Wallace and Connor, Donald Trump is defending what he considers to be “traditional”
American Civilization. This can be seen in his pledging to build a wall on the US-Mexican
Boarder and his want of a temporary banning of Muslims in the United States. Trump is a step
backwards into the Jim Crow master narrative. For more information, see:
http://www.pbs.org/newshour/rundown/are-there-echoes-of-george-wallace-in-trumps-message/
22

States has only yesterday signed into law the most monstrous piece of legislation ever
enacted by the United States Congress.
It is a fraud, a sham, and a hoax.
This bill will live in infamy. To sign it into law at any time is tragic. To do so upon the
eve of the celebration of our independence insults the intelligence of the American
people.
It dishonors the memory of countless thousands of our dead who offered up their very
lives in defense of principles which this bill destroys.
Never before in the history of this nation have so many human and property rights been
destroyed by a single enactment of the Congress. It is an act of tyranny. It is the assassin's
knife stuck in the back of liberty.
With this assassin's knife and a blackjack in the hand of the Federal force-cult, the leftwing liberals will try to force us back into bondage. Bondage to a tyranny more brutal
than that imposed by the British monarchy which claimed power to rule over the lives of
our forefathers under sanction of the Divine Right of kings.
Today, this tyranny is imposed by the central government which claims the right to rule
over our lives under sanction of the omnipotent black-robed despots who sit on the bench
of the United States Supreme Court.”47

In 1964, at the height of the Cold War, American freedom was all important to many
Americans. Wallace hoped to show that by passing the Civil Rights Act, Johnson and the
Supreme Court had acted no better than the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Johnson and
his allies had just “forced” the law on the United States when a majority of the citizens did not
want it in Wallace’s mind. He wanted the American people to realize that they have to fight for
their “traditional” civilization and “values” like the founders of the United States had. Wallace
wanted Americans to believe that they are under federal occupation now that did not differ from
the occupations of King George III or Abraham Lincoln. In the mind of George Wallace, all
“true” Americans, led by Wallace of course, needed to rise up, Americans, like the Founding

47

PBS. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/wallace/sfeature/quotes.html.
23

Fathers did, to overthrow “King Lyndon” and his council of evil liberals, restore America, and
make America great again.
Since its defeat in the American Civil War, the South has always felt threatened by
outsiders and their ideas. In the postwar period, the main goal of white Southerners was to
preserve their culture from these outside “alien” influences. Because of this perceived threat,
white southerners voted for men who promised that they would protect the South from outside
influences and would do anything to stop it. This led to the rise of leaders like Bull Connor and
George Wallace.48
In the early 1960’s, George Wallace was the most recent in a line of Southern leaders
stretching back to the Nathanial Bedford Forrest who fought for the “Lost Cause” and would do
anything to defend Southern culture and civilization from outside influences. To the Alabamians
and Southerners who supported George Wallace, their world was under attack and they needed
to save it or all would be completely lost. What they didn’t realize was that they had already lost
the battle and it was only a matter of time before they would be forced to adapt to the new world
that was in the process of evolving right in front of them.
The builder of this new world was Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., a pastor from the Atlanta
area who quickly became the American face of nonviolent civil protests in the United States and
the world. He was the American Gandhi in the making. After leading the Montgomery Bus
Boycott in 1955 and a failed attempt to force the integration of Albany, Georgia, in 1962, King

48

For more information about the “Lost Cause of the Confederacy” see Charles Reagan Wilson’s
book Baptized in Blood: The Religion of Lost Cause and Tony Horwitz’s Confederates in the
Attic: Dispatches from the Unfinished Civil War.
24

soon realized that Birmingham, Alabama would be a main, if not the main, battleground in the
struggle for civil rights.49
In history there are pivot points, points so important that the course of history depends on
which way the pivot throws history. The Franco-Prussian War of 1871 was one such pivot. That
conflict unified Germany, made France want revenge, established the alliance system that would
destroy Europe in World War I, and pointed the way to the destruction of the of the twentieth
century. The complete history of the twentieth century would be different if that war turned out
differently. That is power and importance of the historical pivot point. Birmingham 1963 was
another such point
Starting in April, Dr. King and his fellow protesters, marchers, and supporters engaged
the government and white community of Birmingham in an attempt to force the integration of
that city. They believed if they could force the integration of the citadel of segregation they could
destroy the system anywhere and everywhere.50 Once on the ground in Birmingham, in just over
a month, King and his supporters forced the white leaders of Birmingham to begin to desegregate
the city, force the white knight Bull Connor from power, and drew attention from all corners of
the world to the struggle for civil rights erupting in the American South.
The Letter from Birmingham Jail is probably the greatest piece of written memory and
narrative from the 1963 struggle in Birmingham. The document was written by Dr. King while
he sat in the Birmingham City Jail. His letter was written in response to two letters written by
eight white Alabama clergymen. In their letters “An Appeal for Law and Order and Common

49

Rieder, Jonathan. Gospel of Freedom: Martin Luther King, JR.'s Letter From Birmingham Jail
And The Struggle That Changed A Nation. New York: Bloomsbury, 2013. Pg. 6-7.
50
See
http://www.amistadresource.org/civil_rights_era/birmingham_desegregation_campaign.html
25

Sense” and “A Call for Unity”, these men wrote about the need for a slow and ordered process
to gain civil rights and an end to the “outside” influences, like Dr. King, interfering in the natural
development of Birmingham’s African-American community.51 They, like European colonial
administrators in Africa in the mid-twentieth century, believed that any headlong rush towards
civil rights and equality with the white man would destroy the social order of Birmingham and
Alabama. Like their counterparts in Africa, they believed that these civil rights and the
corresponding equality would naturally come to the African-American around the end of the
twentieth century or sometime in the beginning of the twenty-first.
In response to his fellow clergymen, King blasted their evolutionary approach in The
Letter from Birmingham Jail. To King, it was time to move. Protests had ended the British
Empire in India, and were in the process of achieving independence for Africa. They could do
the same with similar results in the American South. In his broadside, he answered the charges of
the white clergymen telling them, and the world, that is the moral responsibility of all people to
break, and fight, against unjust laws, and that it didn’t matter that he was an outsider in
Birmingham because “injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere”.52 He stated that
African-Americans had waited long enough and the time was now to finally achieve their
freedoms.53 It was easy for those who have never felt the wrath of Jim Crow to tell AfricanAmericans to wait for evolution to take its course54

“A law is unjust if it is inflicted on a minority that, as a result of being denied the right to
vote, had no part in enacting or devising the law.”

51

Ibid. Pg. 41.
Ibid. Pg. 182.
53
Ibid. Pg. 172.
54
Ibid. Pg. 170.
52

26

“Segregation laws are immoral and unjust “because segregation distorts the soul and
damages the personality. It gives the segregator a false sense of superiority and the
segregated a false sense of inferiority.”55

The Letter from Birmingham Jail established Dr. King’s place as one of the greatest
social justice figures of the United States and the world in the twentieth century. After its
publication and his “I have a dream” speech in Washington D.C. he had established himself as
the leader of the Civil Rights Movement, one of America’s greatest citizens, and man who
practiced the non-violence that he preached. He would soon be compared with Gandhi and other
great non-violent protest leaders from around the world.56
In the short term, The Letter from Birmingham Jail charged the white community and
white church especially with the charge that they had to take a stand or risk being “dismissed as
an irrelevant social club”.57 All Americans were charged with fighting for social justice and civil
rights through peaceful protest. 1963 was not a time to wait but a time to move.
Unfortunately, sometimes the lessons learned from visual memory, written memory, and
the corresponding narrative can be forgotten. In the aftermath of Dr. King’s own assassination in
Memphis, Tennessee in the 1968, Americans were pulled from the path of social justice into the
black holes of white conservative reaction and black nationalism. In these black holes,
Americans forgot the lessons of The Letter from Birmingham Jail. It is up to organizations like
the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute to preserve those lessons and education this, and all future generations about The
Letter from Birmingham Jail.

55

Ibid. Pg. 184.
See: http://peacemagazine.org/archive/v17n2p21.htm for more on this comparison.
57
See: http://www.churchmarketingsucks.com/2007/01/irrelevant-social-clubs-martin-lutherking-jr-on-the-church/ for more on this.
56

27

NARRATIVE
Memory in all its forms are integral components in the crafting of all forms of narrative.
Without them, there can be no narrative. Control is also a vital component in narrative. In prison
institutions, control is absolute and allows for only one form of narrative, the narrative of those
who control the institution whether that is a government or some form of an institution.58 In
restaurant institutions, the records and materials are allowed to speak for themselves creating a
space for multiple narratives, and sometimes counter-narratives to develop.59
The precursors of the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts were prison collecting institution. They supported the Jim Crow master narrative
making sure that all their collections supported this narrative on purpose or even by accident.
Thomas Duke Parke and his papers were victims of this for most of the twentieth century.
Thomas Duke Parke was not a racist. Parke, who served from 1895-1899 as the City
Physician of Birmingham, Alabama spoke out against the convict leasing system of the time that
condemned African-American men to a new form of slavery in the mines and industrial works
around Birmingham.60 These men, who were convicted of crimes, ranging from failing to pay a
small fine to jaywalking, would become trapped in the mines by the fees and fines that would

58

Jimerson. Pg 6-8.
For example see Verne Harris’ Nelson Mandela Centre of Memory at:
http://archive.nelsonmandela.org/home or the National Voting Rights Museum and Institute at:
http://nvrmi.com/.
60
Blackmon, Douglas A. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans
from the Civil War to World War II. New York: Anchor Books, 2008. Pg 5-9.
59

28

never allow them to return to their former lives.61 Parke, instead of certifying, as other
physicians had done, spoke out against the system and campaigned against it for the next twentyeight years.
It wasn’t until the beginnings of the Civil Rights Movement that Dr. Parke’s Papers were
examined for the first time.62 In the mid-1950’s, a researcher was conducting an examination of
Dr. Parke’s papers and created a finding aid for those papers to assist in his research. The finding
aid focused on possible research points that were important to the researchers and public of the
1950; they were racial points. The researcher took that finding aid and gave it to the archive and
the archive used it as the definitive finding aid for Dr. Parke’s papers. It wasn’t until 2010 that
another user of the same archive realized that the original researcher’s finding aid was horribly
biased and did not fully represent Dr. Parke and his life.63 When the record was corrected, the
archive discovered that Dr. Parke fought against the convict leasing system it once said he
supported and had at times had almost socialist tendencies. He was not what the archive, which
was in fact the Birmingham Public Library Archive, and history had painted him as. He was
something completely different.

61

Ibid. Pg 47.
Like Dr. Parke, the former American President John Quincy Adams is currently enjoying a
historical reevaluation and reinterpretation for the better. Since 2013, there have been six new
biographies of Adams or his wife Louisa. Each, like James Traub’s John Quincy Adams: A
Militant Spirit, have broken with the past interpretation of Adams as a poor president and poor
leader to show that Adams laid the foundation for many of the functions of government, like
roads and other internal improvements, that we take for granted today. That, and his work before
and after his presidency show that Adams did not deserve the reputation he was given for most
of the 19th and 20th centuries.
63
This story was provided to the author through a reference request to Jerry Smith. Smith was
the discoverer of the issue with the Parke Collection at the Birmingham Department of Archives
and Manuscripts.
62

29

In restaurant institutions, memory and narrative are allowed to evolve. When this
happens, great change can take place. Take for example what happened in Guatemala.
Thousands, if not millions of identification documents were discovered in 2005 in the former
archives of the Guatemalan National Police. That organization had brutally terrorized the people
of Guatemala for 30 years from the 1960’s to the 1990’s.64 According to the archivists,
historians, and volunteers reconstructing the archive, these identification cards were the cards
taken from the victims of the National Police.65 When completely reconstructed these cards will
be able to help tell the stories of the people they used to belong too. They will also be able to tell
the whole story of what happened during the military dictatorship in Guatemala and educate
Guatemalans and the world.
A counter-narrative can also provide new information to a narrative, or narratives. Many
aspects of the Civil Rights Movement are represented at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute
and Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts. One aspect that is
missing from the both institutions is the role radio, especially African-American radio, played in
the fight for civil rights in the 1960’s.
One institution in Birmingham that has taken up this aspect is the Birmingham Black
Radio Museum Project. Founded by Bob Friedman in the late 1980’s, the BBRM is tasked with
collecting the history of Birmingham Black Radio that other Birmingham institutions have
missed.66 For most of the 20th century, radio was one of the only avenues, along with
newspapers, where African-Americans could actually take some sort of leadership role equal to

64

Weld. Loc. 233.
Ibid. Loc. 301.
66
"Alabama Museums Association." Alabama Museums Association. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.alabamamuseums.org/museums/view_museum.php?museum=112.
65

30

that, or great than, their white neighbors.67 Like preachers, radio hosts could be leaders when no
other leadership roles were available to African-Americans.
African-American radio hosts also had an unheralded role in the Civil Rights Movement.
During the Civil Rights Movement, radio hosts like Tall Paul White and Shelly “The Playboy”
Stewart would broadcast secret messages to organizers, marchers, and protesters, telling them
when and where to assemble.68 It is thought, but cannot be proven completely, that they
broadcasted the go signal for the children to leave their schools and enter the streets to begin the
Children’s March in May 1963.69
The history of African-American radio in Birmingham and its role in the Civil Rights
Movement is not mentioned or highlighted at either the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute or
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts. Instead it is up to
institutions like the Birmingham Black Radio Museum Project to carry this history. Institutions
like the BBRM will always be needed to provide counter-narratives that fill in, and add to,
narratives provided for at other institutions.
Memory, narrative, alternate narrative, and counter narrative all make up the building
blocks of the relationship between collecting institutions and social justice. They make collecting
institutions restaurant collecting institutions and allow for the development of education and
research opportunities. Without them there would be no foundation for institutions like the
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute to build off of.

67

Ward, Brian E. Radio and the Struggle for Civil Rights in the South. Gainesville, FL:
University Press of Florida, 2006.
68
Ibid.
69
Ibid.
31

COLLECTING INSTITUTION OVERVIEW
Both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute were born in the initial opening wave of liberation that swept
through Birmingham in the late 1970’s and 1980’s. After suffering for so long under the
oppression of the master narrative of Jim Crow, the city, and its people, wanted to understand
ALL of their history. They wanted to understand all of the narrative strings of Birmingham’s
history for different reasons. Some wanted to understand what had happened to love ones and
why it happened to them, some wanted to attempt to learn the lessons of Birmingham’s past and
how to apply them to Birmingham’s future, and some wanted to cash in on the country’s and
world’s sudden interest in civil and human rights (they wanted the tourist dollars).70 Whatever
their own personal reasons, these two institutions came to life and then lead the charge and the
change in how Birmingham and the wider world treated Birmingham’s past.71
The Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts was the first of
the two to be founded. It was founded in 1976 and tasked with being a repository of the all the
history of Birmingham. For the first time, this met ALL of Birmingham’s history. This charge
was worked into the Department’s mission statement.
“The Birmingham Department of Archives and Manuscripts collects government records,
business records, maps, photographs, letters, diaries, scrapbooks, and other primary
material documenting the history and development of Birmingham, Jefferson County and
the surrounding area of Alabama known as the Birmingham District. The Archives
70

Raiford, Romano
Restaurant institutions as defined by Randell C. Jimerson in Archive Powers are institutions
that allow the records, documents, and collections to speak for themselves and let them guide
users.

71

32

collects material statewide relating to the Episcopal Church in Alabama, the Civil Rights
Movement in Alabama, Jewish history and life in Alabama, LGBTQ history and life in
Alabama, and the Environmental Movement in Alabama.”72

For the first time in Birmingham’s history, it had a collecting institution that wanted to
not just collect all the narratives of that history but also examine all of these narratives. The
public and researchers from Birmingham and the wider world had a place to go and examine the
multiple known, and discover the unknown, narratives that make up the story of Birmingham.
The Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts was, and is still,
willing to collect, preserve, remember, and educate the people of Birmingham and the wider
world about the complete story of Birmingham. They can help new stories be told, correct
wrongs, and help Birmingham and the wider world move towards social justice. Instead of one
master narrative, all the narratives could speak.
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute opened to the public on November 16, 1992 after
a 16 year struggle.73 During those 16 years, the people of Birmingham, its government, and
outsiders battled about what would be included in the Institute and why they even wanted to
build an Institute in the first place. In the eyes of some, Birmingham had embraced multiple
narratives after 1963 so there was no need to return to the events of the Civil Rights Movement
and the Jim Crow Era. This opinion lost and the Civil Rights Institute opened in 1992 with a
strong emphasis on education, research, and the continued fight for civil rights in Birmingham
and the wider world.

72

"Birmingham Public Library - Central - Archives." Birmingham Public Library - Central Archives. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bplonline.org/locations/central/archives/.
73
Raiford, Romano
33

Mission
To enlighten each generation about civil and human rights by exploring our common past and
working together in the present to build a better future.
Vision
We stand strong as THE CORNERSTONE of the civil rights story, a living memorial with an
on-going mission.

•

Values
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute is committed to:
• Persevering and telling the Birmingham story
• Being a good steward of archival and financial resources
• Creating programs that encourage cultural awareness
Championing civil and human rights by facilitation an atmosphere of dialogue and
understanding74

Both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute were founded to be strong restaurant collecting institutions
that educated and provided opportunities for those who wished to learn about the multiple
narratives of Birmingham’s history.

74

"About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights Institute." About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.
34

EDUCATION AND RESEARCH
“BCRI [Birmingham Civil Rights Institute] is a cultural and educational research center that
promotes a comprehensive understanding and appreciation for the significance of civil rights
developments in Birmingham with an increasing emphasis on the international struggle for
universal human rights. BCRI is a “living institution” that views the lessons of the past as
crucial to understanding our heritage and defining our future.”75

Unfortunately for the people of Birmingham, Alabama, it took over 105 years to realize
that all the narratives working together would produce the strongest society. For those 105 years,
the master narrative was that of the rule and continued advancement of the white
Birminghamians and their white civilization. All other narratives were “enemies” of the white
master narrative and did not matter to the average citizen, the historian, or the librarian. This led
to 105 years of racial strife, violence, and oppression. Birmingham could never realize it's true
potential with only one part of its story being told. After the opening of the doors of prison
collecting institutions in the 1970’s, Birmingham and its collecting institutions finally had a
chance to examine what had happened in the first 105 years of Birmingham’s story. The original
master narrative was collapsing. What would replace it would be up to new collecting
institutions like the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. The original master narrative had to collapse so new
narratives could grow and evolve.
Both of these institutions place an emphasis on supporting and growing Birmingham’s
new multiple narrative history and apply the historical lessons of Birmingham of the past to the

75

Ibid.
35

Birmingham of the present and the world. They educate the public and allow for research into
Birmingham’s past so narratives, and their lessons so they can be applied to present and future
generations. This is seen in the mission statements of each institution. Take again the mission
statement of the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute (BCRI)
Mission
To enlighten each generation about civil and human rights by exploring our common past and
working together in the present to build a better future.
Vision
We stand as THE CORNERSTONE of the civil rights story, a living memorial with an on-going
mission.

•

Values
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute is committed to:
• Preserving and telling the Birmingham story
• Being a good steward of archival and financial resources
• Creating programs that encourage cultural awareness
Championing civil and human rights by facilitating an atmosphere of dialogue and
understanding76

Education and research are the most important functions of both the Birmingham Public
Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute in
terms of social justice. Both function as figurative transmission towers for the memories and
lessons of the past and how they can be applied to the present and future. Without these
functions, a collecting institution cannot help a society reach social justice in the United States.
The Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts holds multiple
collections that examine many aspects and sections of Southern history and culture. Before the
formation of the Department in 1976, many of these collections and records were used to serve

76

"About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights Institute." About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.
36

the master narrative of Jim Crow and segregation.77 These collections and records exulted the
“glories” of the white citizens and white history of Birmingham while putting any other history
and culture out of the master narrative and history of the city. After the founding of the
Department and the gathering of those collections and records under the umbrella of that
Department, the same collections and records that once served the white man’s master narrative
became free to speak the truth to all current and future generations.
One collection that went through this transformation and now serves as a tool of social
justice is the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files. These files, dated from 1941-1972, contain
information collected about civil rights meetings, demonstrations, and organization efforts. It
also has information related to white supremacists, pornography, voting rights, and Rev. Fred
Shuttlesworth.78 Most of these documents were generated by the Birmingham Police Department
when Bull Conner ran that department.79
Whatever narratives, or multiple narratives, that this collection naturally generated were
suppressed during the first decades of its existence. During those years, this collection was
suppressed itself by the overarching master narrative of the Birmingham of the mid-twentieth
century. Instead of being able to speak its mind, it was enslaved to the master narrative that Bull
Conner and those who supported him preached in support of.
After it was placed in the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts this collection had the chance to finally speak its mind without the overarching and
overbearing power of a master narrative holding it down. When this weight was lifted, the

77

"Birmingham Public Library - Central - Archives." Birmingham Public Library - Central Archives. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bplonline.org/locations/central/archives/.
78
http://encore.bham.lib.al.us/iii/encore/record/C__Rb1490380?lang=eng
79
Ibid.
37

collection came to life. Instead of telling the story of the “glories” of Jim Crow Birmingham, it
told of the horrors. This collection told the story of a police force which tried its best to perform
its best to beat, oppress, and terrorize its own citizens because some of those citizens wanted
equal rights.80 In the United States of the 20th century, one that was fighting the Cold War as a
bastion of freedom and liberties, a police force was imprisoning, beating, surveilling, and killing
their own citizens in the name of a fascistic racist master narrative.
Like the liberated records of apartheid South Africa, the police surveillance files of the
Birmingham Police Department can inform, educate, and warn users in the present and future of
the horrors of the past and the lessons that can, and should, be learned from them. These records,
if used correctly, can show how a society can go from a closed society to an open society and
how any society, even the United States of America, could have to deal with these issues in the
life of the society and culture they inhabit. They also serve as a warning telling Birmingham, the
United States, and the world that this kind of activity should never be allowed in any modern free
civilized society. And that it even happened in the United States of America. The supposed home
of the free and liberty.
While not in any educational display at the Department of Archives and Manuscripts, the
lessons offered up by this collection are actually on display at the Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. After telling the story of Birmingham’s struggle for civil rights, the Institute warns its
visitors that the struggle is not over. In a series of panels, they tell visitors about some of the civil
rights and social justice struggles that have taken place since the events in Birmingham.81 The
panels warn visitors that the struggle for civil rights and social justice is not over around the

80

"About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights Institute." About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.
81
Photographs 2-5 in photographic appendix.
38

world or in Birmingham. The fight is not over and neither should education, investigation, or
research be either. The Institute wants to be always moving, always growing, and always
learning.
There are current movements in today’s world where the lessons learned gleamed from
the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files Collection could be important. One such movement is
the Black Lives Movement in the United States. This movement is the direct response to an
increase in police violence which seems directed primarily at African Americans. Unfortunately,
violence directed towards African Americans by police forces is not a new phenomenon. What
the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files could teach both sides of this conflict is that this
conflict has unfortunately happened before. The files, and the reactions to them, could show
police departments and the victims of those departments how to change and end the current
cycle. Most of all, they could show that this type of behavior belongs as the ash heap of history
and both sides, and the wider public, need to come together and finally find the true cause of it
all.
Another corner of the world where the lessons of the Birmingham Police Surveillance
Files Collection could provide helpful lessons is in Canada. According to the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, between 1980 and 2012, around 1017 First Nations women were murdered
while another 108 went missing during that same period.82 The police barely investigated the
murders when they happened and just forgot about most of them afterwards. Hopefully, the new
investigation into the old records recently initiated by the Canadian Prime Minister Justin

82

"Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women in Canada Could Number 4,000." The Guardian.
2016. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/missing-andmurdered-indigenous-women-in-canada-could-number-4000.

39

Trudeau will be able to undercover some of the lost truth of what happened to these women.
Like what happened in Birmingham and the records connected to those events, hopefully the
records connected to the murders will be able to tell family members what happened to their
loved ones, punish if need be, and remind Canadians that they should always be fighting for
social justice.
The educational opportunities based around the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files
Collection allow for many opportunities for social justice. These opportunities allow this
collection to move social justice forward in Birmingham, Alabama, the United States, and the
world. Another way, not just this collection, but the entire Birmingham Public Library
Department of Archives and Manuscripts helps achieve social justice is through the production
of secondary resources through research of the collections they have a hand.
Research is an important way to present the ideas and lessons contained in collecting
institutions to the wider world. In the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts, this process has produced books like Diane McWhorter’s Carry Me Home:
Birmingham, Alabama: The Climatic Battle of the Civil Rights Movement. Carry Me Home was
born from the records and collections stored at the Department of Archives and Manuscripts.
McWhorter, who is originally from Birmingham, used these items and her own personal stake in
her project to tell the story of Birmingham’s eventful 1963.83
For Diane McWhorter, the events of 1963 Birmingham are important for both personal
and historical reasons. Because she was a small child living in 1963 Mountain Brook, Alabama,
she did not fully realize what was happening at Birmingham’s heart. She knew there was a
conflict, and she had family members on one side but she didn’t know what they were fighting

83

McWhorter. Pg. xv-xvi.
40

for at the time. She wrote Carry Me Home to tell the story of Birmingham and her family in
1963 and answer all her questions.84
What she discovered was that the events of 1963 Birmingham were actually the final
results of decades of racial and political intrigue in Birmingham and Alabama.85 What she found
was a raging battle for the master narrative of Jim Crow that started in the 1940’s and would
finally end in 1963. Inside that battle she discovered that her family played a role in this intrigue
and supported the master narrative of Jim Crow. Her father and uncle were minor members of
the Big Mules.86 The Big Mules were Birmingham and Alabama businessmen who controlled the
politics, cultural, and business in Birmingham and Alabama. Starting in the 1940’s, the Big
Mules cultivated, organized, and assisted forces that would support their rule and fight against
any threat to it and the narrative that told its story.87 This met that they cultivated the likes of
Bull Conner and Asa Carter to lead the fight against outside influences and forces. The Big
Mules did not want change and would fight it at any cost.
In McWhorter’s mind the only reason the Big Mules eventually broke and gave in to the
demands of the Civil Rights Movement were the fact that it was beginning to affect their
pocketbooks. The images of Bull Conner’s police department beating children that were circling
the globe gave Birmingham a black eye and painted it into the same corner occupied by Nazi
Germany and Pol Pot’s Cambodia. This, and not their changed belief system and their rejection
of Birmingham’s master narrative, was the reason that 1963 was a victory for civil rights.
McWhorter’s analysis in Carry Me Home Alabama is one that should come as a warning to those

84

Ibid. Pg. xvi.
Ibid. Pg. 150.
86
Ibid. Pg 400.
87
Ibid. Pg. 450.
85

41

who read it. To McWhorter, the victory one in Birmingham 1963 was not the final battle in the
war but just another battle. The liberation is incomplete. Those who read this book should take
this away from their reading. This battle may have been won but the war is ongoing still.
The sense of continuing struggle is evident today. In 2015, an Indian man was badly
beaten by police officers in Northern Alabama. According to the man’s family, the only reason
he was beaten was because he didn’t speak English and was not white. The officers reported he
was belligerent and didn’t answer their questions. Whatever the reasons that he was beaten it, it
was a case of police brutality, overreach, and shows that the struggle continues.88 This man’s
civil rights and social justice was taken away from him by these police officers who were doing
their best impression of Bull Conner’s police force from the 1960s.
This sense of continuing struggle is the most important lesson one can take from Carry
Me Home. And it is the one of the most important lessons one can take from any of the
collections, or works produced by them, in the Birmingham Public Library Department of
Archives and Manuscripts. Most of these collections were created in a time and place where
they served, even if not designed for it, the master narrative of Jim Crow. They served the white
man and his story only. Now, because of the Department of Archives and Manuscripts, they
serve all narratives and provide lessons for present and future generations to examine, learn
about, and apply to their own situations.
Education and research are the two main ways the Birmingham Public Library
Department of Archives and Manuscripts helps Birmingham and the wider world search, or work
towards, social justice. Both concepts are supported strongly by the Department and form

88

"Grandpa Partially Paralyzed after Encounter with Police." CNN. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.cnn.com/2015/02/12/us/alabama-police-beating/.
42

cornerstones of its and the library’s central mission statement. Like the Department of Archives
and Manuscripts, the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute also supports social justice through
education and research. The Civil Rights Institute does so through its public museum, collections
access, and the works that that research produces.
Unlike the Department of Archives and Manuscripts, the Civil Rights Institute has a
public area where portions of its collections can be put on display and the narratives, both of
blacks and whites, of the Civil Rights Era can be told. Because of this public area, the Institute
has to worry about making sure that it allows for all the narratives of the Civil Rights Era to be
told and not their own master narrative. The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute is still not a full
restaurant collecting institution because of the issues in their public museum area.
The public museum area of the Institute is where it is not fully a restaurant collections
institution. This portion of the BCRI relies heavily on visual stimuli to influence visitors and tell
the master narrative of the Civil Rights Institute. At times, for oblivious reasons, this narrative
draws heavily from television and newspaper accounts of events.
These displays, of both newspapers and television, offer a window into the minds of the
people who lived through these events, those who reported it, and those, on both sides, who
fought Birmingham’s battle for civil rights.89 They offer a chance for visitors to see what it was
really like to live through the South’s civil rights trials and tribulations. But, they don’t tell the
whole story. The tell only the master narrative of the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
One aspect of the narrative of Birmingham’s civil rights story that they leave out is the
contributions of African American radio hosts. Starting with the mass introduction of radio in the
1920’s, radio is one of the only areas, the other being as a member of the clergy, that African

89

See Photographs 6-7 in photographic appendix.
43

Americans had a chance to advance and make something of themselves in that field.90 By the
time 1963 dawned in Birmingham, there are been many African American radio hosts that had
had an impact on the city and the surrounding area. These men, and a few women, showed that
African Americans could successfully run businesses and could also successfully contribute to
Southern culture in a way that wouldn’t destroy it but enhance it.
In the battles of 1963, these same radio hosts played important roles. Because they were
the representatives of a mass form of media that African Americans actually had some manner of
control over, they were used to pass messages and orders along to civil rights marchers and
protesters. When the children of the Children’s March left their classrooms in May 1963 they did
so after listening to Tall Paul and others give them coded messages in their radio programs to
begin the march. African American disc jockeys played an important part of African American
history in Birmingham and Birmingham’s total history.91
This history is unfortunately missing from the displays of the museum area of the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. It is currently being saved and persevered by Bob Friedman
at the Birmingham Black Radio Museum Project.92 While the public educational displays at the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute are informative and do help visitors learn about the history of
the civil rights struggle in the South, they would be more complete if they made sure to at least
mention other narratives that their master narrative fails to support.
The area where the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute succeeds in being a restaurant
collection institution and helping to search for social justice the most is the research

90

Ward.
Ibid.
92
"Alabama Museums Association." Alabama Museums Association. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.alabamamuseums.org/museums/view_museum.php?museum=112.
91

44

opportunities it offers. The Civil Rights Institute holds many records and collections, for
obvious reasons, that relate to civil rights and social justice in Birmingham and the wider world.
These collections have been used to support the writing of many works that have taken the
lessons of Birmingham’s Civil Rights Movement into the wider world. One such book is Gospel
of Freedom: Martin Luther King, JR.’s Letter From Birmingham Jail and The Struggle That
Changed A Nation by Jonathan Rieder.
Gospel of Freedom is the story of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.’s Letter from Birmingham
Jail and then its deployment in the fight for civil rights in Birmingham 1963.93 The book is the
history of what led King to write the letter, how people discussed it and then used it during the
Civil Rights Movement. To Rieder, King’s Letter from Birmingham Jail, was the gospel of
freedom for the battle for civil rights and can be the gospel of freedom for other civil rights and
social justice movements around the world.
Jonathan Rieder’s book and others like it show the power of the collections contained
within the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute. The stories and narratives the collections tell
embrace the ideal of a restaurant collection institution much better than the public museum
complex within the Institute does. This is important. The public museum complex is important to
the educational opportunities that the BCRI offers but it is in the collections, and the research
opportunities presented there, that the true work towards social justice takes place. The lessons of
the Civil Rights Movement are contained there and available for the researcher to mine them. In
these mines, social justice will be found.
With education and research the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts and the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute can help Birmingham and the

93

Rieder. Pg. xv-xx.
45

surrounding world move towards social justice. Because of these opportunities that can, and
have, been mined, the lessons of Birmingham’s Civil Rights Movement contained in both
institutions can be presented to the public. Hopefully as more information is discovered and
organized that both institutions will continue to be living institutions and grow in the educational
and research ways that they can help Birmingham and the world work towards social justice.

46

CONCLUSIONS
In Guatemala City in 2005, because of an accident, the archives of the Guatemalan
National Police were rediscovered.94 Operating from the 1890’s to 1996, the National Police
served as the chief instrument of torture and oppression against the Guatemala people.95 The
archives of the National Police contained record after record of those it had tortured, oppressed,
and sometimes murdered. The country was trapped within the “banality of evil” and the National
Police Archive was trapped within the “banality of information abuse”. After the collapse of the
government in 1996, Guatemala began the transformation from an oppressive society into an
open society. It wasn’t until 2005 when the archives were re-discovered that the archives could
begin that transformation also. After the National Police Archives were discovered, archivists
and volunteers from Guatemala and around the world began that transformation process. They
were able to piece together what happened to people who were taken by the National Police,
educate everyone about them, assist in the punishment of some, and help others forgive. They
had successfully begun the process of transforming the National Police Archives from a prison
institution to a restaurant institution.96
This transformation, and opening, is important at all levels of any collecting institution
and it is vital for any institution to have a chance, or the ability, to engage in, or assist, in any
search for social justice. In South Africa, Guatemala and the United States, when things were

94

Weld, Kristen. Paper Cadavers: The Archives of Dictatorship in Guatemala. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press Books, 2014. Loc. 632-634.
95
Ibid. Loc. 233.
96
Ibid. Loc. 301.
47

opened to examining, researchers, and the public, were finally to understand what happened
during the reign of the Khmer Rouge, military dictatorship, and the Vietnam War. One product
of a successful transformation is An Indigenous People’s History of the United States by
Roxanne Dunbar-Ortiz. In An Indigenous People’s History, Dunbar-Ortiz uses the same
information and material used to write the accepted history of the United States, showing the
triumphant founding and growth of the United States, to show a different side of that same
history.97 Dunbar-Ortiz paints a picture of a United States that isn’t a freedom loving nation
where anybody can do anything but of a brutal genocidal empire that attempted to exterminate
the indigenous population of North America but failed too. Her analysis is only possible because
the collecting institutions of the United States finally allow, because of social, cultural, and
institutional changes, for the development of multiple narratives, different voices, and the search
for social justice. In the United States, the wall “banality of information abuse” is starting to
collapse but there is still much work to be done.98
Another example is Global Crisis: War, Climate Change & Catastrophe In The
Seventeenth Century by Geoffrey Parker. Parker’s history of the seventeenth century is very
much a new and different view of the history of that century. Instead of war, religion, great men

97

An Indigenous People’s History of the United States uses documents, collections, and
resources that once only told one master narrative to tell a new narrative, that of the plight and
abuse of Native Americans before and throughout United States’ history. Like the Birmingham
Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and Birmingham Civil Rights Institute,
it shows readers that there are social justice lessons to be taken from the darkness of the past.
98
Over the last 15 years, different, and often overlooked narratives from the wider historical
narrative of the United States and the Americas are being brought into the light. Like An
Indigenous People’s History, Andrés Reséndez’s The Other Slavery: The Uncovered Story of
Indian Enslavement in America, Iris Chang’s The Chinese in America: A Narrative History and
Tom Gjelten’s A Nation of Nations: A Great American Immigration Story have all attempted to
bring a forgotten or often not talked about portion of United States or wider American history
into the historical light and wider narrative of the two regions.
48

and women, or new technologies driving the history of that century, Parker claims that climate
change was the real and overarching driver of historical events and the changes that swept that
century.99 Parker is able to back up those claims and show that climate change did play a part in
the events of the seventeenth century with some of the same records that assisted in the
production of traditional narratives of the period.100
The ability of records and collecting institutions to produce both multiple narratives is an
important, and vital, ability of any collecting institution when it comes to social justice. This
allows for a multi-faceted examination of the events contained within the institution and in free
and open way. Users, researchers, and patrons are able to freely grapple with all aspects of the
records and determine their effects on themselves and the world around them. This is a
complicated process that sometimes is never started or never completed to a satisfactory
completion point.101

99

Parker, Geoffrey. Global Crisis: War, Climate Change & Catastrophe In The Seventeenth
Century. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013. Pg. xxix-xxx.
100
A traditional account of the period would focus on politics or religion as causes for the
disorder that swept through that century. Examples of these accounts are Gustavus Adolphus by
Theodore Dodge and The Thirty Years War by C.V. Wedgwood and Anthony Grafton. Both
books focus on the “great men” of the period that drove the history in their eyes.
101
For example, Uruguay has had two truth and reconciliation commissions. One ran in 1985
and the other in 2000-2003. The second commission was established to go back and continue the
process started by the first commission. For more information, see Priscilla B. Hayner’s
Unspeakable Truths: Transitional Justice and the Challenge of Truth Commissions.
49

THE SOCIAL JUSTICE RELATIONSHIP
The transformation process from the prison society and prison collecting institution is
what makes these civil rights and social justice gains possible. Every document, collection, and
record that was generated in Jim Crow Alabama by the official white man was designed to serve
the master narrative of Jim Crow. Those documents that could have told another story or added
to the narrative of Alabama were destroyed or forgotten about. It was a prison and it was locked
up tight.
Then came 1963 and the events of that year. Those events finally, after decades of trying,
forced the doors open of the societal and informational prisons that Jim Crow Alabama had been
constructed. The throwing open of these doors started a process that would lead to both the
Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute being founded. With these two institutions founded, the transformation could
really and finally pick up its pace. Birmingham finally had restaurant institutions that could
allow the collections, documents, memories, and records contained within them to speak for
themselves. They were finally going to tell the multi-narrative story of Birmingham.
After the doors of the informational prisons were open, and informational apartheid and
the “banality of informational abuse” both collapsed, collections, documents, memories, and
records that once only served, or were force to serve, the master narrative of Jim Crow Alabama
had a chance to be reevaluated. When collections, like the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files,
were reevaluated in this new open light they told a different story. Those files were originally
created to support the narrative of Jim Crow and support the actions of Bull Connor and his

50

police force. In the new light of the restaurant collection institution it now lived in, these same
files told the story of the abuses of Bull Connor and his police force, the brutal suppression and
oppression they visited upon the citizens they were supposed to protect.
The story of oppression and violence against the people of Birmingham in the
Birmingham Police Surveillance Files now could be examined by researchers and users. These
researchers discovered lessons from this collection that could be adapted to the present and the
future. These lessons are the source of this collection’s and the restaurant collecting institution is
overall ability to help Birmingham and the wider world work towards social justice.
Another way this transformation process liberates social justice lessons from former
prison collecting institutions is through research. Books like Carry Me Home: Birmingham,
Alabama: The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution by Diane McWhorter uses
documents and collections from the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and
Manuscripts and memories from her own past to tell the story of 1963 Birmingham. Her book
showed, and continues to show, readers that the struggle for civil rights and social justice is still
continuing. The “Battle of 1963” was won but the wider war is still going on in Birmingham,
Alabama, the United States, and the world.
Through revaluations of both the Birmingham Police Surveillance Files and business and
political documents, hidden corners of Birmingham’s history can be exposed to the light of
history for the first time and social justice lessons can be taken from them. As time goes on, and
more education and research is produced from these, and other records, this transformation
process will continue to happen and continue to hopefully produce social justice results that
could be applied to Birmingham and anywhere else in the world.

51

FUTURE RESEARCH
The Birmingham Civil Rights Institute in its mission statement declares itself to be a
“living institution” that will grow and change with the changes in society and culture in
Birmingham and the world.102 Any collection institution that wants to a have a relationship with
social justice needs to be a “living institution”. This means that they should, while not
compromising their core archival beliefs, help their societies find social justice and be able to
change when the definition of social justice changes. In a restaurant collecting institution that
really allows its collections to speak for themselves, the lessons provided from those collections,
will be able to be adapted to whatever definition of social justice there may be. In 1993, this was
civil rights for African Americans, women, and other racial minorities but in 2016, it may be
civil rights for racial minorities and members of the LGBTQ community. Whatever the changes
in the definition of social justice, in a proper restaurant collecting institution, with their
collections, and the lessons attached to those collections, should be able to meet the demands of
social justice without compromising their core archival beliefs.
Both the Birmingham Public Library Department of Archives and Manuscripts and the
Birmingham Civil Rights Institute are strong restaurant institutions right now that help
Birmingham and the rest of the world work towards social justice through education and
research. While they are strong restaurant institutions right now they need to make sure that they

102

"About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights Institute." About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.

52

continue to make sure all narratives have a chance to speak. At the Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute, this means telling the story of social justice movements past 2004, and the story of
Birmingham’s African American radio hosts. At the Birmingham Public Library Department of
Archives and Manuscripts this means making sure that new collections are processed and old
collections are reexamined and reevaluated to make sure everything is correct. If both institutions
do these things and more they will continue to be strong social justice restaurant collecting
institutions for years to come. Users will come from far and wide to access their records and
continue to work towards the twin social justice goals of education and research. As long as both
institutions continue to be willing to grow they will continue to function as restaurant collecting
institutions and as valuable partners in the relationship between collecting institutions and social
justice.

53

REFERENCES
"About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights Institute." About BCRI | Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bcri.org/Information/AboutBCRI.html.
"Alabama Museums Association." Alabama Museums Association. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.alabamamuseums.org/museums/view_museum.php?museum=112.
"Alabama Museums Association." Alabama Museums Association. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.alabamamuseums.org/museums/view_museum.php?museum=112.
http://americanarchivist.org/doi/pdf/10.17723/aarc.65.2.920w65g3217706l1
Amnesty International. https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/.
Arana, Marie. Bolivar: American Liberator. New York: Simon & Schuster, 2014.
http://archive.nelsonmandela.org/
Arendt, Hannah. Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New York: Penguin
Classics, 2006.
Bascomb, Neal. Hunting Eichmann: How a Band of Survivors and a Young Spy Agency Chased
Down the World's Most Notorious Nazi. New York: Mariner Books, 2009.
http://www.bhamwiki.com/w/Eleanor_Bridges
"Birmingham Public Library - Central - Archives." Birmingham Public Library - Central Archives. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.bplonline.org/locations/central/archives/.
Blackmon, Douglas A. Slavery by Another Name: The Re-Enslavement of Black Americans from
the Civil War to World War II. New York: Anchor Books, 2008.
http://www.bplonline.org/locations/central/archives/
Burton, Antoinette M. Archive Stories: Facts, Fictions, and the Writing of History. Durham,
NC: Duke University Press, 2005

54

Carson, Clayborne, David J. Garrow, Gerald Gill, Vincent Harding, and Darlene Clark Hine,
eds. The Eyes On The Prize Civil Rights Reader: Documents, Speeches, And Firsthand Accounts
From The Black Freedom Struggle. New York: Penguin Books, 2013.
Casewell, Michelle. Archiving the Unspeakable: Silence, Memory, and the Photographic
Record in Cambodia. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2014.
Clark, Alexandra. Hidden History of Chattanooga. London: The History Press, 2008.
Chappell, David. Inside Agitators: White Southerners in the Civil Rights Movement. Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press, 1996.
Committee, Church. The FBI, COINTELPRO, And Martin Luther King Jr.: Final Report of The
Select Committee To Study Governmental Operations With Respect To Intelligence Activity. St.
Petersburg: Red and Black Publishers, 2011.
"Considering Counter-Narratives." https://benjamins.com/#catalog/books/sin.4/main
http://encore.bham.lib.al.us/iii/encore/record/C__Rb1490380?lang=eng
Encyclopedia Britannica. "Aeneas ." http://www.britannica.com/topic/Aeneas.
Digital Archive of the Guatemalan National Police Historical Archive (AHPN)." Digital Archive
of the Guatemalan National Police Historical Archive (AHPN). Accessed April 16, 2016.
https://ahpn.lib.utexas.edu/.
Duff, Wendy, Andrew Flinn, Karen Suurtamm, and David Wallace. "Social Justice Impact of
Archives: A Preliminary Investigation." Archival Science 13, no. 4 (2013): 317-48.
Eskew, Glenn T. But for Birmingham: The Local and National Movements in the Civil Rights
Struggle. N.p.: The University of North Carolina Press, 1997.
Gilliland, Anne. "Neutrality, social justice and the obligations of archival education and
educators in the twenty-first century. "Archival Science 11, no. 3 (November 2011): 193-202.
Gilmore, Kim. "The Birmingham Children's Crusade of 1963." Bio.com. Accessed April 16,
2016. http://www.biography.com/news/black-history-birmingham-childrens-crusade-1963-video.
"Grandpa Partially Paralyzed after Encounter with Police." CNN. Accessed April 16, 2016.
http://www.cnn.com/2015/02/12/us/alabama-police-beating/.
Hampton, Henry, Steve Fayer, and Sarah Flynn. Voices of Freedom: An Oral History of the Civil
Rights Movement from the 1950’s Through the 1980’s. New York: Bantam, 1991.
Hayner, Priscalla B. Unspeakable Truths: Transitional Justice and the Challenge of Truth
Commissions. New York: Routledge, 2011.

55

ITCJ. "What is Transitional Justice?." https://www.ictj.org/about/transitional-justice.
Jimerson, Randall C. Archives Power: Memory, Accountability, and Social Justice. Chicago:
Society of American Archivists, 2009.
Jimerson, Randall C. "Archives for All: Professional Responsibility and Social
Justice." American Archivist (2006). Web. 2 Sept. 2015.
Jimerson, Randall C. "Embracing the Power of Archives." American Archivist 69 (2006): 19-32.
Web. 2 Sept. 2015.
Jovanovic, Spoma. Democracy, Dialogue, and Community Action: Truth and Reconciliation in
Greensboro. Little Rock: University of Arkansas Press, 2012.
https://justicetosurvivors.wordpress.com/2014/01/27/genocide-survivors-speak-of-horrors-oftheholocaust-cambodia-and-rwanda/.
Learning and Memory Presentation.pptx - Learning and Memory PSY/340." Learning and
Memory Presentation.pptx - Learning and Memory PSY/340. Accessed April 16, 2016.
MacMillan, Margaret. Dangerous Games: The Uses and Abuses of History. New York: Modern
Library Classics, 2008.
McWhorter, Diane. Carry Me Home: The Climactic Battle of the Civil Rights Revolution. New
York: Simon & Schuster Paperbacks, 2012.
Meredith, Martin. Coming to Terms: South Africa's Search for Truth. New York: Public Affairs,
1999.
"Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women in Canada Could Number 4,000." The Guardian.
2016. Accessed April 16, 2016. http://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/missing-andmurdered-indigenous-women-in-canada-could-number-4000.
National Association of Social Workers. “Social Justice.”
http://www.naswdc.org/pressroom/features/issue/peace.asp
Parker, Geoffrey. Global Crisis: War, Climate Change & Catastrophe In The Seventeenth
Century. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2013. Pg. xxix-xxx.
http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/amex/wallace/sfeature/quotes.html.
Raiford, Leigh, and Renee Romano, eds. Civil Rights Movement in American Memory. Athens,
GA: University of Georgia Press, 2006.
Rieder, Jonathan. Gospel of Freedom: Martin Luther King, JR.'s Letter From Birmingham Jail
And The Struggle That Changed A Nation. New York: Bloomsbury, 2013.

56

Roberts, Gene, and Hank Klibanoff. The Race Beat: The Press, The Civil Rights Struggle, and
The Awakening Of A Nation. New York: Vintage Books, 2006.
Roberts, J.M., and Odd Arne Westad. The Penguin History of the World. New York: Penguin
Books, 2013. Pg. 53-54.
Schwartz, Joan M., and Terry Cook. "Archives, Records, and Power: The Making of Modern
Memory." Archival Science (2002): 1-19.
South Asian American Digital Archive. "SAADA and the Community-Based Archives Model:
What Is a Community-Based Archives Anyway?."
https://www.saada.org/tides/article/20120418-704.
The WikiLeaks Files: The World According to US Empire. New York: Penguin Random House,
2015.
Von Ranke, Leopold, and Georg S. Iggers. The Theory and Practice of History. New York:
Routledge, 2010.
Ward, Brian E. Radio and the Struggle for Civil Rights in the South. Gainesville, FL: University
Press of Florida, 2006.
Warren, Dorothea O. The Practical Dreamer: A Story of John T. Milner, His Family And
Forebears. Birmingham, AL: The Southern Family Press, 1959.
Weld, Kristen. Paper Cadavers: The Archives of Dictatorship in Guatemala. Durham, NC:
Duke University Press Books, 2014.
Welsh, Frank. A History of South Africa. New York: Harper Collins Publishers, 2000.
Wikipedia. “Memory Institutions.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Memory_institution
Wilson, Bobby M. America's Johannesburg: Industrialization and Racial Transformation in
Birmingham. New York: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 2000.

57

PHOTOGRAPHIC APPENDIX

58

Photograph 1:

103

Martin Luther King Jr. being hung in effigy by members of the National States Rights Party in
Birmingham.

103

Photograph taken by the author at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016.
Permission granted by Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
59

Photograph 2:

104

Panel describing the ongoing humanitarian crisis in Darfur, a region in western
Sudan. Panel located at Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.

104

Photograph taken by author at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016.
Permission granted by Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
60

Photograph 3:

105

Panel describing the protest of mothers protesting against the military
government of Argentina. Panel located at Birmingham Civil Rights
Institute.

105

Photograph taken by author at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016.
Permission granted by Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
61

Photograph 4:

106

Panel describing the Anti-Apartheid Movement at the Birmingham Civil
Rights Institute.

106

Photograph taken by author at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016.
Permission granted by Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
62

Photograph 5:

107

Picture of the President Barack Obama and President Bill Clinton walking across
the Edmund Petttus Bridge in Selma, Alabama.

107

Photograph taken at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016. Permission
granted by the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
63

Photograph 6:

108

Display at Birmingham Civil Rights Institute describing the role of newspapers in the
Civil Rights Movement.

108

Photograph taken by author at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016.
Permission granted by Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
64

Photograph 7:

109

Display at Birmingham Civil Rights Institute describing the role of newspapers in the
Civil Rights Movement.

109

Photograph taken at the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute on March 1, 2016. Permission
granted by the Birmingham Civil Rights Institute.
65

