UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA
Los Angeles

Rethinking the Library Response to Black Literacy

A dissertation submitted in partial satisfaction of the
requirements for the degree Doctor of Philosophy
in Information Studies
by
Jesse Ryan Erickson

2016

ProQuest Number: 10118907

All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.

ProQuest 10118907
Published by ProQuest LLC (2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

© Copyright by
Jesse Ryan Erickson
2016

ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION

Rethinking the Library Response to Black Literacy
by
Jesse Ryan Erickson
Doctor of Philosophy in Information Studies
University of California, Los Angeles, 2016
Professor Johanna R. Drucker, Chair

This dissertation radically reframes the library and information discourse on the African
American literacy gap. It argues that special collections libraries are research environments
where humanistic knowledge is produced, and that the books they house can provide important
insights about the nature of literacy that have been previously overlooked. The research employs
a nascent ethnobibliographic methodology in the examination of a range of artifacts from the
black press, as it effectively recasts these artifacts as individual nodes in a larger system of
knowledge production. By engaging in ethnobibliographic analysis, the study attempts to both
identify and explore the bibliocultural link that connects bibliographical materiality with the
processes of racial identity construction. The study draws upon data collected from a group of
four individual case studies to further situate the research in an argument that advances the idea
of a perception gap over the notion of an achievement gap in the institutional response.
ii

The dissertation of Jesse Ryan Erickson is approved.
Scot David Brown
Beverly P. Lynch
Ramesh Srinivasan
Johanna R. Drucker, Committee Chair

University of California, Los Angeles
2016

iii

Dedication
This dissertation is dedicated to the memory of Lawrence Clark Powell, whose love for
books and reading inspired the dream of a book-centered library for a new generation, and to
Miriam Matthews, whose courage and fortitude blazed a trail for future librarians of color in a
quest to preserve our diverse culture histories.

iv

Table of Contents
List of Figures

vii

Acknowledgements

viii

Biographical Sketch

ix

Chapter One: Introduction

1

1. I. Overview: A New Framework for an Aging Question

1

1. II. Statement of the Problem: A Persistent Crisis in Black Literacy?

2

1. III. Approach: NLS and Multi-modality in Information Systems

25

1. IV. Research Questions

42

1. V. Applications: The Significance of the Study

43

Chapter Two: Review of the Literature

45

2. I. History: The Beginnings of Bibliographic Method

45

2. II. Theory: Epistemological Foundations of Bibliographic Method
and its Scientization

62

2. III. Further Developments: Challenges and Revivals

76

2. IV. Trajectory: The Postmodern Turn and Beyond

86

Chapter Three: Method

98

3. I. Methodological Framework

98

3. II. 1. Method Design: Multisite Case Study

101

3. II. 2. Method Design: The Ethnobibliographic Database and its Qualitative Data

109

3. II. 3. Method Design: The Database Model for Ethnobibliographic Method

112

3. III. Subjectivity, Distance, and Reflexivity in Ethnobibligraphic Method

131

3. IV. Limitations to the Method: Structural and Conceptual

138

Chapter Four: Findings for Access and Encounter

141

4. I. 1. Access: The Research Space and its Local Environment

141

4. I. 2. Access: Daily Operations for Public Reception

153

v

4. I. 3. Access: Confronting Implicit Bias as “Custodians” of Knowledge

155

4. I. 4. Access: Racial Distribution in Ethnocentric Research Spaces

164

4. II. 1. Encounter: Events and Programs as Library Outreach

166

4. II. 2. Encounter: The Insularity of Academic Events in Research Spaces

175

Chapter Five: Findings for Representation and Organization

178

5. I. 1. Representation: The Early Black Press and the Rise of the Humanizing Text

178

5. I. 2. Representation: The Period of the Revolutionary Black Press

194

5. I. 3. Representation: Black Press Books for the Hip Hop Generation

209

5. I. 4. Representation: The Hegemonic Eurocentrism of the “Ideal Book”

220

5. II. 1. Organization: Library Catalogs as Access Points to the Black Press

231

5. II. 2. Organization: Counter-cataloging Textual Hybridity

241

Chapter Six: Findings for Collections and Performativity
6. I. Collections: The Collectors and their Bibliophilic Legacies

250
250

6. II. 1. Performativity: African American Vernacular English and Hip Hop
Literacies

262

6. II. 2. Performativity: African American Vernacular English and Library
Literacy Practices

273

6. II. 3. Performativity: Role Reversal in Literacy Instruction at the Amistad Research
Center

277

Chapter Seven: Conclusion

281

7. I. Contextualization of Spatiality

281

7. II. Bibliocultural Synthesis

289

7. III. Adaptation as a Response to Black Literacy in the Library

294

Appendix A: Tables and Graphs

301

Appendix B: Descriptive Bibliographic Entries for Representation

306

References

326
vi

List of Figures

Figure 1. The Administrative Cycle of Knowledge Production

38

Figure 2. The Four Levels of Access

120

Figure 3. The Three Levels of Encounter

121

Figure 4. The Four Levels of Representation

126

Figure 5. The Two Levels of Organization

128

Figure 6. The Four Levels of Collections

129

Figure 7. The Four Levels of Performativity

130

Figure 8. Environmental Dissonance in Access

146

Figure 9. Frontispiece for Chords and Discords Depicting Walter Everett Hawkins

190

Figure 10. The Final Issue of Nkombo Magazine

207

Figure 11. Engraved Title Page in Morris’s Golden Legend

224

Figure 12. The William Andrews Clark Jr. Bookplate

253

Figure 13. Holding Cell at the Mayme A. Clayton Library and Museum

286

Figure 14. Ethnobibliographic Model of Bibliocultural Co-emergence

293

vii

Acknowledgements
I would like to acknowledge, first, the exceptional staff of professional, non-professional, and
volunteer employees at the William Andrews Clark Memorial Library in Los Angeles, the
Amistad Research Center in New Orleans, the Mayme A. Clayton Library and Museum in
Culver City, and the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture in Harlem. Their openness
to a new and unfamiliar research method allowed me to pursue uncharted academic territories
and break new ground in the study of bibliography. I would especially like to thank Nina
Schneider at the Clark Library and former director of the Amistad, Lee Hampton, for taking a
special interest in my research and offering their time and expertise to assist my work. I should
also thank the Amistad Research Center, in particular, for granting me copyright permission for
my use of an image from Nkombo magazine. Furthermore, I must gratefully acknowledge the
support I received from the Bernard H. Breslauer fund for my time spent conducting onsite
research. And last, but certainly not least, I must extend my eternal gratitude to my advisor,
Professor Johanna Drucker, whose persistent guidance, dedication, and encouragement made this
work possible.

viii

Biographical Sketch
Jesse Ryan Erickson is a bibliographer and researcher in the field of special collections
librarianship. He received his certification in descriptive bibliography in 2009 from the
California Rare Book School under the tutelage of Bruce Whiteman. In 2010, he graduated
summa cum laude from the University of California, Los Angeles, receiving his Bachelor of Arts
in History with departmental honors in recognition of his senior thesis on the bibliographic
history of the Malleus Maleficarum. He earned his Master of Library and Information Science in
2014, specializing in book history and librarianship. In 2014, he also completed a full index for
the Medieval and Renaissance Manuscript Collection located in the Department of Special
Collections at UCLA’s Charles E. Young Research Library. Past publications include a
published version of his senior thesis, “The History of Malleus Maleficarum: A Bibliographic
Study” and, more recently, the article “Revolution in Black: Black American Alternative Press
and Popular Culture at the End of the Twentieth Century” which was printed in the 2011 issue of
Publishing History. Other publications include his reviews for Humanism and Libraries: An
Essay on the Philosophy of Librarianship by André Cossette and Modern Print Activism in the
United States edited by Rachel Schreiber. His current research is situated in the areas of
ethnobibliography and print culture studies.

ix

Chapter One: Introduction
“In learning to read, I owe almost as much to the bitter opposition of my master, as to the kindly
aid of my mistress.”
Frederick Douglass, Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass

1. I. Overview: A New Framework for an Aging Question
For years now, the library, as an institution, has taken steps to address the strong
perception that there is a crisis in black literacy. This crisis refers to the current statistical gap in
literacy rates among African Americans, and especially, young African American males, when
compared with the rates of their white peers. The library has already developed well-defined best
practices for dealing with the promotion of the acquisition of basic literacy skills—even if it has
done so in a largely normative manner.
Throughout its more recent institutional history, that is, primarily since its
professionalization as a field at the close of the nineteenth century, the library’s stated mission
has celebrated its role as being a neutral repository for the preservation of culture and the free
dissemination of information (American Library Association, 2004; Buckland, 2003, pp. 680684). Similarly, as a node in a larger information network that is facilitated by a library system,
the bibliographic object, that is to say the book, has long been viewed as a neutral vessel for the
intellectual transmission of symbols, thoughts, concepts, ideas, etc. (Rayward, 1994). Ideally,
such systems of knowledge production should also be of relevance to the distinct literacy
practices of any given community. The same can be said of the materiality of the bibliographic
objects which are believed to transmit knowledge and culture through the replicable
communication of ideas. The recognition of this conundrum further complicates past notions of
1

an objective neutrality, and, thus, begins to reshape our understanding of what constitutes black
literacy.
This relationship between discourse and materiality, then, can be seen as being integral to
the reception or rejection of a library space as a research environment by a particular community,
and in this case, I am referring to communities of color. Manifestly, this study maintains that
there are racial and, likewise, cultural characteristics present in the multifaceted nature of the
book as a concept which forge a link between books and culture. These characteristics are not
just present in a book’s text; they are actually embodied within its various physical components.
It is the contention of this study, therefore, that an analysis of the more imperceptible
bibliocultural relationships that exist between books and their readers can further inform library
policy in terms of future approaches to engaging with diverse communities. In keeping with this
central argument around books and race, this study intends to reframe the current conversation
concerning the black literacy gap by looking at the issue from a different vantage point. This
study offers an analysis from the vantage point of the bibliographic object. These objects,
however, are seen as nodes in a larger system of knowledge production.
1. II. Statement of the Problem: A Persistent Crisis in Black Literacy?
In the summer of 2014, a public rivalry reemerged between rapper, author, and
entrepreneur 50 Cent (Curtis James Jackson III) and the champion boxer Floyd Mayweather Jr.?
It should be emphasized, here, that the instance of contention in question had emerged between
two contemporary cultural icons coming from within black community. Their friendship had
already become strained two years prior to this time because of an allegedly miscarried financial
situation on the behalf of Mayweather. 50 Cent, having felt cheated in past dealings, continued to
2

sour relations by initiating a public shaming of Mayweather’s rumored illiteracy. Drawing upon
the popularity of the so called “ice bucket challenge” phenomenon that swept through the nation
that year on social media, 50 Cent (Jackson III, 2014) drew public attention to Mayweather’s
struggle with literacy with the following Instagram post:
Floyd will you except [sic] my ALS/ESL CHALLENGE: I will donate $750k to a charity
of your choice, If you can read a full page out of a Harry Potter book out loud without
starting and stopping… (para. 1)
The post went viral in terms of its circulation in the black social media networks prompting
opportunists to capitalize off of the situation. Power 105’s “The Breakfast Club” radio show
subsequently picked up on the allegations and, in reaction to the rapper’s claims, released their
unedited audio recordings of Mayweather attempting to read a short promotional statement for
the station called a “drop” (Clarke, 2014). The show’s host, Charlamagne, first read the drop in
its entirety in about ten seconds; and after his comparatively quick reading, he played the audio
of Mayweather’s attempt to read the same drop (Yvette, 2014).1 It took Mayweather more than
two minutes to read through the following two sentences:
I’m Floyd Mayweather and I’ve joined iHeartRadio for the Show Your Stripes movement
to support the hiring of vets. Go to ShowYourStripes.org, a website that connects
veterans with employees and helps businesses find candidates with the best training. (as
cited in Clarke, 2014, para. 3)

“Disclaimer: Blacklikemoi.com (BLM) is a [sic] urban gossip and entertainment news site which publishes rumors
speculation, assumptions, in addition to accurately reported facts. Information on this site may or may not be true
and BLM makes no warranty as to the validity of such claims. The owner of this site does not insure the
accurateness of any content on BLM. BLM makes no warranty as to the validity of any claims.”
1

3

In consideration of Mayweather’s markedly high net worth, the audio clip, having exposed his
apparently low level of proficiency in terms of a textual literacy, thrust the question of the value
of literacy in society and, also, into the larger discourse of black literacy and its achievement
gap.
I have commenced my statement of the problem with this story of a public feud gone
awry because, in my view, it is a compelling illustration of the public perception of an
achievement gap in black literacy. Many of the issues that are deeply embedded in our
contemporary construction of the problem on a societal level are unveiled in the minutia of this
public dispute. There are matters in this rivalry that deal with black-on-black hostility, notions of
long-term behavioral challenges, the social consequences of educational disadvantage, and,
perhaps most prominently, the commodification of black masculinity. 50 Cent, at the onset—as a
result of his media persona coupled with the lyrical content of his songs and his history of
violence in dealing with previous public feuds—might be marginalized by academics and public
intellectuals as an uneducated and, hence, unlettered person who figuratively has no moral or
intellectual ground to stand on in the literacy debate. Further, there are serious questions
concerning the maturity of his decision to use public shaming as a retaliatory measure in a
personal dispute.
The fact remains, however, that in addition to having written a sizable catalog of rap
songs, 50 Cent has both authored and co-authored several non-fiction and fiction books,
including works in the popular genre of urban fiction. The idea that this rapper is also a
published writer complicates the stereotype of the “illiterate street thug.” Moreover, the added
point of Mayweather’s fortune, even as an anomaly, obscures direct correlations between literacy

4

rates and success because it succeeds in disrupting the very discourse on black literacy with its
counterfactual postulation of the “exception” story (i.e. the “illiterate multi-millionaire”). The
rivalry as a public, multimedia spectacle, therefore, as it produced and then diffused through the
various social networking platforms, speaks both to our conceptualizing of a literacy crisis and
the politics surrounding the process of being able to articulate the existence of such a crisis. It is
precisely from this injection of pop culture into the literacy debate that we can begin to identify
and explore a much larger discourse on what black literacy means in America.
The library as an institution has been attempting, in some form or another, to engage with
black literacy since its late nineteenth century professionalization as a field (Dawes, 1978).
Contrary to one of the institution’s core missions, throughout its longer history in the United
States the library had actually supported past efforts to suppress the proliferation of black literacy
(Carmicheal, 2006, p. 109). In his essay Southern Librarianship, for instance, James V.
Carmichael Jr. (2006) pointed out how the “Atlanta race riot of 1906,” according to the history,
“occurred just as the southern library school was graduating its first class, followed by W. E. B.
Du Bois’s futile attempt to be served when the library opened in 1902 and a direct petition by
black citizens to Carnegie for a branch in 1903” (p. 109).
More recently, however, we find the library seeking to address the literacy issue by
making a constructive contribution to black literacy. The result has been the emergence of a
number of organized, concerted efforts to develop new protocols intended to guide policymaking. We find the institution drawing upon prevailing directives disseminated across a number
of publications and reports in the professional literature as the primary means of realizing
targeted improvement objectives. In a highly visible report by Sandra Hughes-Hassell et al

5

(2012) titled Building a Bridge to Literacy for African American Youth, the crisis is introduced to
us with an alarming set of statistics. Citing a NAEP study conducted in 2009, the report claimed
that, in terms of reading skills, “only 16% of African-American male fourth graders and 14% of
African American male eighth graders performed at or above the proficient level” (HughesHassell, Kumasi, Rawson, & Hitson, 2012, p. 2; Lewis, Simon, Uzzell, Horwitz, & Casserly,
2010, pp. 4-5). 2 The report continued by noting that only around half of African Americans
“graduate from high school, and only 5% go to college”—although the rates have since exhibited
an upward trajectory (Hughes-Hassell et al., 2012, p. 2). More tellingly, the same report, in a
largely rhetorical maneuver, attempted to tie these education and literacy statistics with a series
of alarming crime figures. Sandra Hughes-Hassell, Kafi Kumasi, Casey H. Rawson, and Amanda
Hitson noted, for example, that teenaged black males “are eight times more likely to die from
homicide than white male teens.” And, perhaps most distressingly, the authors have informed us
that even though “African-American males make up only 14% of the US population,” they
constitute “nearly 40% of prison inmates” (Hughes-Hassell & Rawson, Youth matters, 2014;
Lewis et al., 2010, p. 6). The report’s authors, it seems, are implicitly insinuating that a
correlation exist between literacy levels, graduation rates, and the potential for upward mobility
as diametrically opposed to a descent into a criminal underclass.
Socioeconomic factors, cultural relevancy, behavioral guidance, and life skills are all
given sufficient attention in the Building a Bridge to Literacy (2012) report, and many of the
proposed solutions to the crisis that the authors have put forward, such as a better integration of
black popular culture into literacy instruction and a more comprehensive appreciation of people’s
backgrounds, are of great importance and warrant further exploration (Hughes-Hassell et al.,
2

According to the 2010 National Association for Educational Progress.

6

2012, pp. 23-27). What is absent from this report, however, is a serious discussion of how
discursive factors also play a role in shaping our perception of the crisis. Without such a
discussion, we are unable to begin to analyze the role that bibliographical materiality plays in
unobtrusively shaping the literacy discourse.
Consider, for instance, an illustration of this oversight derived from my early education.
An account from personal experience should shed some light on how this bibliocultural,
perceptual interplay has operated in an earlier iteration of our current reference regime. Having
grown up during the 1980s and ‘90s, that is, in the early stages of the proliferation of
computerized information technology in education, one of the primary reference materials for
school research was the print encyclopedia. The World Book Encyclopedia was a commonly
found set in Los Angeles area public and school libraries at that time where I received my
primary education. Consequently, I was able to benefit from an exposure to such a readily
accessible source of knowledge, in theory, strengthening my so called “literacy skills.” I recall
the 1990 edition with a mixed sense of fondness and antipathy. Its bold combination of a red
synthetic leather binding with gilt titles and a custom offset World Book Modern typeface
designed by Hermann Zapf has left a lasting aesthetic imprint on my cognitive development
(World Book, Inc., 1990, p. viii). The reading synesthesia produced by the physicality of the
book and the graphic design of the text dually imparted a sense that, by attentively reading the
text with comprehension, I was receiving objective knowledge in an abridged format. In other
words, the implicit conveyance of red leather with gilt titles and a columnar layout with a font
based on functionality (i.e. legibility) is one that lends an air of intellectual authority to both the
object and the text it displays. Not as much gravitas, perhaps, as the small point sized serif
typefaces on fine paper in embossed leather bindings that structure a volume from the
7

Encyclopedia Britannica, but just enough to cement a veneer of truth over the text—a
semblance of objectivity that becomes accessible to the formative learning processes of an
adolescent reader.
The World Book (1990) article on “reading” itself is illustrative of just how and why
ignoring the relationship between the material and discursive elements of the bibliographic
object and the race of the reader can be detrimental to seeking to understand the nature of the
supposed literacy problem (pp. 156-165). Firstly, in this article the subject of “reading
disabilities” is depicted with a young girl of color being instructed by a middle-aged white
woman. Secondly, the photographic illustration is positioned side by side with a picture intended
to portray “computerized reading programs” (p. 163). The white male child in the foreground of
the photo, whose upright and engrossed posture conveys the image of his mastery with the
technology, is presented as the very model of advanced literacy comprehension (p. 163). The
child of color in the photograph is restricted to the background of the image with the pointing
arm of a white instructor signifying a need for assistance. In this superficially neutral image, the
message of a black literacy deficiency is stealthily suggested and narratives of white intellectual
superiority are quietly reinforced. To the encyclopedia’s credit, it was published during the full
burgeoning of the discourse on multiculturalism which has since become a mainstay in both
contemporary theory and professional practice. Consequently, each volume makes an almost
strained attempt at including a variety of people from different racial and ethnic backgrounds in
its numerous illustrations. 3 The problem one sees with the article upon further reflection,
however, is that the image of illiteracy within it is represented, consistently represented by the
face of a minority.
3

Note that World Book, Inc. is owned by Scott Fetzer Company, a subsidiary of Berkshire Hathaway, an American
multinational conglomerate holding company that is currently run by Warren Buffett.

8

If black youth has become the face of illiteracy, and if that illiteracy is viewed at the level
of the person, as an inhibitor, and at the level of community, as a crisis, than the act of acquiring
that literacy, as a skill, as a technology for achieving success, must accordingly be viewed as a
liberating agent. This syllogism is a derivative of an older set of models concerning literacy
theory that emerged with its coalescence as an academic discourse. It is a syllogism which still
lies at the heart of many of the major approaches to providing literacy instruction to
“underserved” populations.
Literacy has long been a sensitive question for the black community. Its adoption has
been viewed simultaneously as a constructive and destructive agent—a force which could be, at
once, dangerous and empowering, radical and conservative. The relationship that blacks have
sustained with literacy has been uniquely shaped by the American experience and the adverse
effects of the African slave trade. It is understandable, then, that throughout the history of
literacy in the United States, black people have sustained a strong tradition of communal reading.
It is a tradition that has been as much oral as textual in character—deeply intertwined with black
poetry, black politics, and, most notably, the black church (Johnson S. C., 1999). In the years that
the enslavement of black people was integral to the everyday lives of Americans in both the
North and the South, access to conventional literacy was typically denied outright to blacks.
Existing, non-conventional literacy practices of the peoples of the African Diaspora and their
descendants, such as the complex communication system found in the West African Batá
drumming tradition, were simply overlooked, or even ridiculed as childish and irrational
(Gundaker, 1998; Villepastour, 2010). And black writers like Phillis Wheatley, the nation’s first
woman poet of color to be published in print, were largely viewed by white America as special
cases, anomalous to the mental capacity of the typical black mind. This perception was used to
9

justify and routinely prevent black people from learning how to read and write (Cohen & Stein,
2012). Nevertheless, from early African American poetry to slave narratives, there have been
more than enough examples of advanced literacy practices (and even in the more conventional
sense of Western education) within the black community to compellingly suggest that a counternarrative, a subaltern narrative of emancipation and ethnic autonomy has existed from the
earliest points of colonization and the cross-cultural intermixing which occurred with the
transatlantic slave trade (Gundaker, 1998).
From the Antebellum Era to the period of Reconstruction much of mainstream America
was strongly opposed to black people’s engagement with Western education because it was
considered to be a potentially emancipatory force (Gilmore, 2010). Yet the African American
community at large experienced real gains in the expansion of literacy during the 1880s and ‘90s,
particularly in and among the newly established enclaves of free blacks in the North of the
country (Margo, 1990). Communal reading practices in the form of literary societies, bible
groups, and public reading experienced increased in activity during the late nineteenth century
(McHenry, 2002). The reading groups and book clubs helped to enhance social bonds during
what would become an increasingly hostile environment for black education. Strengthening
literacy among blacks was especially in crucial in the South where the broad implementation of
literacy tests for voting served as a means of disenfranchisement (Gilmore, 2010). The younger
generations of black readers who had the benefit of learning to read in public schools helped the
older generations acquire functional reading and writing skills. And at times, the more literate
readers of the community were known to have read and transcribed essential documents and
correspondence for their illiterate neighbors (Young, 1996).

10

Black readers also helped to keep the community connected to the larger world. Since its
early beginnings with the launch of Samuel Cornish Jr. (d. 1858), John B. Russworm (d. 1851),
and Peter Williams Jr.’s (d. 1840) Freedom’s Journal on March 17, 1827, and, later, Phillip
Bell’s The Colored American in 1837, and, perhaps most notably, Frederick Douglass’s highly
influential abolitionist paper, The North Star in 1847, the black press has been among the
primary vehicles for voicing the interests of black people in America. It is important to note here
that whereas previous definitions of the “black press” have restricted the use of the term to refer
only to the black journalistic and periodical productions, I have opted to broaden the term more
radically to include also all of the bibliographic manifestations of any expression of a black
literary work (Pride et al., 1968). View in this way, the public and shared readings of black press
publications and periodicals became a crucial tool in the effort to ensure that both the illiterate
and the literate members of the community stayed informed about black social justice projects
across the nation. Concomitantly, the sharing of this information worked to forge a sense of
national identity among even the most geographically isolated groups (Ernest, 2011; McHenry,
2002). In all, these alternative, dialogical modes of knowledge production and dissemination
which have long persisted in the African American community must be contextualized by the
history of black reading and looked upon not only as a part of the larger American cultural
heritage, but also as a means of cultural survival in a social environment where the national
interests had historically been aligned with the intellectual suppression of the black race.
Still, research has shown that, alongside the expansion of public education, the gains in
conventional literacy acquisition which accelerated during the late nineteenth century continued
throughout much of the twentieth century (Margo, 1990). Illiteracy rates among African
Americans had declined significantly during this time to around 25% in 1920 and less than 15%
11

by the 1950s (p. 8). In the face of these advances, however, the need to address what had been
identified as an achievement gap in comprehensive literacy skills among black and white
students became apparent by the mid-1960s. In 1965 the Elementary and Secondary Education
Act (ESEA), the educational arm of the Civil Rights Movement and Great Society, set out to
narrow “achievement gaps by providing every child with a fair and equal opportunity to achieve
an exceptional education” (Young W. H., 2013). Progress on that front saw mixed results with
gains flattening out by the 1970s, and by the 1990s, in the wake of the mandated integration of
public schools, the “achievement gap” discourse began to move further toward the dialectics of
“crisis” (Harris, Kamhi, & Pollock, Literacy in African American communities, 2000). The
National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) NAdLitS study conducted in 1992 provided
more evidence for this perception when it found that, in testing for multiple proficiency levels in
reading comprehension and literacy skills, African Americans had tested at the lowest levels
(Harris, Kamhi, & Pollock, Literacy in African American communities, 2000). From there, and
with further testing to demonstrate the disparity, the black literacy gap had been tied to a
decreased likelihood of lifetime academic achievement and, hence, fewer economic
opportunities. The language of crisis began to proliferate over next the two decades, growing to a
fever pitch in recent years.
The learning-related skills (LRS) approach to literacy instruction is currently a popular
choice among researchers and professionals in the library and education fields when it comes to
addressing the black literacy gap (Matthews, Kizzie, Rowley, & Cortina, 2010). The LRS model,
which, as we shall come to find, has much in common with self-regulated learning (SRL) skills,
stresses the importance of “task persistence, learning independence, flexible thinking,
organization, and attention control” (p. 759). Similarly, the SRL method posits that the
12

development of such constructive behavioral skills as “self-management, self-evaluation, selfdirection, time management, and self-control” is the ideal course when it comes to addressing the
literacy gap problem (Matthews et al., 2010, p. 759; StriveTogether, 2014). The difference,
according to a University of Michigan study (2010) on the efficacy of learning-related skills is
that, whereas SRL is strictly oriented to the mental processes of the individual learner in their
cognitive interface with an educative task, the LRS model seeks to apply the same types of
behavioral characteristics to the development of the learner in relation to the “social norms and
expectations” associated with academic achievement.
The example provided by Jamaal Matthews, Karmen Kizzie, Stephanie Rowley, and Kai
Cortina (2010) offers rigorously gathered and assessed statistical evidence in support of the LRS
model (pp. 760-765). It underlines the following four factors into its framework of analysis:
socioeconomic status (SES), referring to a family or individual’s wealth and quality of life,
externalizing behaviors, or “harmful, destructive or impulsive behaviors” in an educational
setting, interpersonal skills with an emphasis on “prosocial behaviors” which include
“cooperation and sharing” in the learning space, and the home literacy environment of the learner
(p. 759).
Analyzing a longitudinal data set from the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study
Kindergarten Cohort 1998-1999 (ECLS-K) collected by the National Center for Education
Statistics (NCES)—a study that looked at 18,211 children from nine different ethnic groups—
Matthews et al. determined that black American boys were found to exhibit a greater amount of
behavioral problems than other demographics (pp. 760-765). In this sample, the same group,
largely coming from a disadvantaged socioeconomic situation, was also more likely to lack a

13

healthy home literacy environment (p. 765). Mathematically the LRS model appears to be the
most effective solution for addressing the black literacy gap. According to their findings, the
authors asserted that LRS skills such as “academic persistence, organization, and learning
independence may be of particular importance for the literacy growth for African American
students” (p. 765). They pointed out that the gains achieved by students that were above the
mean on LRS demonstrated achievement trends which were “similar to those of the most
privileged students who have the advantage of coming from significantly higher socioeconomic
contexts as well as richer home literacy environments” (p. 766). They ultimately have claimed
that the effect of lacking a solid LRS foundation in childhood education can lead to later
difficulties with learning (p. 766). Home literacy and SES, they concluded, have only a marginal
effect on literacy acquisition when compared with that of LRS (p. 766). Resultantly, Matthews,
Kizzie, Rowley, and Cortina ultimately submit that the best method of addressing the literacy
gap for black youth would be to redirect energies and resources currently spent on disciplinary
measures for behavioral problems toward establishing and reinforcing a good LRS foundation
for primary school learners (pp. 766-767).
Before accepting the postulation that the LRS model explains and therefore is best suited
to address the literacy gap wholesale, it is important for the library as an institution to first
recognize the theoretical underpinnings of the model. Again, I assert, that both the LRS and the
SRL approach are epistemologically built upon certain conventional models which form the
basis of much of the modern literacy theory as it is applied to library science. Among the most
pervasive and, hence, one of the most scrutinized of these models is the autonomous model. This
model is closely tied to the modernization theory for literacy. In essence, the autonomous model
tells us that literacy is an autonomous technology. It is a skill that an individual, a community, or
14

society can acquire as a means of achieving permanence through the written codification of
linguistic signs and, likewise, a means for promoting the production of knowledge (Street, 2006).
In the autonomous model, literacy acquisition is viewed as a neutral technology that inherently
manifests itself as a civilizing agent. Jack Goody and Eric D. Hirsch Jr. were two major
proponents of this model (Fernandez, 2001; Street, 2006). Goody (1968) was instrumental in
formulating some of the initial arguments in support of autonomous literacy. He admitted that
structural functionalism is inadequate in its scope when applied to the study of literacy (p. 68).
He also acknowledged the illusory nature of the same conceptual dichotomies that his arguments
simultaneously support (p. 4). Furthermore, he claimed that his view of literacy is not actually
deterministic, but only that literacy as a “technology” has “liberating effects” that need to be
more fully understood (p. 4). Goody, however, had failed to come to terms with the possibility of
the concept of literacy itself being malleable and illusory. The stakes for Goody, it seems, were
simply too high.
In Literacy in Traditional Societies, Jack Goody and Ian Watt (1968) argued that “the
overwhelming debt of the whole of contemporary civilization to classical Greece must be
regarded as in some measure the result, not so much of the Greek genius, as of the
intrinsic differences between non-literate (or protoliterate) and literate societies” (p. 55).
In his view, literacy, being a technology that must intrinsically propagate a hierarchical
dichotomy between orality and the textual, has real and observable consequences: The
development of an easy system of writing (easy both in terms of the materials employed
and the sign used) was more than a mere precondition of the Greek achievement: it
influenced its whole nature and development in fundamental ways. In oral societies the
cultural tradition is transmitted almost entirely by face-to-face communication; and
15

changes in its content are accompanied by the homeostatic process of forgetting or
transforming those parts of the tradition that cease to be either necessary or relevant.
Literate societies on the other hand, cannot discard, absorb, or transmute the

past in

the same way. Instead, their members are faced with permanently recorded versions of
the past and its beliefs; and because the past is thus set apart from the present, historical
enquiry becomes possible. (p. 67)
In this particular iteration of the autonomous model, although Goody went at length to detail
cases of communicational hybridity, the stark division between the oral and literary traditions
further lends itself to the perception of a similar division between so called “simple” and
“advanced societies.” These are the terms he uses in place of “primitive cultures” and “modern
civilizations” in his attempt to break with the structural functionalist perspective. And again, it
should be stressed that Goody (1968), for the most part, acknowledged the myriad of ways that
orality can become intertwined with both print and manuscript traditions (pp. 11-22). He noted
how this relationship manifests itself in the “restricted literacy” of religious orders and how oral
and literary traditions are combined in various permutations of ritual practices with magical and
sacred texts. One of the major conclusions he reached, however, is that such magico-religious
literacy practices have really functioned as quasi-literacies in quasi-historical traditions (pp. 2325). In other words, the alternative ontologies associated with magico-religious systems function
through a type of literacy that approaches a “truly” literate civilization, but not wholly.
Unfortunately, the same division becomes fundamental to justifications of cultural superiority
that remain operative in the discursive and material expressions of a broader sociopolitical
hegemony in education.

16

The modernization theory of literacy—which is in many ways an ideological parallel to
the autonomous model—further links the skill of reading and writing to industrialization and the
macroeconomic development of modern society. In modernization theory, a theory of literacy
that is firmly rooted in positivism and structural functionalism, the technology of literacy is
thought to contribute not only to the establishment of national history and democratic society,
but also social mobility for the individual and scientific advancement and economic development
for humanity. It is a strain of thinking which has since encompassed the expansive dimensions of
the information age (Hirsch, Kett, & Trefil, 1988). Eric Hirsch (1988), for instance, has argued
for a return to a more conservative approach to literacy. In his exposition on the imperative for a
national, “cultural literacy,” Hirsch explained:
The function of national literacy is to foster effective nationwide communication. Our
chief instrument over time and space is the standard national language. Mature literacy
alone enables the tower to be built, the business to be well managed, and the airplane to
fly without crashing. (p. 3)
There is a strong trace of an earlier functionalism present in Hirsch’s imperative. Humans who
possess the power of literacy have a great deal of much mental agency in this depiction. Hirsch’s
case for a national literacy, however, is essentially an amplification of the framework which held
signature literacy as the baseline and, hence, the primary reference point for analysis for earlier
scholarship on the subject—that is, in that he imagines a developed national literacy as a vitally
important utility (Fernandez, 2001, pp. 5-6). Hirsch, moreover, believed that having a shared
cultural heritage, as a nation—one which is grounded in valid interpretations of canonical texts—
is essential to the growth and wellbeing of our collective society. For Hirsch (1988), then, the

17

decline of cultural literacy ultimately contributes to a larger decline in the health of the nation.
He recognized the contributions of ethnic and racial minorities, but really only insofar as they are
able to converse in the language of the national literacy (pp. 22-24). A further decline in black
literacy, likewise, according to this perspective signals not only a threat to the humanities, but a
comprising of the American democratic social order down to the level of bureaucratic
functionality and the maintenance of civic infrastructure.
Hirsch’s cultural literacy model, in that case, represents a conservative reaction to the
then rising status of the critical approach to literacy theory. If functional literacy essentially
views literacy as a technology and a tool, then critical literacy views the same phenomenon as a
process, as a social construction. The more political proponents have further described that
construction as one of violence; not a tool, but a weapon that can either be directed toward a
social justice agenda or the perpetuation of political oppression through erasure and the spread of
hegemony (Fernandez, 2001, pp. 37-45). This analogy approximates the version of critical
literacy offered by Paulo Freire (1970) in his monograph Pedagogy of the Oppressed. For Freire,
the potential for a coercive literacy rests in one’s orientation to a diametrically opposed set of
instructional ideologies—that of an oppressor in their attempts to objectify those they view as
their possessions, in a process of dehumanization, and that of a liberating consciousness which
acts a dialectical humanizing agent for the oppressed. According to this view, a banking model of
instruction wherein an enlightened instructor simply imposes the mechanisms of literacy upon an
ignorant population is but another obstacle put in place for the oppressed in their efforts to
actualize their status of humanity (Freire, 1970, pp. 53-75; 128-139). Furthermore, Freire (1970)
has suggested that a broader view of literacy—one that incorporates a rigorous analysis of
“dialogue” and its pervasive potential for coercion—can help to restore humanity to the
18

disenfranchised through the introduction of a pedagogical egalitarianism in the learner/teacher
relationship. This idea points to the optimism of the problem-posing method in that it entails a
pedagogy that recognizes the culturally-inflected knowledge base of the learner in literacy
education.
Other literacy scholars have sought to build upon the theoretical foundations
underlying Freire’s vision of a critical literacy. For Ira Shor (1999) critical literacy “challenges
the status quo in an effort to discover alternative paths for self and social development” ( para.
2). The dialectical relationship persists in this interpretation; interestingly enough, however, the
sense of determinism found in the functional models also remains; as Shor (1999) further
explained that “[critical] literacy—words rethinking worlds, self-dissenting in society—connects
the political and the personal, the public and the private, the global and the local, the economic
and the pedagogical, for rethinking our lives and for promoting justice in place of inequity”
(para. 2). In this view, literacy is still said to increase agency for those who engage with its
practices. By the same token, Charles Dukes and Kavin Ming (2014) found education and
literacy to be an inherent human right. They argued that literacy achievement gaps in minority
populations constitute a societal injustice because in recognizing literacy’s functional necessity
in terms of navigating the complexities of contemporary societies and its role in helping
underserved demographics to achieve the political aims of expanding enfranchisement any
attempts to restrict or discourage its dissemination becomes a tacit form of political suppression.
True to form, they have sought a program of literacy that would work to apply the notion of
social justice as a “verb” instead of simply maintaining its status as a “noun” (pp. 118-120). The
difference between these two understandings, they claimed, is that social justice as a noun
roughly represents an abstraction of an ideal whereas social justice as a verb implies political
19

action. This understanding of literacy instruction is clearly in line with the idea of liberation
humanism as outlined by Freire’s problem-posing methodology in that both of these perspectives
hold liberation, representation, enfranchisement, and, ultimately, humanization as their end
goals.
If researchers like Freire, Shor, and Dukes and Ming can complicate our concept of
literacy as an essentially neutral technology that, upon acquisition, inevitably results in cognitive
and behavioral benefits for the individual, other theorists, such as Harvey J. Graff, completely
challenge the epistemological foundations upon which the modernization theory is built. In the
introduction to his book The Labyrinths of Literacy, Graff (1987) declared that he intended to
question each of the major “expectations” and “assumptions” that presuppose previous claims
concerning the impact of literacy acquisition on both individuals and societies (p. 17). In his
words:
Literacy, I have come to believe, is profoundly misunderstood. That is one ‘natural’
consequence of the long-standing tyranny of the ‘literacy myth,’ which, along with other
social and cultural myths, has of course had sufficient grounding in social reality to
insure its wide dissemination and acceptance. Misunderstanding of literacy is as true for
the past as for the present; these two elements are in fact but one, we must recognize.
And this misconstrual of the meanings and contributions of literacy, and the interesting
contradictions that result, is not only an evidential and empirical problem but also a
failure in conceptualization and, even more, epistemology. (p. 17)
As a historian, in contrast to the sociologists, anthropologists, and education scholars that are
typically represented in the literature, Graff contended that much of the work that had been done
20

up until that point was seriously lacking in its account of the sociohistorical context of literacy
(p. 17). Graff has conducted his research from that premise, challenging the previously
overlooked “sacred cows” of literacy which have linked it with education, wealth, success,
mental health, and even fertility.
This serious consideration given to the contextual and, hence, historical and political
components of literacy in the critical approach provided the groundwork for the development of
the more recent New Literacy Studies (NLS). Brian Street, among the first to promote the use of
the term into the current literacy paradigm, attempted to make a clean break from the
autonomous model by offering an alternative in what he has called the “ideological model”
(Street, 2006). One of the key differences, Street (2006) affirmed, is that the ideological model
“offers a more culturally sensitive view of literacy practices as they vary from one context to
another” (p. 2). Like Graff and Shor, Street also stressed the importance of moving past our
earlier notions of literacy as a neutral skill to be “imposed” upon a non-literate society for the
benefit of global development and shifting toward a new understanding that would view literacy
as “set of a social practices” and “social constructions” of self-hood and identity (Graff, 1987;
Shor, 1999; Street, 2006).
The integration of a social justice agenda in practice coupled with “the contextual turn”
allowed for the larger field of literacy studies and instruction to take up the idea of
multiculturalism more earnestly. A more clearly defined multicultural pedagogy that emerged
around the turn of the last century still circulates within the literacy discourse today. In a
multicultural pedagogy, every culture is acknowledged and respected. It is a pedagogy that is
intellectually positioned to recognize that instruction in the classroom can be perceived as a

21

hostile environment to minority ethnic groups. Teachers who employ its basic framework will
often choose to draw upon culturally relevant materials for instruction. They have a tendency to
place a higher emphasis on classroom discussion than on lectures and didactic test-driven
exercises. Moreover, classroom policies that are intended to reflect this type of pedagogy will
seek to understand rather than reprimand cultural differences in language, lifestyle, customs,
behavior, etc. (Ladson-Billings, 1995). The development of multicultural pedagogy naturally
required the parallel advance of a multicultural model of literacy to support it. The largely
relativistic multicultural model for literacy homes in on the contextual in order to integrate
alternative knowledge bases of diverse demographics in an improved way (Guzzetti, Alvermann,
& Johns, 2002). In practice, it has aimed to combat the assimilationist approach to literacy
instruction by diversifying readings and instituting more participatory tasks in the processes of
cultivating life-long literacy practices (Guzzetti et al., 2002; Ladson-Billings, 1992, p. 314).
Multiculturalism in NLS has really been at the forefront of many of the recently proposed
solutions for the African American literacy gap. The solutions have been distributed across a
number of different institutional platforms. Sarah Johnson (1999), for instance—who argued that
the most effective way to ameliorate deficiencies in black literacy is to build up a campaign from
within the community’s long-standing ecclesiastical traditions—called for literacy programs that
allow black learners “to locate their own histories and at school and church,” so that they are
better able to “emancipate themselves as a subordinate people” (pp. 41-42). For Alfred W.
Tatum (2006) promoting literacy among African Americans should be centered upon an
increased engagement with “enabling texts”—essentially texts that “nourish people as they try to
function in the society and time in which they live” and “ultimately become part of one’s textual
lineage” (p. 23). Although past scholars have recognized the need for having culturally relevant
22

materials in the library and education systems, according to Tatum, they have been shortsighted
in their recognition of the vital role that African American texts play in shaping the perception of
reading for black youth (pp. 14-19). His past work has not only served to help educators in
identifying this type of text, but it has also offered instructional methods for mediating these
texts across cultures. In these solutions we find that more attention needs to be paid to the
personal and the experiential. This idea, in many respects, is tied to “the contextual turn” in
literacy theory, but with an acute reduction in scope. Along such lines, ethnographic method,
which had been used to study what were considered pre-literate and non-literate communities
more than a half-century earlier, has been revived anew and used to study the problem of the
black literacy gap. Anthony T. Griffith, (2009), for example, studied the lives of black male
incarcerated youth in order to make a better determination about how these young men
experience the world. His research was predicated on the notion that detailed accounts of the
lived experiences can provide insights into the efficacy of instruction on literacy practices in the
classroom.
From here, multicultural literacy made its way into the domain of library and information
studies. By the turn of the century the multiculturalist perspective had succeeded in introducing
many important concepts to discussions on how we identify and redirect the imbalanced
saturation of hegemony in Western knowledge systems. In terms of information studies,
multiculturalism has helped to guide professional practice toward new directions that embrace
rather than discourage diversity. Multicultural literacy in the library has helped professionals to
appreciate the dynamic of language barriers in minority demographics (Chu, 1999). It has
opened the eyes of professionals to the hostility of the reference interview—that is, one wherein

23

two incommensurable knowledge systems come into conflict with each other in a sociopolitical
context (Chu, 1999).
Building upon past multicultural research, the majority of the recent literature in the
library response to the black literacy crisis has similarly employed ethnographic method in
addressing the literacy problem. Kumasi (2008), for instance, conducted an ethnographic study
on African American literacy practices by organizing an adolescent book club in the library as
part of the Closing the Gap: Community Literacy Intervention Program. Personal accounts in the
participants’ responses comprised the primary data for this study. She then used the facilitated
discussions as a methodological tool for understanding African American literacy, again, in the
context of the experiential and, in this case, the modes of social constructivism.
Even with a reemphasis on both the contextual and the experiential, even in calls to
embrace diversity more fully, each of these contemporary accounts of black literacy flatly affirm
the existence of a crisis. Hughes-Hassell (2013) has stated unequivocally that the crisis is real
and national in nature (para. 18). The current response petitions better cultural competency and a
fuller consideration given to the affective qualities of library space and the meaningfulness of
collections. The response asks that libraries “enable, facilitate, and empower African American
male youth to level the economic, social, and political playing field” (Hitson, 2013, para. 3). In
such declarations, again, we find those vestiges of the structural-functionalism inherent to the
autonomous and modernization models of literacy. They persist in the very perception of the
existence of the crisis in as much as they lurk in the proposed solutions to address it. The
library’s efforts to pluralize collections and democratize the space are certainly well intended,
but questions continue to remain concerning the actualization of such ideals on the mundane

24

level of day-to-day operations. One must consider the politics of administration, for example,
and, always, the cultural milieu of the local environment. The humanizing agenda articulated by
Freire is implementable in theory, but discursive mechanisms embedded within the material
manifestations of knowledge are more elusive in their identification than many care to concede.
What is lacking, then, is a systems-based approach that attempts to explore the multi-modalities
of knowledge production more acutely from the perspective of the book. This study, therefore,
will look into the finer degrees of granularity that are encapsulated in the node which constitutes
the bibliocultural link.
1. III. Approach: NLS and Multi-modality in Information Systems
It has been suggested here that, despite a marked attempt to move away from the
intellectual cornerstones of past scholarship in literacy, the autonomous and modernization
theories have continued to persist in the library’s current understanding of literacy, particularly in
its response to the apparent literacy gap within the black community. Yet, we continue to be
reminded of the underlying assumptions that underscore the “idea” of the existence of a gap in
literacy and the social construction of its being in a state of crisis. We are reminded by the very
bibliographic objects which are in and of themselves manifestations of the dialectical tensions
between objectivity and subjectivity, between singularity (i.e. hegemony) and hybridity (i.e.
counter-hegemony), and most discernibly, between orality and literacy. Moreover, we are
reminded in the physical spaces in which these objects function as cognitive conduits and data
sources in a research process.
The idea that the “acquisition” of literacy is a “neutral skill” that is utterly transformative
toward one’s benefit warrants further analysis. In the historiographical lineage of Western
25

thought, the idea harks back to philosophy of Plato, and elements of the rationale remain, even if
deeply submerged in the meta-theoretical substrata, within the raison d’etre of the classical
model of the Western library. Admittedly, one must entertain a somewhat ahistorical
interpretation in terms of the philosophy by conflating the idea of literacy with that of education,
especially when considering the status of orality as an information medium in classical Greek
civilization. Any supposed division between the two, however, that is between education and
literacy, being perceptual in nature, is fraught with categorical instability. Let us, for one,
consider the position of Socrates in Plato’s Gorgias (Plato, 1952 version):
Is the rhetorician’s equipment the same in regard to justice and injustice, beauty and
ugliness, good and evil, as it is regarding health and the several subjects of the other arts?
Is it, in fact, true that he does not really know what is good or evil, beautiful or ugly, just
or unjust, but has devised a means of persuasion about them so that, in the eyes of the
ignorant, he seems to know more than the actual possessor of knowledge though he does
not really do so? Or is it necessary for him to know? (p. 469)
It is at this point, fairly early on in the dialogue, that the figure of Socrates outlines a pedagogical
mission of education that would wed the pursuit of knowledge with a civic agenda. This
dialogically expressed desire for community leaders to “really know” cannot be overstated. It is
an imperative that calls for public figures (i.e. rhetoricians) to be steeped in an education which,
in its teleological nous, works toward the greater “good” of society. This idea of an education
toward virtue has parallels in the struggle between negotium, which upholds the value of civic
life and otium, which is associated with a life of intellectual frivolity. It has, therefore, been
linked with the moral philosophy of Ciceronian rhetoric (Wegemer, 1990, p. 5). The dual

26

imperatives of education as an essential social good were later amalgamated in the crucible of
early modern humanism and shaped by the Renaissance period discourse on the nature of
scholarship (Wegemer, 1990). Through this discourse, the notion of civic humanism firmly
established itself in the history of Western thought, bringing with it, a vestigial classicism that
would inform subsequent ideological paradigms of educational philosophy.
Knowledge in the pursuit of virtuous living, as a societal agenda, involves a search for
truth. The contemporary search for knowledge in the pursuits of collective societal advancement
(as well as individual social mobility) has yet to divorce itself completely from this model. The
epistemological symbiosis survived as the search for truth evolved to entail defining the
objective reality of a substance, a concept, an event, a phenomenon, etc.—in essence,
discovering the truth of things. The pursuit of knowledge shifted toward assigning an increased
epistemological weight to empirical arguments based in “objective” analyses, and the status of
the objectivity itself was inflated in its ongoing efforts to refute the deleterious corruption of
relativistic sophisms. In the eyes of Plato and Aristotle objectivity constitutes logic; according to
Bacon, Spinoza, and Descartes it is rationality and reason; in the views of Comte and Durkheim
its positivism; and for Popper it is represented by physicalism (Dick, 1999).
Postmodern perspectives, nevertheless, have, at the conceptual level, all but demolished
the epistemological foundations to the “objectivity” rationale. The postmodern assault on the
universality of the objective can be gleaned from Jean Baudrillard (2008) when he stated:
Even the scientific object is ungraspable in its reality. Like the stars, it appears only light
years away, as a trace on the screens. Like them, by the time we record it, it might also
have disappeared. The fact that we cannot determine both the velocity and position of a
27

particle is part of the illusion of the object and its perpetual play. Even the particles in the
accelerator do not smash into each other in real time, and are not exactly
contemporaneous with each other. (p. 55)
In this passage, Baudrillard pointedly identified the problem of the phenomenological flux that
occurs during the act of performing scientific observation. The identification of this problem
casts an air of skepticism over the unquestioned legitimacy of objectivity, but the added
argument that scientific observation can be gendered, racialized, and temporally situated only
deepens our suspicions. Science’s claim to a total objectivity, then, is further complicated by the
view that the implementation of its methodology, at least in part, is influenced by sociopolitical
and economic factors that are inextricably embedded in the discursive mechanisms of knowledge
production (Harding, 2002, pp. 140-141). These mechanisms, in turn, contribute to the political
hegemony of Western education over alternative knowledge systems based in indigenous,
minority, and subaltern cultural traditions (Harding, 2002, p. 141).
The notion of a universal scientific truth, the philosophy of positivism, is wavering and
elusive. Even more so for the immaterial moral “truth” sought in humanistic thinking—the
version of truth described in Plato’s Gorgias. Yet, how does the social imperative of civic
humanism get passed down through each succeeding generation of scholars in the first place?
The answer is, in part, through our study of the Western canon (Wisner, 2000, p. 67). Adherence
to the Western canon, much like the legitimacy attached to objectivity, is viewed from the
postmodern position as both normative and politically conservative. (Goebel, Hall, & National
Council of Teachers of English, 1995; Hirsch et al., 1988). Even though it has become somewhat
customary to draw attention to this conservatism, let us briefly entertain the manner in which the

28

supposed conservatism of the Western canon can be exclusionary. Interestingly enough, this idea
of “education toward the greater good” so central to Socrates’s argument in the Gorgias dialogue
is also one that is central to the West African Odu-Ifa tradition (Asante, Yoshitaka, & Yin, 2008,
pp. 212-214). The tradition of Ifa, which is still practiced in country of Nigeria today, basically
involves a participatory reading experience between a local priest and a community member
wherein the priest consults with the individual about their lives by drawing upon a vast corpus of
texts. These texts appear to be essentially oral in nature, but in actuality, they are codified in
binary configurations of cowrie shells as they are cast by the priest to form particular patterns on
a substrate. Viewed from the perspective of Goody (1968) and the autonomous model, the
tradition is not exactly a literate one. It would be viewed as quasi-literate in terms of its
restrictedness to a broader access to the texts among the community (pp. 11-20, 28). It is this
magico-religious form of literacy that he associates with Yoruba culture; and the implication,
then, is that the practice of reading in the tradition of Odu-Ifa is a search not for truth, but for a
quasi-truth, a fortune-telling. Undoubtedly, this is not the only alternative knowledge system to
have been jettisoned from a place of epistemological legitimacy as a result of the inadvertent
adherences to Eurocentric privileging so pervasive in the autonomous model (Fraser, 2008, p.
39).
In what ways, then, can we characterize the nature of a critical, multicultural perspective
in terms of its contribution to black literacy discourse in the library field? The library itself, we
read, is in a state of crisis because of its failure to uphold its humanist foundations (Cossette,
2009). The humanities, we find, are also in a state of crisis. The crisis is thought to have
stemmed from losses in funding and revenue and the prioritization of scientific research over the
liberal arts (Hutner & Mohamed, 2013). Others have attributed the crisis to bibliographical
29

decentralization and the inability of the print infrastructure of the academic publishing industry
to keep pace with an exponential rise in information technologies (Cmeil, 2010; Darnton, 2009;
McGann, 2005). The literacy, library, and the humanities crises, as it follows from the
modernization theory, threaten the health of an informed democratic society if unchecked in their
persistence (Hirsch, et al., 1988). Each theory has placed the decline of the national character as
the end result. The establishment and preservation of the Western canon, then, in the traditional
modus operandi, becomes a central aim for educators, bibliographers, and librarians (Wisner,
2000, p. 58). It is an agenda that lies beneath our most commonly touted explanations of the
black literacy crisis. In other words, the failure to reproduce a shared cultural literacy is seen, in
part, as a failure to uplift struggling demographics from their socioeconomic plights. Without
this literacy, they will not have the tools necessary to be productive, civically-minded members
of society, nor will they have access to the cultural capital required for success in the Western
world.
Moving away from the autonomous and modernization models—which, again, are rooted
in positivistic and functionalist ideas, demands a not only reconsideration of the canon, but also a
greater scrutiny given to the institutional mechanisms that work to produce its roster. Early
attempts to address the issue of cultural disparities involved updating the canon in the humanities
and revising collection development policies for the library. The same can be said for
acquisitions and, as it follows, of authority control (Grosser, 1991). Consequently, as of late,
both the humanities and the library have developed in a multicultural direction with each
becoming more culturally sensitive in terms of access policies and representation (Goebel et al.,
1995). Attempts at amelioration have, for years, focused on democratizing collections so that
they would be more pluralistic in terms of accessible materials. Granting that there have been
30

many gains, the attempts continue to be rooted in the hegemonic structures that are literally
embedded within the physicality of the research space. Breaking the mold requires a different
approach; an approach that draws upon the critical view. From the standpoint of Freire’s vision
of “liberation” humanism it is an approach that—while still recognizing the importance of the
Western canon—rejects those exclusionary forms of conservatism which have been formulated
around attitudes of Western intellectual superiority.
The present study is not based in epistemologies of causality—in the search for a singular
objective truth. As an alternative, it offers a perspective that has been formulated around
concepts of plurality and the autopoiesis of co-emergence. If it is a search for truth, it seeks a
multi-faceted truth that is incessantly being rendered by subjectivities. In other words, it adopts
an approach that is more in line, philosophically, with the position of Heraclitus. In contrast with
Plato who viewed substance in light of its ideal in the form of “the good” and Aristotle who
viewed it as inherent qualities imbued in individual manifestations of “the one,” Heraclitus’s idea
of substance focused on the concept of “change.” Accordingly, he was able to perceive
multidimensionality in objects and hybridity in phenomenon. He was further able to recognize
the constructed nature of singularity. This view is captured in the fragment wherein Heraclitus
[Fragment 76a] observed, “Fire lives in the death of earth, air in the death of fire, water in the
death of air, and earth in the death of water” (Heraclitus & Robinson, 1991, p. 47). In this
statement we can ascertain that whereas the other pre-Socratic philosophers chiefly focused on
the primacy of a singular substance (i.e. element) as the defining quality of all matter and
information in existence, Heraclitus, despite holding fire (i.e. energy) as the dominant force,
managed to recognize the inseparable interplay between the discrete manifestations of substance.
And, again, like Baudrillard, he was further able to identify the influence of perceptual flux on
31

observation. This idea is clearly posited in his [Fragment 6] declaration that the “sun is …not
only new each day, but forever continually new” (Heraclitus & Robinson, 1991, p. 13). These
notions of interconnectedness and flux which underscore the fluidity of supposedly fixed objects
will be important to maintain throughout the course of this study in its effort to reframe the
literacy debate within the context of the library’s institutional response.
To divert from a causality-based approach, what is called for is an approach that reflects
a relativistic monism, or one that is in keeping with the African humanism alluded to in the
communion between the reader and the client in a reading of the Odu-Ifa (Asante et al., 2008).
The coupling of these seemingly logically incompatible terms describes a model wherein
interaction between information(s) (i.e. phenomena) creates the ever-changing primary substance
of what is perceived as the objective, yet what is always elusive, precisely because of its
continually being shaped by the parameters of mutual transfiguration between subject and object
and the contours of process. Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari’s (1987) rhizome model contrasts
with orthodox notions of causality in radical terms. In a clever analogical reconceptualization,
they have casted the image of “the book” representing “the world” as neither subject, nor object
(p. 3). In one vision of “the book of the world” image (i.e. observable nature) the authors
described an ontology that reflects the structure of a tree. In accordance with this tree model,
relations are rooted from precedence and origins, and they hierarchically distributed in branches
which owe their origin and sustenance to the roots. Contrastingly, when cast as a rhizome “the
book of the world” is read in the following terms:
The world has become, but the book remains in the image of the world: radicle-chaosmos
rather than root-cosmos. A strange mystification: a book all the more total for being

32

fragmented. At any rate, what a vapid idea, the book as the image of the world. In truth, it
is not enough to say, “Long live the multiple,” difficult as it is to raise the cry. No
typographical, lexical, or even syntactical cleverness is enough to make it heard. The
multiple must be made, not by always adding a higher dimension, but rather in the
simplest of ways, by dint of sobriety, with the number of dimensions one already has
available—always n -1 (the only way the one belongs to the multiple: always subtracted).
Subtract the unique from the multiplicity to be constituted; write at n – 1 dimensions. A
system of this kind could be called a rhizome. Bulbs and tubers are rhizomes. (p. 6)
With this description, Deleuze and Guattari have completely undermined the conventional model
for epistemological justification and, hence, threaten our comprehension of canonical
authenticity. The tree-model emphasizes fixity, causality, singularity, and authenticity, and the
rhizome underscores flux, multiplicity, and “assemblage,” or linkages (pp. 6-7). This theme is
further explored by Ramona Fernandez (2001) who applied the concept of the rhizome to literacy
studies directly by exposing the inherent dichotomies of autonomous and modernization thinking
in our understanding of the concept—the most primal being that which divides literacy from
illiteracy (pp. 21-34). She noted how the rhizomatic “vision of literacy does not make a
simplistic division between skills and facts, a division underlying Hirsch’s analysis” (p. 69). She
affirmed, moreover, that multiculturalism, or what she prefers to call “mixed cultures,” is “one
place to begin opening our dualistic thinking about literacy” (p. 19). I would further put forth,
however, that the hybridity/singularity dichotomy and its parallel in that which divides
hegemony from a counter-hegemony, creates difference and, thus, differences in our
understanding of what constitutes literacy cross-culturally (Bhabha, 1994, p. 1). In applying the
rhizome model to bibliographic method and in holding a view that race is essentially socially
33

constructed, we can begin to investigate the book’s role in shaping identity construction as a
route to cognizing black literacy. To achieve this objective, the role of the bibliocultural link will
be focused on throughout this study, particularly in its relationship to the production of
knowledge within the context of library-based research.
Building upon the rhizome model for literacy, the recent integration of multimodalities
into the framework NLS is also of relevance to this study. Multimodality in literacy expands
notions of literacy from reading, writing, and speech to cast a light on the other “modes of
representation,” such as the “visual” and the “kinesthetic” (Street, 2006, pp. 11-12). In essence, it
is the idea that literacy “needs to be contextualized within other communicative modes” (Street,
2006, p. 12). When looking at literacy from within the boundaries of contemporary education,
“the book” in its materiality should be viewed as an important link in this contextualization
process. A book is not simply a self-supporting system of textual apparatuses in terms of its
intellectual manifestation and material production; many times, it is an individual node within a
larger network of knowledge production. For that reason, it is a subject which needs to be
examined in a “web of relations” (Taylor M. C., 2001, p. 211). Although networks can be
organized in simple and rigidly fixed sets of relations, they are often systems of complexity
which are characterized by perpetual flux and defined, more broadly, by the connectivity of their
interchanging combinations (Taylor M. C., 2001). Of course, to complicate this dichotomy
further, here we are really dealing with qualities of both sets in one.
In looking at research collections as sites of knowledge production, it is important to
understand some of the more prevalent models of knowledge production proposed by past
theorists. One of the most cited knowledge production models comes from Michael Gibbons et

34

al. (1994) in The New Production of Knowledge. Looking chiefly at the production of knowledge
within science and technology disciplines, the authors coined the terms Mode 1 and Mode 2
knowledge production to describe what they viewed as two variant streams—one of which is
implicitly commodified through its symbiotic relationship with academic convention. The main
differences, according to this model, were defined as follows:
…Mode 1 problems are set and solved in a context governed by the, largely academic,
interests of a specific community. By contrast, Mode 2 knowledge is carried out in a
context of application. Mode 1 is disciplinary while Mode 2 is transdisciplinary. Mode 1
is charactarised by homogeneity, Mode 2 by heterogeneity. Organisationally, Mode 1 is
hierarchical and tends to preserve its form, while Mode 2 is more heterarchical and
transient. Each employs a different type of quality control. In comparison with Mode 1,
Mode 2 is more socially accountable and reflexive. It includes a wider, more temporary
and heterogeneous set of practitioners, collaborating on a problem defined in a specific
and localised context. (p. 3)
This division of productive modalities was, understandably, also applied to the humanities as
well. And as the sciences were depicted by the authors as “autonomous subsystems” within the
academy with a marked propensity for adaptation, the humanities—contrary to the typically
intuited response—were also defined as having adopted at the least some of the characteristics of
Mode 2 knowledge production in a manner which differed from the sciences in several respects.
Most notably, these characteristics and differences included the growing acceptance of
reflexivity, transdisciplinarity, and contextualization in humanistic research (Gibbons, et al.,
1994, pp. 90-110).

35

Helen Crompton (2003), moreover, has argued that Mode 2 knowledge production is
more amenable to innovation than Mode 1, particularly when situated in a milieu of hypercompetitiveness and within organizations that depend on long-term growth (pp. 3-10).
Extrapolating a connection from Crompton’s account of the differences between these
productive modalities, the ways in which Mode 1 knowledge production are closely aligned with
Freire’s banking concept of education become clearer. Being that Mode 1 is based on notions of
permanence and hierarchy, it pursues its ends via the transmission of facts from the expert to the
novice. Ultimately, such knowledge must always seek to establish consensus of a grand narrative
that objectively defines the “truth” of a subject. Conversely, Model 2 knowledge production
being more collaborative, dynamic, and process oriented is substantially less reliant on the
contributions of single authorities. Accordingly, it is more open to an egalitarian manner of
learning that does not privilege the voice of a single expert at the expense of silencing other
prospective dialogical influences.
Recall, then, that the book as an object, along with the literacy practices through which
they are cultivated and inscribed, is but one component in the larger system of knowledge
production. This system, being educational in nature, is primarily concerned with learners and
researchers; and being also institutional it is quintessentially administrative. Notwithstanding the
relatively recent rise of Mode 2 characteristics, within this system we find a particular web of
relations that it is still largely sustained and facilitated through Mode 1 knowledge production.
The heart of the cycle is administration (Figure 1). Again, this is because knowledge as a
commodity is produced in accordance with the bureaucracies associated with government and
information-based industries. Administration basically refers to the hierarchies, policies, funding,
and operations that provide the platform needed for the cycle to function. In the university
36

environment, this built-in relationship between administration and knowledge production is
particularly pronounced. The library as a research space, whether situated in the university or
not, does not radically depart from the symbiosis. The utility of administration, in this context,
rests in the ability of administrators, educators, and informational professionals to facilitate the
continuation of the productive cycle from a learner’s first encounter with literacy instruction and
through every educational stage thereafter in the advance toward original scholarship. The
responsibility to facilitate the education of the learner is intrinsic to the academic mission.

37

Learner

Counter-hegemony
Hegemony

Potential

Conformity

Administration
(M1)

Proliferation

Relevancy

Dissemination
Innovation

Researcher

(M2)

Figure 1. The Administrative Cycle of Knowledge Production

Hegemony, as it follows, is the conservative element of the system. By working to
promote the legitimacy of the system, hegemonic agency concomitantly substantiates attitudes of
permanence and superiority. It must tell us what a genuine “education” is, by perpetually
defining what it is not. It is necessarily exclusionary. Hegemony, not only functions through the
politics of qualification and credentialing, but it is also exercised in the apparatuses of
specialization (Day, 2005, pp. 590-591). Postmodern theorist Michel Foucault stated,
“Disciplines constitute a system of control in the production of discourse, fixing its limits
38

through the action of an identity taking the form of a permanent reactivation of the rules”
(Foucault, 1966/1970, p. 224). Hegemony, then, not only shapes the way in which knowledge
gets produced, it also perpetuates its uniformity in society through the influence of intellectuals
that have passed through the administrative cycle (Francese, 2009, pp. 35-37). Furthermore,
there are hegemonic ideologies that remain in the production of knowledge that permeate in the
culture— ideologies such as the Democratic ideal of education and the Enlightenment model of
freedom. Hegemony is this sense fortifies pedagogies and grammatical rules for literacy
instruction and information literacy instruction.
Hegemony is reliant upon conformity. Once a learner has learned how to properly
conduct research, the wider acceptance of the presentation of his or her work is partly dependent
upon the degree to which the work exhibits the various trademarks of its credentialing (e.g.
degrees, accreditation, peer review, etc.). Simply put, the work must display the accepted cultural
conventions to be taken seriously. French sociologist Pierre Bourdieu’s (1986) concept of
cultural capital, at its most basic, has been offered in the following terms:
Cultural capital can exist in three forms: in the embodied state, i.e., in the form of longlasting dispositions of the mind and body; in the objectified state, in the form of cultural
goods (pictures, books, dictionaries, instruments, machines, etc.), which are the trace or
realization of theories or critiques of these theories, problematics, etc.; and in the
institutionalized state, a form of objectification which must be set apart because… in the
case of educational qualifications, it confers entirely original properties on the cultural
capital which it is presumed to guarantee. (p. 243)

39

For cultures which are outside the mainstream, the acquisition of cultural capital involves an
assimilation process. The farther away the cultural base of the learner is from the mainstream,
the greater the amount of effort needed for one to assimilate. Thus, the very acquisition of this
form of capital can be a source of cognitive dissonance prompting a learner to reconcile the
discrepancy through counter-hegemonic action.
These preceding processes are heavily saturated with the proliferation of material
productions of knowledge. As knowledge goes through a process of commodification in its
production, it does not solely reside within minds of experts who deliver lectures, presentations,
and consultations as part of their professional duties; there is also the material production of
marketable commodities in which the knowledge gets embodied in “non-discursive”
manifestations (Canagarajah, 1996). Hence, the proliferation mode in the cycle represents the
researchers’ material contributions to the production of knowledge. Traditionally these
manifestations have principally been printed bibliographic objects (e.g. books, book chapters,
journals, articles, reports, etc.), but, somewhat deterministically, the proliferation of productions
has increasingly been migrating to digital formats as modern technology has shifted in that
direction.
Since knowledge is a commodity in this system, the dissemination of produced
knowledge from researchers into academic discourse, and, subsequently, public discourse,
cannot be extracted from the administrative hegemony that preserves itself through the
enforcement of cultural conformity (Canagarajah, 1996, pp. 442-445). The stakes are high in
this mode, for eventually (factoring in some form of academic consensus and an advancement of
the current state of knowledge in a particular field or discipline) abridged distillations of the

40

latest manifestations of the proliferation process will make their way into primary and secondary
education in the form of secondary source bibliographic objects and other learning materials—
most notably, the textbook.
The fundamental tenets of information retrieval in the library profession are structured
around the idea of maximizing the relevancy of information contained in information objects
intended for researchers (Bates, 2006). Similarly, relevancy for the learner in the administrative
cycle of knowledge production pertains to the learner’s ability to identify with knowledge (i.e.
information/bibliographic) objects and somehow connect them with the experience of personal
identity construction. The arrangement is a pedagogical one. If both the research presented in the
object and its formatting and design hold no relevance for the learner, then there is distance
between the intended information and cognition. This distance, perhaps, constitutes an altogether
different form of literacy gap. In other words, a learner’s potential to further the cycle of
production and achieve academically often depends upon his or her ability to retain, at least
temporarily, the knowledge embodied in the objects that are studied or reviewed in the process of
learning.
Additionally there is a counter-hegemony that runs, dialectically, through the cycle. At
the most extreme end of the spectrum (e.g. anti-imperialism, anti-colonialism, anti-capitalism,
etc.) there is an attempt to revolt against and/or deconstruct the hegemony; and at the more
moderate end there is an attitude of encouraging a gradual reform. The counter-hegemonic mode,
however, can stimulate change in the system. This type of change can be interpreted as a
disruption or innovation depending on the perspective(s) of the stakeholders involved. In the
case of the latter, the interpretation which views the change as signifying innovation, Mode 2

41

knowledge production in itself represents a paradigmatic shift in the established pedagogical
hegemony of Mode 1 (Gibbons, et al., 1994, p. 3). Freire’s (1970) problem-posing methodology,
moreover, is a well-defined example of counter-hegemonic pedagogy in the form of liberation
humanism. Kumasi’s (2010) cultural inquiry model, a model that shares many characteristics
with the Freire’s critical pedagogy, represents counter-hegemonic innovation in the library’s
relationship to black literacy. Nevertheless, the innovations cannot fully be extricated from the
hegemonic structures that disseminate them—a point that is evident in the fact that both of these
examples have come to into the academic and professional discourses not only through the text
that conveys the authors’ meanings, but also in the formatting and graphic design that helps to
impart a sense of intellectual legitimacy to their works.
So here were have the basic framework for a study that looks at a set of (social) relations
amid processes through which books emerge and expire as nodes in a web of relations, not a
phenomenological account of subjects (i.e. humans) and their behavioral interactions with
objects (i.e. books) in the acquisition of “literacy” as a “skill.” Within this schema we encounter
ecologies of the book wherein an array of literacy practices travel through library spaces that are
situated in diverse research environments.
1. IV. Research Questions
At this point in the discussion we have determined that many of our past assumptions
about literacy and how we interact with it are fraught with perspectival biases (Graff, 1987). We
have seen that recent attempts to address the problem of black literacy have overlooked the
manner in which the articulation of it as a crisis, discursively, has contributed to its emergence.
And, lastly, we have acknowledged the insufficiencies of dichotomization (e.g. subject/object,
42

black/white, orality/text, illiteracy/literacy, performance/study, ephemera [non-book]/book, etc.)
when such divisions are employed, either expressly or inadvertently, in the direction of exclusion
(Fernandez, 2001). This trajectory leads, then, to a number of fundamental questions that this
study directly confronts. First and foremost there is the question of racial identity construction.
This study is predicated upon the idea of a bibliocultural link; and, again, by using the term
“bibliocultural” I mean to convey that culture is embedded in the book as an object in a network
of instrumental assemblages. Does a link, therefore, exist between the materiality of the book
and the social construction of racial identity? If so, how do we discern and examine the ways in
which this link becomes manifest in the minutia of the book’s materiality and in its relation to
the social dimensions through which the book as an object becomes subjectively operative? And,
finally, how can a deeper understanding of this link inform our decisions concerning the
development and implementation of institutional policies that shape the library’s relationship
with black literacy?
1. V. Applications: The Significance of the Study
It is not the intention of this study to address a crisis in black literacy by determining the
best path to improving literacy rates in the classroom, the library, or in any other learning or
research environment. The goal involves two objectives: [1] to reframe the discourse
surrounding the issue and [2] to draw upon any insights attained through the process of
investigating the issue from an alternative standpoint to inform [special collections] library
policy. Accordingly, the potential applications for the study would directly pertain to the
advancement of bibliographic method, literacy theory, and the evolution of librarianship. In
terms of bibliographic method, this study offers a new method in ethnobibliography. It is a

43

method that, up until the present research had been carried out, had yet to be implemented in the
form of a major academic study. In consideration of projected demographic shifts in the Western
World at large, the potential impact of this new method—which focuses on investigating the
very granular dimensions of a bibliocultural link—could be augmented over time. In terms of
literacy and librarianship, this research will help us to broaden and rethink our ideas around
literacy pedagogies, collections and their use in the community, and, most importantly, what it
means to be culturally viable and socially relevant within a particular community.

44

Chapter Two: Review of the Literature
2. I. History: The Beginnings of Bibliographic Method
This study is firmly-rooted in the tradition of bibliography. It is situated in its discourse
just as much as it is steeped in its methodology. To understand the implications of this
orientation, however, requires a looking back; that is, it calls for a foray into the history of
libraries, education, and the humanities, and all through the lens of bibliographical thought as it
has developed overtime. In order to adequately comprehend the nature of this study, one must
also have some sense of the epistemological models that support the method. Consequently, this
literature review will cover this history in a manner that highlights many of the central themes
which have been at the heart of the debates that have driven bibliographical discourse up until
the present day. As there are far too many points of contention within the intellectual history of
bibliography to be presented in a single chapter, this review will admittedly offer only an
abridged account. Therefore, I shall reiterate that the intention here is to reach the point in the
discourse wherein ethnobibliography is found to harbor the potential for further cultivation
within this growing body of bibliographical literature.
In its most basic form bibliography as a practice can tangentially be traced to an ancient
antecedent in cataloging. Cataloging, of course, in the instance of written agricultural and
commercial inventories claims an incontrovertible basis in the earliest years of world civilization
(Bunson, 1991, p. 21; Frankfort, 1956, pp. 112-113; Harris M. H., 1995, pp. 18-35). And,
without succumbing to any strict notions of causality, cataloging itself must ever so slightly
anticipate the book in a “chicken and egg” scenario in which both would become visible in a
45

symbiotic relationship of co-emergence. Library cataloging, being a practice which essentially
works to facilitate documentation and access for an accumulated collection of books, from its
genesis has been intimately wedded to bibliography. One, however, must have a working
definition for the principal term. To my understanding a serviceable definition would be that
bibliography is the study of books as physical objects. Arriving at such a definition, however,
has proven to be the cause for much dispute. Even determining what exactly is meant by the term
“book” has been subject to the most intense academic scrutiny. A brief survey of the history of
this basic definition, then, will further serve to elucidate its convention.
Granting that the rudiments of the bibliographical tradition reside in its ancient
antecedents, the two figures of Johann Tritheim (Johannes Trithemius, d. 1516) and Conrad
Gesner (d. 1565) are largely considered to be the undisputed forefathers of this tradition in the
West. Tritheim’s Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum (Trithemius, Heynlin, Brant, &
Amerbach, 1494) is still held in high regard, as it is seen as a foundational text for enumerative
bibliography among book historians, collectors, and librarians. The first 1494 edition was printed
under the name Liber de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis in Basel by Johann Amerbach—a protégé of
Aton Koberger. It is largely considered to be the first bibliography—surely, the first in print.
Setting a high bar, it offers an impressive list of roughly 7,000 titles. There are approximately
1,000 philosophical and religious authorities represented in the catalog, and their respective
works range from the classical to the late medieval and early modern periods. Documenting
mostly philosophers and theologians, each entry includes both a biographical synopsis and a
corresponding list of their attributed titles (Trithemius, Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum
sive illustrium virorum, cum appendice eorum qui nostro etiam seculo doctissimi claruere Per

46

venerabilem virum, dominum Iohãnem a Trittenhem Abbatẽ Spanhemensem, disertissime
concriptus, 1531).
It seems that from the very beginning, as a tradition based in reference—facilitating
source access and promoting genuine scholarship among the learned—the writing of
bibliographies has been beset by discursive pitfalls and shaped by the socio-historical modalities
within which its various systems of knowledge organization have been devised. The distinct
intellectual divisions (i.e. subjects) that have been imposed by its method—a method which itself
has been systematically hierarchical and taxonomic in its meta-theoretical structuring—have
uniformly sought justification in claims of objectivity and attempts of achieving universality in
application that have, at best, resulted only in approximations. The reality, however, is that such
divisions have been mired in the subjectivities that have crafted them.
Given that Tritheim’s intellectual legacy has typically been associated with the
Renaissance in Northern Europe, the Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum can be looked at as
a thoroughly humanistic project (Brann, 1981). As indicated by the paratextual epigram that
serves as a title page introduction of the fourth edition (Cologne, 1531), even the satirist and
humanist Sebastian Brant was a firm believer in the quality of Tritheim’s work (Brann, 1981, p.
214).4 Yet, being that this proto-bibliographic work was primarily concerned with the
organization of information in an ecclesiastical setting, it is also true that the profuse saturation
of medieval scholasticism had left its imprint upon it. Traces of scholasticism abound in the
Catalogus. Definite signs of this influence can be observed in the authorial selection bias that
Trithemius had an acquaintance with Sebastian Brant during the course of his life. The epigram opens with “In
Huius Noblissimi Operis laudem. D. Sebastiani Brant Epigramma, Scriptores quicunque uelis nouísse probatos
Ecclesiae, & quicquid quisque; decoris habet, Abbatis docti legito hoc epitome Iohannis Ex Spanhem,” in the fourth
edition. In the first edition, however, the epigram concludes the text in the manner of a colophon and opens
somewhat differently with “In laude Catalogi scriptoru[m] ecclesiasticorum optimi patris Iohannis de Trettehem
abbatis Spanhemensim.”
4

47

endeavored to constrain its comprehensiveness as a catalog. They are evident in its capacity as an
authoritative document, particularly in its biographical glossing.
And there is a scholastic aesthetic, moreover, to many of the elements of its composition
and style, much of which assumes some semblance of the late medieval manuscript tradition.
Yet, the subtle intellectual hybridity of the catalog—again, one which combines both humanistic
and scholastic characteristics—is quietly present in Amerbach’s choice of a solidly blackletter
title followed by a mostly roman type text block with guide letters for rubricating. Hybridity in
design and function, in fact, was further echoed in the typography of subsequent editions. Peter
Quentell’s (1531) edition, for instance, was, again, printed in a budding roman type with strong
woodcut initials that were consistent with the aesthetic proclivities of its intended readership.
Tritheim’s Catalogus, it appears, was not so bound by ecclesiastical conventions to the extent
that its compiler was entirely prevented from a judicious endorsement of the spread of humanism
(Brann, 1981).
A slightly nuanced demarcation should be made here between the notion of an author
and that of an authority (e.g. scriptural commentator, clergyman, theologian, etc.) as far as the
primary listings which comprise the catalog are concerned. This distinction reflects the late
medieval and early modern modalities of knowledge construction. The demarcation, by virtue of
the catalog’s intended audience and desired marketability, was inadvertently inherent in
Tritheim’s selection process as a cataloger of books. And if a questionable understanding of
authorship complicates our notions of the source, it should be added that many of the works
listed in the catalog predate the development of formal titles as a convention. In its place the
incipit enjoyed dominance as a primary identifier for centuries prior to the development of the

48

“title” in Western literature. Uncovering such entrenched biases and complexities in the
documentation of titles by confronting the elusiveness of their inherent nature can serve to
untangle some of the more abstruse dynamisms that have operated in the fashioning of
bibliography’s meta-theoretical framework.
To begin, referring back to this notion of selection bias—and, in Tritheim, this (bias)
being within the broader context of an intellectual hybridity between the scholastic and
humanistic traditions—one finds, for example, that his Catalogus is indicative of the far-reaching
penetration of Thomism in late medieval scholastic philosophy, even into the onset of the early
modern period. Among the listings it is clear that both Thomas Aquinas (d. 1274) and his
mentor, Albertus Magnus enjoy comparatively comprehensive summaries and source lists by
virtue of their reputations in the church and their respectively prolific intellectual contributions
as theologians to Western thought (Trithemius, Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum sive
illustrium virorum, cum appendice eorum qui nostro etiam seculo doctissimi claruere Per
venerabilem virum, dominum Iohãnem a Trittenhem Abbatẽ Spanhemensem, disertissime
concriptus, 1531, pp. B3, 89.a). Their mutual effort to reconcile Aristotelianism with church
theology, moreover, was pointedly noted by Tritheim in each of their biographical summaries.
And the office and lifelong ecclesiastical service of both theologians were described by the
complier in a highly religious tone that was acquiescent to the basic rhetorical strictures and
demands that were requisite with the clerical conventions of the period.
In terms of representation and inclusion, then, the influences of Senecan stoicism and the
scholastic emphasis on the Aristotelian tradition in the catalog appear to outweigh the influences
of the Ciceronian rhetoric and neo-Platonic thought which had been revived in the discourse of

49

the humanistic circles associated with Tritheim’s intellectual environment. Much of the catalog’s
humanistic representation restricts itself to its promoters within the church or to those who had
already achieved a relatively safe level of acceptance within it. Humanists such as Francesco
Petrarca (d. 1374), Leonardo Bruni (d. 1444), George of Trebizond (d. 1486), Niccolò Leoniceno
(d. 1524), and Jacob Faber Stapulensis (d. 1536) are listed, but they are spread comparatively
thin, it seems, amongst the names of theologians and scholastic philosophers of lesser renown.
And even in these cases, some of more controversial philosophical offerings and intellectual
achievements of these authors were comparatively downplayed, as ideological conformity and
continuity appear to have been prioritized with the aim of maintaining the internal textual
integrity of the compiled whole.
Perhaps, the scope of the catalog was additionally tempered by Tritheim’s own resistance
to embracing the pagan thinkers with as much zeal as some his contemporaries (Brann, 1981).
By any comparison, his catalog did not approach the level of humanistic scholarship found in
Desiderius Erasmus’s (d. 1536) Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum—first published in
Basel in 1529 by a relatively obscure printer named Andreas Cratander (d. 1540).5 In Erasmus
there is a level of engagement with textual criticism in his project of publishing a new edition of
a classical work which is absent in the precedent set by Tritheim. Likewise, the typography of
Erasmus’s Catalogus, especially in the 1549 Frankfort edition printed by Peter Brubach, with its
deliberately italic typeface and its symmetrical page layouts, are also characteristic of a firm
adherence to Renaissance humanism (Hieronymus & Erasmus, 1549; Holder, 2009). Throughout
most of Europe and the Western World in the Reformation era, actually, book design had grown
thoroughly roman in nature. England and Spain were slower in adopting the typographic
5

Jerome’s edition of the Eusebius.

50

aesthetic, but the dominance of roman types and humanistic book design spread with the
humanistic pedagogies that were promulgated through the intellectual discourse of the period
(Chappell, 1970). The innovations and techniques implemented by Aldus Manutius, innovations
such as the invention of italic type in 1501, his forward-looking pocket editions, and his
important advances in cutting accurate Greek typefaces, were carried on in the works of
Geoffroy Tory (d. 1533), Albrecht Dürer (d. 1528), and Johann Froben (d. 1527)—Erasmus’s
personal friend and editor (Chappell, 1970). These innovations as well as others that would
follow from Claude Garamond (d. 1561) to the House of Elzevir moved design further away
from the gothic aesthetic that was established at the onset of the incunable period (Chappell,
1970).6
Conrad Gesner’s (d. 1565) Bibliotheca Universalis offers an example of how the
bibliographic tradition continued to advance in accordance with the reigning humanism of its
age. Printed in 1545 by Christoph Froschauer (d. 1564), Gesner’s Bibliotheca Universalis is
much closer to Erasmus’s Catalogus in aesthetic terms. More than that, however, the Bibliotheca
Universalis effectively established a more solid basis for a practice that would be eventually
come to called enumerative bibliography—a form of reference which would become
increasingly essential to modern scholarship in the humanities.7 On the whole, Gesner’s
enumerative project sought to encompass a much greater share of the titles of his time than
Tritheim had documented. The move reflects the germination of a larger shift wherein cataloging
would eventually breakaway from bibliography in the interminable pursuit of codifying all
knowledge and arriving at a universal classification system. His Bibliotheca Universalis (1545)
was among of the first of the bibliographies to include thousands of titles and hundreds of
6
7

Lasting from roughly 1450 to 1500 C.E.
Christoph Froschauer was also known for his printed editions of Erasmus’s works.

51

individual authors listed in it. Gesner, consequently, is considered by many to be the first
genuine bibliographer, although it is well-known that he had numerous predecessors and
contemporaries in the practice (Wedgeworth, 1993, p. 322).
Nevertheless, some of the challenges inherent to developing bibliography persisted as the
method of systematically listing authors and their works that was first advanced by Tritheim in
the Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum, Gesner and subsequent bibliographers consistently
maintained that knowledge was a thing that could be compartmentalized, and that it could be
ordered and preserved in accordance with the harmonies of some grander scheme. As the
classical educational divisions of the liberal arts were carried on in the Middle Ages in the form
of the trivium and quadrivium, the processes of paradigmatic reinterpretation that had first helped
to shape the humanities (studia humanitas) exerted certain typological pressures on the
bibliographical schemas that emerged during the study’s formative years. Gesner’s Pandectarum
(1548), for example, portrayed a schema of thematic division that was closely aligned with the
traditional liberal arts in many respects, but it also exhibited some interesting permutations in
terms of its subdivisions (Jerchower & Lerner, 2007, p. 4).8 The most obvious deviation appears
to be the full-blown expansion of the seven core subjects into a considerably larger scheme. In
the placing of grammar as the head leaf in the oratory branch of knowledge—that is, over
rhetoric, dialectic, and poetry—the influence of humanistic thinking, again, appears to have been
considerable in the early formulation of the schema. Yet, Gesner places poetry within the dual
categories of necessary and ornamental knowledge, thus linking the art of poetry with the
practice of magic. More informative, in fact—in terms of how this system of knowledge
organization is historically situated within its intellectual paradigm—is the way in which
8

From the Tabula de Singulis Pandectarum.

52

Gesner’s schema lists astrology among the sciences alongside astronomy, music, geometry, and
arithmetic; but divination, being linked with poetry, is grouped with magic.
It is also during this early modern period in the history that a range of different types of
proto-bibliographic lists had developed along often intersecting lines. Proto-bibliographic
subgenres which included bio-bibliographies, inventories, censorship lists, and booksellers’
catalogs began to formalize and inform each other’s structural templates (e.g. formatting,
metadata, etc.) as they proliferated (Walsby & Constantinidou, 2013, p. 4). These templates
would often include components such as the essential identifying metadata of author, subject,
publication date, folio size, etc. and a bibliographic “entry” format which, in most cases, took the
form of a paragraphed list rather than the paragraphed block text found in the essay format of
textual composition. Proto-bibliographies such as George Draud’s Bibliotheca Classica (1611)
and, later, Johann Frabicus’s Bibliotecha Graeca (1705) really began to demonstrate the
potential application of bibliography as a tool for serious research (Suarez & Woudhuysen, 2013,
pp. 372-3).
Draud’s Bibliotheca Classica (1611) was one of a number of works to have exhibited
early signs of the alphabetical subject/author schema that would subsequently persist throughout
the taxonomies and encyclopedias of the Age of Enlightenment. Whereas Gesner employed the
more conventional method of alphabetically indexing authors by their first names in the
Bibliotheca Unversalis, Draud was slightly ahead of his time when he his organized his lists
alphabetically by the last name of the authors. Furthermore, in another move toward modernity,
Draud unveiled a sophisticated layering of subject division as the overarching organizational
structure for the work. His entries were organized within in a set of primary subjects (i.e.

53

philosophy, poetry, and music) that further encompassed a comparatively robust assemblage of
subcategories covering such diverse topics as ethics, syntax, harmonics, motets, and even
physiognomy.
Johann Frabicus’s Bibliotecha Graeca (1705-1728) is another bibliography that displays
an incredible amount of scholarship in terms of its depth and granularity. An epitomical example
of domain-specific bibliography, Frabricus attempted to cover the entirety of extant Greek
literature from Homer to the fall of Constantinople in 1453 (Sandys, 1998, p. 2). The Bibliotheca
Graeca has some of the most comprehensive entries found in a work of its kind, as Fabricus
included copious information on specific editions (Fabricius, Harless, & Heumann, 1790). In
Fabricus, moreover, we find that each important detail concerning an author or a work is
supported by the primary sources from which the information was derived, effectively
demonstrating an early example of citation practices. This work is also supplemented by an
authorial index which abridged the more comprehensive information in the bibliography and, in
doing so, provided a short list of topics and subjects covered in their works.
The gradual ascendancy of empiricism and science over rationalism which occurred
during the seventeenth and eighteenth century provided much of the essential components of the
modern bibliography (Eden, 2015). So too, however, did the broadening of the Western artistic
and literary canon which expanded generationally. The swelling in the production of both
scientific and humanistic literature afforded by the spread of print technology worked to shape
the structure and purpose of bibliographic composition. Essentially, bibliographies, as materials
of reference, had to meet the rising demand for new information coming from a concurrently
burgeoning readership (Katz, 1998). The new information, and often the most comprehensive,

54

far and wide came in the form of books. The aim of the bibliography in these years was
increasingly directed toward identification, documentation, and, in best cases, item retrieval. And
the problem of compartmentalizing knowledge effectively became a practical one (Lindberg,
Numbers, & Porter, 2003).
This later period was one in which bibliographic study was still to a great extent
concerned with collection cataloging and knowledge organization. It becomes crucial to
acknowledge here that Francis Bacon’s (d. 1626) division of the sciences had been a major
influence on bibliographic and encyclopedic subject division for several generations beyond its
introduction in 1605 in The Advancement of Learning (Anstey & Vanzo, 2012; Lindberg,
Numbers, & Porter, 2003). Although several aspects Bacon’s theory of knowledge were wellfitted within the Renaissance epistemological paradigm, his ideas advanced the empirical strain
of thinking and, in part, helped to clarify the division between speculative and operative branches
of science (Anstey & Vanzo, 2012). Bacon essentially divided the mind into three major groups:
memory, imagination, and reason (Bacon, 1605/2011). These mental faculties were then further
linked to a principal group of disciplines: poetry as part of imagination, history as part of
memory, and philosophy as part of reason. Further divisions include the separation of rationalism
in the class of divinity from empiricism, or sense experience, which is classed with philosophy.
The fundamental structure of this tripartite division was echoed, not only in Denis Diderot (d.
1784) and Jean Le Rond d'Alembert’s (d. 1783) intellectual tour de force, the Encyclopedie
(1751-1772), but also in the bibliographies of the eighteenth century (Diderot, 1751).
Adam Clarke’s The Bibliographical Miscellany (1806), a supplement to his
Bibliographical Dictionary (1802-1804). Here, even at a time when bibliography was really

55

beginning to distinguish itself from other areas of research as an acceptable intellectual pursuit,
challenges similar to those inherent to the notion of fixed authorship and source identification
were similarly woven into the fabric of subject assignment. Consider, once more, that these
historicized subject-based classifications systems are inescapably representational of the values,
biases, and ontologies of their origin. The classification system one finds in The Bibliographical
Miscellany constitutes another case in point. Compared with Gesner’s categories we find that
there was a substantial departure from the traditional divisions of the liberal arts and the
humanities (pp. 198-209). In a neatly laid out graphic outline of a bibliographical classification
system that Clarke attributed to the models of his predecessors in Bacon, Diderot, and Thiebaut,
one finds a system that evokes the enduring presence of the Enlightenment and the Scientific
Revolution in early nineteenth century thought (p. 198).9 However, considering Clarke’s
background as a Methodist theologian, the primacy of religion can also be felt throughout this
and his much larger, more comprehensive six volume Bibliographical Dictionary (Clarke, 1834,
p. 382). In the sixth volume, for example, the once sentence entry for Isaac Newton is dwarfed
by the entry immediately preceding it, the entry for Martin Luther. Luther’s entry, as it turns out,
received more than a full page worth of text (Clarke & Harwood, 1804, pp. 347-348).
In this particular scheme of division, knowledge can either be natural and scientific or
artificial and technical (Clarke, 1806, p. 206). From there it is further divided into a subset of
knowledge that is either sensible or rational in quality or one that is internal or external, and so
on (p. 206). Each set of categories in the system is arranged in a taxonomy that divides itself into
increasingly granular levels from aspect to subject. Sensible knowledge—which is natural,
according to this scheme—encompasses physiology or natural history. This group, in turn,
9

The French agronomist Arsène Thiebaut of Berneaud (d. 1850).

56

contains the subjects of meteorology, hydrology, mineralogy, physiology, and zoology. Tertiary
divisions of knowledge include powers and properties from which philosophy, ontology,
pneumatology are derived, quantities to which the subjects of arithmetic, geometry, and statistics
are assigned, and relations, where one finds the anthropocentric subjects of politics and law as a
subset of ethics and religion. Bringing to mind the system outlined by Gesner, Clarke’s scheme
had the subjects of alchemy and natural magic tangentially linked to chemistry and then further
tied to perspective and painting—two subjects logically paired with optics (p. 206). The contrast
suggests a link to the Baconian precedent which grouped magic, or magia, as a branch of physics
and mechanics as a correlate of operative science (Anstey & Vanzo, 2012). Furthermore, in this
particular system we find that the status of the liberal arts was demoted to a lesser category. The
liberal arts are represented, but they have been redefined as a subdivision of science and art in a
scheme which has divided subject-based knowledge into five primary categories of which
science and art is but one.
Clarke also made significant contributions to what, in my view, had been a major
expansion of bibliography from its enumerative application into the domain of historical
bibliography. In The Bibliographical Miscellany, the study of the book as its own subject is
detailed in a fairly comprehensive roster of past writers on a range of topics pertaining to “the
book.” Clarke’s account of the history covers the period roughly between the Scientific
Revolution and the close of the eighteenth century. The focus, however, is mostly on the
eighteenth century, suggesting that there was budding interest in matters that could be wellserved by bibliographical research during that time (pp. 48-88). The roster lists experts in literary
history, the history of typography, library cataloging, and print history—further indicating that
bibliography as a study coming out of its formative years was an expansive interdisciplinary field
57

that could potentially encompass multiple academic specializations in its fold. His Bibliographic
Dictionary, which was organized alphabetically by surname, contained a balance of literary,
historical, biographical, and descriptive information in the entries. The result anticipated the
modern annotated bibliography as shown in the following entry for John James Scheuchzer’s
(1731) Historia Naturalis Bibliae:
Physica Sacra; hoc est Historia Natura Bibliae, a Joan. Jacob, Scheuchzer edita, et
innumeris iconibus aenies elegantissimis adornata procurante J. Andr. Pfeffel, 1731, &
ann. seqq. From 9 to 16 guineas. This is one of the most beautiful and most useful works
which has appeared on the natural history of the Bible. The plates are 750 in number, and
were executed by the most eminent artists of that time. It was first published in German,
in 1731, five volumes, and was translated into Latin, and next into French, and published
at Amsterdam in 1732, 8 tom. in the 4 vol. fol. but the plates are far inferior to those in
Latin, and much more so to those in German editions: but in all other respects the work is
as correct and magnificent as any of the former. (p. 50)
In the above passage we find that, even though he had succumb to the irresistible temptation to
interject prejudice and opinion into objective documentation, Clarke had clearly demonstrated an
ability to distinguish definitive characteristics among various different types of rare books and
categorize them accordingly. He noted distinctions in what qualifies and defines a rare book. In
The Bibliographical Miscellany, we find that Clarke had been able to recognize the rarity of
specialty genres such as incunabula and manuscripts, censored and condemned works, scarce
editions and limited runs, large paper and fine press books, works from historical and academic
societies, and early library catalogs, among others (pp. 150-161). This rubric for the discernment

58

of rarity would have been vital information for the antiquarian book dealers, book collectors, and
librarians of the period. Clarke’s contributions to the study, then, share much in common with
that of his bibliophilic contemporary, Thomas Forgnall Dibdin (d. 1847). Dibdin, as we shall see,
unwittingly, yet actively, played a major role in shaping bibliography’s reputation as one of
antiquarianism. And although the association has been hotly rejected by later generations of
bibliographical theorists, the charge of antiquarianism still stands on some levels.
Dibdin—who, again, in the eyes of many historians, had been a disproportionately
responsible contributor to the study’s reputation for antiquarianism—is, nonetheless, a figure
who is largely thought to have also popularized bibliography. He has been admired for the bookcentered life he enjoyed serving in a career in the English clergy, as often as he has been
disregarded for his apparent lack of scholarly exactitude. His Introduction to the Knowledge of
Rare and Valuable Editions of the Greek and Latin Classics (1802) and his Bibliotheca
Spenceriana (1814–15) are consider to be among the more serious offerings in his corpus.
Looking at bibliography from the standpoint of Dibdin’s writings, however, one is compelled to
conclude that although bibliography as a serious form of study had more expansively begun to
take shape during the first half of the nineteenth century, it was in many respects still confined to
the corridors of church, the reading rooms of great academies, and to the shelves of the
gentleman’s private library.
Didbin’s scholarship is still thought of as having been notoriously imprecise. Yet his
books are regularly sought after by present day collectors of the “book on books” genre. Dibdin’s
simultaneously didactic and conversational style is most conspicuous in more popular works
such as Bibliomania (1809) or his Bibliographical Decameron (1817). Being many generations

59

removed from the period, however, it becomes apparent that these bibliocentric narratives
actually have much to offer in terms of their ability to offer a glimpse into the social atmosphere
of late eighteenth and early nineteenth century print culture. Throughout the Bibliographical
Decameron, footnotes often stretch on in a copiously more elaborated fashion than what is found
in the main body of the text. It is in these enthusing dialogues set in the private [rare book]
viewings of polite society that scores of bibliographical topics are meticulously deliberated. One
such discussion, for example, has two gentlemen, Lorenzo and Philemon, discussing the
aesthetic quality and technical execution of an illuminated miniature of the Crucifixion found in
a Veronesi Missal from the fifteenth century (Dibdin, 1817, pp. clii-cliv). The dialogue provides
insights into the nature of the aesthetic sensibilities of the period whereas the footnotes delve into
the physical minutia of the book as an object, busily noting material components such as
illumination size and sequence.
The conversation immediately following has the same pair of gentlemen referred to
above discussing the royal provenance of the Missal of Henry VII (pp. clv-clvii). In this dialogue
Philemon points out that the missal constituted a significant gap in the British Museum’s
collection of royal manuscripts on the account that it was, at that time, in the ownership of the
Duke of Devonshire (p. clv). These wide-ranging conversations around the book often deal with
provenance and the history of library collections. The frequency to which provenance research
(intermingled with diplomatics) can be found in the text is perfectly understandable when taking
into account that past bibliographers, such as Clarke, had also included paleography as well as
the history of libraries and collections as an important part of bibliographical study. And it is
even more understandable considering that for the cataloger and bibliographers of the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth century, the lines between ecclesiastical, state, academic, and
60

private book collections was very much blurred. The historical legacies behind a number of the
world’s great collections can attest to this hegemonic confluence, especially in the manner in
which these collections have persisted in their function as museums and research libraries, in
some cases, over centuries.
The blurring of librarian and bibliographer is especially pronounced in the writings of
one of the next major figures in the history of the study of bibliography, scholar and librarian
Henry Bradshaw (d. 1886). In terms of his contributions to the field of librarianship and the
study of bibliography, it is clear that his feet were firmly placed in both camps. And in concert
with his predecessors there is also a heavy emphasis on book history in many of his essays.
Having an in-depth knowledge of book history was viewed by Bradshaw as being a crucial part
of being a truly competent librarian (Bradshaw, 1889, pp. 371-372). The reason, in part, that
Bradshaw was able to arrive at such a conclusion involves a counterintuitive notion that the
antiquarian element, when attached to the library, actually lifts its status and prestige to that of a
museum wherein the bibliographic objects become artifacts to be preserved for future research.
Armed with this understanding of collections Bradshaw drew only a paper-thin line between the
role of the bookseller and that of the librarian. He attempted to define the value of his profession
in the following terms:
When I define a librarian as ‘one who earns his living by attending to the wants of those
for whose use the library under his charge exists,’ you will perhaps be inclined to ask in
what respect my librarian or his assistant differs from a bookseller or a bookseller’s
assistant. The only substantial difference which I see consists in this: that the bookseller
caters for the reader or writer of books, in order to make what living he can; while the

61

librarian caters for the same people, in order to make such living as the trustees of his
library assign to him. (p. 376)
This conflation seems confusing on the surface, however, as the author quickly proceeded to
explain, all depended “on the individual man.” Citing figures such as William Pickering and C. J.
Stewart, Bradshaw contended that both booksellers and librarians could offer a similar service in
a genuine knowledge of the “books themselves and not merely their market value” (p. 377).
Both as a librarian and as a bibliographical scholar his goal was to uplift the profession by
“catering” more to eager students than to the fancies of rich collectors (p. 377). In the hands of
Bradshaw, then, bibliography becomes more curatorial in nature.
In keeping with the literature of the late eighteenth and early nineteenth century, one
finds in Bradshaw that special attention is paid to paleography and the study of early typography.
Evidences from these specializations were then being applied in the determination of the
authenticity of rare books and manuscripts. Bradshaw is known, for example, for having exposed
the Constantine Simonides’s Codex Sinaiticus forgery.10 Relying upon a vast bibliographical
knowledge base gained through daily experience in the examination of early books and
manuscripts, he indicated that he was easily able to see through such fraudulent copies with a
relatively standard analysis of the script or type, the paper or parchment, the collation or
foliation, the formatting or arrangement, and the distinguishing traces of provenance (Kitto,
1863, pp. 480-481). Focusing on the application of the study of books as objects in the
determination of textual authenticity, consequently, became a catalyst for the contraction of
bibliography into increasingly sharper degrees of specificity. This contraction process, as we
shall soon learn, helped bibliography in its transformation into an academic research method.
10

The forgery was exposed in Bradshaw’s January 28, 1863 letter to the Guardian.

62

2. II. Theory: Epistemological Foundations of Bibliographic Method and its Scientization
So far we have seen repeatedly in the literature that the roles, functions, and the various
priorities of bibliography have been historically situated inasmuch as they have changed over
time. The same is true for the bibliographies of the modern age. To summarize, quickly, the
history up to this point: initially, the study emerges in the early history of Western civilization,
first and foremost as a form of inventory created for the express purpose of identification; next,
in dealing with the growing complexities of early modern humanistic research, in addition to
source identification, bibliographic study became increasingly concerned with the organization
of knowledge; after that, a period of cumulative descriptive granularity and scholarly
sophistication would coincide with the proliferation of scientific literature and encyclopedic
productions that occurred during the seventeenth and eighteenth century; and, lastly, the study
experienced an expansionist period wherein provenance and bibliographic materiality emerged
as the chief concerns at its apex. The necessity for the preservation of materials for the purpose
of providing access to future generations of researchers also began to be taken seriously as a
bibliographical issue in this latter period of expansion. Library studies, as its own discipline, had
yet to breakaway from the study of bibliography.
In addressing the question of provenance, then, proper identification had resurfaced as a
focal point in the discourse. This time, however, the identification had not been directed
exclusively toward the documentation of both new and extant titles, but, instead, it dealt more
explicitly with the identification of specific copies and various states and conditions of books as
artifacts. Identification, it seems, had remained central in the mission, but it had to be done with
authority. Hence, we arrive more formally at the concept of authenticity and authentication (e.g.

63

documentary and textual). In the modern period of bibliography, we see a bibliography
attempting to discard its antiquarian reputation and, instead, embrace a more pragmatic direction.
Bradshaw had pointed to a way forward, but his work remained steeped in the eighteenth and
nineteenth century antiquarian attitudes that dominated the intellectual pursuits of “polite
society” during his lifetime.
For the next generation of bibliographers, the mission was not as restricted to the service
of wealthy bibliophiles is it had been in the past; more broadly, it sought to help contribute to
knowledge in advancing techniques for analyzing the material traces of book production as
evidence in isolating the most definitive versions of the more distinguished titles in the Western
canon. As editors, this generation believed that bibliography had the potential to improve the
intellectual quality and historical authenticity of scholarly editions and safeguard the legacy of
English literature. In other words, they employed bibliography in the service of literary studies.
The generation of mostly English bibliographers I have been referring to here has, in the past,
been called the “Anglo-Saxon school.” The majority of their collective contributions have served
to benefit the very insular specializations of Elizabethan drama and seventeenth century studies
(Wagner & Reed, 2009, p. 19). Among its most distinguished representatives were Alfred W.
Pollard (d. 1944), Ronald B. McKerrow (d. 1940), and Sir Walter W. Greg (d. 1959). They
engaged heavily in discussions as to: 1) the nature of bibliography and its parameters as a study,
2) the function of bibliography as a method of textual (as opposed to item-level) authentication
in the determination of an “ideal copy” and, 3) its relationship to literary research and the library.
The form of bibliography that they each helped to develop and advance was termed, “new
bibliography.”

64

The beginning of the march away from a period of an unbridled antiquarianism, however,
was commenced on somewhat shaky ground. That such works as Pollard’s Early Illustrated
Books (1893), Shakespeare Folios and Quartos (1909) and Fine Books (1912) contained a
prodigious amount of book history within them cannot be denied, and one would be remiss to
conclude that such works had failed in their ability to advance the level of analytical precision in
bibliographical research. The lofty airs that continued to characterize such titles, however, had
also calcified such productions with the same antiquarian sentiments that the study had begun to
discard (Pollard, 1912). The question, then, became whether bibliography was an art or a
science.
In the views of Greg, bibliography was decidedly more of an art than a science. In his
terms, what “may be called bibliography,” has “the characteristics of the science,” but he held to
the historical understanding of the study wherein the accepted parameters did not necessarily
separate print from manuscript (p. 76). He goes as far as to assert that a study of bibliography
must “apply to the transmission of all symbolic representation of speech or other ordered sound
or even logical thought” (p. 76). This declaration is in step with the expansive view espoused by
his predecessors in Clarke, Dibdin, and Bradshaw—all of whom grouped the history of the book,
library history, paleography, and typography in their view of bibliography. As indicated in the
following selection from his paper entitled “What is Bibliography,”11 he likewise sought to
dispel any ambiguities in this regard:
Those who have followed me so far will not be surprised that I call the field a wide one.
It includes the study of book-making and of the manufacture of the materials of which
books are made, it includes a knowledge of the conditions of transcription and
11

This paper was originally published in the Transactions of the Bibliographical Society in 1912.

65

reproduction, of the methods of printing and binding, of the practices of publication and
bookselling—it includes the whole of typography and the whole of paleography. (p. 80)
To downscale this demonstrably broad view, however, Greg sought to define, more clearly, the
limits of the study as well. He, at once, desired to both set it apart from its antiquarian heritage
and to help to keep its proponents from losing sight of its primarily academic mission; its bookcentered core, as revealed in his stance on the peripheral status of encasings and adornments:
Bookbinding is certainly a province of bibliography, yet it almost merges into a fine art,
as do even more clearly book-illustration and illumination. Bibliography has to take
cognizance of these subjects, but it can never make them altogether its own. Book-plates
have a purely superficial connexion [sic] with books: their study is but a bastard branch
of the subject. (p. 80)
Greg’s consigning of book illustration to a peripheral status here is striking considering that by
doing so he, in many ways, disregards a substantial portion of the contributions made by
predecessors such as Dibdin and Pollard.
It was in the advances of McKerrow and Greg that bibliography came to be absorbed in
the study’s potential application toward an empirically justifiable determination of textual
authenticity. Works such as McKerrow’s (1927) An Introduction to Bibliography for Literary
Students and Greg’s (1903) The Bibliographical History of the First Folio proved that
bibliography, in fact, had tremendous potential in this regard. Something as seemingly trivial as
the knowledge of when the letter “V” began being used in place of the “U” or the “J” in place of
the “I” could be seen as having empirical weight in the identification of the ideal copy

66

(McKerrow, 1910).12 The impetus for the methodology was, in part, initiated by Karl
Lachmann’s (d. 1851) genealogical method for textual criticism. Lachmann’s presented his ideas
in hopes of countering the problem of arbitrariness in the selection of a given source intended for
editing. Lachmann’s genealogical method can be summed as follows: Historically significant
works have an original source or “archetype,” and this singular source provides the basis for
which subsequent copies are made; the act of copying, however, over time often leads to the
degradation of the original; hence, scholars should locate the original source, or the copy closest
in reproductive proximity to it for its subsequent reproduction (Bendix, 1997, pp. 60-63). This
rationale is basic theory behind what is known as the “copy text” (Greg, 1966).
With the broader acceptance of this method in the community of editors and literary
scholars, the groundwork was laid for the scientization of bibliography. Effectively, it was a
formalization of the study as an empirical method aimed at the unearthing of buried truths. It was
clear to the new bibliographers that the knowledge of book production was a vital factor in
singling out the copy text. They were able to build on that theory and complicate it in the
discourse. The skill of their having being able to identify the differences among substantive
readings—intended, authoritative editorial alterations in text—and accidentals—those
discrepancies to which mistakes in composition, typesetting, or other elements in book
production—is a compelling illustration of this point (McKerrow, 1927; Greg, 1966).
In order for the bibliographer or the would-be literary scholar to be able to distinguish the
sometimes infinitesimal differences between what was intended by the author and what appears
on the page, vital information concerning a text, it was discovered, could be found in the material

12

Consider, for example, the name Iacobus Sprenger in Trithemius, Jacob Sprenger being the anglicized form used
in modern literature.

67

dimensions of the book. In this view, the job of the compositor took on a role of particular
importance. The establishment of collation formulae—again, which was largely initiated by the
works of McKerrow and Greg—provided a new method for bibliographical description. The
collation formula, being a recognized set of symbols which, as a series, function as an
alphanumeric representation of a book’s gatherings, quietly arose as the secret language of the
bibliographer. It is a language of abstraction wherein description is the primary vehicle for the
analysis of a book’s typesetting and layout. Thus we get the names descriptive and analytical
bibliography.
As a practice, these formulae reached their culmination under Fredson Bowers (d. 1991)
by the middle of the twentieth century. Bower’s Principles of Bibliographical Description
(1949) is still seen as a core text in the larger canon of bibliographical pedagogy. In keeping with
its age, as much as the study struggled to hold on to its humanistic roots, a scientization process
took hold in the depths of its paradigmatic contraction. Moreover, by the time that Bowers joined
the discourse the template for bibliographical description had been at least rudimentarily
standardized and bibliography itself, as a study, had successfully become embedded in the fabric
of academia—illustrated by the circulation of scholarly literature exclusively devoted to the
subject. The antiquarianism of its former years was becoming more vestigial in its cultural
legacy, and the unrelenting reservations concerning the ability to this antiquarianism to remerge
in scholarly investigations concerning bibliographical matters were routinely thwarted by the
method’s success at tackling difficult literary problems. Collation formulae under Bowers—who,
again, was an immensely influential bibliographer in his own right—brought such precision to
the method as to cast away any remaining questions as to its lack of empirical rigor (Bowers,
1949). Yet, it was precisely the perceived overemphasis on collation formulae and on typography
68

that provoked a reaction against the contractionary trajectory. It was the overemphasis on print to
the exclusion of, say, paleography that Greg, for one, was reacting to toward the end of his life,
despite himself having played a major role in the genesis this descriptive method. Furthermore,
the enigmatic nature of these formulae to the outsider was also a growing point of contention
(Greg W. , 1966, pp. 77-79). Bibliography as a study, consequently, had to divide itself into
distinct schools—a move that served to crystalize its narrowing and ideological diminution for
generations to come.
Bowers was openly concerned with demarcating these divisions. He often argued at great
lengths as to the nature of their distinguishing characteristics. In his paper, entitled
“Bibliography, Pure Bibliography, and Literary Studies,” for example, he singled out
enumerative and historical bibliography from that of the descriptive, analytical, and textual
schools. According to this new bibliographical regime, enumerative bibliography, as noted
earlier, dealt expressly with bibliographical citation and the comprehensive compilation of
abridged informational entries intended to document [book] titles. Next, Historical bibliography
dealt largely with the history of book production, but in the context of the historical lineage of a
particular book, edition, or series (pp. 42-43). The special attention paid to a particular title and
its instances of manifestation, then, is what distinguishes it from its approximate in book
history—a substantially larger field of study. Descriptive bibliography, a specialization of
Bowers, is a process of arriving at the sum total of all pertinent material bibliographic data in an
abstracted form to attain a comprehensive understanding of a particular bibliographic object or
text. A bibliographer under this tradition will look at various material bibliographic data points to
formulate hypotheses concerning the genealogical history and authenticity of a given text (pp.
43-44). Analytical bibliography, as Bowers has defined it, is a “technical investigation of the
69

printing of specific books, or general printing practise [sic], based exclusively on the physical
evidence of the books themselves, not ignoring, however, what helpful correlation may be
available with collateral evidence” (p. 40). In his eyes, it was a pure methodology. Textual
bibliography, for all intents and purposes, specifically involves the utilization of bibliographical
description in a methodological application toward literary research. It can work in concert with
or even serve textual criticism which, contrastingly, considers the text of a work to be the
principal form of evidence in determining authenticity. Representing, in some respects, the
teleology of the others, it has routinely employed the analyses derived from the bibliographic
evidence to either lend support to or refute a particular argument concerning those questions
involved with the identification of an editorial copy text (pp. 44-45).
In Bowers, then, we can comprehend the tremendous intellectual value and legitimacy of
advanced bibliographic method. And if cognizance of the method’s significance for literary
research can serve to dispel prior accusations of its bookish frivolity, then bibliographical
research in the form of the descriptive and, more notably, the analytical can stand on its own. In
Bowers’s words:
Let us, then, look at analytical bibliography. Now if my attempt to delimit this field is at
all legitimate, it may follow that some of the fears that analysis is becoming too pure to
have general usefulness stem from a failure to distinguish analytical from textual, or
critical bibliography. If I am at all right, I should like to view analytical bibliography as
by definition a pure method, and critical bibliography as its application to immediate and
specific problems. If this view be accepted, it must be allowed to pursue its own
investigations in its own way without being forced to justify itself, at least as a principle,

70

by the necessity for practical application in the service of humane studies. So long as the
results filter down through critical bibliography to assist in literary study, as they most
certainly do, we should not worry whether it is becoming an end in itself, for in the
course of time every fresh conquest of knowledge finds it application. (p. 46)
It was in such declarations that Bowers was able to help redefine the scope and purpose of
bibliographical research as a whole. Yet, this move toward literary studies would also push the
study further and further away from its cradle of book cataloging and librarianship.
These divisions, we find, were so influential that they were immediately echoed by
bibliographers like Roy Stokes (d. 1995) and his book The Function of Bibliography (1969)
wherein we find a detailed set of discussions based around a practically identical set of
bibliographical schools. The only major difference from what is found in Bowers is that
historical bibliography had altogether been dropped from the group (Stokes, 1969). The four
divisions of enumerative, descriptive, analytical, and textual had, by that time, become the most
generally accepted arrangement for the study. With the shedding of paleography, papyrology,
and provenance research from the larger umbrella of bibliographical study, the bibliography of
1960s and ‘70s began to develop as a much narrower field of inquiry. Fears of academic
inconsequentiality continued to overshadow bibliographical research, however, as its antiquarian
roots were looked upon by serious scholars with a mild disdain. In terms of the study’s
“scientific” application to literary history and textual criticism, one can recognize this sense of
apprehension in Stokes concerning any vestiges of antiquarianism within its mission:
Although bibliography is concerned with the physical problems and aspects of such
material, there is little to be gained, apart from purely antiquarian pleasure, in unravelling
71

such problems for their own sake. The major interest will always lie in some relationship
to the text to be transmitted. (p. 17)
This statement might, on the surface, appear to contradict the position articulated by Bowers in
his defense of analytical bibliography, but, upon further investigation, we find that Stokes
actually credits Bowers for doing a service for bibliography, not only in narrowing a field that
had been far too broad in scope, but also by affording bibliographers with the necessary tools for
engaging in research efforts that would ultimately be of intellectual worth to future generations
(pp. 17-18).
Finally, in its redirection toward the literary domain, it was also in this generation of new
bibliographers when the study experienced its near terminal split from library studies with rare
book cataloging as its strongest remaining connecting thread. The break has never been a
complete one, but it is a rift that, once begun, set the two on their own separate paths. They have
yet to be reconciled to that point of the interconnectedness which had initially defined their
mutual origin. Bibliography, in its intellectual contraction, to some extent, moved away from
material functionality in terms of access and retrieval. It progressed in its application in the
direction of authentication and the analytical, as the emphasis was moving toward the immaterial
nature of the ideal copy. Yet, the study persistently required using materiality as its empirical
base for epistemological confirmation. The ideal copy being object-oriented could only be
discerned through descriptive method by a rigorous recording of the physical details of the
earliest extant copies.
Library cataloging and information retrieval, on the other hand—in its documentation of
holdings of unique information objects—began to revisit its prior emphasis on perfecting
72

representational systems for subject classification. For bibliographers like Greg and Bowers, the
literary contents of a particular copy of a text can carry little or no relevance to the execution of
the descriptive method (Greg W. W., 1966, p. 247; Stokes, 1969, pp. 72-73; Bowers, 1975, p.
42). In the documentary projects of information theorists such as Paul Otlet (d. 1944), it was
almost the complete reverse; that is, the materiality of the container of an information object had
little to no relevance to the task of delivering the desired information contained within it
(Rayward, 1967). The information represented by the text was the key component of his
“bibliography of bibliographies.” And the information units extracted from books were intended
to collectively convey a global encyclopedia similar to what some had initially envisioned for
internet technology. Therefore, even though the basic elements of Otlet’s universal decimal
system for the organization of information were unquestionably founded in systems that have
their genesis in bibliographical research, it developed as a sharp break from the tradition in that
the material object which contains the text was disregarded for the “documentary” approach
which privileged the textual information and its identifiers (Rayward, 1967). Moreover, the sheer
universality of its design was in stark opposition to the levels of minute bibliographic specificity
that the new bibliographers had, up until that point, been endorsing.
The development of information retrieval, its relationship to library cataloging, and its
split from bibliography is much too long and complicated of a subject to address at length in this
review, but a summary of some of the major changes that occurred, at the very least, must be
provided in order to understand how bibliography became less involved with the role of
cataloging the world’s sources for knowledge. The most compelling impetus for the split, really,
rests in the heart of the second Industrial Revolution when the rapid expansion of printed
knowledge in the form of monographs, digests, scientific reports, and, perhaps above all,
73

scholarly journals made it next to impossible for enumerative bibliography to capture the
massive volume of new and existing titles. The need for libraries and librarians, however, to be
able to keep up with this expansion was essential for all parties involved. New systems were
needed both to cope with the increasing volume of scientific data and humanistic research and to
maximize efficiency in providing access to these growing bodies of knowledge for researchers.
The field, like many others during that time, simultaneously went through its process of
professionalization.
In keeping with the pragmatism of the age, Melvil Dewey’s (d. 1931) Decimal
Classification System (DDC)—a scheme of subject division based in decimal units—served to
address the crisis of a rapidly rising volume of printed literature with a serviceable utility (Dick,
1999). The largescale migration of bibliographical catalog entries from the codex format over to
the index card (i.e. the card catalog) was very much a physical embodiment of this utility. Fairly
early in the history, bibliographers such as Pollard looked upon universal classification systems
such as Dewey’s with an air of intellectual derision. In his essay “The Arrangement of
Bibliographies,” Pollard went as far as to explicitly denounce the entire rationale behind the
DDC as arbitrary and absurd (1909/1976, pp. 130-137). He did not acquiesce to notion of the
superiority of efficiency in access over the autonomy of scholarly expertise (pp. 137-140). In
step with the humanistic tradition of bibliography, he insisted that the subject specialist was best
qualified to determine the arrangement of a particular scheme of knowledge organization for a
particular discipline or area of research (pp. 130-143). These early twentieth contentions between
new bibliographers and library catalogers during the first half of the twentieth century only
served to further the widening gap between the two fields.

74

By the mid-twentieth century, it was well understood, at least intellectually, that “pure”
bibliography dealt with the so called “ideal copy” of a work and library cataloging dealt with
specific copies and variants (i.e. items) in a collection. Advanced bibliography by that time had
made its way into the rigorous training procedures of literary scholarship. The change in status
might explain why in Bibliography and the Modern Librarianship, Bowers’s (1966) views on the
state of librarianship, at least, are somewhat condescending. Regarding one of his encounters
with a rare book reading room assistant he recounted, “In those days the official custodian busied
himself with light housekeeping tasks on another floor and left the conduct of the working
quarters to a she-dragon who had demonstrated her incompetence so successfully in every other
division of the library that by process of natural selection she had finally gravitated to the rarebook room” (p. 76). Again, the classist contempt and, far worse, the overt sexism in Bowers’s
language is difficult to ignore. Granted, Bowers did manage to exempt those scholar librarians
familiar enough with bibliographical terminology to at least converse intelligently upon the
subject; nonetheless, his polite exemption precluded an acrimonious polemic against what he
considered was a distressing trend of ignorance when it came to the knowledge of bibliography
and book history in the practice of modern rare book librarianship (pp. 75-93). His negative
attitude, however, as we shall soon learn, did not prevent the field from seriously addressing at
least some of his accusations. And not only were some of his techniques for collation partially
adopted within the cataloging infrastructure in works such as Paul S. Dunkin’s (1951) How to
Catalog a Rare Book, but, by the close of the twentieth century his ideas, to some extent, helped
to inspire a resurgence of interest for advanced bibliography in library studies (pp. 59-62).

75

2. III. Further Developments: Challenges and Revivals
As plainly seen, I have opted to portray a chronological succession in this discussion of
bibliographical discourse in order to provide historical context to some of the core themes and
ideas in the literature. In doing so, I have attempted to highlight the historicity inherent to our
understandings of what bibliography “is” at the conceptual level. The recognition of historicity
itself, too, is a product of the paradigmatic situatedness of the study. As it will be shown here, by
the 1970s, the growing critiques against the orthodoxy of new bibliography had split the study
once more into yet another two camps. One view took the ultimately expansive position that
symbolism, or the semiotic performance of textual representation, is inextricably entangled with
the material, thus, making a recognition of the socio-historical context indispensable to the
research. The other, more conventional view would disregard this symbolism in favor of an
exacting focus on strictly material, empirically-driven evidence and logical deduction. This
division was epitomized by the debate that had arisen between McKenzie’s (d. 1999) “sociology
of texts” and the tradition of descriptive bibliography under Bowers. Moving forward, however,
we find that although each camp managed to progress along its individual path, these paths have
since reached a point of convergence. Furthermore, we see both paths enjoying a protracted
revival in the library through specialized training book history and special collections curation.
Let us first recall, however, the initial reasons for this more recent schism.
In Bibliography the Sociology of Texts (1985), Don F. McKenzie (d. 1996) challenged
some of the key components of definitions of bibliography previously advanced by Greg and
Bowers. For him, new bibliography had become the unchallenged “orthodox” interpretation of

76

the study. He questioned the arguments which held that the “symbolic meaning” of “signs” that
makeup a text were of little or no consequence to bibliographical analysis (p. 1). In his view:
…‘sociology of texts’, then, contrasts with a bibliography confined to logical inference
from printed signs as arbitrary marks on parchment or paper. As I indicated earlier,
claims were made for the ‘scientific’ status of the latter precisely because it worked only
from the physical evidence of the books themselves. Restricted to the non-symbolic
values of the signs, it tried to exclude the distracting complexities of linguistic
interpretation and historical explanation. (p. 7)
For McKenzie, the narrow view of bibliography had been ill-conceived. He also believed that
historical bibliography’s exodus from the other schools was an erroneous development. In no
uncertain terms, McKenzie (1985) declared, “Far from accepting that ‘historical bibliography is
not, properly speaking, bibliography at all,’ it is tempting to claim, now, that all bibliography,
properly speaking, is historical bibliography” (p. 3). Considering that by the time that Stokes
Function of Bibliography (1969) was published, historical bibliography was not even included
among the other branches, the statement really expressed a radical alternative to the then
reigning four category division.
In addition to characterizing the orthodox definition as “too limited,” McKenzie sought,
in the re-expansion of the study “to establish the continuity of bibliographical principle to nonbook forms” (1985, p. 31). This far-reaching and forward-looking assertion was and, in many
respects, still is a revolutionary idea in terms of the commonly accepted notion of what the
foundation of bibliography truly represents—that is, necessarily, “books” and, not necessarily,
“texts.” As previously noted, however, even for the book historian, or, perhaps, especially for the
77

book historian—with their concentrated study of the book throughout its various historical
manifestations (e.g. clay tablet, scroll, wax tablet, codex, eBook, etc.)—arriving at an absolute
definition of what actually constitutes a “book” in its differentiation from a text is riddled with
intellectual peril. Nonetheless, McKenzie proposed his way forward; and despite common
admonitions against ideological “mission creep,” he argued that:
…one can only be pragmatic and indicative, pointing out what seem to be parallel cases,
one where the records have a textual function which is subject of bibliographical control,
interpretation, and historical analysis. It may well be that, for present purposes at least, it
is more convenient to think simply in terms of homologies, of correspondent structures,
suggesting that, whatever our own special field – be it books, maps, prints, oral traditions,
theatre, films, television, or computers-stored databases – we note certain concerns. (p.
31)
McKenzie, consequently, argued for the application of advanced bibliographical analysis to
objects at the periphery of bibliography’s intellectual domain. It follows, however, that these
non-book texts would still be objects in which textuality becomes integral as a result of their
cognitive mediation through some form of literacy. It has taken decades for this idea to take hold
in the discourse, but more recently McKenzie’s criticisms have been embraced with less
controversy, particularly in the rise of print culture studies. The connection here resides in the
fact that many of the documents associated with books—sometimes even the ones that textual
bibliographers would consider as the copy text—are extant in a “non-book” format such as a
graphic novel or a serialized magazine novel, or a “non-book” state such as that of an
uncorrected proof (pp. 30-32).

78

Another important point McKenzie made for his sociological approach to bibliography
was that, under Bowers, new bibliography had become steeped in the philosophy of new
criticism. With his own discussion of the epistemological aims of Greg and Bowers, he was able
to situate his own contribution to the discussion within a framework that reflected the intellectual
history. He explained, for example:
That orthodox view of bibliography is less compelling, and less surprising, if we note its
affinities with other modes of thinking at the time when Greg was writing. These include
certain formalist theories of art and literature which were concerned to exclude from the
discussion of work of art any intended or referential meaning. They were current not only
in the years when Greg was formulating his definitions but were still active in the theory
of New Criticism when Professor Fredson Bowers was developing his. The congruence
of bibliography and criticism lay precisely in their shared view of the self-sufficient
nature of the work of art or text, and in their agreement on the significance of its every
verbal detail, however small. In neither case were precedent or subsequent processes
thought to be essential to critical or bibliographical practice. (1985, p. 7)
The interpretation couched in the above selection anticipated a breakdown in the study’s staunch
resistance to critical theory. Here McKenzie had begun to analyze the meta-theoretical
motivations for the study’s development into, primarily, a method for textual and artefactual
authentication based in the physical evidence.
Although these criticisms were articulated in the mid-1980s, in Bowers (1971) Four
Faces of Bibliography we learn that McKenzie had actually issued his “attacks” over a decade
prior to the publication of his Bibliography and Sociology of Texts. In this essay, Bowers reacted
79

to McKenzie’s accusations of analytical bibliographical navel-gazing. Providing numerous
specific hypotheticals wherein analytical and textual bibliography could be applied to questions
of textual transmission, he responded that analytical bibliography and its related branches of
study simply existed outside of the purview of McKerrow’s critique (1971/1975, p. 106). Further
than that, Bowers used the response to exploit the opportunity to remind his audience of
bibliography’s fundamental value as a method. In an inadvertent acquiescence to the antiquarian
and historical strains in bibliography, he explained, “By this means a collector who
understandably wants a copy of the first printing of the first edition can recognize it and buy it,
instead—in his ignorance—of paying the price of a so-called ‘first edition’ for a superficially
identical copy of the second, third, fourth printings…” (p. 105). Analytical bibliography, in his
understanding, can also provide an effective method for arriving at both a complete and accurate
publishing history of a work, and, thus, it is well-suited to serve as a supplement to description
for collectors and librarians (p. 105). According to Bowers, however, publishing history is itself
is a bibliographic peripheral, an outsider to the advanced bibliography (i.e. descriptive,
analytical, etc.). Certainly, in his view, it is a branch of the study which can benefit from the
more pure forms, yet not to the same degree as literature and literary history (p. 107). And
although he pointed out bibliography’s potential value for the librarians he concluded this essay,
again, in affirming that bibliography must do more than to simply cater to the identification
needs of librarians. He warned bibliographers not to let the study be “confined” to the library (p.
107). Bowers, instead, sought to promote the adoption of “all forms of bibliography as the liberal
arts as reputable and indeed necessary parts of post-graduate liberal arts training” (p. 107). The
supposition places the method solidly in the keeping of the humanities, as it rightly anticipated
the future of bibliography.
80

Bowers, by any measure, succeeded in enshrining new bibliography within future
discourses and subsequent pedagogies for bibliographic method. For all of McKenzie’s
reservations, in many respects his work still sought to build upon the analytical foundations for
bibliographic method set by his predecessor. For the most part, McKenzie’s revelations
concerning the hitherto unforeseen involvedness of historical print production, with its multiple
compositors, its non-sequential forms, and other puzzles of that nature, only complicated the
creative simplicity of analytical bibliographic abstraction (McKenzie, 2002, pp. 32-33) . It was a
matter, then, of exploring arguments through a more “bottom-up” style of inductive reasoning.
The comprehensive framework for description and analysis provided in Bowers, however,
remained intact. His Principles of Bibliographical Description was revisited in Phillip Gaskell’s
(1972) A New Introduction to Bibliography—a book which helped to introduce the method to a
new generations bibliographic scholars. In it we find that the methods for collation and the
explanations of layout, composition, imposition are presented in a considerably more
comprehensible manner than that of Bowers.13 Gaskell’s (d. 2001) writing, moreover, is less
outwardly enigmatic. His didactically-oriented chapter progression, for instance—being one in
which each of the major components of “the book” (e.g. binding, paper, type, etc.) receives an
individual explanatory chapter devoted to its exposition—renders the work in the style of a “how
to” guide. And although the book doubles as a work of book history, covering a large breadth of
historical topics in the explanation of each component, its pragmatism is evident in its
concluding chapters and appendixes which provide pithy, yet concrete instructions in
methodology for neophytes to the study.14

13
14

Though not as simplified as the abridgement of Dunkin.
Gaskell has sample bibliographic descriptions.

81

George Thomas Tanselle (d. 2006) was another bibliographer of great repute who helped
to carry on Bowers’s legacy. Much of Tanselle’s writings exemplify the survival of descriptive
bibliographical principles in the next generation of bibliographical scholarship, but his ideas, at
times, also suggest that he has a firm grasp of the sociological approach. His (1992) “A
Description of Descriptive Bibliography,” for instance, retreads an earlier conventional
definition, but in a new, more philosophically sensitive light. His definition for descriptive
bibliography has stated that it is a “genre of writing that aims to set forth the physical
characteristics and production history of the objects that we call books” (p. 2). He concluded that
the practice is, indeed, a “crucial cultural activity.” This conclusion was reached through the
following explanation:
Books themselves are works of graphic art and may of course be studied as such; but a
large majority of them are also utilitarian objects that serve to convey written directions
for recreating dances, pieces of music, and verbal statements (including the ones we call
literature). Those directions, not being the works themselves, may at any point be
inaccurate reflections of the works,; and every feature of the objects carrying such texts—
whether present by design or by chance—is potentially significant for judging how those
texts came to be what they are and why they were interpreted as they were in the past.
Historically minded readers—those interested in readers’ responses as well as those
interested in any historical approach must read all the physical clues that books have to
offer, not just the inked letterforms, in an effort to decide how the texts should—for their
purposes—be constituted. This kind of critical reading (different from what is commonly
meant by “critical reading”) does not convert literature into a tangible art (though there
are of course instances of mixed-media works, like concrete poems, that do combine the
82

verbal with the visual). Rather, this reading of physical evidence provides the basis for
freeing oneself from the limitations of particular objects, from the contingencies of the
single past moment reflected in each artifact. (p. 8)
Furthermore, in approaching compliance to the critiques of critical theory, he quickly conceded,
“All readers, regardless of their degree of interest in history, must equally face the possibility of
altering the texts they encounter…” (p. 8) . Now, in terms of its application, Tanselle’s
interpretation broadens the scope of the method’s potential in a subtle, further attempt at
paradigmatic re-expansion. Authentication, although still important, takes a back seat to the
overall historical value of the physical evidences intrinsic to the book as the material
manifestation of a text. In his eyes, the unyielding separation between the two has been, at best,
subjective and contextual. The confusion, for instance, surrounding the illusionary division
between materiality and textuality that allegedly accounts for conflicting approaches which have
set apart special collections practices from those of general librarianship (e.g. academic, public,
etc.) is portrayed by Tanselle as a misrepresentation that would eventually lead to further
divisions in the study and practice of bibliography (p. 6). In regards to librarianship specifically,
the division in question resulted in special collections privileging preservation over access and
general librarianship prioritizing access over preservation.
Another recent proponent of new bibliography and descriptive bibliographic method for
contemporary bibliographical scholarship is Terry Belanger. Over several decades now, Belanger
has rather supportively sought to close many of these internal gaps and rifts between
bibliography and antiquarianism, bibliography and the library, and, most importantly, between
bibliography and itself. Largely ambivalent to any lingering fears of antiquarianism and its

83

potential to degrade the study, Belanger has done more than most to keep the fundamentals of
new bibliography alive for future generations. His attitudes are relatively conventional when
compared with much of the contemporary research in print culture studies at the forefront of
bibliography’s academic development. In his chapter on “Descriptive Bibliography,” for
example, in Book Collecting: A Modern Guide, bibliography was simply defined as “the study of
books;” and “a bibliographer” as “one who studies them” (1977, p. 99). Contrary to his own
definition, he went on to note how the commonly used term of “bibliography” lacks precision
and cites this point as the reason for its separation into distinct bibliographical schools. His
version has seven divisions. Yet, with that admission as to overall vagueness of the terminology
he has been able to encapsulate the definition of what makes up descriptive bibliography in
stating, simply, that it is comprised of the “close physical description of books” (p. 99).
Additionally, it is interesting to note that historical bibliography has once again made its way
into the group of bibliographical schools. In this instance, however, it was included as a branch
of analytical bibliography, pointing to the author’s closer allegiance to the “orthodox” view (pp.
103-105).
In Belanger’s description of descriptive bibliography we find an explanation for the
method in a condensed summation. His explanation for collation in Book Collecting was
economized to seven pages (1977, pp. 107-113). Whereas in the Principles of Bibliographical
Description, Bowers describes techniques for dealing with a multitude of varying circumstances
in terms of the application of bibliographical research, Belanger gives only what is essential for
the basic comprehension of the idea in his explanation for collectors. Consequently, his
distillation of the fundamentals is, perhaps, broadly, the more teachable of the two. These
summaries, as indicated in the book’s title, provide book dealers, librarians, bibliophiles, and
84

other book collectors with the baseline knowledge necessary for their hobby, trade, or profession.
Beyond ambivalence, viewed in such terms, bibliography could once again embrace its
antiquarian heritage. In reality, even at its most academic, the study had always been employed
in the service of these various book-centered communities to some degree. Communication
among these seemingly autonomous groups has been, for generations, within the ordinary given
their intellectual proximity to each other and their shared desire to understand the various facets
of rare books and manuscripts more deeply. And by the early 1980s, in response to this shared
desire for knowledge Belanger helped to establish the Rare Book School model of
bibliographical instruction. It is a model that has since sought to provide an educational
environment wherein these book-centered communities can come together and learn from each
other (Rare Book School, 2015).
At the same time, another form of bibliographical instruction had taken hold within the
pedagogical infrastructure of the library as an institution (Branch & Dusenbury, 1993; Grassian
& Kaplowitz, 2009). This form of bibliographical instruction would first specialize in teaching
students and other library learners, primarily, the finer points of current citation standards in
addition to information as to how best to utilize the library’s catalog, databases, and other
reference resources. The advance of bibliographic instruction in the library, although distinct
from the bibliographical tradition endorsed by scholars such as Pollard, Greg, and Bowers, is not
so far removed as one might first assume. We must recall that enumerative bibliography, despite
having been largely ignored by practitioners of new bibliography, had, for the most part,
continued to develop within the information infrastructure of library cataloging. In this way it
had advanced, also, with the growth and proliferation of national bibliographies, subject
bibliographies, union/consortium/national library catalogs, and even auction catalogs (for
85

provenance research). The ascendancy of computer cataloging over card cataloging and the full
integration of the database system of information storage and retrieval—changes that had been
built upon the bibliographical cataloging infrastructures of past centuries and fashioned by the
radical innovations of figures such as Otlet and Dewy—allowed for greater access (Cmeil, 2010,
pp. 340-342). However, in order to maximize access and, also, efficiency in access, library users
needed to be taught this different form of bibliographical instruction to be able to navigate the
search functions of these new systems with a sufficient level of competency (Kent & Hall, 2002,
p. 192). In a way, as the role of librarian continued to abandon its position as the arbiter of
knowledge—that is, knowledge in the material form of book collections—we find that the study
of bibliography proper, in it still relatively contracted iteration, increasingly assumed the role of
a methodology and became less of an autonomous discipline as a result.
2. IV. Trajectory: The Postmodern Turn and Beyond
As we have seen now in the literature, the twentieth century witnessed the coalescence of
bibliography into an academic research method. As revealed in one of the most long-lived of its
debates, however, we also find that bibliography has yet to be recognized as a discipline. In that
regard, the history of the book, as a field of research, has been far more successful in achieving,
at least, a wider measure of interdisciplinary integration. Thus, advanced bibliography, even in
its current state, still constitutes a set of ideas that form the basis of a method intended to be
applied in the service of other academic and professional disciplines, especially literature,
history, and library studies.
McKenzie once reminded us that the methodology of Bowers was intermingled with the
episteme of new criticism (1986, p. 7). Accordingly, Bowers’s view of bibliography, which
86

portrayed it as a method for textual or artefactual authentication, necessarily had to assume the
existence of an author or creator of some sort. This assertion, which was left virtually
unconsidered throughout the first half of the twentieth century, began to be thoroughly
scrutinized during the second half. Roland Barthes’s (1977) essay “The Death of the Author,” in
probably the most visible critique against the concept of authorship to date, drew upon a range of
examples from Balzac to Proust to convey the idea of an authorial disembodiment from a text.
Barthes has asked us to consider whether or not one can really locate the author in a text and
separate it from all the interrelated, asomatic influences of temporality and geo-spatiality. Given
that the new bibliography of the early twentieth century focused much of its attention on trying
to sort authorship out of the attributive chaos that tends to characterize historical traces, it
follows that bibliography, as a study, should have encountered this conundrum prior to its
injection into the postmodernist discourse. As previously discussed, the problems of authorship,
whether not it exists and whether or not it is a useful concept to employ when describing the
process of textual generation are important considerations. And one’s propensity for
misattribution over time should be of special concern to paleographers and incunabulists wherein
clear-cut notions of a singular authorship are repeatedly proved to be inapplicable in complex
cases.
Whereas figures such as Barthes (d. 1980) and, later, Jacques Derrida (d. 2004),
questioned the very existence of authorship at the conceptual level, Foucault (d. 1984) probed the
processes involved with knowledge organization. In his book Les Mots et les Choses (1966,
transl. The Order of Things, 1970), Foucault dissects the subjectivities of these systems. Inspired
by Borges, Foucault’s The Order of Things concentrates on the knowledge organization systems
of the seventeenth and eighteenth century. In outlining the epistemological lineages, he
87

elucidated the fictions of objectivity and universality—ideals that these systems have historically
either erroneously claimed or tirelessly hunted. Further than that, Foucault attempted to analyze
what he calls the “pure experience” of ordering. He was interested in those processes of ordering
that have worked to shape our perception of the world. He sought to arrive at some sense of how
the “modalities of ordering” become operant across the “reflexive knowledges” of autopoietic
taxonomic regeneration (p. xxi). In addition to the agency of “codes” and “signs” in the
processes of ordering, close attention is also paid to the intricate interconnections between
knowledge, language, and text—their cultural variation as well as their shifts over time.
Taxonomy (i.e. taxonomia) is distinguished from the primary composites of the classical
episteme that in his interpretation includes, in addition to this, what he calls mathesis (e.g. simple
natures; as in, algebra), and genetic analysis, or the active, imaginative ordering agent (pp. 60-62,
68-72). Consider, for example, his conclusions on the reproductive nature of taxonomic
classification:
Taxonomia also implies a certain continuum of things (a non-discontinuity, a plentitude
of being) and a certain power of the imagination that renders apparent what is not, but
makes possible, by this very fact, the revelation of continuity. The possibility of a science
of empirical orders requires, therefore, an analysis of knowledge—an analysis that must
show how the hidden (as it were confused) continuity of being can be reconstituted by
means of the temporal connection provided by discontinuous representations. Hence the
necessity, constantly, manifested throughout the Classical age, of questioning the origin
of knowledge. (p. 72)

88

It is clear from the above selection that this analysis does not intend to present an inquiry into the
legitimacy of these systems. Instead, Foucault was attempting to understand how we have
historically constructed our intellectual environment through ordering to provide insights as to
the nature of the process itself.
For decades proponents of a “pure bibliography” were able to resist being swept up in the
postmodern tide. Aside from the relinquishment of control couched in the concept of intentional
fallacy, this rarefied form of bibliography was not eager to integrate postmodern thought into its
vocabulary (Wimsatt, 1954). Its intellectual latitude, consequently, for decades was likewise
voluntarily restricted to the conventional Western canon and devoted to a sense of nationalism in
terms of its overall reach. During this time, the sociological approach introduced by McKenzie
represented the most significant break away from bibliographical orthodoxy. His works assumed
a greater vitality in bibliographical discourse accordingly. It was Jerome McGann, however, who
really demonstrated the true potential for postmodern thinking in bibliography. In The Textual
Condition (1991), McGann explained how having unexpectedly fallen into the task of producing
a new edition of Byron and, as a novice, selecting The Giaour as his preparatory editorial
project, he began to understand the fashion in which he had adopted Greg-Bowers theory of
editing (then called “eclectic” editing) in the process of researching for the work (pp. 19-21). He
aptly concluded, then, that a “‘text’ is not a ‘material thing’ but a material event or set of events,
a point in time (or a moment in space) where certain communicative exchanges are being
practiced” (p. 21).
Slightly further into his analysis, McGann began to reflect upon the numerous sociohistorical issues involved with the selection of the source material for a scholarly edition. Using

89

Dante Gabriel Rossetti’s House of Life to illustrate the editorial complexities in question,
McGann explained how there are actually a number of options that an editor could explore when
producing a new edition of these sonnets (pp. 23-30). The primary challenge for producing the
edition, it appears, lies in the fact that there are at least four or five different editions which are
possible candidates for selection. To address this challenge, according to McGann, one option
would be to apply the eclectic theory of Greg-Bowers to the editing process in hopes of isolating
the most authoritative version of the work to use as a copy-text (p. 29). Much of the complexities
of the document’s history, however, with this method would be brushed aside in abstraction with
the identification of the ideal copy. A second option, then, would be to provide what McGann
called “diplomatic texts” for each edition and collate them in order to demarcate points of
difference among the variants (pp. 29-30). Such an approach, though, would both operose to
produce and almost inherently convoluted. Another option, an evolutionary approach would try
to draw upon the historical evidence to reconstruct a “genetic text” that represents the evolution
of the author’s process or intent during his lifetime, or a “continuous production text” that seeks
to encapsulate the historical evolution of the work during the life of the author (pp. 30-31). More
challenging than these other options, however, it seems, is the approach that seeks, more
comprehensively, to account for “set of relations,” or various sociohistorical dimensions that
factor into the dynamic interchanges of texts as “events” (pp. 31-32). For, as McGann
perceptively pointed out, in grappling with the act of producing an edition, “every part of the
productive process is meaning constructive” (p. 33). One of McGann’s more enduring
contributions to the field, then, lies in the manner in which he was able to situate the socially
constructed nature of the theory underlying conventional advanced bibliographic method. In

90

doing so, he has helped to transform the once prevailing search for literary truth to a mission,
instead, of literary contextualization.
At the beginning of the twenty-first century, we find a new camp of bibliographic study
premised upon the notions of the constructed nature of texts. We find a generation, likewise, that
both acknowledges and explores the complexities of transnational textual transmission. And a
study which had previously been apprehensive in concerning itself with such matters has finally
come to embrace nontraditional and critical perspectives. Some of the more recent developments
in literary history and, more specifically, in the history of printed texts have clearly followed
down the trail that was pioneered by McGann in the 1980s and ‘90s. Piper’s (2009) Dreaming in
Books, for instance, is a study that focused on the “process of how we became bookish at the turn
of the nineteenth century” (p. 3). In this study, Piper looked almost expressly at how the material
increase of books in the physical environment helped to shape the social construction of
bibliophilic psychologies in the context of what he has argued was a “romantic bibliographic
culture” (p. 7). A collection of essays called Modern Print Activism (Schreiber, 2013) has
identified a relatively nascent area of research within the larger umbrella of print culture studies
called “print activism” (pp. 5-7). In essence, the essays intended to explore the various ways in
which activist identities, particularly those that have concerned class, race, and gender, have
been informed by as well as facilitated through print media (p. 7). The essays advance
postmodern critiques in that they begin to shed more light on the influences of Western
hegemony inherent in much of the discursive relations of print culture. Fox’s (2013) “Give this
Copy of the Kourier Magazine to your Friend,” for example, investigated how the Ku Klux Klan
used print publications to propagandize their cause and legitimize their image in the eyes of the
wider Anglo-American public (pp. 106-122). Additionally, Robert Fraser is another important
91

voice in contemporary bibliographical research. Fraser has been instrumental in the foundation
of transnational and post-colonial book history. Recognizing the limitations of Eurocentrism in
conventional book history, both his Book History through Postcolonial Eyes (2008) along with a
collection of essays that he co-edited titled Books Without Borders (Fraser & Hammond, 2008)
have concertedly worked to examine, more fully, the transnational expansion of printing
practices in manufacturing, distribution, and reception into the comparatively ignored regions of
the “developing” world. The geographically distributed nature of his investigations has served to
reveal the major limitations of large national bibliographic projects and outline the difficulties
facing the ability of such projects to bolster a national identity.
The national bibliographic projects themselves—projects such as the National Union
Catalog (NUC), the British National Bibliography (BNB), Canadiana, the National Bibliography
of Canada, and the National Bibliography of Indian Literature (MBIL)—by this time, had
swelled to enormous proportions. Their propagation relied chiefly upon those technological
affordances brought about by systemic developments in both the print and the digital domains.
As the codification of a canon—that is, of cultural knowledge—is achieved in the consolidation
of a national literature, having that literature physically represented by bibliographical
documentation, then, is viewed as one of the hallmarks of a “civilized” nation-state. Enumerative
bibliography in this form has thrived in comparison with its advanced bibliographical offshoots,
but in order to maintain relevancy, it has had to utilize digital technologies to deal with issues of
scope and scalability. The cataloging systems that enumerative bibliography had initially helped
to develop played a reciprocal role in helping to the enumerative branch integrate with the newer
digital platforms. The large print runs of these massive national bibliographies have
correspondingly assumed a reduced level of importance during the migration process—
92

sometimes to the point of deaccession or non-inclusion in the collection development policies of
the smaller reference libraries.
Prior to High Amory (d. 2001), the term ethnobibliography had only been used
sporadically. In the limited cases where we do find the term being used, it was reserved for the
enumerative bibliographies that were explicitly devoted to the literatures of different ethnic
groups—bibliographies like the Ethnic Information Sources of the United States: Ethnic peoples:
Jamaicans-Yugoslavs. General information on ethnic peoples (Gale Research Company, 1983).
In this regard, Amory’s (1996) The Trout and the Milk: An Ethnobibliographical Talk was a
major advancement for the study into previously disregarded terrain. In terms of the discourse,
the move was unquestionably the most instrumental to this research used in this study. In
essence, Amory’s goal was to cut a middle path between new bibliography and the sociological
approach:
Ultimately, I propose to pursue what I have called “ethhnobibliography,” an attempt to
align my ideal with the “ethnohistory” of James Axell and others, to distance it slightly
from what McKenzie has called a “sociology of texts.” A “text,” particularly the mental
kind favored by French theorists, has no real location, crossing readily from one culture
to another, as when Roland Barthes “reads” the absence of street signs in Tokyo. Books,
on the other hand, are almost always individual or tribal objects, and they are far more
amenable to cultural or social definition. The few books that have achieved iconic status,
such as the First Folio, the Gutenberg Bible, and the Bay Psalm Book, are, of course,
another matter. Perhaps my profession is showing, but as a librarian I am conscious that
perhaps the majority of the books ever printed have rarely been read; libraries have much

93

in common with Grandmother’s Attic, and a good thing too, but this fact, which forbids
us to think of books as texts, in no way exhausts their cultural significance. (p. 51)
There is a great of deal of ideological maneuvering happening in this statement. An appreciation
of the fundamental understanding of a book’s materiality as being the chief differentiating factor
from its existence as a “text” has certainly been articulated. One even can infer that there is a not
so subtle rejection of McKenzie’s views implied by his definition. It cannot be discounted,
however, upon further explanation that, in seeking to also comprehend the cultural dimensions of
the bibliographic object, and in this case, from a historical vantage point, a tacit embrace of the
sociological approach was also present. Another instance of maneuvering in this selection can be
found in his reflexive admission of being a librarian. His use of ethnobibliography in the research
was essentially historical, but, as Amory was outlining the parameters of the method from the
dual perspectives of both a book historian and a library cataloger, there was also a quiet
realignment of bibliography with that of library studies in his work. His research, therefore, also
conveyed the often shrouded value of descriptive cataloging for historical investigations.
The revelation of the hidden benefit of descriptive cataloging (and, as it follows, of
descriptive bibliographical principles) that resides in the manner in which Amory had proceeded
to demonstrate ethnobibliography’s potential as a research method is an important starting point
for the method’s application in the study of race and culture. Actually, the ironic title of Amory’s
talk was not simply meant to be a play on the English translation of Levi-Strauss’s (1964) book
Le Cru et le Cuit (The Raw and the Cooked). Amory used the trout and milk trope to clarify his
vision for the method’s application. His “trout,” for the purposes of his study, is the cultural
history of the Pequot tribe—a tribe native to Connecticut. His “milk” is “the seventeenth century

94

culture represented by the object” (p. 51). In this instance, the (bibliographic) object happened to
be an iron salt pseudomorph of a medicine bundle that was found in the gravesite of a young
Pequot woman who died in the colonial period. Of interest to Amory was that this pseudomorph
medicine bundle contained a piece of fine cloth that was curiously paired with a fragment from a
late seventeenth century small-format Bible. Amory had set out, then, to look into the question of
exactly how such a fragment could have been found in an incontrovertibly pagan burial site.
Using descriptive bibliographical principles, Amory was able to unearth a number of details
concerning the possible origin of the fragment, and, with the help of others, he was able to
identify its extracted passage (pp. 58-60).15 With his historical analysis of Pequot culture, he was
further able to provide context for the kinds of relationships the tribe were likely to have
maintained with the object (pp. 61-65).
It is clear that Amory’s vision was groundbreaking in the way that it was able to expand
the potential application for bibliographic study; on the other hand, there are a couple of serious
gaps in Amory’s interpretation of ethnobibliography that I think should be noted here. The first,
more obvious point concerns the some of the historical evidence used by Amory to illustrate the
Pequot side of his argument. In his account of the Pequots’ likely reaction to print technology, it
appears that Amory had almost exclusively drawn upon the voices of primarily white observers
like Roger Williams and Gabriel Sagard to build his case. Largely absent are firsthand accounts
coming from the evidentiary vestiges of Pequot culture; and indigenous authorities are excluded
from his discussion (p. 52). The second oversight involving the intercultural materiality of the
book object, does recognize a tendency toward entanglement and cultural re-appropriation, but it
stops short of serious investigation in his own account which is largely unidirectional—the
15

More specifically, Psalm 98.

95

direction of colonial. What is forgotten is that the reciprocal relations of intercultural exchange
have had a mutual role in shaping the contours of the book both in this country and around the
world. In other words, the appropriation of languages, letterforms, and, even the elements of
book design has been a largely conversational process.
Viewed in this light, ethnobibliography, perhaps, has roots that predate the seventeenth
and eighteenth century projects of print globalization that coincided with the Age of Discovery.
For, in many cases, the cultures that colonists and explorers had well-established bibliographic
and literary cultures that were indigenous and which had developed upon independent lines. As
early as 1637, John Fell of the University of Oxford Press had already procured a complete set of
punches for an English Arabic, No. 11; and by 1693, the Press’s collection of types included a
Nissel and Petraeus’s Great Primer Ethiopic, No. 51 produced by the House of Elzevir (Morrison
& Carter, 1967, pp. 240-246). Lost to our history, however, is the names of those Ethiopian
scribes who had perfected the syllographic letterforms that formed the very basis of the typeface
in the first place. And so a better understanding of such intercultural manifestations of book
history compels us to achieve an even greater awareness of the cultural, intellectual, and
aesthetic influences of the non-Western communities.
Regrettably, the introduction to a “new” ethnobibliography as offered by Amory has been
limited to this single study. And, again, it is my contention that the ideas he has outlined in this
talk warrant further exploration. Ideally, even though Amory himself declared it to be “another
matter,” in addition to a range of other concerns, ethnobibliography could reasonably be
expanded and applied as a method in the examination of, say, the processes involved in a book’s
cultural ascendancy to an “iconic status.” Hence, having established the theoretical foundation

96

for the method, and having covered the grounds from whence it has emerged in the discourse, I
shall now proceed to a discussion on the method’s application in this study—that is, in my
attempt to employ it in addressing the question of the black literacy crisis and its relationship to
special collections research.

97

Chapter Three: Method
3. I. Methodological Framework
Up to this point I have sought to establish the following: first, that the larger discourses
on literacy and black literacy in particular have demonstrated that it is quite possible that our
fundamental conception of its state of crisis is one that is currently in need of serious
reconsideration; that, second, our notions concerning the black literacy crisis have routinely been
skewed by the privileging of normative models based on causality and exclusively positivistic
literacy research which have inadvertently served to perpetuate hegemonies in the systematic
production of knowledge; next, that prior research on the literacy question has repeatedly treated
physical books and libraries only as conduits of knowledge transmission in the expression of
literacy practices that, outside of their value in positively contributing to the processes of literacy
acquisition, possess little to no intellectual value for researchers in terms of their materiality; and,
lastly, that bibliography, which has also developed, for the most part, upon empirical lines, and
which has historically worked to bring the importance of bibliographic materiality to the
forefront in various disciplines, is, therefore, well suited to account for the discrepancies in the
literature by applying bibliographic analysis to our reconsideration of how the research library,
as an institution, both views and responds to the achievement gap in black literacy. Having
established the basis upon which a study of this nature can further advance the library and
information fields, it is important at this juncture to detail at length precisely how bibliographic
method, specifically, in the form of ethnobibliography can be applied to the question of black
literacy. It is likewise important to explain here how ethnobibliography in this study is employed
as a mix-methods approach.

98

There is a great deal of license afforded to ethnobibliography as a result of such a sizable
gap in the literature concerning the parameters of its application. With greater license, however,
comes a greater responsibility to be rigorous in establishing the applicatory procedures involved
with the collection and assessment of data. Let us recall, however, that there is only a single
precedent for ethnobibliographic method found in Amory (1996). My own use of
ethnobibliographic method is aligned with the inherent characteristics of Amory’s definition.
Nonetheless, it constitutes a major departure from his work. The key point of departure sharply
moves the method away from ethnohistory in the direction of a broader ethnography (pp. 51-52).
In attempting to address a topic of current import and human agency, ethnobibliographic method
for this study approaches ethnography in that it utilizes some of its data collection techniques;
but I stop shy of a direct implementation in terms of its larger framework because I view
ethnobibliographic method as being anchored in the book object and not in human behavior.
Moreover, unlike Amory, whose use of the method was strictly limited to the combination of
ethnothistory and bibliography, my application of ethnobibliographic method has been informed
by a slightly larger group of appropriately selected methodologies—chiefly those that are related
or even intrinsic to the method’s etymological foundations in ethnos (ἔθνος) meaning “people,”
biblos (βίβλος) meaning “book,” and grapho (γράφω) meaning “to write” or “record.” In this
study, bibliography as a core methodology approaches the ethnographic in its integration of the
multisite case study approach, the grounded theory method (GTM), and the database model of
knowledge construction.
As I will further explain at a later point, in terms of the overall design, my use of
etnobibliographic method resembles grounded theory method strictly in that manner in which the
granularity of the coding system was developed using data gathered during the initial phase of
99

my field research. This resemblance, however, in no way denotes a wholesale adoption of the
grounded theory method as it was first conceived and then acrimoniously split by sociologists
Anselm Strauss and Barney Glaser. It is, instead, more in keeping with the constructionist
grounded theory posited by Antony Bryant (2002). In his insightful and perceptive article “Regrounding Grounded Theory,” Bryant insisted that any potential application of grounded theory
method in information science must not be haphazard or ambiguous about the manner in which it
is adopted. He reminds us that the foundation for grounded theory, being rooted in the
objectification of data, is really a positivistic one that is vulnerable to the misguidedness of
scientism (p. 26). He proposed that, in order to combat this vulnerability, researchers should
recognize that the very act of deriving a theory through developing a systematic coding schema
to be used in the analysis of “raw data” is also an act that involves a constructing of meaning (pp.
34-37). In other words, as much as the grounded theory method has sought to bring the
epistemological legitimacy of scientific rigor to qualitative research through claims of objectivity
and objective measure, ties to the subjective remain. The data and the processes involved with its
collection are likewise inextricably meshed with the biases of the researchers who design the
study (p. 32). A vigilant awareness of these of these biases and limitations through a sustained
reflexive analysis, however, again, situates the integration of the GTM in a constructionist modus
operandi. The integration of the database model, then, uses this “grounded” database as a tool of
recording empirical evidence used in analysis. The data, the empirical evidence, was obtained
directly from four case studies where I engaged in onsite field research over a period of several
months.
My use of ethnobibliography can be said to be in closest alignment with the precedent set
by Amory (1996) in that we both have approached the method with bibliography as the defining
100

element. What is offered here in regards to past definitions of the term is not enumerative in
either scope or design, but it does attempt to be exhaustive in terms of the depth and granularity
of the bibliographic description which provides an evidentiary basis for investigational analysis.
Again, it is simply the case that the bibliographic data, viewed in concert with the ethnographic,
will be applied toward analysis of the bibliocultural dimensions of the book and not toward
matters of identification or textual or artefactual authentication. On the surface, this use of
bibliography may appear to be radically outside of the tradition, and there is some truth to that
statement. However, my use of bibliography, despite its somewhat radical implications, is
categorically aligned with earlier missions outlined by past bibliographers that entail a
demonstration of the potential value of bibliography for humanities research and beyond. And in
this study the method also offers an expansion of bibliography’s potential application into
literacy theory. This application as a practical option for looking into the literacy question has
been, up until this time, relatively overlooked (surprisingly so given the patently material nature
of the book in connection to the performance of reading).
3. II. 1. Method Design: Multisite Case Study
The subject of this study is undoubtedly one of vast complexity. Investigating any issue
from a systems perspective necessarily presents us with the problem of complexity. The
ungraspable complexity of systems, in my assessment, has been among the main reasons why
many of the new bibliographers and their successors have typically resisted notions of “non-book
texts” and post-colonial books as being in their purview. Strictly speaking, prior attempts to
relegate the more marginalized bibliocultural manifestations of the book to being outside of the
accepted scope of the conventional bibliographic purview are likely to have coalesced, at least in

101

part, around fears of a taxonomic “slippery slope.” If one is to include printed plays in the study
of bibliography, then why not screenplays; if published collections of musical reviews count as
legitimate bibliographic objects of study, then why not the booklets found in compact disc cases
and vinyl records with liner notes; if illuminated manuscripts count, then why not palm leaf
manuscripts from South East Asia, and if so, then why not Incan Quipu?
Similarly, there is always the apprehension surrounding the apparent boundlessness of a
system. The systems from which books emerge as well as the systems within which they
circulate fall squarely into this characterization. Looking at the book as a physical object from
the systems perspective involves, for example, the admission that there is an extensive network
of writers, agents, editors, publishers, printers, (and now) coders and IT specialist, marketers,
shippers, retailers, readers, and more that are each uniquely part of a book’s manifestation,
manufacture, dissemination, etc. Within still deeper levels of granularity there are timber
companies, chemical companies, paper manufactures, data centers, cloud servers, machinists,
printers, typographers and digital typographers, graphic designers, and so on, seemingly ad
infinitum.
Studying discrete phenomena as stand-alone objects, on the other hand, is graspable. A
well-defined book consisting within an equally well-defined framework of analysis such as the
standard template for bibliographic description carries the advantage of also having well-defined
parameters insofar as limits are concerned. Yet, in a somewhat roundabout fashion, the
limitations themselves can lead to abstractions which can be detrimentally exclusionary. To
navigate this tension between the exclusivity of object-oriented abstraction and the difficulty
with grappling with systems-based complexity, I have employed a database model of data

102

collection in a series of case studies. The case study is methodologically suited to contextualize
the complexity of a phenomenon in question (Stake, 2010). Multisite case study analysis can do
the same for a connective theme shared by each individual case involved with some overarching
question or concern (Stake, 2006). I have selected four such case studies to illustrate in
increasing detail, the primary facets of the system in which I have situated books and black
literacy for this study—namely, in the administrative cycle of knowledge production.
My selection process, then, was one that resulted in a nonrandom, highly specific group
of sites. The pool of possible research sites was limited by the relatively small number of
institutions fitting the criteria of a potentially suitable sample. In consequence of such an indepth granularity in terms of the data collection, a small sample was needed, also, to cope with
the scale and time constraints of the project. The study, however, with all of the individual case
studies combined, is still a longitudinal one. Approximately four months in the year of 2014
were devoted to field research—accounting for arrangements, travel, etc.—with the basic idea
being that one month total would be allotted to each site. However, the actual time spent onsite
varied widely in some cases, and it was always dependent upon the particular conditions of
access to the facilities and collections afforded by each individual institution. Of this four
months, then, a total of thirty-nine days was spent actually onsite in the process of data
collection. Out of these days, a range of four to six hours was typically spent at the actual
location. Research collections were generally open during weekdays and during the day time, so
the majority of my time spent onsite coincided with the morning to afternoon hours. The
following four collections were selected for their reputation as leading institutions in their
respective areas, their importance in terms of collection depth, range, comprehensiveness, and
rarity, and, also, their geographic region:
103

Site One [S.I] – The William Andrews Clark Memorial Library. Otherwise known as The
Clark Library, this institution was chosen to stand in for the conventional model of a
Western, Eurocentric research collection. It was selected to serve as this model because
of its historical ties to the luxury class, its neoclassicism, and, most importantly, because
of its comparatively strong collection of fine press printing. Selected works from this
collection in particular will be used in this study to illustrate the Western model of the
ideal book. It stands to reason, then, that this site is also meant to serve as the primary
point of comparison with the others. In addition to its robust collection of fine printing,
the Clark Library—which was initially assembled in the early twentieth century by
copper heir William Andrews Clark Jr. (d. 1934)—also has a world renowned collection
of books and materials either by or relating to Oscar Wilde. And many surely have
praised their sizable collections of Shakespearean works and seventeenth and eighteenth
century books. The Clark Library is a quasi-autonomous organization in that, once
private, is now run completely by the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
library system in conjunction with the university’s Center for 17th and 18th Century
Studies. Despite its current relationship with UCLA, however, consequence of its
particular history as a private collection, the facilities are not actually located on the
university campus grounds. The library is located, instead, in the West Adams
neighborhood of Los Angeles. I was able to spend roughly ten days at this site while
residing at my home residence in Leimert Park for the duration of my scheduled January
time allotment.
Site Two [S.II] - The Amistad Research Center. This site was selected as an example of a
major African American research collection based in the Southern United States and
104

having some of its historical roots also in that region. It can be called a semi-autonomous
organization in that it has had, for some time now, a negotiated arrangement with Tulane
University for the use of the campus space for its storage and processing facilities as well
its offices and its reading room. The Amistad was originally founded in 1966 in the Race
Relations Department of the United Church Boards of Homeland Ministries (UCBHM) at
Fisk University in Nashville, Tennessee as a repository for the records of the American
Missionary Association (Amistad Research Center & Johnson, 2005).16 Since 1969,
however, it has been recognized as an independent non-profit organization. By 1970, the
center had relocated to Dillard University in Louisiana, eventually ending up at Tulane
University in 1987 (Amistad Research Center & Johnson, 2005). In terms of chronology,
their collections cover from around the period of Reconstruction to the present day
(Amistad Research Center & Johnson, 2005). Their collection strengths include rare
Africana, African American fine art, materials on the Civil Rights Movement, the African
Diaspora, and independent press publications of the Black Arts Movement. The Amistad
is physically located in Uptown New Orleans on the Tulane University campus grounds
on St. Charles Ave. I was able to spend a total of twelve days onsite doing field research
at this facility; and I stayed in New Orleans with a colleague in the Upper Ninth Ward for
about twenty days of the February time allotment.
Site Three [S.III] - The Mayme A. Clayton Library & Museum. The Clayton Library was
included in the study primarily because of its reputation as being the largest collection of
African American books and other research materials in the Western United States; but it
was also selected as a result of its geographic proximity to Site One. Formed in the early
16

SII-Doc8

105

1960s by librarian and bookseller Mayme A. Clayton (d. 2006), this library and museum
is a completely independent non-profit organization which operates almost entirely
autonomously out of a former courthouse building in Culver City, California. The
collection specializes in African Americana, historical black films, and works from the
black press including a wide variety of ephemera such as posters and pamphlets.17 Due to
the limited hours of public access, however, a total of only six days were spent onsite
during the whole duration of the March allotment. As Culver City was only a relatively
small distance away from my home residence, I was able to stay at home in Leimert Park
during the time that I was conducting this research.
Site Four [S.IV] - The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. In the matter of
ensuring that a model for a contemporary African American research collection that
would be comparable to the Clark Library in terms of its reputation and standing also
finds adequate representation in this study, having the Schomburg Center in the group of
the four case studies was absolutely essential to the overall aims of the research. Given its
paramount status and reputation in the black community, its exclusion, frankly, was not
an option.
Bibliophile, collector, and local historian Arturo (Arthur) Schomburg put together
the collection in the early part of the twentieth century, and it still has the distinction of
being the largest individually assembled collection of African American books and
manuscripts in the country. After a near meteoric buildup of African American research
materials tended to with years of independent scholarship and erudition, Schomburg’s
collection was officially acquired by the New York Public Library (NYPL) in 1926.
17

SII-D1: HIST

106

Since the time when he relinquished personal ownership of his collection over to the
public, the collection has grown to encompass an impressive array of photographs,
artworks, and archival materials on a range of subjects vital to the African American
community. There are over 10,000,000 items of rare, historical, or intellectual
significance available to researchers and learners onsite. The collection’s main historical
strengths are in black studies, the African Diaspora, Africans in the Americas and the
Caribbean, Haitian history, and, most notably, Harlem history and the Harlem
Renaissance. The collection, fittingly, is located on Malcolm X Boulevard in Harlem,
New York. In the overall duration of the April allotment, in the spring of 2014, I was able
to spend a total of eleven days doing onsite data collection out of the eighteen days that I
stayed, unaccompanied, in an apartment in Harlem across the street from Jackie Robinson
Park off of 145th St.
These four sites will not be discussed in chronological succession. The research, instead, will be
presented in a manner in which each chapter is specifically devoted to a set of primary
categories. The categories, then, form the boundaries and the structure of a systems-based
analysis in which the information collected from the case studies ultimately becomes the
evidentiary basis for a reinterpretation of our past assumptions concerning the black literacy
question (i.e. construction of meaning).
3. II. 1. Method Design: The Ethnobibliographic Database and its Quantitative Data
Although this study is ultimately qualitative in terms of the primary manner in which the
data is analyzed, some of the data included within the framework of the database is unavoidably
quantitative. The quantitative data can be divided into two primary groups, the ethnographic and
107

the bibliographic. The ethnographic group includes data that corresponds to those patently
discernible characteristics of individuals populating the site which are decidedly quantifiable.
This form of data includes measures of the apparent race, sex, and estimated age group of library
patrons (i.e. users, learners, and researchers) for each day of each case study. It also includes
numeric totals for the equipment used for research, the vernacular inflection of researchers, and
their specific type of apparel and attire. These measures allow for a basic level of comparative
demographic analysis among the different case studies. The second group of data, the
bibliographic group, includes measures for some of the physical characteristics of a bibliographic
object which are also quantifiable. This mainly refers to the overall size of the object, its type, its
text, and page amount. The measures of typography and design can also be analyzed across the
different studies.
The sample size of noted populations is relative to the number of patron visits and limited
to the spatial accommodations provided by each facility.18 The stratification of the samples—that
is, the divisions among race, gender, age, etc.—is in approximate alignment with the population
pool. The population pool is, by design, a random one. It is random in the sense that there was
always the potential for a different set of collection users, learners, and researchers in each day of
my documented field research, even if the same group of individuals at any one of the four
research sites would return daily (Aron, 2014). It was necessary for me to refrain from
interrupting the daily randomness of the population pool in order to portray a more accurate
reflection of the day-to-day research environment.
The research presented here in no way implies that the presence of black press
publications in a library alone can account for an apparent rise or decline in literacy rates.
18

A noted total population of 630 library patrons stratified among four different libraries over thirty-nine days.

108

Similarly, I do not attempt to advance any hypotheses of a bibliometric nature. One such
hypothesis, for instance, might pose the question as to whether a higher number of black
authored works or black publications in a particular collection would have a direct or causal
effect on the literacy rates of a non-random sampled population. I am deliberately avoiding this
type of investigation. Moreover, I do not attempt to show that any of the quantifiable
characteristics of the physical research space are the direct cause for any fluctuations in literacy
rates. This study does not test for or record literacy rates at all in fact. This point might seem
somewhat unusual given that the question of literacy underlies much of the research. The main
goal here, however, again, is to work toward the reconsideration of the issue, not a
redetermination of it. Accordingly, I make no attempt to search for any causal relationships or,
even, direct or indirect correlations between these physical characteristics and the behavioral
phenomena. Therefore, no bi-variate or multi-variate analysis of the statistical data will be
included during the course of this study (Aron, 2014).
3. II. 2. Method Design: The Ethnobibliographic Database and its Qualitative Data
The bulk of the analysis in this study will come from the database’s store of qualitative
data. In concert with the quantitative, qualitative data used here is divided into the same two
branches of the ethnographic and the bibliographic with the bibliographic apportioning the
greater share. The ethnographic qualitative data includes notes and observations concerning
conditions of access, daily operations, community programs and outreach efforts, and the more
performative expressions of research and literacy practices. The bibliographic qualitative data is
comprised mostly of textual bibliographic description; in other words, those accumulated
recorded observations of bibliographic objects which are primarily alphabetic as opposed to

109

being numeric in their makeup. In addition to recorded information on the physical qualities of
the individual books in question, this data set also includes historical information pertaining to
the item and, often, relating to its collection and its previous owners. Combined, these two
groups of qualitative data form the primary evidentiary basis for both discerning and
understanding the bibliocultural link which ties ethnic and racial identity and literacy practice to
bibliographic materiality.
It must be stressed that the bibliographic qualitative data group is the group that is most
integral to the larger framework of the study. Essentially it is books, not the human beings or
their behavior, which are the core subjects of the research Again, this fact might be the cause for
some concern considering that this study aims to address perceptions surrounding the very
human activities of reading and writing. This concern can only be exacerbated by the fact that
this study will, in due course, attempt at a reassessment of the current institutional response to
black literacy—a response which, in the past, has played out in the form of outreach programs
and policy development. In both of these cases, however, upon further investigation one can see
that even in addressing the issue of a black literacy gap and reassessing programs and policies
intended to ameliorate the problem, what I am really concerned with here is: 1) the perception
surrounding an activity (i.e. ideas) and 2) the institutional-level response (e.g. policies, programs,
etc.).
The books and their respective research environments are the actual conduits of the
exploration. Those persons who physically inhabit these research environments—although not
completely invisible in the observation schema—are certainly never treated as the subjects.
Therefore, the kind of information found in the qualitative ethnographic data group—which, as a

110

corollary of bibliography’s centrality to the method, is perpetually tethered to the anchoring
bibliographic in a derivative fashion—is strictly limited to general observations which document
bibliographic object-oriented activities and, in dealing with these objects as the raw material of
primary source research, those transactions, operations, and other communicative exchanges
involving the public’s engagement with facility policies and its modes of knowledge
organization.
Although it is true that a substantial portion of the qualitative data used here is
ethnographic in nature, the study in no way constitutes ethnography. The main reason behind this
constraint is that ethnobibliographic method’s ultimately bibliographic orientation categorically
dictates the exclusion of any direct behavioral analysis upon a population in the research. It does,
however, allow for the examination of behavioral phenomena using secondary sources to provide
more context to the discussions of the various issues in question. In that way it also ensures that
any preempted individual interactions between the researcher and the populations are likewise
excluded from documentation and data analysis. In keeping with that principle, the research
generally excludes any direct documentation or analysis of any individual behavioral
characteristics, sentiments, attitudes, or emotional responses exhibited by patrons during the field
research or any activities in general outside of public interactions with the research space itself or
its staff. Interaction with private persons, entities, or private spaces, including observation, was
completely outside of the boundaries of the method for the purposes of this study. Most
importantly, I should add that this study does not attempt at any psychological investigation, and
it does not, at any point, entertain any temporary or conditional behavioral manipulation of
human subjects. The observation of a formally arranged or predetermined sample population or
group was likewise abandoned here.
111

As I have previously discussed at length, a number of other studies have already engaged
in literacy testing, behavioral analysis, and ethnography in their attempts to both explain and
address the black literacy gap (Kumasi, 2008; Ladson-Billings, 1992; Matthews et al., 2010).
And it is clear that this growing body of research has produced a number of noteworthy results
which have since served to inform the response in the library and information fields in
constructive ways. The research presented here, however, attempts to address a serious gap in the
literature concerning alternative means of addressing the issue by paying closer attention to the
role that bibliographic materiality plays in shaping our understanding of it. For that reason, I did
not find it necessary to conduct surveys or any prearranged interviews of select persons or
groups of individuals. And although I deemed it appropriate to include photographic
documentation of research sites, there was never any reason for me to photograph any individual
library patrons or staff during the course of the field research. Lastly, with respect to privacy
concerns, no personal identifying information (names, phone numbers, home addresses, email
addresses, etc.) of any individual was ever directly ascertained for the purposes of this study, and
this type of information was never gathered or included as part of the data.
3. II. 3. Method Design: The Database Model for Ethnobibliographic Method
As I have previously indicated throughout this chapter, in this study data collected from
the research sites has been arranged in accordance with the coded schema of an
ethnobibliographic database. Employing the database model in ethnobiblipgraphic method might
appear to some as being in contradiction with my effort to avoid falling into past theories of
causality concerning the issue of an achievement gap in black literacy. One could reasonably
argue that there are elements of the database that have derived from the taxonomic systems

112

which are emblematic of a modernist rationale. One could point out, for instance, that, similar to
grounded method, the database model has been rooted in positivism; and having been dependent
upon empirical justification in terms of its epistemology, it has likewise been susceptible to an
uncritical scientism. The fundamental concept of the database itself, however, is adaptive,
fungible, and non-deterministic with respect to ideology. There isn’t anything inherent to the
basic matrix structure of a database that would prevent it from being arranged either
hierarchically in the service of a normative “tree-root” model of organization or in a
“rhizomtaic” manner typified by a faceted, networked form of organization. The actual
organizing force underlying the database exists in the mutually supporting rationale for its
implementation. Viewed critically and in the lens of narrative consumption, therefore, the
database becomes its own model of analysis (Azuma, 2009).
In Hiroki Azuma’s (2009) book Otaku: Japan’s Database Animals we find a serviceable
conceptualization of a database model of narrative consumption. In this book, Azuma referred to
Lyotard’s theory of the decline of the grand narrative as a heralding of postmodernity (p. 28).
The grand narrative, in this view, makes up the canonically-circumscribed guiding force of social
cohesion which connects the cultural productions of one’s own time with that of the social mores
and symbolisms of the past (p. 28). According to this articulation of postmodern thought, the
rupture with the grand narrative became a catalyst for postmodern critiques across a range of
academic branches of study. The very concept of the grand narrative—being consummate with
the tree-root model and having its preceding corpus of great works and their derivatives tied to
its perpetuation in contemporary society—faced a challenge with the introduction of the
rhizomatic model, with its restructuring that emphasized smaller narratives connected at the
surface level in a network which only collectively amounts to a whole (pp. 30-31). The advance
113

of systems theory in a number of fields has worked to vindicate a larger wave of postmodern
paradigmatic shifting which experienced its zenith during the 1990s, and which has since
retracted. Azuma, who viewed the narrative structure as double-layered, has extended the
argument in his assertion that, even more than the rhizomatic, a database model is one that can
more closely embody the conceptual restructuring afforded by postmodern narrative
consumption in that:
…with the double-layer structure, the agency that determines the appearance that
emerges on the surface outer layer resides on the surface itself rather than the deep inner
layer, i.e. it belongs on the side of the user who is doing the “reading up,” rather than
with hidden information itself. In the world of the modern tree model, the surface outer
layer is determined by the deep inner layer, but in the world of the postmodern database
model, the surface outer layer is not determined by the deep inner layer; the surface
reveals different expressions at those numerous moments of “reading up.” (p. 32)
However, it is my contention that the rhizomatic model—in which, according to Azuma, the
basis for narrative consumption is set within a system made up of “signs” that are linked “in
diverse patterns over the outer layer alone”—is not inherently incommensurate with his
expansion of the structuring in the form of the database. One need only consider the possibility
that connectivity between the smaller narratives on the surface layer of the network effectively
functions as an inner layer that is virtually identical, in the conceptual sense, to the one proposed
by Azuma in his double layer, database structure (p. 31).
The idea of the grand narrative is by no means limited to the societal internalization of
fictive works or the visual arts. There have been grand narratives, in fact, that have ran
114

throughout many of the intellectual developments in both literacy theory and the study of
bibliography. A common grand narrative, for example, which has guided much of the research
into the question of the black literacy gap, tells us that black youth, and young black men in
particular, are in state of crisis, and that their literacy skills are correspondingly imperiled by this
state. A grand narrative which underlies much of the rationale behind descriptive, analytical, and
textual bibliography is that there is a formal object in space which is understood to be a “book,”
that books, as recorded objects, are the physical manifestations of texts, and that these texts have
a source in their creator and earliest point of materialization (i.e. the copy text), and that the
collective corpus of a core text and its derivatives in the form of books can also be traced and
recorded.
Being that the research in the study takes a systems approach that is more reflective of
the rhizomatic model as opposed to the tree model, and given that the data is organized in the
structure of the database, deciphering and adhering to the grand narratives which have typically
driven past inquires and methodologies concerning the issue will be left behind in place of a
“reading up” of smaller narratives from the data points covered by the individual categories.
Smaller narratives such as the one which suggests a link between bibliographic materiality and
the expression of ethnic identity are the more graspable narratives concerning the complex
systems in which “books” and “literacy” are at play. These smaller narratives point to insights
that are situated within their individual nodes in a network of informational nodes. These
narratives can also provide a lens into learning how traces of the bibliocultural link are
operational within a particular time and place and a particular community. In this way, the search
for a universal truth is supplanted by a network-based analysis and the interpretation of data is
redirected through the construction of meaning.
115

The overall design and structure of the database is intended compartmentalize the
intricacies of a complex system into manageable units that function as discrete data points within
the larger system. Even in conceding to the notion that the database, at least as a model for
narrative consumption, has seen little application in bibliography aside from the basic idea of
compartmentalization, the fundamental rubric for analysis set by Amory’s precedent remains
intact. This claim is most evident in the fact that both of our applications of this method have
employed descriptive bibliography in pursuit of a better understanding of an ethnic group. His
attempt to forge a middle path between the more positivistic descriptive and analytical traditions
in bibliography and postmodern critical thought is also maintained throughout the research.
Accordingly, as elements of grounded theory method have been partially adopted in my own use
of ethnobibliography, this limited incorporation of GTM is decidedly constructionist in terms of
its transparency and its reflexivity (Bryant, 2002). Similarly, a serious effort has been made here
to contextualize the database and deconstruct its implementation as a model for informational
organization.
In this study, the category is the main unit of the database; it is effectively the primary
source data point from which postulations are explored. Categories, then, makeup the various
fields in the database. The categorical codes used in the database were developed onsite during
the first week of research.19 Though the granularity of the categories in the database was roughly
determined within the first week, the subsequent distribution of raw data recorded in my field
notes occurred both during the course of the onsite research (as was necessarily the case for the
stratification of the quantitative demographic data ) and, especially for the more qualitative and

19

*GTM, noted here as “day 0” and is not represented in the database.

116

less purely descriptive data, after the conclusion of the onsite field research and during the initial
phases of data transcription and analysis.
3. II. 4. Method Design: A “Grounded” Coding Schema
The individual categories, although considered to be discrete data points, are not
standalone units. Notwithstanding their mimetic status as units in a system, there is a substantial
degree of interconnectedness to the categories in terms of the domains which they each stand to
represent. The particular structure of this database is as organic as it is fungible. The project is
not an attempt to standardize ethnobibliographic method into a single descriptive template or
analytic agenda. Depending upon the specific goals of one’s research, a grounded database
model, once adopted in the framework of an ethnobibliographic methodology, can produce
categories that are suitable to a variety of different systems or environmental settings. For my
own analysis of the bibliocultural link and its agency within the larger system of an
administrative cycle of knowledge production and the smaller node of special collections
research, the distinct set of categories are divided into primary categories [PCAT], secondary
categories [SCAT], subcategories [BCAT], and micro-categories [MCAT]. More specifically,
the completed database ultimately contains sixty-nine categories divided into six PCATs, twelve
SCATs, thirty-one BCATs, and twenty MCATs. Spread across the thirty-nine days, then, the
database consists of a total 2,691 individual data points.20
The case studies are comparative; therefore each day of onsite research within each
category group was assigned a degree of difference during the analysis phase. The range was
from zero to five degrees. A zero indicated a direct import that had no discernible difference in

20

An expected amount of informational redundancy is part repetitiveness of daily operations in onsite research.

117

structure when compared to the Western convention. The fifth degree was assigned to those
facets of a research site or bibliographic sample that conveyed a marked innovation or a clear
difference from the convention. The assignment of the greatest degree of difference constituted
the recognition of a new or completely distinctive practice based in alternative (e.g.
epistemological or pedagogical) models which have emerged from the cultural difference.
The primary categories of the database form its surface layer. They provide the basic
organizational structure of the research and, as grouped pairs, they frame the subsequent layout
for chapter division. The six primary categories are as follows: access [ACC], encounter [ENC],
representation [REP], organization [ORG], collections [COLL], and performativity [PRFM]. I
shall provide a basic summary of each primary category and briefly note each succeeding one
with respect to its various degrees of granularity.
Access, the focus of Site Four, is seen as the category which marks the entry point
between items (e.g. artifacts, surrogates, facsimiles, etc.) in research collections and the
population of library collection users, learners, and researchers that collectively makeup the
primary activities of that research environment (Figure 2). Secondary categories for access
include: environment [ENV], which refers to the socio-political, economic, climatological,
intercultural, and other perceptible conditions of the research environment and its surrounding
communities; facilities [FAC], or the architectural and aesthetic qualities of the research space;
policies [POL] being, specifically, those policies which govern access to collections and use of
the space, and not necessarily those of internal policies pertaining to records management,
human resources, or collection development; and, lastly, demographics [DEM], corresponding to
the particular, approximated demographic makeup of a research space on a given day and time.

118

Subcategories for access include, beginning within environment: interior design [INT], a
category that accounts for the physical design, decoration, and physical arrangement of the
research space and includes information on its permanently and temporally exhibited collections;
and within policies, those which are of a restrictive [RST] nature (e.g. limits on cell phone use,
prohibited materials in the reading room, etc.); promotional [PROMO], or those which invite or
encourage greater access to collections; and preservationist [PRSV] policies, which may also be
restrictive, but which have been explicitly intended for the protection of a collection’s artifacts
from theft and physical degradation. Within demographics, population characteristics are further
divided in the largely generic categories of white [W], black [B], nonwhite [NW], Asian [A],
Latino [L], Native Indian/Pacific Islander [N/I].
Inextricably tied to the preceding racial and ethnic demographic categories, microcategories for access include those which cover the approximate sex and age groups of the
population. I have separated these categories out, again, into the largely generic classifications of
male [M], female [F] for sex and young adult [YA], adult [A], middle aged [MA] and senior
[SC] for the micro-categories of age.21

21

The young adult group is approximately 17 to 25 years old; the adult, approximately to 25 35 years old; middle
aged ranges from approximately 35 to 65 years old; the senior group, from approximately 65 years of age and older.

119

PCAT

SCAT

ACC

ENV

BCAT

FAC

INT

POL

RST

MCAT

PROMO
PRSV
DEM

W

M

B

F

NW

YA

A

A

L

MA

NI

SC

Figure 2. The Four Levels of Access
Encounter, also the focus of Site Four, is meant to cover any directed institutional
engagement with the local community initiated by the institution itself in an effort to connect
with its greater population of library patrons and potentially expand its base (Figure 3).
Secondary categories for encounter include: outreach [OUT], relating to those efforts made on
the behalf of the institution to promote its actual physical space and its collections by reaching
out to its population and/or its surrounding community (e.g. advertisements, programs, mailing
120

lists, newsletters, etc.); and events [EVT], meaning those free and ticketed events open to the
public including the public exhibition of collections. Subcategories for encounter include, as part
of events: entertainment [ENT], events purely meant for leisure and enjoyment; community
[COMM], events organized either by or specifically for the local community; promotional
[PROMO], events intended to promote collections, programs, and the space; and, finally,
educational [EDU], those events which are primarily used as teaching opportunities. Each of
these subcategories pertains to the overarching character of the event; but, again, the categories
can overlap, and in this group, they tend to overlap to a substantial degree. There are no
designated micro-categories for the encounter category.
PCAT

ENC

SCAT

BCAT

MCAT

OUT
EVT

ENT
COMM
EDU
PROMO

Figure 3. The Three Levels of Encounter
Representation is unique among the other primary categories because, in addition to
being highlighted in Site Three, it is the only category group in which each of its levels applies to
all of other the case studies more broadly. On the surface layer, the category locates samples
from within a specific collection in a specific research site. Next, the category is further divided
into a group of smaller categories in increasingly granular levels. These increasingly granular
121

levels refer to the description and analysis of the bibliographic sample, the material object of
study (Figure 4). Secondary categories for representation include: Bibliography [BIB], which, as
it is employed in this study, refers only to descriptive bibliography, historical bibliography, or
publication history. Neither textual bibliography nor analytical bibliography will be applied in
the methodology of ethnobibliography as it has been framed in this study. The analytic principle
still stands, but a teleological position wherein an analysis is applied toward the determination of
textual authenticity has been abandoned as a result of its irrelevance to the larger goals of the
research.
The descriptive method stands out as a method of primary importance. The material
traces of the bibliographic object recorded in exhaustive detail and viewed in relation to a system
are expected to serve as primary empirical evidence which can further point to new insights
concerning the literacy question. Nevertheless, regardless of the empiricism that underlies the
descriptive tradition both the core unit, the bibliographic entry, and the main product, the
bibliography, are essentially abstractions. To explain my assertion better, let me employ what I
would like to term the “music box analogy.” Basically, a descriptive bibliographic entry to its
referent (i.e. the book that it is meant to represent) is like that of a music box to its original song.
The original has the potential for wide variety of sonic textures that are often stipulated in its
notation and articulated in its performance. The music box, however, can only approximate that
potential manifestation. It can provide a simple approximation with just eighteen or thirty notes,
or it can offer a rich one of seventy-two or more. Yet, no matter how close the approximation, it
forever remains a stripped-down representation of the original. Still, the process of abstraction
itself brings visibility to otherwise undetected components of a text—components intrinsic to its
materiality.
122

Bibliographic samples used in this study for my analysis include, first, an assortment of
fine press books representing the Western ideal for a printed book and, second, a range of black
press books ranging chronologically from the late nineteenth and early twentieth century up to
the present, but primarily from the latter half of that time frame (Appendix B). For Site One, in
accordance with the humanistic tradition, I relied upon my prior knowledge of the Clark
Library’s collection of fine printing to determine my sample pool. My search list for
bibliographic samples in the three sites which specialize in African American collections,
however, was put together using the research of Donald F. Joyce as a guide for selection. Joyce’s
(1983) Gatekeepers of Black Culture is among the most comprehensive studies in black press
publication history to date. In this book, Joyce surveyed the greater part of historical and modern
black-owned book publishers, effectively documenting and outlining the history of the black
press from the early nineteenth to the early twentieth century. His Black Book Publishers in the
United States (1991) serves both as expansion to his earlier survey and a supplementary
reference tool for identifying the various publishers and presses. These sources provided a more
than satisfactory range from which to attempt to draw samples and materials for further
description and analysis. In the majority of instances, once a sample was first identified and then
searched for, requested, and, finally, retrieved, it underwent a repeated process of bibliographic
description. The deeper levels of categorical granularity here directly correspond to the
granularity of the bibliographic description.
Subcategories for representation include: in bibliography, title [TL] which is the title of
the sampled work. The title category provides space for a formal title transcription. Traditionally,
this descriptive technique of conveying a book’s title in words as it appears on a page was
employed in the service of the proper identification of particular editions and the ability to
123

distinguish their varying issues, printings, states, etc. Here, however, precise transcription is
intended to illuminate any major differences or subtle continuities in ethnic forms of
bibliographic expression that may operate within standardized rules for title page templates.
Generally, these templates rely upon functionality as the primary justification for their
worldwide adoption; despite their apparent functionality, however, such templates could still
benefit from comparative investigation. Next, publication [PUB] covers any metadata containing
information about the date, location, and the contributors the composition, production,
manufacture, and dissemination of the work. The binding [BND] category is designated for any
materially manufactured bibliographic component intended to gather and preserve the physical
integrity or organization of the work. This externalizing stratum can be as simple as staple, an
adhesive, or a string and as complex as a blind-tooled Moroccan leather binding with raised
bands. In this study, all forms of bindings, or lack thereof, are deemed noteworthy. After
binding, the paratext [PRTX] category captures any graphic, visual, or textual material in the
work not seen as being a part of the text itself; quite literally, the surrounding text including
features such as headlines, pagination, and even marginalia. Next, a collation [COL] category is
included, a category that specifically pertains to the sequence and arrangement of substrate
assemblages. The arrangement most often refers to conventional bibliographic substrata such as
gatherings of folded paper or parchment sheets that comprise the main physical body of the text
block. As it applies in this study, the term typically follows the descriptive method of notation
for pre-twentieth century books. For twentieth and twenty-first century publications, collation
roughly refers to book size and format (e.g. quarto, octavo, etc.). Pagination [PG] records the
number of individual pages in a book and not necessarily those pages which have been numbered
(notation of the inclusion of a numbered pagination occurs in the paratext category). Paper
124

[PPR], being the most common material substrate of the samples, also has its own category. Size
[SZ] simply refers to the actual size of the text block. The margin [MRG] category records
measurements extending from the gutter and the tail of the text block out to the right-hand and
bottom edges of the typesetting. Typeface [TYP] is the category for the specific font, group of
fonts, or font family used for the book’s text. Additionally, the contents [CNT] category allows
for a complete transcription of contents as listed in the table of contents or, in the lack thereof, in
the chapter of sectional titles. There is a final bibliographic subcategory for notes [NTE] that
provides space for any notes on the publication history obtained, in some cases, directly from the
historical records of the publishers.22
Micro-categories for representation include: within the paratext, the bookplate [BP]
category designated for graphically stamped or adhered traces of the ownership history, a
frontispiece [FP] category for opening illustrations or opening ornamental, or even ekphrastic
texts, an acknowledgements [ACK] category for dedications, in most cases, from the author(s),
but also from other contributors such as the publishers, an illustration [ILLUS] category intended
for illuminations, drawings, etchings, woodcuts, lithographs, mezzotint, aquatint, photographic,
or any other types of illustrations recognized as being part of the work, and a closing category for
ornaments [ORN] which, in addition to actual page ornaments, covers page and paragraph
borders, line breaks, section dividers, ornamental, decorated, historiated initials, and other such
decorative embellishments and stylistic flourishes found in the sample. In the subcategory of
paper there is the lone micro-category of watermark [WTRM] to cover any watermarks found on
laid paper.

22

In order to limit redundancy, this field has been intentionally excluded from the selection of sample entries listed
in Appendix Two.

125

PCAT

SCAT

REP

BIB

BCAT

MCAT

TL
PUB
BND
PRTX

BP
FRP
ACK
ILLUS
ORN

COL
PG
PPR

WTRM

SZ
MRG
TYP
CNT
NTE

Figure 4. The Four Levels of Representation
Site Two will be at the center of my discussion on organization. The organization
category refers to the organization of knowledge (Figure 5). It further situates bibliography
within the library and information fields. Whereas past bibliographers have stressed a division
between bibliography and library cataloging this research recognizes the important role that
126

knowledge organization has played in terms of shaping the material and historical dimensions of
a text (Bowers, 1975). Moreover, as this study attempts at a serious reconsideration of the
library’s traditional response to the black literacy gap, the method operates on the premise that
documentation and analysis of the actual processes involved with the facilitation of the primary
source research can provide important evidence into the way books circulate within systems of
knowledge production. Again, in a study of this nature one must account for the cataloging
infrastructure and citation regimes that play into these research processes. In the teleological
sense, the end products that come out of this procedural bridge between the researcher and the
collections are presumed to proliferate, to eventually disseminate as the type of knowledge which
is taught within our schools and colleges.
Secondary categories for organization include: a reference [REF] category, wherein I
account for my selection for each item sampled and discussed in the study and provided notes on
reference interview procedures and research technology; identification [ID], which falls down to
the item level and, hence, includes the cataloging metadata and the identifying publication
information of bibliographic samples; and, lastly, a record [REC] category designed to capture
the alpha-numerically coded metadata at the inventory level of identification. As a result of its
lateral position in relation to the surface layer—that is, insofar as it maintains the role of a
channel which connects researchers to the item through the facilitation of collections and their
corresponding cataloging infrastructures—the organization category ceases at the secondary
level.

127

PCAT

ORG

SCAT

BCAT

MCAT

REF
ID
REC

Figure 5. The Two Levels of Organization
Along with representation, the collections category was another focal point of Site Three.
The collections category is premised by a basic notion that items housed in any given research
institution are part of some sort of collection, even if assorted or unnamed. This fundamental
precept is suggested by the term “special collections”—a largely self-referential descriptor. Thus,
it is a category which further locates an item in its particular node within a larger system of
circulating and non-circulating research collections (Figure 6). Although these collections are not
limited to bibliographic materials, allowing for a small number of exceptions, this study will
focus almost exclusively on collections of printed books.
The sole secondary category for collection is provenance [PROV]. Every item in a
collection has unavoidably come from somewhere, whether that somewhere was directly from
the publisher or author of the work or from a distributor, a retailer, collector, or any other onetime possessor of the object. The provenance category captures whatever historical information
there is concerning item-level transmission. The one subcategory for collection is history [HIST].
The history subcategory, naturally, is set within the secondary category of provenance. The
history category provides some details on the historical development of the collection and its
housing institution. Micro-categories for collection, again, set within provenance, and further
still within history, include ownership [OWN] referring to specific previous and/or current
128

owners of the object, and residence [RES] which locates the object to the specificity of its
current publically accessible address.
PCAT

SCAT

COLL

PROV

BCAT
HIST

MCAT
OWN
RES

Figure 6. The Four Levels of Collections
Along with organization, performativity was a category that received special attention in
Site Two. The category, again, does not seek to analyze any social behaviors that may impact,
either positively or negatively, the “acquisition” of “literacy skills.” What the category actually
refers to are those practices which are strictly limited to the facilitation of physical interactions
with bibliographic objects and materials within broader context of the systems through which
these objects operate. The only secondary category for performativity, then, is use (Figure 7).
And it follows that all four of the subcategories for performativity are set within the secondary
category of use (collection, space, etc.). The first of the four, equipment [EQ], accounts for the
equipment used by the researchers to supplement or facilitate primary source research. The next
category, that of practice [PRCT], notes any actions coming from the population which make up
the routine procedures of collection use; more specifically, it documents those actions initiated
by collection users, learners, and researcher. The third category in the set, the activity [ACT]
category, reverses the orientation in the practice category and captures any procedurally directed

129

actions initiated by staff. And, lastly, there is an appearance [APR] category that includes notes
on patron dress and apparel.
PCAT

SCAT

PRFM

U

BCAT

MCAT

EQ
PRCT
ACT

AVE
AAVE

APR

FML
SFML
CSL
UFM

Figure 7. The Four Levels of Performativity
The micro-categories for performativity are paradoxical in nature in that even though
they have been assigned to the deepest level of granularity, the data they contain can only depict
a surface level of performance. This paradoxical relationship that the performativity category has
with the database is a direct result of my conscious eschewal of any attempts at psychological or
behavioral analysis. Therefore, the micro-categories are limited to: first, in the activity
subcategory, American Vernacular English [AVE], meant to numerically tally use of the
standard English, and African American Vernacular English [AAVE], which is not reduced to
the label of “black slang,” and which, instead, is meant to encompass a distinct subaltern
linguistic system with its own fluid grammatical structure; and, second, in the appearance
130

subcategory, a formal [FML] category for suits, ties, slacks, and dress shoes (e.g. oxfords, etc.), a
semiformal [SFML] one for polo shirts, cardigans, Dockers, jeans, button-ups/downs, etc., a
casual [CSL] category for jeans, t-shirts, shorts, baseball caps, and jumpers, and a uniform
[UFM] category for those patrons who visit the space in their work uniforms.
3. III. Subjectivity, Distance, and Reflexivity in Ethnobibligraphic Method
Having outlined the basic structure and framework of the method, it is appropriate, at this
time, to make further mention of some of the major ideological influences which underlie its
application. The first of these two major influences is multiculturalism. Amidst the scathing
attacks coming from Lynne Cheney and Rush Limbaugh which have claimed that
multiculturalism had been distorting history, opposing national unity, and suppressing patriotism,
and in the face of more serious intellectual critiques coming from scholars like David A.
Hollinger, who further asserted that education should move toward cosmopolitanism and a postethnic society, Gary B. Nash, Charlotte Crabtree, and Ross E. Dunn (1997) resolutely reaffirmed
that multiculturalism:
…refers to the many cultural affiliations that Americans hold and to the complex fusion
of cultural identities and attitudes that each of us carries in our mind. Culture is acquired,
but never through one’s genes. Nor can it be displayed in the hue of one’s skin. Rather,
each person shapes and reshapes his or her cultural personality in connection with
individual upbringing, religion, gender, social status, family allegiance, schooling, sexual
preferences, and more. We manifest culture through speech, aesthetic sensibilities,
cuisine, holiday celebrations, work habits, literary predilections, and so on. (p. 77)

131

Ethnobibliographic method does not borrow from multicultural perspective so much as it is an
extension of the same multicultural projects developed in the 1980s by Nash, Crabtree, and other
historians and education scholars. Criticisms that have characterized the perspective as an antipatriotic distortion of historical truth, however, have been misguided and, perhaps, even blind to
the role that each historian plays in the interpretation of historical evidence and the construction
of meaning (Fluck & Claviez, 2003, pp. 104-109). Even those who have cast multiculturalism as
divisive and short-sighted in the larger context of a so called “post-ethnic” America have
erroneously underestimated the impact of racial and ethnic identity formation (Hollinger, 1995).
In the investigation of the bibliocultural link, particularly in light of a book’s influence on one’s
affective state and the construction of meaning—and in this case, in dealing with cultural
expression of one’s racial identity—a dissection of the very mechanisms which manifestly shape
the process of construction becomes a byproduct of such an analysis. The idea of Afrocentrism,
too, plays an important role in the analysis because the bibliographic specimens in question are
all coming from the black press.
Afrocentrism, as it has been expressed by Maulana Ron Karenga, Molefi Kete Asante,
William H. Watkins, Kafi Kumasi and a number of other theorists, is a philosophy which situates
social and historical developments within the framework of an African ideological center
(Kumasi, 2010). In realigning itself, in the pedagogical sense, to allow for black people to exist
at the center of their own history and culture, the concept of Afrocentricity does offer a vital
counterpoint to Eurocentric hegemony (Asante, 1990; Gordon, 1993; Watkins, 2005).
Additionally, it is a perspective that, being indissolubly embedded in the black experience,
stresses a vestigial continuity with an African ancestral origin. And as a concept that was vital to

132

the intellectual productions of the Black Arts Movement, it is a fitting vantage point from which
to discern historical traces of the bibliocultural.
One must be cautious, however, when it comes to the extent to which an endorsement of
Afrocentricity might be proffered. And one must also genuinely consider those critiques which
claim that Afrocentrism has been blighted by ethnocentrism, flawed perceptions of cultural
unanimity, and ahistorical mythologizing of narratives that lack evidentiary support (Oyebade,
1990). One of the most compelling critiques comes from Robert Gooding-Williams (1998) in his
essay, “Race, Multiculturalism, and Democracy.” In this analysis of the social construction of
race and how our understanding of race should inform our pedagogy, Gooding-Williams found
that Asante’s argument for the embrace and expansion of Afrocentricity in education was both
naïve and problematic. He argued that Asante’s theory had utterly failed to recognize the
complexity introduced by intercultural symbiosis, and the he downplayed the challenge of
identifying the actual vestiges of African heritage as expressed in African American culture (pp.
26-30). In response to such complexities, we are told, Asante has claimed that the survivals
simply “grow from the soil of the African-American subject’s ancestor,” very nearly implying an
inheritance of culture that can occur biologically (pp. 26-28). Moreover, Afrocentrism, according
to Gooding-Williams, has embarrassingly glossed over the profound heterogeneity of peoples
who inhabit the African continent and their diverse cultures (p. 28). In his view, moving forward
multiculturalism in education should be race conscious, but it should do so while also avoiding
succumbing to any ethnocentrism, be it a Eurocentric or an Afrocentric variety (pp. 32-33). His
warning against slipping into ethnocentrism is one that is certainly warranted considering the
harmful inequalities in education and knowledge production that such ethnocentrism has led to in
the past. However, given the saturation of Western hegemony within these systems, as a
133

counterpoint representing a subaltern voice, I am not certain that it should be fully abandoned in
terms of the larger mission of liberation humanism which involves the enfranchisement of
oppressed peoples through education and learning (Gordon, 1993). In all, it is clear that with
respect to the Afrocentric perspective, the line between cultural survivals and the imagined
community is difficult to draw; but, in regards to the literacy question at least, it is one that will
be further explored in the ethnobibliographic analysis to follow (Fraser & Hammond, 2008).
The central challenge of Afrocentricity is perspectival in that it is one that involves the
relationship between subject and object. And in any research, the question of proximity, of the
distance from the subject, is a virtually omnipresent concern (Ginzburg, 2001). Sometimes
closeness to the subject is seen as a potentially adverse position in the research process because it
is generally understood that such closeness can make researchers more vulnerable to their
subjective weaknesses, blind spots, and personal biases. In other situations too much distance
from the subject can do the same, but, alternatively, through a complete inability to relate or
connect with the subject on a personal level. Reflexivity, the second of the two major underlying
influences of this study, is a direct response to the problem of distance.
In more recent scholarship in the bibliographic tradition, the new bibliographers have
sought to remove themselves from the subject to the extent of assigning it the status of the
uncorrupted, unadulterated object. In the desire to legitimatize the tradition, bibliographers such
as Greg, Bowers, and Stokes often disregarded their own ability to guide the overall direction of
the discourse. The acknowledgement of the personal voice—an example of which can be found
in the narrative bibliographic prose of Dibdin—was shunned for fears of a return to
antiquarianism. This lack of reflexivity, of course, changed with literary and bibliographic

134

explorations of McGann, as he had infused it into much of his writing. And in the present
ethnobiliographic study reflexivity factors in as an indispensable principle.
The concept of reflexivity, as it is understood in this research, is a step in the direction of
systems theory and the idea of co-emergence because it recognizes bidirectional agency in
empirical observation and subjective influence in the determination of causality. Here, as in
many other studies which involve qualitative research, it becomes a formal recognition of my
own impact on shaping the research as a researcher. The idea of acknowledging personal agency
through reflexive analysis, though, has not gone unchallenged. Some have argued the process
does not go far enough to identify the ulterior motivating forces behind knowledge production
and epistemological justification. Bruno Latour (1988), for one, contended that reflexive analysis
is, in reality, discursive. He suggested that it is a purely rhetorical pretense which seeks to
legitimize itself acknowledging that there is an attempt being made by a researcher to separate
subject from object, to dichotomize an explanation from that which is being explained (pp. 157159). Even the pretense of reflexivity in research, according to his understanding, can be
discarded without consequence (pp. 167-168). Yet such a claim is amusingly unrealistic given
that many of these discursive mechanisms have been in place to promote proper scholarship and
maintain the integrity of research, and it is almost an absurdity to suggest that fundamental
methodological and compositional formulas in academic discourse can be left behind in a single
generation as even theories that have drawn heavily upon meta-reflexivity and deconstruction
have become important voices in the larger academic discourse. Rather, it is that the mechanisms
themselves need to be subject to the same forms of analytical scrutiny given to the research
problems. Reflexivity helps to address that need. And for this study, it was a key part of

135

developing the coding schema for the ethnobibliographic database insofar as it has been able to
support its socio-political contextualization.
In looking at the research process reflexively, being able to both recognize and gage my
own sense of proximity to the subject, my personal narrative is of value, and it should be
acknowledged as being pivotal to the research process and the study’s development. Firstly, it
must be stated that I am a black person working in special collections, so my proximity is close
enough, nearly, to assume the role of the subject itself. Coming from a mixed marriage
parentage, I have a white side of my family from which I am estranged and black side that I feel
very close to in comparison. The divorce of my parents during my adolescence led to my being
raised, largely, by my mother—a young, single black woman who, during most of her adult life,
worked as a medical assistant. She provided a wonderfully warm and cultured life for me during
my formative years. Contrary to common stereotypes concerning black people and their
appreciation of “high” culture and the fine arts, it was my black mother who introduced me to the
Huntington Library and Botanical Gardens, and not my white father. This introduction to rare
books was a watershed moment in my life because it would eventually steer me into the pursuit
of a career in this field. Yet, in being a black person who is a patrilineal descendant of
Caucasians, my sense of “otherness” in the field of rare books and other conservative
establishments of “high culture” has been intensified by my past experiences in having to
navigate through conflicting ethnic and racially-oriented social spheres—a situation indicative of
what William Edward Burghardt Du Bois described as the double consciousness, or the double
self (1903). In his own words:

136

It is a peculiar sensation this double-consciousness, this sense of always looking at one’s
self through the eyes of others, of measuring one’s soul by the tape of a world that looks
on in amused contempt and pity. One ever feel his twoness,—an American, a Negro; two
souls, two thoughts, two unreconciled strivings; two warring ideals in one dark body,
whose dogged strength alone keeps it from being torn asunder.
The history of American Negro is the history of this strife—this longing to attain
self-conscious manhood, to merge his double self into a better and truer self. In this
merging he wishes neither of the older selves to be lost. He would not Africanize
America, for America has too much to teach the world and Africa. He would not bleach
his Negro soul in a flood of white Americanism, for he knows that Negro blood has a
message for the world. He simply wishes to make it possible for a man to be both a
Negro and an American, without being cursed and spit upon by his fellows, without
having the doors of Opportunity closed roughly in his face. (pp. 45-46)
The statement, even for contemporary black scholars, carries a powerful resonance. Not only did
Du Bois voice an understanding of the tension between singularity and hybridity in this
declaration, he also pointed his understanding in a new direction by alluding to its self-fulfilling
quality. Perhaps paradoxically, in terms of racial and ethnic identity, the one, or singularity, is
consumptive upon the other, hybridity, concomitantly singling out difference to seemingly
illimitable gradations in order to categorize it as the “other.” The phenomenon is both most
complicated and most exemplified in the example of “white passing” among black Americans
sharing environmentally conditioned phenotypes which are associated with a perception of
“whiteness.” The condition is further convoluted when the individual or individuals involved in

137

the passing are, themselves, not aware of their African American ancestry. It is clear, then, that
the questions posed in Du Bois’s concept of the double-self are directly relevant to those posed
by this study concerning black literacy. Therefore, the concept will be among the chief drivers
for my reflexive analysis in the research process, and in a number of instances, will be pertinent
to the ways in which the data in the database are evaluated.
3. IV. Limitations to the Method: Structural and Conceptual
Having outlined the basic structure of the method and the types of information included
through its mode of collecting data, and having touched upon some of the underlying themes and
impelling concepts of the research method, I conclude here with one of the prerequisites of any
serious study—and especially one which shall integrate reflexive analysis within its framework; I
must close this chapter with a recognition of the methodological limitations. Granted, there shall
be limitations that I did not conceive of, research that I failed to consult, questions that I failed to
pose, and data that I either erroneously omitted or altogether overlooked. This condition is
present in any work of scholarship or major research project. One can only attest, however, to
having done their very best to make these factors known, to make them visible on the surface
layer. Other unforeseen gaps or misinterpretations shall eventually emerge to the foreground
through academic discourse.
Beginning with the manner in which I have collected and processed the data, it is
important to remain cognizant of the subjectivities entangled in the database’s design. Some of
the biases and subjectivities in data collection, such as those mixed-up with a rapid and informal
determination of patron demographics, are so subtle as to be virtually impossible to discern at the
point of collection. These approximations in the demographic data are somewhat problematic,
138

but they are not detrimental to the study as a whole. Allowing for a wide range of hybridity, for
instance, the singularity of white and black ethnic identity, is, for the most part, patently clear
and needing only visual confirmation. Other subjectivities are markedly more contrived. The
hierarchy of white male hegemony found in the sex and race categories of the database was
purposefully intended to reflect the relationship found within the Western patriarchal hegemonic
structures of the system’s convention. It does not in any way suggest a complicit internalization
of either a personal sense of victimization or racial inferiority. Also, with a quick graphic
assessment of the database’s schema, one can see that the highest degrees of granularity occur in
the access and representation categories. The unbalanced distribution of data points that is
afforded to those two category groups is a direct result of their being the primary categories
which include the data sets on racial demographics, social environment, and bibliographic
materiality—the most prominent factors in dealing with the race/literacy issue at the heart of this
study.
Next there is the question of missing data from collected sources. These omissions can
include points not conceived in the original schema as well as other missing data such as field
research from overlooked research sites. Ideally, at least the region of the Midwestern U.S.,
given’s its historical significance in the black would have also been represented. There were,
however, considerable constraints on the time and scope allotted to this project as a result of its
limited resources.
The decision to decline from any use of surveys which would document population
sentiments or self-identification was, again, an intentional one, and it is in accordance with the
purposes of this study. So too was my refraining from postulating hypotheses that require proof

139

of statistical significance in terms of drawing a measurable correlation between two phenomenon
through causality. The overall research design presented in this study is certainly replicable; but,
again, the parameters can change according to the dynamic political, geo-spatial, and temporal
conditions that operate within a particular research space or set of materials. The fact remains the
wealth of studies that focus on the testing for literacy rates under controlled conditions to isolate
variables and draw conclusions on causal relationships are only looking at one piece of a larger
picture, and in such a way that is inflected through its own disciplinary ideologies and
methodological principles. The very same can be said of those studies that focus,
ethnographically, almost exclusively on community relations or the internal relations of a
particular group. The situation, then, is not any different for those studies that have placed an
emphasis on the psychological dimensions of the literacy question, attempting at a
comprehensive understanding of the behavioral conditions and emotional responses of
individuals selected for a study in their responsive interaction with selected texts. This study,
however, was designed to investigate an institutional response to the question in looking at the
actual conditions and policies of the library as they play out in the field without any pretentions
or personal interference. It has been formulated with the intention of providing a detailed portrait
of the research environment within which books circulate as both the products and the
instruments of knowledge production. In doing so, it is believed that we can begin to trace a
book’s contribution to the perpetuation of the same systems that encapsulate the processes of its
dissemination.

140

Chapter Four: Findings for Access and Encounter
4. I. 1. Access: The Research Space and its Local Environment
What is the meaning of a collection if it is inaccessible? What is the purpose of a
collection if only accessible to a select few? What is the price of providing broader public access
to collections with regards to their long-term preservation? How do institutional policies
designed to maintain environmental norms in the research space encourage or inhibit collection
access? These considerations are among some of the more important questions that one must
contend with when attempting to understand the role that access plays in the perpetuation of a
cycle of knowledge production which both facilitates and is facilitated through various literacy
practices. It is fitting that research Site Four, the Schomburg Center, was selected to focus on the
subject of institutional access because, coincidentally, it is also the standout example in the group
in terms of its cohesion with the local environment and its overall implementation of access
policies. And in drawing attention to the entry point between a population and a collection, we
also become concerned with how access involves a physical space necessitated by the collections
contained therein. I will note, however, that access to the physical space, though it may be
desired, is not necessarily intrinsic to the existence of a collection.
I begin with New York City in the earlier part of April in the year of 2014. Regarding the
New York Weather, having never been a resident of the nation’s most populous city, I cannot
personally speak to the experience of its temperature averages. According to a climatography
report from the U.S. Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, and the National Environmental Statistics, Data and Information Service (2004)
which provided annual averages from 1971 to 2000, the weather that I experienced during my
141

field research was not dramatically outside of the past range of highs and lows.23 I believe that
there was around a ten degree difference in either direction in terms of annual averages. What
stood out, however, was that it felt extremely cold in the wind chill, perhaps due to my own
rearing in the comparatively moderate California climate. The news media during this period was
in agreement with me. And perhaps one could take a cynical approach and suggest that the
stories which covered the weather as part of the tail-end of the winter’s “polar vortex”—reputed
to have been the alleged cause of the colder than normal temperatures—were exaggerated, but I
did find it slightly unusual that on at least one morning I awoke to find the city covered in a layer
of snow from a storm which occurred the night before. Not long after this cold spell, however,
temperatures warmed up to a comfortable range of around the mid-sixties to the mid-seventies.
It is reasonable to question if the weather bears any relevance to the black literacy gap.
Viewed macroscopically, however, in light of a research collection’s potential to foster black
literacy practices the relevance of the weather becomes manifestly more apparent. Simply put,
poor weather can be a serious deterrent to access. On the second and third days of my field
research, a brief thunderstorm that was trailed by a dramatic decline in temperatures made even a
short commute in Harlem a difficult one.24 I was reminded of my experience commuting to the
Clark Library from home in Crenshaw. Even in late January, still very much the winter season,
the weather settled around the high sixties which was comfortable compared to the recursively
branded “polar vortex” paralyzing the East Coast with biting cold. Back in New York, on the
morning of the storm, during what felt like its peak, I found myself huddled in a corner
underneath one of the building’s overhangs with a small group of the Schomburg’s regular
patrons—many of whom also seemed to have been caught off-guard by the ferocity of the
23
24

The report found an average low of 44.4◦ and a high 60.0◦.
SIV-D2:ENV; SIV-D3:ENV

142

downpour.25 It became clear to me during this experience that poor weather could serve to block
access to collections, particularly from those communities that must function without a public
transportation infrastructure, or one that even approximates the level of efficiency found in the
transportation systems in Harlem and all throughout New York City. Those who had the least
amount of wealth and assets in the area were also those who were most impacted by the weather.
This situation also played out at Site Two, the Amistad Research Center, where the late
winter weather routinely made a fairly long excursion on the bus and trolley from the Upper
Ninth district to the wealthy Uptown neighborhoods surrounding the Tulane campus an arduous
one. Furthermore, drastic contrasts between wealth and poverty could be witnessed in full view
along the way. The remnants of Hurricane Katrina, from the condemned “shotgun” houses
marked with FEMA X-code symbols to the repairs on the trolley track which were the cause for
further delay, could be seen and felt all about even though it was nearly a decade later. Potential
damage to collections due to extreme weather events, however, turned out to be an important
concern for the Amistad’s relocation from Dillard University to Tulane. The result, granting the
aesthetic and cultural discontinuities between the campus’s gothic revival facility and the core
subjects and strengths of the Amistad’s collections of Africana and African Americana, was that
the collections ultimately survived the storm with minimal material losses. One can speculate as
to whether or not the same could be stated if it had remained at its former residence which,
notwithstanding its status the Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCU), had a
Southern American antebellum style architecture that had jarring, almost plantation-like
appearance to it.

25

SIV-D3:ENV

143

The phenomenon I have begun to identify in the evidence is a disjuncture which can best
described as an environmental dissonance between the residencies of collections and the local
community and/or target collection user, learner, and researcher populations. It is important to
note, however, that it is often the case that the target population of a special collection is not the
local community (Figure 8). In the Amistad case, the reading room’s location on the Tulane
University campus was not only physically distant from the heart of the black community in
Louisiana, but it was also culturally so in terms of its architecture. Still, the clearest example of
this form of dissonance was found in the Clark Library’s proximity to the neighborhood of
Jefferson Park. West Adams, the Clark Library’s neighborhood of residence, is one of the oldest
neighborhoods in Los Angeles. During the time in which the Clark Library’s collection was
amassed, West Adams was also one of the most affluent areas to live in the city. Some of the
wealthiest and influential residents of Southern California lived in West Adams. The Clark
Library’s facility and location—with its English Baroque and Italian Renaissance architecture, its
lush green lawns, and its Greco-Romanic sculpture—is only a vestige of that once affluent time.
At present, the demographics along with amount of wealth in the neighborhood has shifted to
reflect increasingly diverse demographics (Los Angeles Times, 2015). In point of fact both West
Adams and the adjacent neighborhood of Jefferson Park are predominantly Latino and African
American in makeup (Los Angeles Times, 2015). West Adams itself, however, is one of the
most diverse areas in the country (Cooper, Lynch, & Kurtz, 2008). During the 1950s and ‘60s the
demographics began to shift with the coming of the freeways and the rise in USC students living
in the area (Cooper, Lynch, & Kurtz, 2008, p. 7). By this time the neighborhood had lost its
status as one of the wealthiest areas for whites, but affluent blacks replaced the white residents as
the neighborhood opened up to minorities.
144

Looking at its neighbor in Jefferson Park, walking from the Metro Exposition line train
stop to the grounds of the Clark Library, far from the Victorian estates and historic houses that
emblematize the historicity of the region, one finds dilapidated housing and people struggling
with homelessness and mental illness; one observes a grey economy full of street carts and
houses converted into storefronts; one takes in the ubiquitous graffiti art plastered upon
buildings, bus stops, street signs, and abandoned lots. Casually inquire about what exactly the
Clark Library is to the average person in the area, even though it is in the neighborhood, and you
are likely to get a reply expressing obliviousness or confusion. One of the reasons, I think, for the
lack of local awareness is that even though the Clark Library—representing the conventional
model of a Western special collections facility—is actually highly accessible to the local
population in theory, that accessibility in practice, for the most part, restricts itself to an insular
community of scholars who inhabit the region temporarily strictly for research purposes. The
Clark Library’s architecture and design, literally being surrounded by a large, “ivy-shrouded”
brick wall, reinforces the “walled-garden” effect that serves to insulate a predominately white
demographic of students, scholars, and researchers from the minority populations and
communities which surround it. That is how the dissonance inadvertently operates as a
demographic filter.

145

Figure 8. Environmental Dissonance in Access
In stark contrast to the environmental dissonance between the physical residency of a
collection and its local community found at the Clark, the general aesthetic of the Schomburg
matched its regional community seamlessly, simultaneously blending in with the look and feel of
its neighborhood while standing out as a major attraction. The Harlem environment, even in the
face of clear signs of demographic shifting and some gentrification, was a vibrant Pan-African
and, in some respects, Afrocentric community (Center for Urban Research, The Graduate Center,
City University of New York, 2011). I am referring here to the Central Harlem North district.
East Harlem has been predominately Latino for some time, and it is outside the range of this
study geographically (The City of New York, 2011). As I walked up and down Harlem’s interior
blocks on a daily basis, it was common for me to see the presence of the African Diaspora in
everything from African and Afro-Caribbean restaurants to the street merchant selling black
history themed wares. I noticed fairly quickly that the sidewalk pavement was lined with
emblems commemorating the more celebrated figures of black history, and that many of the
avenues and boulevards were also named after black history’s most distinguished achievers. The
Schomburg Center itself, for instance, resides at the cross streets of 135th Street and Malcolm X
146

Boulevard (formerly Lenox Avenue). The cohesion between African and African American
culture in Harlem is a solid one. Walking to my destination on Martin Luther King Blvd. I
witnessed an impromptu afternoon African drum session complete with a random dancer that
joined in the spontaneous public square amusement which lasted less than twenty minutes, and
which was performed without any expectation for monetary compensation for the public
performance. 26 Spontaneous dance sessions constituted one of the popular activities of the
people enjoying leisure time at the nearby Jackie Robinson Park.
Similar performances could be observed on a regular basis in Leimert Park, the Crenshaw
district neighborhood where I resided during my time doing my Los Angeles-based field
research. Crenshaw, with a close to 80% African American population, is also a majority black
neighborhood that is experiencing the beginnings of a possible gentrification (Los Angeles
Times, 2015). In many ways, it represents the heart of the Los Angeles African American
community. Like Harlem, there is a Pan-Africanism to its aesthetic and cultural dimensions. In
the town square of this neighborhood lined with jacaranda trees and blooming birds of paradise
flowers, African and Afro-Caribbean drum circles are the norm; so too are African American art
galleries and shops that sell African and Reggae apparel. In terms of this sense of community
Afrocentrism, the cultural affinity that Leimert Park shares with Harlem—two neighborhoods
separated by a distance of well over 2,000 miles—is both remarkable and unquestionable.
Whether or not such manifestations of cultural cohesion are simply signs of an “imagined
community” of a Pan-African nation, however, is debatable. Additionally, there are questions
regarding the actual degree of any shared practices or cultural affinity with Africans living in
Africa. Such reservations, however, should not preclude any attempts to understand, more
26

SIV-D11:ENV

147

clearly, the nature of the bond between African cultures and black people in America both in the
historical context of central Harlem’s predominately African American community and in the
lasting legacies of Pan-Africanist figures such as Garvey, Du Bois, Hughes, and even Schomburg
himself (Obiwu, 2007).
The particular look and feel of contemporary Harlem, as far as the eyes and ears can
discern, is not pop. Harlem is more jazz and soul; it is more reggae, more hip hop. It is true that
this is the same Harlem of the Harlem Renaissance—a time reputed for jazz infused rent party
nights, when syncopated melodies and stride piano sessions could be heard from windows and
nightclubs. At present, however, reggae and hip hop culture are undoubtedly the most prominent
in the black cultural mainstream of Harlem. Hip hop’s virtually ubiquitous pervasiveness in the
region should come as no surprise given that hip hop, as a movement, actually began in the late
1970s in Harlem and the Bronx (Keyes, 2002). And, in terms of its early development as a
musical genre, as a result of this particular location of origin, there were also many deeply rooted
Afro-Caribbean influences in the early formation of the sound (Banks, 2010). Actually,
Afrocentric undercurrents are often traced to hip hop, as it has widely been considered to have
evolved from the West African Griot tradition (Keyes, 2002). And the practice of rapping,
having a predecessor in the jazz “scat” tradition, has also been linked to the Black Arts
Movement and spoken word poetry. These creative developments also had a strong presence in
Harlem’s music and literary scenes at different points in the twentieth century (Allen, 1996;
Keyes, 2002).
Now recognized as a global phenomenon, hip hop is a term used to describe a collective
culture surrounding the art and lifestyle of rapping. The art aspect of this description involves a

148

poetic form characterized by highly stylized and complex rhythmic combinations of rhyming
stanzas that are typically referred to as “bars” (Stewart, 1998, pp. 261-262). Many of the most
celebrated “classic” raps also include a chorus line called a “hook” that ties in the main theme of
the rap’s narrative. Rapping is done both acapella and over a percussive musical accompaniment
called the “beat,” and it can be completely improvised in a practice known as “freestyling.” As
for the lifestyle part of rapping, a lifestyle of rapping is centered upon various activities
associated with the art such as the composition of rap (i.e. lyrics), the practice of freestyling, the
informed consumption other rap songs and rap related media, an attunement to the latest
fashions, beats, and rhyming styles, and participation in rap events that generally include
dancing, concert performance, and “call and response” exchanges between attendees and rap
artists (Stewart, 1998, pp. 258-259).
On any given day, the most current mainstream and underground rap songs could be
heard booming out of car and apartment windows, on store speakers, and from portable speakers
set up on street corners, booming with a deep and resounding bass. You heard nationally topranking artist such as Rick Ross (William Leonard Roberts II), Drake (Aubrey Drake Graham),
YG (Keenon Daequan Ray Jackson), and, occasionally, you heard local legends like KRS One
(Lawrence "Krisna" Parker), the Notorious B.I.G. (Christopher George Latore Wallace, d. 1997),
and Talib Kweli (Talib Kweli Greene). Again, the scene was largely identical in Leimert Park
with the exception of some of the artist preferences among locals. One immediately got the sense
that hip hop culture was deeply intermeshed in the fashions, the language, and the gestures of the
local population. In other words, it had become an integral part of the manner in which people
were expressing themselves on a day-to-day level. Most importantly, for the purposes of this
study, was that it was highly visible, even upon the most cursory analysis, in the local print
149

culture. Walking down Harlem’s main streets, I observed the dozens of black press booksellers
that lined the streets with their book and magazine stands. I saw a bustling trade in locallyauthored, independent urban fiction (also called “street lit’). Amidst the more well-known titles
in African American literature sold by street vendors, the street lit’ books visually jumped out at
me from their place on the stands as I made my way to my location. They quickly grabbed my
attention with cinematic, often franchise-friendly titles and highly stylized cover art that depicts
common hip hop narrative archetypes and literary tropes which are further indicative of a street
lit’ novel’s particular subgenre (e.g. gangsta’, wifey, diva, etc.).
It is true that with little effort, one can find a display or two of the latest in urban fiction
in general collection public libraries such as the Mid-Manhattan Public Library, but you will not
find such displays in the Schomburg reading rooms. There are questions, then, in terms of library
access to local literatures that concern the fundamental nature of this point of difference between
the general collection and the research collection. The difference, in this case, cannot be simply
due to the fact that the Mid-Manhattan Branch is among the largest of the circulating branches in
the NYPL system or because the branch’s collection places an emphasis on the popular whereas
the Schomburg, by contrast, tends be looked at more seriously as a research collection. Yet,
falling short of an across-the-board association with the operations of a general collections
library, the Schomburg, for a special collections facility, is extraordinarily open in terms of its
operations and actively sensitive in meeting the needs of the local community.
The fact that there was as aesthetic concord between its modern architecture and its
surroundings was patently obvious, even to the most casual onlooker. The renovations that were
made from 2002 to 2007 under the direction of the Dattner Architects helped to produce the

150

initial impression of light, warmth, and openness (Richard Dattner and Partners Architects,
2009). And the complex as a whole is even larger than it appears to the naked eye. The
Schomburg Center complex, in its entirety, is a full 75,000 square feet (The New York Public
Library, 2015). The complex is actually made of three different interconnected buildings: The
Schomburg Building, the Langston Hughes Building, and the Landmark Building (The New
York Public Library, 2015). The different buildings, it seems, are devoted to the separate
functions of the Center such as exhibitions and curation, research and preservation, and
performance and community events. Yet, admittedly, these separate functions often overlap. The
atmosphere of openness at the Schomburg’s entrance was, from an architectural vantage point,
achieved through an installation of a glass façade and “acoustic wood panels” (Richard Dattner
and Partners Architects, 2009). It was a warmth and openness, perhaps, absent in the elegant, yet
stern Beaux-Arts architecture of its former building which, like the neo-classicism of Winston
Albert Cordes and Crosby, Robert David Farquhar, and Barton Phelps and Associates in the case
of the Clark Library, exhibited qualities of clear signs of environmental dissonance. In contrast,
the newer building’s sharp, angular edges, its prominent height, and it’s clear and colorful
signage, set it apart from the other buildings on the block in such a way that enticed pedestrians.
Upon entry, after a routine security bag check-in which was substantially more involved
than the other three case studies, I was directed to a main level where the Jean Blackwell Hutson
Research and Reference Division was located. It included two main areas, the reception
area/computer lab and a reference reading room. It was in this area that I began to discern
somewhat subtle, yet graduating degrees of distance between the environment of the research
space and what appeared to have been the cultural mainstream of the local population. This sense
of distance I detected was temporal; it was generational.
151

Much in the room memorialized and celebrated black history from both a local and a
global perspective. There were close to a dozen paintings from the artist Yves Etienne that
covered the walls; and, with a not so subtle nod to the particularly heavy diasporic makeup of the
community, there was a Haitian flag with the veve art of the tradition of Vodoun. In the reception
area/computer lab, one of the first objects that I noticed was a sculptural bust from the African
American sculptor, Bo Walker (d. 1986). This artist was known locally for his lifelike sculpture
of Frederick Douglass which was exhibited at the Schomburg in 1982 as part of their “The Road
to Freedom” show (Mitgang, 1982). In this area I found that there was an intellectual sanctity in
the general atmosphere; a gravitas. Upon further analysis, I understood that the unique interplay
of architecture, design, and policy had worked in concert to create this atmosphere.
The reading room in the Jean Blackwell Hutson Research and Reference Division was
spacious, quiet, and scholarly. The large circular, softly-lit reading room had about a dozen large
marble top study desks with around four times as many swivel chairs than tables that could
comfortably accommodate fifty library patrons. Quite arguably, much of the sanctity in the
atmosphere could be directly attributed to the combined presence of a non-circulating room
reference library and a celebrated Aaron Douglas mural. These two features of the room
commandingly surrounded the perimeter, one on the walls at eye-level and the other hugging the
ceiling walls. Douglas’s four paneled “Aspects of Negro Life” was a narrative type of painting
wherein the images were meant to tell a story to the onlooker. The paintings told a visually
dynamic story of the African American experience from slavery through the years of modern
commerce and industry.

152

It was a striking parallel to the ceiling painting found in the Clark Library’s drawing
room which is by the library and the university’s Center for 17th and 18th Century Studies for
special events. The Clark’s ceiling painting, like the Douglas mural at the Schomburg, surrounds
the perimeter of the room. Also like Douglas, the painting is a narrative one, depicting major
scenes from John Dryden's All for Love. The Clark Library also has a globally recognized
Dryden collection, so the painting is closely aligned with the research materials in that respect. It
is noteworthy, from the perspective of a researcher of color, that in the painting at least one of
the characters from the play, most likely Alexas the Eunuch or Serapion, was portrayed as a
dark-skinned African. In Douglas’s “Aspects of Negro Life” paintings, African Americans
appear as shadows in their own story, but as vibrant shadows moving through life’s sonic
textures in transcendent jubilation. The presence of “whiteness” is only implied as a subtlety in
the painting; it is only suggested, without depiction, as the source of the dominance and
oppression that African American peoples have had to struggle against and someday overcome.
And, as a living example or reflection of that struggle (i.e. literacy and education), the
researchers below, in a sense, were publically exhibited as part of the space. The learners and
researchers who studied in this area were exposed to view by a ring of transparent windows that
bordered the mural and enabled casual, yet discreet bird’s eye observation by visitors on the floor
above.
4. I. 2. Access: Daily Operations for Public Reception
Our more recent understandings of black literacy, it should be recalled, have been
premised upon access: to literacy, to education, to knowledge and upward mobility (HughesHassell, Kumasi, Rawson, & Hitson, 2012). And in the simplest of terms, in the cases of both the

153

Schomburg and the Clark access is provided first to literacy (e.g. information literacy), then to
the research collections and their bibliographic objects, and, finally, to the potential for more
processing, internalizing, and, perhaps, producing more knowledge and, hence, the potential,
also, for enriching one’s own literacy. In the end, especially for the expansion of black literacy,
the access is expected to promote civic participation through greater education, as it is a literacy
that gives back to the community (Josey, 1972).
If the library is a storehouse of knowledge, then the heart of access in a library or
research collection really lies in a facility’s hours of operation. Likely due to the civic nature of
the Schomburg’s parent library system and the comparatively large size of its patron-base, this
institution provided the greatest amount of access when compared to the other case studies. Most
conveniently in terms of my research, I was fortunate to find that the Schomburg was open
relatively late hours, staying open until 8:00 p.m. most weekdays.27 And, unlike two of the other
three research sites, the facility was also open on Saturdays. As expected, there were slightly
different hours for the rare book room. More in line with a conventional special collections
department, this area was open until 5:00 p.m. with a midday closure for an hour-long lunch
period.28
At the Schomburg, light consultations for navigating the library’s cataloging system and
selecting research material were conducted by professionals at a large and fairly traditional
reference desk. Adjacent to the reference desk, there was a paging desk with a semi-automated
item retrieval system designed to maximize efficiency. The level of efficiency surpassed each of
the other case studies. This area was staffed by assistants and floor-level clerks. In addition to

27
28

SIV-D1-D11: PROMO
SIV-D1-D11: RST

154

dealing with reference queries, however, the representatives of both the Schomburg’s
professional and paraprofessional staff, at times, assumed the responsibility of maintaining lower
sound levels—implicitly understood to be the environment that is most conducive to study and
research. Self-policing among patrons did occur as sound levels varied among the particular
demographic makeup that shifted with relative frequency throughout the day. In all, the
Schomburg’s reading rooms generally provided an ambience of study, an atmosphere of silent,
solitary learning that intensified in hierarchical gradations in accordance with the perceived
gravitas of accessible materials. Restrictions on noise such as the prohibition of cell-phone and
loud or disruptive music or conversation were all meant to promote this distinct ambience.
4. I. 3. Access: Confronting Implicit Bias as “Custodians” of Knowledge
In comparison with Harlem’s African American population and the city’s social
environment, it could very well be that such restrictive policies, although quite arguably effective
in their ability to shape and manage the intellectual atmosphere of the research space, are still
somewhat out of step with the local community. Considering how closely aligned the two are in
both function and design, it is difficult to pinpoint all the ways that could account for the subtle
rift between them; however, it would be a disservice not to confront at least one instance of it.
Whereas in so many other areas—in its architecture and interior design, in its programs, and, in
many respects, in its collections—the Schomburg maintains a harmonious relationship with the
local community and the demographics of its patronage, in the enforcement of this restrictive
policy on “noise” we can begin to discern how certain aspects of this African American research

155

library have been informed by a conventional Western model of knowledge production, and how
the consequences of this relationship can be distancing to Harlem’s black population.29
Although there recently has been a growing body of research that has shown
counterexamples to the long-reigning narrative in the history of reading that has depicted
Western literacy practices as private, solitary, and silent, the narrative still holds sway in the way
we conceptualize a “proper” reading environment. In this case it has come to us as the accepted
model for library research in the reading room. This is certainly the reigning model of the Clark
Library reading room—with its mahogany reference desk, its statuette of Johann Gutenberg, and
its taxidermy owl; it is a reading room that simply was not designed to accommodate the
collaborative model of producing knowledge.30 Many libraries, in fact, have rapidly advanced
toward a collaborative model perhaps less prone to an inadvertent isolation from the
community’s modalities in literacy practice (Shanbhag, 2006). Yet, considering the sheer
longevity of the conventional model’s acceptance as a best practice in special collections, it
makes sense that these anti-noise policies continue to persist in the Schomburg’s reading rooms.
In the staff’s efforts to safeguard patron comfort and maximize the potential for learning, what
was being created, largely as a byproduct of the enforcement of restrictive policy, was a sense of
institutional legitimacy.
The problem, however, lies in this idea of “black loudness”—the stereotype that black
people are, on the whole, louder than some of the other racial and ethnic groups. It seems
peculiar that the question as to whether this notion is only a groundless stereotype based more in
implicit bias than in any “real” biological or culturally-rooted factors has been somewhat of an

29
30

The Mode 1 knowledge production which approximates Freire’s banking model of instruction.
SI-D1-D9: INT

156

open one; but, lamentably, such uncertainty has manifested itself within the discourse concerning
the issue. If we can ascribe credence to theorists such as Stuart Hall (1997) and others that have
identified the process of “stereotyping” as a semiotic one that constructs the signifier of
“otherness” to cultural outsiders and creates “difference” as a byproduct of the process, then the
idea that the phenomenon has any biological foundation should and must be wholly rejected (p.
257). Consider the fact that similar characterizations have been used when describing expressive
cultural distinctions among Northern versus Southern Europeans, a characterization that many
have found to be a more digestible stereotype. Still, inasmuch as policies for access to collections
are concerned, “black loudness” as a perceptual phenomenon has to be considered a contributory
factor because it can influence the institutional response in such a way that has a real impact on
the lives of people in the community. And even if the perception of the phenomenon is hinged
upon a fictive and ultimately biased stereotype, the circumstance of its unreality should not
immunize its phantom spectacle from further scrutiny.
In a controversial collections of essays on black stereotypes, John H. Davis (2007), who
openly confessed that his assertions were not based in academic research, sought dispel some of
the more commonly accepted stereotypes about black people by opening a dialogue with each of
them in a conversational style that, at numerous points, approached invective. He asserted that if
there was an exaggerated sonorousness in black orality, then it exists, for the most part, within a
particular segment of the black community—the segment of black male youth (pp. 42-43).
Davis’s rather exaggerated characterization of the situation, however, mostly seemed to reinforce
the same negative stereotypes that he claimed to be deconstructing. Nashieqa Washington (2006)
shared a similar view about the “reality” of its existence, except that she found instances where
black expression is interpreted as being clamorous in the experience of others (e.g. white
157

people), more definitively, to be an important cultural characteristic of black expression (pp. 4950). Moreover, she found it even more crucial to distinguish black people talking loudly, which,
again, she considered to be an accepted practice in black cultural expression and “loud talking” a
term used in African American Vernacular English to describe gossip and its propensity for
insult (p. 50). “Loud talking” was also addressed by Vershawn Ashanti Young (2007) in his
book Your Average Nigga, a largely reflexive and literary analysis of black literacy practices and
the performance of black masculinity. In Young’s account, “loud talking” is a rhetorical
maneuver that involves loudly insulting someone within earshot without referring to that person
directly (pp. 66-68). “This kind of sneak-speaking,” he wrote, “of not being able to address race
directly, of being silenced on institutionally unauthorized issues of injustice, transforms BEV
[Black English Vernacular] into a subversive strategy, a clandestine linguistic practice that turns
its speakers into veritable tricksters” (p. 67). The distinction is of consequence because, as
suggested by Young, it resonates with a slight tone of psychological emasculation, whereas the
more prevalent stereotype of loudness is associated with the more masculine quality of
aggressiveness (p. 143).
Young, in fact, is but one among a larger group of scholars who have sought to
contextualize our notions of “blackness” by looking at how race, as a socially constructed
phenomenon, gets performed in our daily rituals and lived experiences. Here it emerges in
equating “black loudness” with aggression. The questions concerns how individuals might
consciously or unwittingly internalize this association. Accordingly, these scholars have focused
their attentions, not on the stereotype of blacks being loud on its face, rather on we can better
understand that ways in which the associative coupling of the two, sonority and aggression, are
articulated in the performance of “black masculinity”—its communicative modes, its gender
158

roles, its moral codes, social ideologies, socioeconomic apparatuses, etc.—within the larger
framework of contemporary American society. For Dawoud Bey, the issue is, for the most part, a
conflation of black confidence—a source of psychological self-empowerment informally dubbed
“black swagger”—with rudeness or bravado. He notes that the idea of aggression is intrinsic to
the very definition of the word “swagger” (Bey, 2012). And even if there is a more nuanced split
between them, the conflation is problematic because the leap from “confident” to “aggressive” is
perilously short” (p. 150). It is our collective perception of black expression that is key here, as
“black boys and men who carry themselves with assurance, with confidence, are perceived as
dangerous—sometimes even to those in their own communities” (p. 151).
For decades, certain elements of contemporary black fashion, style, language, and
expression—those typically affiliated with rap music and hip hop culture—have routinely been
singled out for censure from those who feel threatened by the experience of social, racial, or
cultural difference. And, again, these elements have been associated with an articulation of
“black masculinity” that is especially contentious. Bell hooks’s singled-out the hip hop industry
as an acutely corrosive force in the construction of “black masculinity” (2012). In her view,
“coolness” had formerly embodied a stoicism in the black male consciousness that helped minds
to endure the perpetual humiliations of racial injustice (p. 73). She argued that this inscrutable
and sublime nonchalance once voiced in the blues has recently been usurped and distorted by the
image of “today’s ‘cool’ Black male” which has power and domination at its core. Seen in this
light, the performance of “black masculinity” renders the stereotype of “black loudness” into an
expressive modality (i.e. “black swagger”). And it is one that can be alluring insofar as it remains
a symbol of “street credibility”—the cultural capital of the streets. Even contextualized, then, the
issue in and of itself continues to reduce what could very well be viewed as an authentic mode of
159

black expression down to a stigmatized status. It essentially stigmatizes the condition of being an
uneducated young black person in America. In rejecting the modality, however, there is the risk
of assuming the inverse stigma of “acting white” (Christie, 2010).
Most people would, in reality, aptly deny that there is any credibility to the notion that
blacks somehow have a genetically-rooted propensity for boisterousness or vociferation in
expression. Others, however, are not really convinced about its existence as a socially
constructed phenomenon or even as a manifestation of racial performativity. The idea that there
is any agency in the performance of “black masculinity” is almost entirely dispensed with in
their approach. Instead, “implicit bias” has been identified as the source of the phenomenon
(Losen, 2015). The singular stereotype might play a role as an underlying contributor by feeding
into the subconscious formation of the bias, but not in a relationship of causality. This research is
based in cognitive science in what has been called “the social neuroscience approach.” Studies in
implicit bias apply methods such as Implicit Association Testing (IAT) and Implicit Association
Procedure (IAP) to measure levels of implicit bias present in individual persons. Both of these
methods monitor brain functioning by scientifically testing response times for word/image
associations (Teige-Mocigemba, Klauer, & Sherman, 2010; Amodio, 2013). The implicit bias
literature which has sought to measure and test for its presence has established a foundation for
other researchers to study its real world effects. In Closing the School Discipline Gap, for
example, Daniel J. Losen (2015) pointed to how implicit bias has repeatedly led educators to
misinterpret the communicative expressiveness of black students and disproportionately penalize
them accordingly (p. 76).

160

Unfortunately, the situation is not limited to a classroom setting—it is arguably endemic
to the greater part of interracial relations in this country. In August of 2015, for example, in
California’s Napa Valley during a train travel wine tour, the members of the Sistas on the Edge
Book Club, a predominantly African American book club, were escorted off their train car for
complaints concerning their loudness that the company apparently received from a couple of
bothered clients (Rocha, 2015). However, after all of the evidence in the controversy was
reviewed by the parties involved—including the fact that one of the members was an
octogenarian—it was determined that the book club members had, in fact, been treated unfairly
for expressing themselves in such a way that was neither unruly nor disruptive. The once
accusing company had to issue a formal apology soon after. The argument for implicit bias, at
least in this example, was unambiguous and clear.
At the heart of this discussion lies the following question: Is this practice of using antinoise policies to check the noise-levels in the reading room atmosphere to create a silent reading
environment truly the one which is most conducive to the ways in which black people have
constructed knowledge, or does it reinforce the largely antiquated notion of the role of a librarian
as a gatekeeper? I found that despite being an African American research collection, alternative
modalities of knowledge sharing had no place in the Schomburg rare book reading room The
rarefication implied by the “special” of “special collections” is limited to those items that
physically makeup collections. Rare book reading rooms, being places that contain important and
unique artifacts, are places that typically have a greater amount of restrictions than others. The
Schomburg Center’s rare book reading room, in this sense, was closely aligned with the Western
model. Individuals were swiftly and politely reprimanded for any perceived violation in policy.
The room itself largely mirrored the interior design of the Clark, only, with an emphasis on black
161

art. The Schomburg Center’s rare book reading room, however, had some of the strictest policies
for collection access and use out of the four different sites that I investigated during my research.
Most of these policies, such as the requirement of researcher registration forms and the
restriction against researcher use of personal paper for note-taking, were more preservation
oriented. Other policies, such as anti-noise policies that matched those that I encountered in the
reference reading room, were evidently intended to uphold the sanctity of the reading room
environment.
The arrangement, though not without its merits, served to perpetuate Freire’s notion of a
banking model of education within the context of primary source research (Freire, 1970). On one
occasion, there was an older untidily dressed black person in the room who conveyed the
appearance of being a homeless senior and had been showing signs of mental instability.31 After
numerous warnings for violating the policy against talking loudly—and in this case, the patron
had been talking to himself—the individual was politely asked to leave the area. A brief time
after their purposefully muted exchange, the individual complied with the request of the staff to
remove himself. I personally felt the discomfort in room amongst learners and researchers when
the patron had violated the rule against loudness. I experienced this shift in the feeling and mood
of the space, despite my being able to empathize with the conditions of poverty and the lack of a
stable residence from having endured through similar challenges in my own past. The Clark
Library, on the other hand, has had a hidden advantage in targeting its desired patronage to the
exclusion of others. Considering the demographic makeup of its surrounding communities, it
seems that the Clark Library’s environmental dissonance has been formidable enough to prevent

31

SIV-D3: RST

162

these kinds of uncomfortable situations that involve, in some form or another, a denial of access,
from occurring within the confines of their reading room space.
On a similar note, whereas at the Schomburg student users received the required
standardized information literacy lesson explaining use and access policies, comparable
undergraduate level introductions to special collections assumed a more advanced student
knowledge of collection use. The staff at both of these institutions, however, was simultaneously
responsible for providing access to collections—and with the aid of security—helping to prevent
material losses of the collection through damage or theft. It is clear, then, that vestiges of the
gatekeeper role can be found in the present day reference librarian, curator, or archivist. In this
sense, the fact that conventional modes of knowledge production are carried on in the special
collections reading room environment is easily fathomable. And it is worth mentioning that in
the Schomburg Center’s Jean Blackwell Hutson Research and Reference Division reading room,
or, more simply, the reference reading room, loud verbal communication among the library’s
users and learners was, at times, the cause for bickering among strangers over the right to talk
and the right to study in silence. Cell phone use and the high volumes of music in some of the
younger users’ and learners’ headphones provoked reactions from other learners and researchers
who preferred a quieter space to conduct their work.32 I, too, was put in a somewhat precarious
position by the restrictions on talking in the reading room when I was approached at random by
an African American patron with a thick West Indian accent who asked me to assist him with his
internet navigation because he could not read well enough, in the conventional sense, to perform
this activity independently.33 The policy placed me in the position of having to decide whether or
not to violate it in order to help this individual. In all, however, the dynamics created by this
32
33

SIV-D9: RST
SIV-D4: RST

163

policy, often being associated with a restrained tension, was not pronounced enough to produce a
sustained disruption in the Center’s adoption of the conventionality of a quiet reading
atmosphere.
4. I. 4. Access: Racial Distribution in Ethnocentric Research Spaces
Mirroring the racial hegemony found in a traditional special collections reading room, the
racial distribution of the patron population at the Schomburg during my time spent onsite showed
a noticeable parallelism (Appendix A). Fundamentally, both institutions had large ethnic
majorities that, despite at least one of these institutions having embodied many aspects of the
multicultural ideal, lacked true signs of interracial integration. The Schomburg Center, in fact,
with an 80% black patron population and only 15% of the total patron population that was
observably white, had one of the largest black majorities of all the case studies. Similarly, a solid
87% of the patrons at the Clayton Library Museum in Los Angeles were black, despite the fact
that Culver City is not really considered to be a majority black community.34
As it turned out, the distribution disparity at the Schomburg and the Clayton was roughly
the parallel opposite of the demographic distribution of white and black readers at the Clark
Library. The Clark had a population that was 89% white and just 4% black in makeup.35 The
disparity suggests that these institutions had managed to reach populations with strong historical
ties to their collections. They have managed to do so in spite of the many challenges related to
the enforcement of restrictive policy or the impact of environmental dissonance. At the Clark,
again, it appears that environmental dissonance has functioned, in part, as a surface level
population filter. The facility’s imposing structural aesthetic has afforded to it the appearance of
34
35

SIV-D1-D11: DEM; SIII-D1-D6: DEM
SI-D1-D9: DEM

164

a private and, thus, forbidden air of opulence. Environmental dissonance, however, might have
had a lesser impact at the Amistad Research Center. This institution was shown to have had a
more or less even distribution of black and white patrons. It is likely that the draw of the
collections coupled with the nature of the outreach helped to moderate such inhibitors to access.
In the case of the Schomburg, the observational data suggests that the symmetry
maintained between the physicality of the research space and its interior helped the library
override the inhibitors of restrictive reading room policies that have served to discourage
disturbances and protect the collections. Along with a number of other factors—certainly
including the robust variety of programs offered by the Schomburg in addition to its
collections—it is likely that the high black population of users, learners, and researches at the
library has also worked to sustain comparatively high levels of black patronage in such a way
that is self-perpetuating. Clearly, the decision to have a high amount of African American
demographic representation at every level of the staff has been another contributing factor. In the
past, tensions have run high when the administration failed the community in this regard. In
1982, for example, two black protest organizers were arrested for threatening to forcibly remove
the then white chief archivist of the Schomburg Center, Robert Morris, from the facility (The
New York Times, 1982). The Schomburg’s research collection, it seems, has upheld a cultural
resonance with its core demographic that is difficult to disregard.
In investigating access in its relation to racial demographics, it is true that it is access to
collections that always concerns us. What is meant here by collections, of course, is the
assemblage of (information/bibliographic/artefactual) objects; and, again, the bibliographic
objects have always remained at the center of the research process. It is only that here these

165

objects have been investigated in connection with the various (systems-based) aspects of their
larger environment—demographics being one of a number of components that make up that
environment. At the Schomburg, then, it was clear that the massive quantity of black studies
books, artifacts, and archival and research materials was directly reflective of the racial
distribution of its demographics. In other words, as the collection’s first intended audience was
the black population, its majority black population of patrons had come about by design.
This situation is more than suggestive of the deep level of de facto segregation that has
existed in major urban environments outside of the South for generations. In looking at the
segregated collections in light of the history of segregation in the United States, however, the
question concerning the different ways in which the materiality of these bibliographic objects
contribute to the construction of racial identity assumes an even greater sense of import.
Furthermore, we must also seek to understand how that identity construction is situated within a
reading environment. With that understanding, it becomes possible to discern how bibliocultural
relationships are shaping collection access. As previously suggested by the relative absence of
urban fiction at the Schomburg in comparison with NYPL’s general collections, the fact that
urban literature technically does not “belong” in a research collection that has the gravitas of the
Schomburg bears a consequence of failing to capture an important part of the history that is
perhaps the lifeblood of black literature in the twenty-first century. Gratefully, this class of black
literature has enjoyed moderate representation in the collections, even if it is significantly lesser
than what is found in the NYPL’s circulating collections.
4. II. 1. Encounter: Events and Programs as Library Outreach

166

Libraries in their dual roles as educational and memory institutions, may seek to realize
their access potential through their encounters with the public or with the anticipated patron
population. This outreach is usually performed through programs and events. The mission of
providing outreach, and especially literacy outreach to the underserved, largely has been a public
sector project, and has represented a challenge of particular difficulty for special collections and
research libraries (Traister, 2003). The ALA’s Office of Diversity, Literacy, and Outreach
Services has explicitly articulated its dedication to the avowedly democratic goal of promoting
greater literacy within minority populations (American Library Association, 2015). Past
responses to the black literacy gap, too, such as the recommendations offered by Hughes-Hassell
et al. (2012) have sought to inform the direction of programs and events in an attempt to increase
their potential relevancy to the black community. The extent to which such outreach is actually
aimed at improving or ameliorating educational conditions for both younger and older learners,
then, falls on a spectrum which has, at one end, public institutions that offer a wide variety of
literacy-specific programs and open events and, at the other end, the highly specialized research
collections that focus more on advanced research fellowships and events that are closed or
insular in nature. We find that the Schomburg has heavily invested in youth outreach and
community-centered events, whereas the Clark, for the most part, has opted to devote its
outreach efforts to advanced specialists and lifetime academics.
At times, as it felt as if the differences between these two institutions could not be any
more blatant. The bright and colorful, music filled exhibit spaces of the Schomburg seemed
worlds away from the somber sepia-toned artifacts displayed in the Clark’s marbled hall display
cases. At other times I was reminded of their similarities. Both institutions, for instance, offered
regular tours—in fact, facility and exhibit tours were a standard at all four sites—and both have
167

been known to provide a range of educational and entertainment-oriented events. Even more,
both the Schomburg and the Clark Libraries have continued to come up with targeted outreach
formulated around collection strengths. One of the primary differences among the two, however,
lies in the extent to which the Schomburg has been able to connect with the demographics of its
immediate regional community. Judging from the frequency, balance, range, and quality of
programs and events, the Schomburg probably displayed the most impressive example of
community outreach out of all the individual case studies.
On the surface, Harlem is hip hop and reggae; underneath, however, a steady stream of
soul, funk, rhythm & blues, and, of course, jazz pumps through its social and communal veins. If
hip hop in this telling is viewed as a semiotic signifier for black youth, then the older genres of
black music can stand in for the earlier generations of black folks in Harlem. I found the events
at the Schomburg to be profoundly penetrative in terms of their relevance to the local African
American population. The concerts, lectures, and exhibits played to the history of black Harlem.
In this sense, it is not only through its and collections and its facilities, but really through its
outreach efforts that the library becomes an integral part and contributing force in that history.
The outcome goes beyond preservation of the history, it is perpetuation which causes that history
to live and breathe again.
During my time spent engaged in onsite research, I was able to attend a mid-afternoon
event called “Before 5 with Marjorie Eliot and Special Guest.”36 This event was part of a
monthly jazz music series that, along with a number of other special events, was both free and
open to the public. With approximately 300 people in attendance at a 347-seat professional
theatre, the audience was predominantly African American, drawing from the more mature and
36

SIV-D9: COMM

168

senior segments of the community. There was a noticeable Caucasian presence in the audience as
well, but they were definitely the minority in the room. The time and date of the event—2:00 pm
on a Wednesday afternoon—encouraged a high attendance among community seniors.
“Straight ahead” jazz music made up the bulk of Eliot’s concert repertoire. The music
pulsated with vibrant energy and filled the room with the sonic intensity of improvised melodic
dialogues. The concert integrated spoken word and plantation songs and spirituals sung acapella
during the interludes to the longer pieces. It was unmistakable from the feeling of comradery in
the room and from the sincere and affectionate dedications that came from her collaborators that
Eliot appeared to have deep roots in the Harlem community. A community fixture, she was the
personal friend of several people in attendance as well as the musicians that performed with her
during the concert. She is part of a living legacy. The history of jazz in Harlem is strong. Like
New Orleans it is viewed as one of the places where jazz music matured in its early
development; it is the city where “stride” piano was born. At its height, the city lauded jazz
greats James P. Johnson, Thomas “Fats” Waller, Willie “the Lion” Smith, and Duke Ellington
among its roster of leading jazz and swing pianist and composers (Harker, 2005, pp. 98-104).
And even if a number of the novelists and academics associated with the Harlem Renaissance
harbored their apprehensions toward the wider public perception of the musical form, they still
appreciated the achievements of the music’s most successful artists (Harker, 2005, p. 48). As a
storied, working jazz pianist, Eliot represented a continuation of that tradition; she was a living
link to Harlem’s celebrated past.
I was also able to observe three of the Schomburg’s exhibits during my time onsite. Like
the Elliot’s recital and the Before 5 jazz concert series, all three were appreciably in touch with

169

the older generations of black Harlem. Each was tailored to meet the educational and
preservation needs of this demographic. The advertising for these exhibits, with its bold colors
and wall-sized text, was large and brightly visible from the streets. The Schomburg’s floor-level
exhibit, “Funky Turns 40: Black Character Revolution,” was a six-month long exhibit that was
open through the spring and summer of 2014. 37 In a long enclosed octagonal corridor which
wrapped around the perimeter of the floor’s center and was set apart from the main entrance
reception area and performance spaces, this exhibit showcased a variety of mid-to-late twentieth
century cartoons. The theme of the exhibit was primarily centered upon images of black folks in
children’s media and post-Civil Rights era young adult entertainment, but it also sought to draw
its learners’ attention to the marginalized, yet deeply entrenched presence of African American
historical narratives in comics and animation of the twentieth century. In doing so, however, the
exhibit chose to consciously confront the long history of negative stereotypes that have been
perpetuated in mainstream television and film from the blackface caricatures of the minstrelsy
era to the more contemporary criminal and gang-related visual misrepresentations of black
people that are still, almost impulsively present throughout today’s media landscape.
The reference to funk music in the exhibit’s title is not an arbitrary one. Funk music has
been a cornerstone in the black community for generations. Vincent (1996) suggested that funk
is rooted in early jazz and African music. He located funk’s split from jazz and the spirit of
liberation that has motivated and defined it in the music’s emphasis, instead, on “unity” and
“togetherness”—a quality, he felt, reflected a redirection to black solidarity championed during
the revolutionary period of the late 1960s and ‘70s (pp. 13-15). “As long as there is rhythm,”
wrote Vincent, “as long as there is togetherness, as long as there is a vibe—it’s funk” (p. 13).
37

SIV-D10: ENT

170

The influence of the funk and soul music aesthetic in these late twentieth century cartoons was
brought out not only in the works themselves, but also in the exhibit’s lettering and graphic
design. It was a design that was akin to the brief animated intro to “Soul Train”—the once
immensely popular broadcast dance show. The artifacts—animation cells, posters, comic books,
and other reading materials from shows like the Harlem Globetrotters cartoon, Fat Albert, and
the Jackson 5ive—were colorfully displayed on the walls and in a series of four large, well-built
display cases. The object-centric displays were further augmented by looped footage of clips
from corresponding animated film and television shows playing on video screens in full audio.
For instance, there would be samples from a comic book series dedicated to the biography of Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. on display with clips from the animated feature Our Friend Martin
(1999) playing in close proximity to them. This interlaced mixed-media format allowed for a
multidimensional experience in “reading” the exhibit’s narrative through the space.
The main exhibition room at the Schomburg Center was located on the second floor,
close to the gift shop. The somewhat counterintuitive location quietly suggested an institutional
favoring of collection research activities over its other educational and more entertainmentoriented functions, but this inference was not immediately perceptible upon my initial
observation. As I entered the “Motown: The Truth is a Hit” exhibit, I was immediately
inundated by a cacophonous wave of energetic music. I was instantly enticed by the boldly
painted blue and gold walls covered by historical artifacts.38 As I read my way through the space
and took note of the displayed objects and their captions, I found that the exhibit was telling an
abridged story of Berry Gordy and his Motown recording label. It was a narrative that sought to
draw attention to Gordy’s firm belief in the African roots of the rhythm and blues and soul music
38

SIV-D10: ENT

171

genres that were at the center of the label’s success. The music’s strong relationship to the Civil
Rights Movement was also publicized in this account. Recording artists and bands such as The
Supremes, The Jackson 5, The Temptations, Marvin Gaye, Smokey Robinson, and Stevie
Wonder were historicized and commemorated through the displayed objects and video clips.
Important recording industry documents, photographs, original vinyl records and album covers,
printed ephemera, and stage outfits and performance attire accounted for the greater share of the
displays. The symbiotic consonance between this exhibition and Harlem’s black community
approached the sense of cohesion created in Elliot’s afternoon jazz concert. It challenges the idea
that the exhibit format of the event, by virtue of its unmistakably Western foundations, must
persistently remain a step removed from its subject, when that subject deals with the history of
oppressed peoples or marginalized groups.
In her book Imperial Eyes: Travel Writing and Transculturation (1992), Pratt
reintroduced her term “contact zone” to describe the “space of imperial encounters, in which
peoples geographically and historically separated come into contact with each other and establish
ongoing relations, usually involving conditions of coercion, radical inequality, and intractable
conflict” (p. 8). The term was later interjected into the museum studies discourse in Clifford’s
(1997) Routes: Travel and translation in the Late Twentieth Century. More recently, Schorch
(2013) noted how this dialectical application of the term in the context of the museum as a
dialogical space—with museums as perpetuators of a dichotomization between the cultural
“other” and the hegemonic through categorizations that demarcate cultural difference—had to
account for the problem of translation and how it contradicts pure notions of hegemonic fixity (p.
69). And Schorch, in his attempt to empirically analyze these concepts, astutely argued that
Babha’s idea of the “third space” addressed the problem in that it afforded a spatial dimension to
172

the “processes” of translation wherein symbolic and semiotic fixity become illusory by a
privileging of the interpretive (pp. 69-70). In this more nuanced understanding of translation,
interpretation, the starting point for any interaction, becomes the nexus of meaning making in
cross-cultural dialog (pp. 70-75).
Much of the past research into this issue has looked at how “contact zones” and “liminal
spaces” have operated in postcolonial and cosmopolitan societies (Schorch, 2013, pp. 68-69). In
instances where the subjugated peoples represent the indigenous population, these processes of
translation between these “zones” and “spaces” typically have the potential to be informed by
indigenous cultural histories that are inextricably wedded to the local geography and landscape.
The history of the enslavement of African peoples, however, being a unique example that
involved several hundred years of involuntary geographic dislocation, must necessarily take on
different dimensions. The Afrocentricity of the Schomburg’s exhibits, for instance, appeared to
have had a stronger visibility in the artifacts themselves than in the various structural and
procedural factors that comprise the current standard of library and museum curatorial practice.
It is not that structure and procedure are utterly exempt from a translation process which, in this
case, accentuates a Pan-African vision of blackness within a traditionally European and
historically imperialist institutional medium; it is that these factors are being negotiated and
reinterpreted in ways that are comparatively opaque.
The Donald Andrew Agarrat photography exhibit in the Schomburg Center’s rare book
reading room exemplified this characteristic of opacity in several respects.39 For one, Agarrat (d.
2013) was a powerfully countercultural artist whose work challenged the societal status quo in
delicate, almost subconscious ways. He was Harlem-based artist who, like Lorna Simpson, used
39

SIV-D2-D4: EDU

173

photography as the primary medium for his works. His love for both jazz and house music
positioned him as a generational bridge between the younger and older generations of black
artists. 40 And he was an avid supporter of black artists and their art during his life. The
purposefully black and white photographs had an everydayness about them, but somehow
captured all of the weight and depth of a lifespan in the expressions of his subjects.
The jarring contrast between the Motown exhibit and the display of Agarrat’s work in the
reading room leaves an impression that is difficult to ignore. The invisible clash of the highvolume and visual intensity of the Motown exhibit with the quiet, reserved atmosphere of the
Schomburg Center’s rare book reading room produces a distinct shift in the atmosphere of the
space. Due, perhaps, to the sight of the researchers combined with the room’s round columns,
sculptures, and reference materials, visitors who entered the room exclusively to see the Agarrat
exhibit routinely conformed to the expected, quiet decorum of the space. Nevertheless, in
circumambulating through the reading room space as an exhibit rather than a reading room, the
Afrocentricity of both the collections and the environment still stand out.
That sense of Afrocentrism conveyed in many of the Schomburg’s public events was also
something that I encountered in some of the programs at the Mayme A. Clayton Library and
Museum. On a Monday evening, March 24, 2014, for instance, I attended a screening of Woodie
King Jr. and Herbert Danska’s film, Right On! (1970), as part of the 4th Monday Screenings film
series.41 The film starred a collective of radical black poets—Gylan Kain, David Nelson, and
Felipe Luciano—who dubbed themselves “The Last Poets.” Basically, it was made up of a string
of recorded performances that featured a politically uncompromising sampling of revolutionary

40
41

SIV-Doc5
SIII-D4: COMM

174

poems set against the hidden space (back alleys, rooftops, staircases, etc.) of Harlem, New York
City. The provocative style of poetry seemed to anticipate the rap medium that would emerge a
decade later, but it also demonstrated the strong commitment that black intellectuals of the late
1960s and early 1970s had to an Afrocentric ideal. The use of African rhythms as the backbeat to
the militant lyricism was, in a sense, evocative of that ideal, at least in aesthetic terms. The
filmed provoked a lively discussion that touched on issues of black oppression, black history, our
relationship with Africa, and, above all, the question of whether or not Black Arts Movement
poets like Sonia Sanchez, Nikki Giovanni, and others had managed to impart to some of their
values on the hip hop generation. At the Clark, I found, that there was notably less transparency
about the racial dimension of its programs and events. Absent too, I believe, was any stated
recognition or contextualization of its tacit Eurocentrism.
4. II. 2. Encounter: The Insularity of Academic Events in Research Spaces
At a conference that I attended at the Clark Library during my time onsite, the
Eurocentric nature of the proceedings would have been completely imperceptible save the
presence of myself and one other attendee of color.42 Regardless of our racial difference,
however, the accepted academic communicative modes and the expected norms of conference
etiquette in the humanities served to nullify the perception of difference denoted by our
complexions. In other words, adherence to the social customs, in this case, outweighed any
manifestations of cross-cultural hybridity; in its place there was a construction of cultural
singularity personified by the group of scholars in Western “high culture” literature in attendance
as well as the speakers and their respective papers. As one of only two people of color at the
conference, the proceedings were as much as a process of enculturation as they were educative.
42

SI-D5: EVT

175

I attended “Double Falshood and Cardenio: Theobald, Fletcher, Shakespeare, Cervantes”
on January 31, 2014—one day of a two-day conference. During the course of the day I was able
to see a series of presentations that explored the question of the authenticity of the play “Double
Falsehood” as a Shakespearean work. Many positions were put forward as others were
intellectually dissected about the authenticity of the play that was declared to be definitively
Shakespearean a little more than a year later by Boyd and Pennebaker (2015). As a number of
the conference speakers took an approach that sought to apprehend a more comprehensive
intellectual history surrounding the debate, Boyd and Pennebaker, claimed that their combination
of artificially manufactured psychological signatures and statistical text analysis provided
compelling indications as to a Shakespearean origin (Boyd & Pennebaker, 2015). The themes of
the conference, in this instance—authenticity, authorship, and Shakespeare—were remarkably in
step with the traditional focus of literary and bibliographic research in the West. And in addition
to the communicative modes and intellectual themes of the conference, the surrounding
conference activities involving, leisure, networking, and socialization could be characterized by
privilege and a predisposition toward academic insularity. The privileges extended to this group
included an open viewing of Shakespearean and other important sixteenth and seventeenth
century works. Crowning the impressive selection of items loosely arranged on tables in even
more impressively decorated and stately rooms was a First Folio (1623) edition of Shakespeare
that attendees were permitted to carefully thumb through without guidance if not without
supervision. Of course, all of the conference attendees could enjoy such luxuries regardless of
their racial or ethnic background, but it is important to restate that, much like the Clark’s reading
room, the demographic makeup was solidly Caucasian.43 Only in the performance of the actual

43

SI-D1-D9: DEM

176

"Double Falsehood" was there real any presence of racial diversity. As it turned out, many in this
small troupe of UCLA student actors that performed that night, including some of the lead
actors, were performers of color.
Next to the Schomburg Center’s robust lineup of outreach activities and events, the
Clark’s outreach is relatively limited. It is true that they are both special collections. It is also
true that they are both research facilities. One, however, is attached to a university library
system; the other to a public. Accordingly, whereas the Before 5 concert tickets were free and
readily available, tickets for musical concerts at the Clark which feature performances by
chamber music ensembles in its drawing room are offered through a lottery system. Some of the
Clark’s smaller events that have, perhaps, a lower profile than others are promoted mainly
through paper advertisements on tables and posted in the reception room. And, regrettably,
engagement with the surrounding communities of West Adams and Jefferson Park has been
virtually non-existent.

177

Chapter Five: Findings for Representation and Organization
5. I. 1. Representation: The Early Black Press and the Rise of the Humanizing Text
In a 1974 episode of Good Times titled “Michael Gets Suspended” the youngest son in
the family, Michael, is suspended for what he perceives is the transgression of his very blackness
(Manings, Lear, & Knight, 1974). The technical reason for the suspension, we soon learn, was
over his refusal to denounce his view that President George Washington was a racist. When
interrogated as to why he held such a controversial viewpoint, Michael explained that it was on
the account that President Washington owned slaves. When asked where he first obtained the
information concerning this inconvenient piece of history, we discover that Michael read it in a
book on black history that he found at the library. After reading this history, he became cynical
and discontented with the way that it had been deliberately left out of the standard curriculum.
Consequently his parents, Florida and James Evans, felt strongly compelled to convince him to
apologize to his teacher so that he may return to class and continue with his education. Without
comparison, Michael, a young adolescent of ten or twelve, was the best student out of the three
children. As the youngest and smartest child in the family, his parents undoubtedly felt that he
had the most potential for success in life. Nonetheless, after his mother and siblings failed to
reason with him, his father was driven to threaten harsh corporal punishment as a final result.
Michael was prepared to take a stand and accept his punishment regardless of the
physical pain he expected to have to endure. He was actually committed to nothing less than
dropping out of school altogether over the issue. James Evans, however, who naturally had a soft
spot for his youngest son, hesitated as he tried instead to explain the severity of the situation by
178

relating the generational plight of the workingman. James, it seems, did not intend for his son to
follow in his footsteps by ending up washing dishes for a living. He sternly warned his youngest
son to take his education seriously. And then a plot twist occurred when Michael unintendedly
sparked his father’s interest in black history during their rather lengthy the post-lecture exchange.
In their discussion, Michael educated his father about the American revolutionary martyr,
Crispus Attucks, as well as a stream of lesser known, but still widely accomplished figures in
black history. James was becoming increasingly inspired and excited by what his son had to
teach him, and Florida walked in on the unexpected scene of the father and son happily
conversing with each other about the various merits and achievements of African Americans
throughout history. Together, they all came to the mutual understanding that there is, in fact, at
least some value in the traditional education system, even if the system is a flawed one. James,
having felt an even greater sense of pride for his son, apologized to him—an unprecedented act
of clemency and humility in the show. Michael was so moved by his father’s heartfelt apology
that he declared his intention to apologize to his teacher and return to school.
In this episode, Michael is being punished for his embrace of a radical counter-narrative.
To retard the punitive actions from further obstructing his potential for success he must reconcile
his new foundation of knowledge with a seemingly incommensurate model perpetuated by a
standard that actively works at suppressing the cultural “other” upon which his very identity is
defined. It is not the case, then, that Michael does not have enough literacy; in fact, he has too
much of it. All the same, the heart of the matter is the vehicle which moves the narrative—the
library’s book on black history. In this story, the black press artifact serves to liberate not just
Michael’s consciousness, but also that of his father. The narrative encapsulates, in its hypercondensed format, a reverse generational passing of the torch in terms of the way of that African
179

Americans have engaged with books and the texts that they embody, similar to when freeborn
black children taught their formerly enslaved parents the conventional literacy skills that they
had learned in school. On the one hand there are hints of the late nineteenth/early twentieth
century split between the Washingtonian and Du Boisean models for promoting advancement
and upward mobility in the black community. Larger and more obvious than that, though, is the
narrative’s allusion to the sharper schism among the diverging agendas of the Civil Rights and
Black Power movements. With this interpretation, the dispute between Michael and his parents,
particularly in their support of the conventional education system, mirrors the key differences
between those in support of civic participation such as Bayard Rustin (d. 1987) and Martin
Luther King Jr. (d. 1968) on one side of the spectrum and reactionary-minded, militancy oriented
thinkers like Kwame Turé (born Stokely Carmichael, d. 1998) and Huey P. Newton (d. 1989) on
the other. In this particular episode of Good Times, the book represents a utopian vision for the
future of the black race; it is a vision of autonomy. The textuality embodied in the books and
literacy practices of the African American community, consequently, is an amalgam of both the
material and the oral. What lies before us is the deeper history of the black press. By reviewing
material bibliographic artifacts and looking at them as spaces for discourse, we can begin our
journey to understand the bibliographic in its relation to racial identity construction in the United
States.
It is prudent to commence with Africa because there is a long and rich literary and
bibliographic history there; and, truthfully, it would be disingenuous to attempt to disentangle
that point from any discussion on the early history of the black press (Fraser, 2008). And
contrary to a historical revisionism which would reduce the continent to the sub-Saharan, this
would have to also include the deeply-rooted literary cultures of Egypt to the north and Ethiopia
180

to the east of the West African center of the transatlantic slave trade. As previously pointed out,
various intertextualities and various points of intersection between the literacies and texts of
Europeans and those of Africans existed during the transatlantic slave trade. In Signs of
Diaspora, Diaspora of Signs, for example, Grey Gundaker (1998) noted that in “Bahia, Brazil, in
the early years of the nineteenth century, Hausa and Yoruba Muslim slaves precipitated a series
of revolts. Schooled in Arabic literacy through memorization of the Qur’an” (Gundaker, p. v).
Moreover, Gundaker found that “about that same time, famed slave insurrection leader Nat
Turner, expressed his mission to lead African Americans to freedom by stressing knowledge of
both roman script and literacy and sacred hieroglyphs in which God’s instructions to revolt were
written in blood on the leaves of trees” (Gundaker, 1998, p. v). Both are examples of
bibliocultural intersection—a “third space” between the oral and the textual and between script
and glyph, writing and the performative, and Western and African textualities.
Henry Louis Gates (1988) perceptibly stated, “The notion that the Middle Passage was so
traumatic that it functioned to create in the African a tabula rasa of consciousness is as odd as it
is a fiction, a fiction that has served several economic orders and their attendant ideologies” (p.
4). Gates put forth, this reasonable if not somewhat controversial statement in his discussion of
the nature and function of the “signifyin(g)” text. In this argument Gates linked the shared
African and African American tradition of “signifyin(g)” to an West African source—the
mythological construct of the “trickster” deity of the Nigerian Yoruba, the orisha Esu-Elegbara.
The connection has been drawn, in part, on the account that in Yoruba cosmology, the orisha
(meaning god, or demi-god) Eshu (Elegba, Elegbara, etc.) is meant to open the threshold of
communication between the invisible realm of the ancestors and the world of the living. Gates
has found various antecedents and analogous qualities in this cosmology throughout the history
181

of black literature and literary criticism (pp. 26-49). Thus, he referred to signifyin(g) as a
rhetorical doubling (of narrative, meaning, interpretation, etc.) which, in its semiotic parallelism,
produces critical parody. In essence, this largely African tradition survived and permeated
throughout virtually the whole of African American textuality, in spite of the obstinacy of
Western conventionality in textual production. Gates aptly draws upon Bakhtin to explain the
“doubled text” in the rhetorical maneuvering of the signifyin(g) tradition (pp. 121-122). For
Gates, Bakhtin’s notion of a third order discourse that is “double-voiced”—a level of discourse
that encompasses parody and a “hidden polemic”—offers a fitting analogy for the “narrative
forms” in African American literature because it describes a form of discourse wherein the
speech is adopted and reconfigured by another in such a way that is both reflexive and invisibly
subversive (p. 122). The invisibility, of course, is achieved through an anteriority. In accordance
with this view of the transatlantic text, as a space for dual representation—a domain for parallel
hermeneutics—the slave narrative emerges as the exemplary genre for the black press during its
formative years. For the most part, as Joanna Brooks (2012) summarized in “The Unfortunates:
What the Life Spans of Early Black Books Tell Us About Book History” both the emergence of
the slave narrative and the early period of the black press in which it developed can be
characterized by such factors as discontinuity and disruption, adaptiveness and mobility,
entrepreneurial authorship, institutional and bureaucratic subsidization, and a committed
cognizance of power relationships.
One of the most famous and commercially popular examples of the slave narrative was
Frederick Douglass’s (1845) Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass. Curiously, as Julia
Sun-Joo Lee revealed in her book The American Slave Narrative and the Victorian Novel (2010),
the “British frontispiece departs significantly from the frontispiece in the American edition of
182

Douglass’s narrative published in that same year” (p. 4). Douglass was understandably offended
by the contrived docility that was conveyed in Henry Adlard’s engraving for the 1845 British
edition. He indicated as much, retrospectively, in an editorial in the April 7, 1849 issue of The
North Star. The peculiarity of the Douglass’s expression in the rendering of artist Bell and the
engraver Adlard is immediately noticeable when compared with the trademark expression of
piercing intensity seen in the engraving for the American edition. With this comparison,
however, Lee has inadvertently drawn the outline for an ethnobibliographic analysis of the black
press book. We discover, for one, that Douglass must have had a keen understanding of how his
work would be mediated across a black and white readership. This phenomenon will show up
again in this analysis because it is a subtle, yet pervasive one. The precedent set by Douglass,
both ideologically and materially, was advanced in a larger project of “humanization”—a
vindicating project which was chiefly concerned with demonstrating to the world, undeniably
and without question, the humanity of the black race. The bibliographic instruments of the black
press that served to materialize African American textuality, perhaps through their propensity for
reconfiguration and textual doubling, were often on the front lines of this project. The choice of
maintaining the continuity of convention was in no way an arbitrary one. The works of this
period accepted the established bibliographic mediums not only to demonstrate that black people
possessed the intellect to communicate in the “civilized” world of letters, but also to convey a
sense of intellectual legitimacy in the work. Looking at these texts less as records of history and
more as historical events, then, new information can be found in both their contents and their
material composition (McGann, 1991).
Estimates for African American newspapers released after Emancipation have a range of
several hundred. No small feat considering that African American pioneers of the press and
183

journalistic entrepreneurs alike were targeted and singled out for attack and risked property
destruction. Correspondingly, a reasonable degree of operational autonomy was necessary to the
project, and the need for equipment and skilled workers of color was similarly essential. It was
not as if the free black community completely lacked individuals with such capabilities. Showing
more than an operational knowledge, as early as 1878 a black inventor named William A.
Lavalette patented two improvements on the Gordon platen printing press, one of which
accounted for the flush meeting of the plate and the bed upon rotation (U.S.A. Patent No.
208,184, 1878). And some of the first black owned and operated presses, such as the press of
David Ruggles (d. 1849), were likely to have been in charge of their own equipment and labor.
In addition to having helped in securing Douglass’s freedom in the North, when Ruggles opened
and ran one of the nation’s first black-owned bookshops in 1834, it doubled as a press for
pamphlet and job printing (Hodges, 2010). Here, the iron hand press was the most probable
choice for an in-house operation, but other, primarily periodical-centered presses partnered up
with local churches to use their equipment if they were not compelled to rely upon some other
means to print their papers. It is really not until the coming of Marcus Garvey (d. 1940) that we
see one of the first truly largescale black publishing enterprises. Garvey’s Negro World Weekly
newspaper was a venture that employed thousands of African Americans, and which would
subsequently sow the seeds of a radical departure from the mission of “acceptance” in the
cultural mainstream (Moon, 2007).
This “humanization” project that was embedded within the underlying ideological
framework of the early black press was advanced further in the first part of the twentieth century.
The Murray Brothers Printing Company, which ran from 1908 to the close of the twentieth
century, was really an exemplar of the turn-of-the-century black owned press. The brothers
184

established a long-lived and successful printing firm that produced high quality works of African
American literature intended mainly for the black intelligentsia of the period. During the course
of subjecting various bibliographic samples to methodic investigation, I was able to examine an
extant copy of a Murray Brothers publication at Site Three, the Mayme A. Clayton Library and
Museum. The Clayton Library, it should be noted, is in possession of a relatively impressive
collection of early black press literature; and the depth and range of the collection enabled me to
cross compare with other materials. The Murray Brothers Printing Company was founded by
Raymond, Morris, and Norman Murray, in part with the aid of their father Freeman Henry
Morris Murray (“Colored printers celebrate birthday,” 1915). In addition to printing works of
poetry, art, history, and criticism, the firm sustained their business with job printing and the
production of ephemera. By 1921, the company had a modern Goss printing press from which
they were able to publish The Washington Tribune which ran until 1946 (Joyce, 1991).
The following statement from Rob Giampietro (2004) in his otherwise groundbreaking
essay “New Black Face: Neuland and Lithos as Stereotypography” is typical of the difficulty that
white audiences can encounter in attempting to perceive the doubling effect in black
bibliographic materiality:
Primarily because of both constant anti-African-American sentiment and the
socioeconomic status of African-Americans during and after the Civil War, AfricanAmerican graphic culture in the United States prior to Neuland’s release in 1923 and
before the Harlem Renaissance in general was unimportant at best and nonexistent at
worst. In short, African-Americans did not have the buying power or the social
acceptance required to cultivate a significant graphic culture. What graphic culture they

185

did have centered around their depiction in advertisements for products associated with
slavery: tobacco and cotton. (para. 8)
Absent in this claim is a cognizance of the bibliographic space as a “third space” between the
dichotomy of black and white visual interpretations. In washing over a rich bibliographic history
of the black press, the statement is analogous to maintaining that blacks did not have a history in
this country at all on the account that it was founded upon Anglo-American structures and
institutions. And yet we know that such claims are misguided, and that, in actuality, there is a
history within a history there. Granted that there have been instances of passing; more
specifically, there has been at least one documented instance of an African American in the print
trade, Grafton Tyler Brown (d. 1918), who attempted to conceal all traces of his blackness
through a demonstration of technical excellence and a mastery of the Western conventions (in
design). In a sense, the simultaneous racial and commercial “passing” of this lithographer—the
first black lithographer to establish his own lithographic printing company the Western United
States—could be likened to the “cultural dualism” of the black bourgeoisie class and its effort to
assimilate the literary trappings of the white mainstream both in its poetry and in its prose
(Palmquist & Kailbourn, 2000). In Murray’s editions, which were undisguisedly printed for an
African American readership, one finds this dualism present in the material components of the
text. Each typographic design element ultimately represents a choice; and each use of convention
quietly takes a stand against dehumanization by virtue of its manifestation. Recall that black
people were, at that time, collectively cast as subhuman and, thusly, were thought to have been
incapable of acquiring advanced literacy skills. This engagement with convention is, in some
respects, a stance of defiance because it rejects a view of black people being lesser than. It is also

186

assimilative, however, insofar as it must be mediated in accordance with the standards of a white
social and cultural hegemony.
Walter E. Todd’s (1909) Fireside Musings is a fairly illustrative case in point.44 The
maroon publisher's cloth binding with its gilt title on the front-cover and spine declares a
statement of quality, authority, and craftsmanship upon visual and tactile contact. The use of
textura blackletter for the book’s title page and poem titles edify the poems and provide them
with a Western sense of tradition and antiquity. The old style roman that follows it in the body of
the work is highly typical of late nineteenth century and early twentieth century Americana. It
features such paratextual reference mechanisms as an introduction (introductory), pagination,
and an index (a table of contents). And it also displays clear signs of aesthetic augmentation. The
book has a frontispiece, for instance, that used a photographic plate of the author for the
illustration. There is also an ornamental letter “I” in the text, and the book bears a printer’s
device on its title page.
The Murray Brothers printer’s device, furthermore, makes a delicate statement that
suggests, again, an allegiance with the mission of humanization. The device, the motif of the
winged torch, was a gentle mark of class and intellectual surety (Trevaldwin & Aylward, 1895).
The symbol of the winged torch historically has been tied to the torch of the Erinyes. Contrary,
perhaps, to the more negative undertones of these deities in Greek mythology, however, as
indicated by Efimia Menelaos Christopoulos, in the Oresteia “at the end of Eumenides—in the
final procession accompanied by Athena—the torch represents the triumph of light”
(Christopoulos, Karakantza, & Levaniouk, 2010, p. 137). Although the symbolic connection has
been somewhat lost over time, we find that this torch, the “torch of knowledge,” was a familiar
44

SIII-D6: B5

187

ornamentation in bookplates and printer’s devices throughout much of the early modern and
modern history of the book in the West. In this instance, the design offered a message of black
enlightenment wherein letters and learning are guiding readers through the darkness of ignorance
and barbarism. Some of the Murray’s other devices have included motifs such as the triple oak
leaf ornament—a symbol of wisdom and fortitude, a T-shaped column formed from acanthus
leaves, and a book surrounded by oak leaves and crowned by an illuming candle.
Much of Todd’s poetry was composed with a grammar which was as standard as the
typography. The use of convention here, again, did not nullify the process of signifyin(g), it
actually served to substantiate it. Note, for example, in the following passage from “My Visit at
the School” the reflexive self-awareness of the speaker as he participates in the rhetorical game
of doubling through his use of parody:
So I called up at the grammar class
That had a large attendance,
Says I, “Can any one of you
Tell me what is a sentence?”
So one little boy held up his hand,
Says I, “Tell me without fail.”
“A sentence,” says he, “Mr. Teacher,
Is thirty days in jail.” (p. 19)
Many of the poems in this book contain such biting witticisms. Far from an attempt at passing,
here the use of voice speaks properly, yet improperly. And the function of employing the
convention in the “humanizing” project assumes more of an intraracial dimension in its ability to
188

provide a greater sense of self-reliance and intellectual autonomy for the black race. These early
black press books had declared over and over again, “We are black, and we are human; we can
read, so we are civilized; we have our own poetry, and so too our own culture, and that culture
has been cultivated by learning.”
Sure enough, in Todd’s poetry one also sees traces of the doubling effect in his relatively
conservative incorporation of African American Vernacular English in the language. The author,
for example, uses the word “study’n” in place of "studying" to emphasize the stylized vernacular
of the black oral tradition. Gates links this practice to the “speakerly text” which, in his words, is
a text that “privileges the representation of the speaking black voice” (Gates, 1988, p. 112). What
we encounter, then, is an early instance of a phenomenon that has had a tangible and enduring
presence in black press book production.
Correspondingly, there are also some references to Africa in his poetry. Yet such
references are, like his use of AAVE, as calculated as they are scant. His “Minister to Dahomey”
poem made use of the affective sentiment toward the historical West African kingdom of
Dahomey among the early twentieth century African American intelligentsia as a metaphorical
code to playfully satirize African American popular culture. The poem’s symbolic African
connotations also served to caricature instances of exploitation at the hands of trusted
opportunists, and perhaps even coming from within the culture.

189

Figure 9. Frontispiece for Chords and Discords depicting Walter Everett Hawkins. Courtesy of
the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
Compared with Walter Todd’s poetry, the language found in the 1909 Murray Brothers
edition of Walter Everett Hawkins’s Chords and Discords is slightly more formal.45 His frequent
use of Shakespearean English was, perhaps, somewhat old fashioned for the times. The
passionate commitment to Pan-Africanist ideals found in his poetry, however, is unquestionably
visible to the present day reader. His “Ode to Ethiopia” was especially transparent in its
appreciation for African history and civilization. In the language and in the polemical themes,

45

SIV-D4: B3

190

once again, there is a doubling effect at play, and it is an effect that is distinct to each edition.
The bibliocultural relationships shift with the context of each individual object’s manifestation.
The broadening of intended readership, for example, coupled with the racial background of the
publishers are likely to have accounted for the various subtle, yet noteworthy differences in the
1920 Murray Brothers edition from that of the Gorham Press. Hawkins’s dedication to “a galaxy
of Brothers and Sisters, whose kind indulgences have inspired my dreams” was revised in the
Gorham edition to acknowledge the “sons and daughters of promise wherever they abide.”
Furthermore, you will not find poems that so expressly celebrate Africa as “Ode to Ethiopia” in
the Gorham version; nor will you find the two poems which engage with the long-reigning
intellectual dispute between Booker T. Washington and W. E. B. Du Bois.
A number of these changes were made, no doubt, by Hawkins himself. Others were likely
to have been the result of editorial discretion. We can reasonably expect, however, that at least
some of the differences in the edition, more specifically, the material components of the book
and its overall design, came at the hands of the publisher. In this particular e\xample, that
individual would have been the publisher of “poetry and belle lettres,” Richard G. Badger, who
ran The Gorham Press in the city of Boston during that time. Nevertheless there is not anything
poetic, nor beautiful in explicitly racist works such as The Negro: A Menace to Civilization
(1907), which came out of that press about a decade prior to the revised edition of Hawkins’s
book. It figures, then, that in this so called “vanity press” version the text, the authorial
frontispiece portrait—a feature found also in Murray’s edition of Chords and Discords, and a
prominent feature, really, in black press books of this period in general—has been altogether
omitted (Figure 9). Likewise, in the printer’s device of the Gorham edition of Chords and
Discords one finds the image of a muscular white man printing on a hand press set on top of the
191

words “Arti et Veritatiti.” The figure conveys a bold, visual declaration to readers that, even if
unintentionally, cues the eye to privilege the white European source (viz. Teutonic birthplace) of
letterpress technology, and, thusly, connote the Anglo-American as the implied “rightful”
inheritor of Western civilization.
Moving into the period of the Harlem Renaissance, one of the samples I reviewed during
my research in the Schomburg’s rare book reading room was Langston Hughes’s (d. 1967) debut
1930 novel, Not Without Laughter.46 At this point in the history of black print, in order to
successfully achieve the humanizing goals of the age serious alliances and partnerships had to be
made with white stakeholders. The greater amount of exposure that Knopf (d. 1984) was able to
provide to Hughes in terms of readership, even if intermediated through figures like Carl Van
Vechten (one of Harlem’s most influential white socialites), is just one of a number of
noteworthy examples of this partnership (Gutjahr & Benton, 2001). In publishing his first novel
under the Knopf’s Borzoi imprint, Hughes’s writing had the potential for crossover into the
literary mainstream from the start. And Hughes continues to be recognized not only as one of the
greatest black poets in the history of American literature, but also as one of the most renowned
poets of the twentieth century. It is impossible for us to disregard the contributions that white
socialites like Van Vechten and supporters like the Spingarn family made in providing a platform
for black literature to reach a larger audience and to be taken more seriously. Far from “selling
out” to white exploitation of black creativity, the fact that Hughes dedicated his first novel to
Joel Elias and Amy Spingarn is further illustrative of his nuanced understanding of the complex
dynamics of race and culture in America.

46

SIV-D3: B2

192

Harlem Renaissance writers like Hughes were not opposed to assuming some of the
legitimizing material characteristics of mainstream publications, but they always had the deeper
purpose of giving voice to those denied one because of their skin color. Hence, in the coming of
age tale which comprises the novel’s core narrative, issues such as black assimilation of white
social and aesthetic standards and the lived experience of cultural heritage as it is passed down
through alternative ethnically-rooted pedagogies are addressed, dialogically, in Hughes’s
depictions of black families. Perhaps somewhat controversially for his purposes, Hughes instilled
cultural authenticity in his characters through an artful use of black vernacular. Moreover, by
doing so he critically dissected the issue of Western hegemony in education. Hughes even went
as far as to reference the intraracial contentiousness of using black vernacular in black literature.
The instance arises when the economically impoverished and educationally disadvantaged
protagonist, Sandy Rogers, comes under the care of his bourgeois Aunt Tempy who has married
into the black upper class (Hughes, 1930, p. 259). “The Negro,” the narrator explained, “was
represented by Chestnut’s House Behind the Cedars, and the Complete Poems of Paul Lawrence
Dunbar, whom Tempy tolerated on account of his fame, but condemned because he had written
so much in dialect and so often of the lower classes of colored people” (p. 259). In the story,
Sandy’s aunt seeks to legitimize her status by an exhibition of her ability to appropriate white
standards in language, dialect, behavior, and appearances.
The design of the book achieves much of the same in a similar attempt to convey a sense
of intellectual legitimacy in the object. Knopf had the book typeset by the Plimpton Press in
Norwood, Massachusetts (Hughes, 1930, colophon). In the Knopf edition, the use of Linotype
Bodoni—a modern roman font—performs a similar legitimizing function. Ottmar
Merganthaler’s linotype machine, after all, clearly was a democratizing technology in terms of
193

the history of print and communication, as it expanded the productive capabilities of typesetting
and letterpress printing (Comparato, 1971). The typographic move away from an old style font
was a move away from the rigid hierarchicalism of the past, and a slight push toward the
idealistically utopian egalitarianism of modernism at its heights. In its subtle affirmation of
modernity, it anticipated the expansion of cross-cultural racial discourse that would accompany
its eventual existential breakdown. Yet, also present is a resistance to move too far, too fast. The
typographic conservatism has each of the chapters adorned with a Lombard ornamental capital
and acanthus leaf dingbats that frame the chapter titles and space them from the ensuing body of
the text. Gutjahr and Bent (2001) have noted how in other Harlem Renaissance period
publications, Knopf used similarly antiquated typographic stylings to convey specific aesthetic
and social messages regarding both the quality of the literature being set and the case for a
historicized vision of aesthetic beauty in mass market books. Effectively these design choices
worked to combat stereotypes concerning substandard writing and low production quality in
black literature.
5. I. 2. Representation: The Period of the Revolutionary Black Press
The project of humanization remained a central goal throughout much of the Civil Rights
Movement. All the same, the intraracial hierarchies and class divisions that existed in the
material and textual structures of the early black press also continued to exert considerable
influence on book production throughout much of this period. Hence, once cutting edge Harlem
Renaissance figures such as Hughes and his contemporary Arna Bontemps (d. 1973) had become
voices of the convention by the early 1960s. And these voices sought to stay relevant as they
entrusted the legacy of black literature to a new generation of writers, poets, journalists,

194

academics, and activists. In the second 1963 printing of the 1960 pamphlet, The American Negro
Writer—a journal that featured contributions from Hughes and Bontemps—the tensions were
brought to the surface in both the discursive and non-discursive arguments.47 Given that this
particular journal was comprised of published conference papers from the March 1959 First
Congress of Negro Writers, and considering that this journal was published by The American
Society of African Culture (AMSAC) which was established two years prior, each of the articles
engaged, on some level, with issues of ethnic and racial autonomy for black Americans; and they
each confronted difficult questions concerning the reestablishment and promotion of African
heritage in African American literary production. Civil Rights activist Julian Mayfield’s (d.
1984) article, “Into the Mainstream and Oblivion,” most notably, offered a strong warning
against total conformity with the white mainstream. Yet, with all the calls for an African
American aesthetic, and with all of the relatively mild warnings against textual assimilation, this
pamphlet is still conservatively formal in both structure and design. The choice of a transitional
roman in a setting with fairly standard one inch margins in combination with its accurate
pagination and formatting help provide visual cues for its acceptance as a legitimate academic
document.
That sense of structural and expressive continuity can be observed, also, in the ninth,
1967 edition of the first volume of Joel Augustus Roger’s (d. 1966) Sex and Race.48 Originally
published in 1940 as an unillustrated edition, the typography, the formatting, and the graphic
design were all set in strict conformity with the reigning conventions of Western scholarship in
the mid-twentieth century. Included are appendices and footnotes, references, running headlines,
a list of illustrations, and pagination. To many, Rogers was an independent scholar in no
47
48

SIII-D5: B2
SIII-D6: B4

195

uncertain terms. As a self-trained anthropologist and historian, Rogers also wrote fiction and was
active in journalism (Appiah & Gates, 1999). And so, as an independent scholar and as an
independent publisher he must have understood the importance of these paratextual mechanisms
not only for demonstrating, properly, one’s implementation of a research methodology, but also
as instruments of evidentiary documentation. It was most likely the independent part of that
equation that allowed for a comparatively high amount of decision-making power in terms of the
production of his editions. The ninth edition, in fact, is the first edition to appear after Rogers’s
death under the imprint of his wife, Helga Martha Rogers (Andrews). They ran the publication
operation jointly, it seems, until his passing. With Rogers’s background as a biracial Jamaican
immigrant to the United States and his wife’s background as a German immigrant, the racial and
ethnic categories of their persons were just as complicated as the racial questions that Rogers
sought to address in his anthropological studies. The comprehensive academic layout of Rogers’s
study set out to convey a sense of intellectual neutrality; even so, these typographical subtleties
were controversial in the manner in which they sought to lend authoritative weight to the
controversial arguments of a “self-taught” academic. The situation, of course, was exacerbated
by the uncomfortable circumstance that this internationally recognized and respected “negro”
scholar was presenting a sophisticated, well-researched argument on the illusory, historicized,
and, most importantly, constructed nature of race and racial categories.
The larger argument of Rogers’s Sex and Race is one which suggests that Europeans not
only have been intermixed with Africans throughout the larger part of their history as a people,
but, further than that, that some of the key elements of their civilization, even some of the more
important ancient Greek deities, actually have African origins. It is an argument that has been
tied to a proto-Afrocentric revision of the Eurocentric model for world history, proportionate in
196

its antithetical symmetry. Much like Leila Amos Pendleton’s A Narrative of the Negro (1912),
which was published independently a generation prior to Rogers’s study, the book’s argument is
closely aligned with a “great persons of color” model of history wherein vindication and
humanization is pursued through highlighting or commemorating the past achievements of the
most accomplished of the race.49 In Rogers, however, the project of humanization reached
beyond the extent of what was permissible according to the parameters of knowledge production
in a Eurocentric system of education, specifically because his views challenged the purity of
European identity as an expressly racially-based construct. He provided copious details on a
range of important European historical figures of African or West Indian descent like, in the
domain of the history of Western music, Joseph Bologne (John VI) the Chevalier de St. Georges
in Portugal (d. 1799), George Bridgetower (d. 1860) the once celebrated violinist lauded by
Beethoven, and the composer Samuel Coleridge-Taylor (d. 1912) whom Edward Elgar had
personally endorsed. All of these figures, although being Creole or biracial by birth, have since
been looked upon as black. Notions of racial hybridity in the middle of the twentieth century
were far more contentious then they are now, as they have since gained more of a solid footing in
the Western psyche, in part through interracial marriage (a heterogeneity paradoxically maligned
as mongrelization or miscegenation) and the rise of multiculturalism. Yet, there seems to be a
lasting inclination in the American cultural landscape toward racial singularity.
The inclination for a dichotomized racial singularity (i.e. white/nonwhite, black, other) is
the conative force which renders the normally traditional frontispiece in Sex and Race which
innocently depicts the eighteenth century British monarch, Queen Charlotte Sophia, into a radical
statement of black humanity. The frontispiece is a photographic plate of a painting that is not
49

SIII-D6: B6

197

without controversy itself. It is among the only plausible evidence for the assertion that this
Queen had black ancestry (through her distant, fifteenth century Portuguese relation, Margarita
de Castro e Souza)—evidence which most historians think is scanty at best. Mario de Valdes y
Cocom Valdes, however, has contended that the painter Sir Allan Ramsay wished to make a
political statement against the institution of slavery in the British Empire during the eighteenth
century by depicting, with accuracy, her African phenotypes and physical characteristics (Chin,
2004). A radical idea, indeed, as it would imply that the Windsor line is part black. The theory,
of course, was vehemently refuted on the accounts that even if there was a relation there, the nine
to fifteen generations that separated her from this line would have reduced any genetic
inheritance to negligible levels, and that the dubious claims of the “African” source as
authentically African made the claim still more tenuous. The statement of the frontispiece,
therefore, is a subtle instance of graphic signifyin(g), not entirely invisible to its white audience
for it challenges notions of racial hegemony. The conventionality of the title page border cannot
fully obscure the doubling effect of the contentious image of blackness on the English throne.
Nonetheless, with all of the comprehensiveness of Rogers’s research and the conformism in the
book’s composition and formatting, Rogers’s grand-narrative had remained far from receiving
wide acceptance in the American academic community. Self-education and the absence of
legitimate academic credentials were the supposed charges against the legitimacy of Rogers’s
theories—an unfair attack considering that the educational system had historically placed serious
restrictions and barriers to acquiring such credentials if you were a black person in America at
that time.
Yet another instance, even more subtle, of visually signifyin(g) with graphic design is
found in the book jacket and binding. The hardcover faux leather on pasteboard binding has a
198

gilt title on the front cover and spine, but the gilt title is in cartoon lettering.50 The titles on the
red toned, illustrated book jacket are done in a vernacular swash. The visual cue of these
letterforms invites a broader readership with its confidence and graphic panache, whilst the
formality of the frontispiece and the bordered title page declares its status as a work of
scholarship and research. In fact, to maintain the idea that the physicality of the graphic
representation in language has no semiotic potency is to ignore the many different functions of
diverse modalities in textual communication. In the world of script and holograph notation, for
instance, the use of handwriting (i.e. cursive, notarial, etc.) over what one would call print (noncursive) writing can imply, specifically, intimacy or formality depending on the context of its
manifestation (Harris & Hartley, 2000). Different script-based typefaces have developed along
these same lines of imparting meaning through association and aesthetic. In this fashion, the
claim that typography is objective and neutral is in incongruous with the history. It is a conceited
attempt to gloss it over. It is clear that typography, from its beginnings, has been a political force
loaded with gendered and racial connotations and assimilative intents. Initially the religious and
then the national character of typefaces were among the first to be scrutinized; next, the idea of
the gendered nature of letterforms began to receive some attention; but now we must also look at
the racial dimensions.
In their discussion on typography in relation to literacy, James Hartley and Joyce L.
Harris (2000) began to identify the myriad of typographic artifices that influence the manner in
which we internalize text—the different substratum-level meanings of typography and layout.
“Different typefaces,” these authors lucidly argued “carry different connotations or emotional
meanings” (p. 113). Common examples have included, according to these authors, the use of
50

Note that, early in his career, Rogers spent some time working as a columnist and cartoonist for The Pittsburg
Courier.

199

italic for wedding invitations, the use of blackletter for formality, or in announcements, or to
signify the macabre, and the use of Times New Roman to signal academic rigor (pp. 109-110).
The same connotative and affective messaging has, in their view, applied to layout, which
includes the size of body of the text in relation to the size of the page, the format, which includes
the style and punctuation in the text as well as the structure of the paratext (references,
pagination, headings, etc.), and typographic cueing such as the calculated use of color and
capitalization. All of these factors, in Hartley and Harris’s view, influence how we internalize
and engage with print literacy. These are the metanarratives embedded in the materiality of text.
The doubling metanarrative present in Rogers’s use of swash and cartoon lettering on a
hardcover bound work of nonfiction quietly foreshadows what was one of the most radical shifts
in black book production since its beginnings. The argument laid out in Sex and Race, which was
really about racial mixing, in turn, helped to inspire Afrocentric theories, because when stripped
down to its fundamental premises, it initiated a discourse that reoriented the study of the history
of Western civilization toward an African source. Ironically with respect to the more nuanced
argument that Rogers had attempted to make, Afrocentrism took on an insular development of
the cultural, intraracially, as opposed to embracing identities constructed around integration and
cultural assimilation interracially along more universally humanistic lines. Yet, the shift toward
identity politics was an important one, as it would help to usher in the maturation of the black
aesthetic with the Black Arts Movement and the revolutionary (Black Nationalist) press.
The poetry of the Black Arts Movement offers some of the more potent examples of this
aesthetic shift. The movement ran through the black press much like the Arts and Crafts
Movement informed Morris’s work in fine printing (Thompson, 1999). In a conscious effort to

200

develop the independent black voice in both art and literature, presses like Dudley Randall’s
Broadside Press, Amiri Baraka’s (born LeRoi Jones) Jihad Productions, Joseph Okpaku’s The
Third Press, and Don L. Lee’s Third World Press pushed beyond the barriers of previously
accepted conventions in terms of composition and design, as part of the larger message of
revolution (Boyd, 2004; Thompson, 1999). Without succumbing to notions of determinism, the
role that the proliferation of mimeograph technology played in helping to advance greater
aesthetic affordances in book production among low capital producers should not be
underestimated. Invented in the 1870s, not shockingly, by Thomas Edison, and manufactured by
A. B. Dick Company as the Mimeo Machine from the period of 1884 to 1890, the mimeograph
provided individuals and organizations with a less expensive alternative for the production of
small print runs and ephemera (Cole, Browning, & Schroeder, 2002). The impressions are made
from a stencil that presses the ink onto sheets of paper which are ran through a rotating ink drum
encased by a stenciled woven paper which contains the master, and serves the purpose of the
form. Typesetting as the skilled labor that it demands in monotype and linotype is not required
with the mimeograph, and operating knowledge of the machine can be acquired with
comparatively lesser time and effort. As a less expensive and more user friendly method of
printing, the technology was widely adopted in developing countries to produce inexpensive
literature; and in this country it was used by the mid-twentieth century to print subgenre fanzines,
business documents, and other frequently ephemeral bibliographic productions in what was
called the “Mimeo Revolution.” In rough terms, more financial autonomy translated into greater
decision making power in composition and design.
I took a detailed look, for example, at broadcast director and activist Ebon Dooley’s (born
Leo Thomas Hale, d. 2006) Revolution: a Poem published out of the Third World Press in 1968
201

during my time spent doing onsite research at the Clayton Library.51 As Dooley’s sole collection
of published poetry, the work reflects the intellectual and artistic environment of the black
revolutionary bookshop of the late 1960s. In fact, Dooley managed the Timbuktu Bookshop in
Atlanta after writing the poems for Revolution (Gore, Theohari, & Woodard, 2009). He
published these poems after a year spent in Chicago studying writing in workshops with figures
like Gwendolyn Brooks—somewhat of an inspiration to Dooley (Giovanni, 1969). The book,
with its hard paper, illustrated staple binding, radical typography, and thematic Afrocentrism, is
typical of Black Arts period publications. These publications are generally commercially
affordable, visually bold, and politically rousing in nature. It is notable, for instance, on the first
glance that the title on the book’s front cover is in a graffiti script. The introduction of graffiti
script on the title is important in terms of its ability, as a graphic statement, to express an
urbanism and postmodernity—a visual breakdown in the modernity suggested in its use of sans
serif in the text’s body (Gundaker, 1998). The communicative mode of graffiti, being based on
the traditional European letterforms and scripts, represents a hybrid text. Yet, the hybridity, at
least in this example, is not a referent to the racial heterogeneity of the representation. Instead,
the referent applies the textuality embedded in the object. In her book Signs of Diaspora,
Gundaker (1998) appropriately identified a distinction between the concept of hybridity and
creolization. She argued that “hybridization is often said to ‘blend’ formerly divergent sources
into a new entity,” whereas, “creolization draws on sources to make new forms but does not
necessarily obliterate them in the process” (p. 11). The hybridity emerges from graffiti’s capacity
to reconfigure and refashion the meanings of conventional letterforms and add layers of
interpretation that are accessible, almost singularly, to those “literate” in its cryptic codes and

51

SIII-D5: B3

202

symbolisms (Gundaker, 1998). Without mutual exclusivity, there is a creolization that acts upon
the letterform in the print. Employed in the print medium, particularly in the instance of its
appearance on the cover page of Revolution as well as others from the period like Sterling
Plumpp’s (1970) Half Black/Half Blacker, the hybridity of the text moves toward the singularity
of a black aesthetic in a racialized bibliographic “third space.”52 A graffiti title primes the reader
for the reception of a radical typography.
Dooley’s radical poetry attempts to reorient black culture, history, politics, and aesthetics
to a black (i.e. African) cultural identity. Some of these poems, such as “Death of the Enemy”
and “Viet Nam Cotillion, or Debutante Ball on the Pentagon, or The Statue of Liberty Has Her
Back to Harlem,” contain incendiary and unconventional language. Also unconventional are the
different typographic and grammatical choices which comprise the text. One of the more
prominent, commonly used typographic cues is the emotive use of capitalization (p. 18). There is
a calculated separation of compound words such as “whiteness” as “white” and “ness” and a
conscious generation of fresh compounds such as “blackchild” (pp. 9, 31). And the choice of an
austere sans for the type coupled with a minimalist layout is almost emblematic of Black Arts
period poetry as a genre. The typographic cueing subverts the egalitarianism façade in the
typeface’s sense of modernity, subtly deconstructing it (Ryan & Minneapolis Institute of Arts,
2001). Consider, for a moment, the publisher’s note:
[Sic] The third world is a liberating concept for people of color, non-europeans—for
Black people. That world has an Ethos—a black aesthetic if u will--and it is the intent of
Third World Press to capture that ethos, that black energy. We attempt to give an initial
exposure to black writers. We publish black (poetry, historical notes, essays, short stories,
52

SII-D2: B1

203

and hopefully novellas) for Africans here (most often referred to as “negroes”) and
Africans abroad. And because we publish black—profit is not our thing/not our thing.
(para. 1)
Form onset, then, a book like Revolution, being a Third World Press publication, was able to
experiment and explore a textual radicalism which would have not been tolerated in the more
mainstream presses. The self-sacrificing ethos, as it turned out, all but completely ruled out the
ability of these small publishers and presses to become “profit making” enterprises. Yet, in some
cases this ethos led these young poets and publishers to consider external funding sources as an
option.
If some degree of operational autonomy is required for the maturation of a black aesthetic
in print, then the finances of the small Black Arts publishers warrant further investigation. What
does it mean, for instance, that in 1973 activist poets Tom Dent (d. 1998) and Kalamu ya
Salaam’ (born Vallery Ferdinand III) received a grant for a $1,000 from the Coordinating
Council of Literary Magazines for their Nkombo literary magazine (Coordinating Council of
Literary Magazines, 1973)? Necessity was a compelling enough factor to be sure. The
magazine—which was a poetry-centric publication of the Free Southern Theater’s
BLKARTSOUTH Workshop—managed to release just nine issues between 1968 and 1974 when
it had been in operation. Yet the historical evidence for the production of this magazine indicates
that black publishing in the 1960s and 70s maintained a fortitudinous devotion to its autonomy,
both locally and nationally, regardless of the problems of operating with comparatively little
monetary resources or financial capital. Costs included the initial investment for operational and
administrative equipment and outsourced printing services, paper, bindery services, distribution

204

materials, intellectual and creative content, and, of course, time and labor. Dent’s records showed
that, in 1970, his equipment investment for operations of around $740.00 included a Gestetner
Stencil Duplicator machine and an Econoscope Colorchange Kit with line-faced paper, cover
stuck paper, and mimeo-wove paper (Gestetner Company). The invoice indicated that Dent paid
an additional $52.47 for the cost of the legal, letter, newspaper, green, and white paper. And
there are receipts, moreover, that show that some of the later issues had outsourced printing and
binding services done by New Orleans-based companies such as Bag’s Instant Printing, located,
at that time, in a room on Tchoupitoulas Street and Edwards Printing at 3412 Washington
Avenue (Nkombo Publications, 1971). So in 1972, for example, Dent was able to have 1,000
books printed for $859.35 (Edwards Printing, Inc., 1973). With administrative and operational
costs alone, then, expenses already approached the $1,000 mark for the project. And then he also
had to account for content and distribution. In terms of content, Dent’s (1972) financial records
showed that he made payments of in between $15.00 to $20.00 per author; and there was a
balance of $950.00 for the combined author fees, staff, tax, and shipping costs. The total annual
cost for printing the magazine ran anywhere from $2,000 to $3,000—a low cost for a periodical
publication, but still expensive if, to begin with, one already has with limited financial resources.
At its height from around 1970 to 1973, the magazine was distributed in black press and
other specialty bookstores, libraries, and academic institutions across the country. The list of
book stores included the Afrocentric bookstore Jolly Brown Giant and the Chantham Bookseller
in New Jersey—a literary and scholarly focused bookstore that, as of 2015, is surprisingly still in
operation (Nkombo Publications, 1970). Academic institutions that carried the magazine ranged
from Miami-Dade College to more prestigious schools like Tulane University in New Orleans,
the University of California, Berkeley, and Harvard. The magazine was even picked up by the
205

University of Zambia in Africa. And this small, independently published magazine reached an
even wider audience by distributing issues in the major public libraries of cities like Seattle,
Chicago, and New York (Nkombo Publications, 1970). With the price of $2.00 per copy at
around 1,000 copies for a larger run, however, one can easily understand how simply staying
afloat presented a challenge. Looking at the figures it becomes clear that, much like the ethos
expressed in the mission statement of the Third World Press, making a profit was not the primary
objective here.
The mission of advancing the black aesthetic in Black Arts poetry books was an
important one. In Nkombo, the text was situated within the framework of the humanities, but it
still maintained a creative distance from a direct conformity with academic convention. Much of
its typography and composition, like in previous examples, reflected this complicated tension.
The final June 1974 issue, in particular, exhibits a number of noteworthy features in this regard
(Dent & Salaam, Tom Dent papers, 1861-1998, The Amistad Research Center (Box 43, Folder
1), 1974).53 It has headlines and section headers; but its sections are given unconventional,
locally-tinged names such as “”Food for Thought” and “From the Gumbo”—the original name
of the magazine before it was changed to embrace its African etymology more intimately. In
keeping with the precedent set by the mainstream literary magazines, Nkombo has a layout that
places photographic illustrations adjacent to its text (Figure 10). Yet, unlike much of the
mainstream publications of the period, Nkombo’s illustrations celebrated black beauty and
praised black culture. What's more, the magazine’s editors had an acute awareness of their
aesthetic statement and its relation to the hegemonic structures from which they sought to break
away. The introduction to the June 1974 issue stated explicitly, “Maybe the magazine is a
53

SII-D12: B10

206

dinosaur. Maybe but really no matter, because a magazine is form whereas the real part is the
content, the insides, and meaning/style that we are struggling to keep alive” (p. 5). The editors
were striking out a sense of difference in contesting the pillars of classical philosophy and
rhetoric in noting that, “[sic] After all aristotle A is not always A, A is A only A don’t change.
And since we live in a world of constant change, A does not equal A, but at best approximates
A” (pp. 4-5). Using lowercase for Aristotle’s name next to the pyramidal capital “A” is a not so
subtle political statement.

Figure 10. The final issue of Nkombo magazine. By permission of the Amistad Research Center.
All throughout the various poems there is an aesthetic of difference, paralleled in its
inversion of our expectations of form and space. One finds, for example, the frequent use of a
207

lower case "i" in place of its capital. There are numerous instances of shorthand such as “blk” in
place of “black,” “thot” instead of “thought,” and informal contractions and compound words
like “Dontcha” (pp. 2-5). Phrases like “*************/amess/age/an age/of mes/misses/sage/be
wise” visibly push the limits of legibility as much as they stress the boundaries of a layered
interpretation of the text (Gex, 1974, p. 6). The synesthetic qualities of their bibliographic form
suggest that the editors and the authors alike subscribed to the philosophy articulated by Quo
Vadis Gex that “poems must be word motions,” and that each is a “song to be sung for poets” (p.
6). With contributors like New Orleans-based poet Octave Lilly Jr. and poet and novelist Alice
Walker, Gex was definitely in good company.
As lead editor, however, Dent was largely responsible for maintaining the integrity of
authorial forms of expressive punctuation. For in-house operations, proofs, and early issues, Dent
had a variety of fonts to work with including: roman, roman italic, shadow, condensed, and
outline fonts—an exposure that was sure to provide him with firsthand experience in typographic
design. Slab serif was the family of choice for the poetry for the last issue, and Clarendon Bold, a
slab serif that has the distinct association of being at once commercial, industrial, and suggestive
of the look of the “frontier,” was selected for the magazine’s title on the cover page. The prose is
set in sans to differentiate genre and meaning. In that respect, at least, it is somewhat of an
anomaly. In addition to text and type, Dent chose the illustrations, and he determined their
placement and arrangement in the space. Layout graphic, arrangement and the order of contents
were given careful consideration by the editor(s), and Dent drafted his layouts with the same
dynamism embodied in the Black Arts style. The organic lines of the cover art, freeform in
contour and Afrocentric in representation, fade into the of dark tan hue of the hard paper, staple
binding in such a way that evokes the ethereal nature of the deities or ghosts that the illustration
208

is likely meant to depict. What especially stands out is the artist’s name, Skunder, written in both
street style roman letters and what appears to be the Ethiopian Ge’ez script. Documented, too, by
Dent were scenes of the local environment. As one might imagine, evident, even at this stage of
black urbanization, was an embryonic form of today’s street graffiti (Dent, 1971).
It is evident, then, that the black aesthetic, in print, was able to mature and flourish during
the period of the Black Arts Movement, in part, because of the dedication of the creators
involved to not privilege profit-making or widespread acclaim over innovation and the
celebration of cultural heritage. It was the almost sole dedication to the purpose of celebrating
black culture by developing that aesthetic which propelled these small press to pursue such
artistically ambitious projects (Ward, 1991). Yet, not so far from Hughes and their other
predecessors, their capacity to come to terms with the need to achieve professional and financial
stability in a society premised upon cultural assimilation, it appears, must have urged a more
pragmatic approach in practice if not in rhetoric and aesthetic. Ebon Dooley, after all, had his
start working in Nashville's Fisk University, as the managing editor of the Fisk literary magazine
and newspaper; and he was a graduate of Columbia Law School before the first issue of NKombo
was ever released (Alkalimat, 2006). Octave Lily Jr. had been an insurance executive in addition
to his work as a writer and poet. And, perhaps most notably, a handful of poets and writers to
emerge out of the Black Arts period, like Alice Walker, Amiri Baraka, and Nikki Giovanni,
would later manage to achieve broad crossover appeal.
5. I. 3. Representation: Black Press Books for the Hip Hop Generation
Signs of the bibliocultural relationship become visible with the most cursory analysis of
the material aspects of black press publications, especially when viewed alongside some of the
209

more relevant textual evidence that they often contain. With the tacitly accepted absence of
urban fiction in research collections, our bridge from street lit’ to the African American literature
of the hip hop generation comes in the form of Shakur’s (1999) posthumously released Rose that
Grew from Concrete. In the world of hip hop, Tupac Shakur (d. 1996) has been viewed as a
transformational figure, and he has reached an iconic status. It is true that one will not find urban
fiction on display in the loftier research spaces of the Schomburg Center like its reference
reading room, but I was able to obtain a non-circulating copy of this book for onsite review. And
it is fitting, here, that Shakur’s posthumously release is a book of poetry. He was among the first
rappers to have full-credit courses at major universities (e.g. Berkley and Harvard) devoted to his
work (Monjauze, Cox, & Robinson, 2008). Songs like “Changes” and “I Ain't Mad At Cha” have
been appreciated for their deep penetration and insight into the many problems that still plague
underserved communities of color (Shakur, 1996). His writings have even been curated in a
yearlong 2015 exhibition at the Grammy Museum in Los Angeles, California (The Grammy
Museum, 2015). These developments are helping to secure this small book of poetry’s place in
the larger canon of black literature, and they working to move Shakur’s work toward a broader
acceptance in the American cultural mainstream. And, similar to the work of Langston Hughes,
Claude McKay, and other Harlem Renaissance writers, even though his book was published by
mainstream publisher Simon & Schuster, it can be looked upon as a black press work by
authorial association—constituting a retraction of an earlier radicalism that threatened a
complete break from the establishment press.
Shakur’s poetry—which covered a range of topics including politics, love, relationships,
and spirituality—was largely written in the voice of contemporary black America, particularly in
the voice of black male youth. His manuscript was composed using the aesthetic and poetic
210

devices of the Black Arts Movement. Shakur’s mother, Afeni Shakur, had been involved in the
political arm of the Black Power Movement, having been a former Black Panther herself, and
she exposed him to the Afrocentric perspective and its literature at an early age. As a child,
Shakur grew up in the presence of Black Arts poets like Sonia Sanchez—a personal friend of his
mother (Monjauze, Cox, & Robinson, 2008). Nikki Giovanni, another one of the leading poets to
have emerged from the movement, wrote the introduction for the posthumously printed edition.
Like his Black Arts predecessors we find that Shakur often used shorthand and numerical
substitution (e.g. “2” in place of “two”) to convey his thoughts, and he liberally peppered his
writings with glyphic and quasi-pictographic textual expression. Note the language and phrasing
in the following selection from his “Under the Skies Above” poem:
My child is out there somewhere
under the skies above
waiting anxiously 4 u and me
2 bless it with our love
A part of me a part of u
and a part of this love we share… (p. 9)
Important typographical choices were made in the effort to preserve the integrity of most of the
devices found in the rhyme book. The shorthand and numerical text were correctly transcribed,
but the glyphic expression (e.g. “♥” in the place of “heart”) was translated into alphabetical text.
This form of expression has been tied to similar iterations of black textuality such as gang signs,
street memorials, grave messages, quilting, and even the veve art of the Afro-Haitian Vodou
religion (Gundaker, 1998). The use of a transitional roman typeface, particularly one which

211

approximates a slab serif, in the printed transcription helped to provide Shakur’s street script
handwriting with a greater sense of literary gravitas. Yet, the publishers also opted to include
Shakur’s manuscript in facsimile on the verso page of each new poem; and they used his street
style hand for the book’s title page. To those with an understanding of the literacy of the
“streets” the effect of this visual cue is one that immediately conveys the author’s “street
credibility.” Here, a rhyme book, a bibliographic object which was at once relatively common
and previously ignored, is now memorialized as a cultural artifact in print. The recent
abandonment of the rhyme book in favor of cognitive memorization and digital recording apps
has only increased its significance as a document, and this artefactual augmentation applies to
both the published facsimile and the original manuscript (XXL Staff, 2011). At this point, then,
we can begin to see how the typographic choices of the editors, publishers, and designers can
present us with visual evidences of cultural transmission and authorial legitimacy in black
literary history. And legitimacy, in this instance, takes on a different meaning in that, on the one
hand, the physicality of the printed typeface affords intellectual legitimacy to the text and, on the
other, there is a self-referential quality to the urban visual aesthetic embodied in the style of
script. The same process of hybridization through appropriation, in fact, is present in the use of
blackletter in gang writing—a practice which essentially “vulgarizes” the inherited decorousness
and formality of textura-based letterforms by redirecting their association toward an aesthetic of
criminality.
The emergence of revolutionary rap, conscious rap, and gansta rap, having had such
substantial ties to the Black Power period of black history, was really a culmination of the
dichotomous identity politics in black poetry that experienced its fruition during the late 1960s.
Shakur’s poetry, much like poet and author Sister Soujah (b. Lisa Williamson), was coming out
212

of a revolutionary platform which paid homage to the “streets” by giving it a literary voice. The
black literature of the (mostly college educated) hip hop generation authors, however, has been
defined by a set of characteristics that have sought to elevate it to a higher status than its “low
culture” derivative in urban fiction. In Writing the Future of Black America (2009)—which,
interestingly enough, has its title set in a wildstyle graffiti font—Daniel Grassian illustrated this
division by the authors he chose to highlight in his book on the literature of the hip hop
generation. 54 The literature covered in his book, by his definition, is “more academic and
intellectually dense than the novels of Souljah and Turner” (p. 16). The writers that Grassian
selected for analysis, Trey Ellis, Jake Lamar, and Suzan-Lori Parks, and others, are defined by
their inclusion of complex themes in their works, complication of racial identities, psychological
analysis of characters, and an approach to the problem of white racism which is subtle, jocular,
apathetic, or even fatalistic.
In 1989, Ellis would group these characteristics under the larger rubric of the “New Black
Aesthetic.” In his view, this new aesthetic had shifted away from the strictly dichotomous
identity politics of Black Nationalism which casted blacks as oppressed victims in perpetuity
(Grassian, 2009, p. 23). He admitted that such issues are still addressed in the new aesthetic, but
in the creative works of his generation issues are often discussed within a context complicated by
notions of transracialism and intraracial diversity and introspection. Nonetheless, his novel
Platitudes (1988), like those of other writers in his generation, sustained a meta-theoretical
awareness of the unnoticed cognitive and affective stimuli contained within the material and
paratextual components of the book.55 This awareness of the “non-discursive” components of

Although contemporary black literature is the subject of Grassian’s research, he is not writing about the subject
from the perspective of a black writer.
55
SIV-D7: B6
54

213

discursive texts certainly had a role in the unveiling and subsequent progression of the novel’s
plot in which a striving, peculiarly post-racialist author, Dwayne Wellington, contends creatively
with a radical black feminist writer named Isshee Ayam.56 The plot is essentially an allegory of
the temporally situated, ideological divisions that have existed among successive generations of
black writers and artists (i.e. Black Nationalism versus post-racialism); but consider, here, in this
segment from the fictional story in the novel which serves as the compositional battlefield for its
metanarrative, the attention Ellis devoted to highlighting a bibliocultural response:
On the bookshelf in the back stands a small library of worn Afro-American paperbacks.
Earle sights down his finger at one title, another, another, until his finger arrives at a thick
brown book. He hooks his finger over the top of the book and, by pulling downward,
rotates it out and free from the shelves’ strong compression. A woman of color, her
nostrils flare, a shredded straw hat on her head, in her mouth a long dried-grass stalk, her
eyes burn from the cover of the book. Over her head the words Hog Jowl Junction and By
Isshee Ayam and Best-selling Author of Heben and Chillun o’ de Lawd. Under the
artwork: The Uhuru Contemporary Afro-American Fiction Series and Soon to Be a Major
Motion Picture! (pp. 131-132)
The passage details a striking example of how image, perception, and racial identity are
intermixed even upon our first impressions of bibliographic materiality. And Ellis also made a
subtle critique here on the Afrocentrism of the 1960s and ‘70s, suggesting that the philosophy
had been based upon an imagined “African” community as opposed to a concrete and tangible
one and that past nationalistically-driven divisions have been too rigid to characterize the black

Note the ironic reference to Afrocentrism (e.g. Isshee Ayam can be deciphered as “is she a yam?”) and the black
middle class (e.g. Dwayne Wellington) in the character names.
56

214

experience. The critique was suggestive of the argument on the networked nature of the
transatlantic consciousness made by Paul Gilroy a few years later in The Black Atlantic (1993).
Ellis’s novel, moreover, tested the literary standards of form, design, and language. His handling
of onomatopoeia, African American Vernacular English, and the manipulation of paratextual
apparatuses as narrative devices, at once, submitted to the legitimizing power of these
apparatuses, in keeping with the conventions of the early black press, and parodied them much
like what previously had been done in the revolutionary period.
Another noticeable example of an acute awareness of the bibliocultural in design in can
be found in the published Theater Communications Group version of Parks’s play Venus.57 In the
first 1997 edition of this play, Parks, with the aid of designers Scher and Govan, exerted a visible
creative authority over the layout. Parks herself has expressed wonder as to why her
unconventional typography and layout has not received more intellectual scrutiny (Lyman, 2014,
p. 90). Like concrete poetry, samizdat literature, Dadaism, Futurist poetry and other artistic and
literary genres that sought to explore the elusiveness of the “non-verbal” in printed text, Parks
unveiled a typography that was, at once, kinesthetic in function and architectural in appearance
(Lyman, 2014, p. 91). In stark contrast to a naturally anticipated tension, note the
counterintuitive fusion between motion and immobility in the selection from the author’s notes
on stage direction:
A Spell – An elongated and heightened (Rest.). Denoted by repetition of figures’ names
with no dialogue. Has sort of an architectural look:
The Venus
The Baron Docteur
57

SIV-D10: B9. Copyrighted in 1990.

215

The Venus
The Baron Docteur (Parks, 1997, pp. 33-34)
In the printed play, textual and typographic cues work together to direct the physicality of
reading, recitation, and performance. There is movement, then, through the “architecture” of a
reading space that is interpreted through the immutability of its formatting and layout.
On the front cover illustration and in the typographic layout on the title page, designer
Scher added a thought-provoking statement in graphic design by having an elongated capital “U”
in “Venus” superimposed upon the enlarged posterior gluteal region of the play’s protagonist,
Sarah "Saartjie" Baartman (d. 1815). The title’s typography was rendered corporeal with this
simple alteration of size and position. The title, thusly, personified the principal themes of the
play in its letterforms. Diction, layout, and typography were carefully positioned to impart subtle
codes and messages regarding race, sex, classification, commodification, and colonialism
(Lyman, 2014). In the passage below, for example, the reader is faced with the issue of bodily
exploitation:
THE BROTHER
Tomorrow I’ll buy you the town.
For now lift up yr skirt.
There. Thats good.
(She lifts her skirt showing her ass. He gropes her.)
THE GIRL.
I dont —
THE BROTHER.
Relax.
Presenting “The African Dancing Princess!”
THE GIRL.
Hahahaha!
I dont think I like it here.

216

THE BROTHER.
Relax.
Relax.
Its going to be fantastic.
(They kiss and touch each other. He is more amorous than she.)
THE NEGRO RESURRECTRIONIST.
Footnote #1
(Rest.)
Historical Extract. Category: Theatrical.
(Rest.)
The year was 1810. At one end of town, in some circumstances, a young woman, native
of the dark continent, bares her bottoms. At the same time but in a very different place,
on the other end of town in fact, we witness a very different performance. (Parks, 1997,
pp. 33-34)

With this brief excerpt alone, one can see that the printed version of the document stands on its
own in terms of its informational and cultural significance. The bibliographic object has not
assumed a servile or supplementary role to the actual performance of the text. In the passage
above, for instance, in addition to the kinesthetic messaging denoted by the “(Rest.)” markers
and the layered semiotic facets of the shorthand and missing punctuation, the specific manner in
which Parks employed a citation mechanism to move the narrative accentuated the historical
basis of the plot.
The plot of the play swirls around the life of the character of “The Venus,” a character
intended to portray, unequivocally, the historical figure of Baartman. A Khoikhoi woman by
birth, Baartman was “discovered” by Westerners, sold into bondage, and toured around Europe
in the nineteenth century exhibition circuit as a primitive, anatomical curiosity. During her
exhibition, her very humanity was a subject of debate. And there is a sad “footnote” to her
biography in the way that her remains were affronted in the name of “science” upon her passing.
Likewise, in the taxonomically-structured design of the “footnote” section in the passage above,
217

the consumptive aspects of the categorization schema refers literally to the fetishization,
exploitation, and eventual consumption of Baartman and her body by Western entrepreneurs and
scientists—most notably by Cuvier who performed an autopsy on Baartman after her death and
published a book out of his “research.” Cuvier’s research notes, as it turned out, were
perplexingly infused by Parks into the play’s text (Canning & Postlewait, 2010). And the
“scientific” conclusion reached by the real life Cuvier after he had examined and preserved
Baartman’s corpse was that he had solid evidence to show the primitive nature of Baartman’s
physiology and, thus, prove the contemporaneously reigning assertions concerning the so called
“animalistic traits” of the Khoikhoi and Khoisan peoples (Crais & Scully, 2009).
Although Grassian (2009) considered Parks’s plays as technically outside the domain of
hip hop theater, the distance achieved by Parks in her critical acclaim may not be so great (p.
167). As a hip hop generation playwright, Parks is still dealing with themes relevant to black
popular culture. The theatrical rendition of Baartman’s story brings to mind the question of the
exploitation of women in the hip hop industry and the objectification of black female bodies on
the covers of urban fiction novels and hip hop magazines. Glancing at hip hop magazines on the
carts of Harlem street vendors, the fetishization of the black female buttocks is undeniable. “Butt
augmentation” procedures are considered fashionable in twenty-first century celebrity culture.
Are these indications of an objectification of black women, the fetishization of our perceptions of
black feminine corporeality, or is it, contrary to the other two scenarios, really a celebration of
the black female form?
Richardson (2006) has argued that depictions of women in hip hop and urban fiction that
are sexist, misogynistic, and exploitative on the surface, images such as the “bad bitch”

218

archetype embodied by a rapper like Nikki Minaj, have a multifaceted relationship with the
consciousness of their consumers in terms of how they form and shape their literacy practices
(pp. 60-66). She noted, for example, how the central narrative for Sista Souljah’s The Coldest
Winter Ever (1999) articulated tensions between status, literacy, and knowledge construction
within a framework that portrayed “the Black female body as the site of competing discourses”
(Richardson, 2006, p. 45). And in her analysis of how young routinely black women consume
sexist imagery in the hip hop industry, the figure of the “tip drill”—a term used by mostly young
black women to describe a “well-built healthy woman with a fleshy backside”—was paralleled
with positive symbolism of an approximate image in traditional sub-Saharan African cultures.
Richardson, however, also paired this consumption with the image’s fetishization, as she linked
the imagery to a commodification of the black female body that occurs through a selfinternalization process which inextricably accompanies the visual consumption (pp. 49-55).
Viewed from a traditional standpoint, in the art of letters and printing in the Western
world alternative typographic aesthetics and graphic design—like the engendered, racialized title
page layout found in Venus or the many recently developed fonts based on graffiti scripts—are
not looked upon as progress; instead, more often than not they are seen as an aberration or a
distortion of conventional form. The West, as we have seen so far in this research, has had a
similar understanding of both African American Vernacular English and the black female body.
Both aspects in the dynamic interplay of culture and biology deal with the tensions that are
seemingly intrinsic to expression and embodiment. The very idea that graffiti lettering could
become the basis for a typeface, then, is a radical one, just as the concept that a “well-built”
black women with a “fleshy backside” could become an ideal of attractiveness is a challenge to
the dominance of a Western standard for feminine beauty which appreciates virtually
219

diametrically opposite physical characteristics (e.g. thin, fair, proportional physique, etc.). In
many ways these developments in typographic design come about through a combination of
shifts in terms of the politics of race relations and the expanding affordances of emerging
printing and digital technologies.
5. I. 4. Representation: The Hegemonic Eurocentrism of the “Ideal Book”
The comparatively radical design elements that I discovered in looking at the more recent
examples of black literature became especially perceptible to me following my meticulous
analysis of a range of quintessentially Western bibliographic samples from the Clark Library.
Yet, in addition to the material and formal departures from tradition observed in bibliographic
samples from the black press, there is a departure, too, in the appropriation and reproduction of
Western form and feature. Soberly sustaining such an awareness involves contending with and
ultimately grasping the Eurocentrism of letters as a manifestation of intellectual hegemony.
Evidently, informational legitimacy, literacy, and the state of being educated are predicated not
only around the paratextual apparatuses of the book, but also around the letterforms themselves.
Literacy is believed to be dependent upon legibility, but the legibility itself can be both culturally
and temporally situated. To put it differently, the ways that we construct and produce knowledge
act reciprocally upon the material dimensions of the corresponding recorded artifacts. The move
from the early primacy of blackletter to the ascendency of roman types in print is demonstrative
of this symbiotic phenomenon. Blackletter types would have taken on far richer degrees of
legibility for a medieval clergyman or scholar than they would have for a Renaissance humanist
optically trained to interpret the visual cues of humanistic roman fonts and early modern graphic
design. This relationship between the practice of literacy and the interaction with a physically

220

embodied, spatialized text gives the materiality the important role, not simply of vessel,
container, or the instrument of literacy, but as an aspect textuality that is inseparably wedded
with literacy’s social construction as a performative practice. Therein lies the bibliocultural link
to one’s identity.
Legibility equates to function; and function, therefore, persists as one of the primary
justifications for the perpetuation of the hegemonic elements of in Western writing and print.
More conspicuously, this hegemony exists in the paratextual apparatuses which are intended to
supplement rapid reference. Yet in books and in literacy alike, one cannot even reach that point
without the existence of alphabetic letterforms. Type designer Frederic W. Goudy (d. 1947) was
a prominent proponent of the function of legibility in letters. Goudy argued that simplicity and
legibility should supersede artistic flourish and personal flare in design. Appropriately, the very
first book that I analyzed at the Clark Library was Goudy’s (1942) Alphabets and Elements of
Lettering.58 This book in particular maintains close connections with the Clark Library in that the
book is a University of California Press publication. At the request of the first chief executive of
UCLA, Edward Dickson, Goudy even designed a type exclusively for the University of
California’s use (Bidwell, 1991, p. 8). In fact, the University of California Old Style typeface
was the primary font used in his Alphabets and Elements of Lettering. Cowan (d. 1942), Clark’s
principal librarian and bibliographer, as an esteemed connoisseur of books was well acquainted
with Goudy’s works—although, I should note that this particular title must have been acquired
by the university subsequent to Cowan’s tenure as Clark’s librarian.59 The larger idea here,

58

SI-D1: B1
Robert E. Cowan (d. 1942) was a bookseller turned librarian. Working for Clark for more than twenty years as his
librarian, he had a highly influential role in the early development of the original Clark Library collection. He was
an expert in early Californiana and Western books, and he contributed a notable accomplishment in these arears with
59

221

however, deals with Goudy’s historic impact on book design as an American typographer and his
influence on bibliophilic “taste.” By the late 1930s, his type could be found in books like The
Bible, Designed to be Read as Living Literature out of Simon and Schuster and a Heritage Club
edition of Dostoyevsky’s Crime and Punishment (Harter & Glick, 1939, pp. 2-3). His typefaces
were favored by the Grabhorns, the Book Club of California; and they could be found in a range
of books from the Viking Press to the Nonesuch Press (Harter & Glick, 1939, pp. 2-8). Goudy’s
legacy persists even in the present day in the digital versions of his typefaces.
In The Alphabet and Elements of Lettering (1942), Goudy offered a condensed
chronology of the rationale behind letterform design from the inception of writing up to the
period of his lifetime. Throughout the book he traced the roots of good design to a Roman
aesthetic of stoic essentialism. He asserted that the “great merit of Roman capitals is simplicity;
every useless and meaningless line has been eliminated” (p. 46). And because he firmly believed
that “pleasing legibility is the great desideratum,” he cited the work of the incunable period
printer Nicholas Jenson (d. 1480) as the purest example of the ideal for good design in a book (p.
91). Goudy did recognize the need to balance functionality with beauty as, like William Morris
before him, he reminded us how difficult it has been for the modern mind to appreciate the
beauty of medieval scripts when, hitherto, it has been accustomed to monotonous and bland
typefaces driven by the commercialization of design in book production. Yet, his recognition of
the “charm” of early scripts shows itself only through a modest integration of typographical
flourish in his own printing.

A bibliography of the history of California, 1510-1930 (1933) and The Spanish press of California, 1833-1845
(1919). Evidently, Cowan’s work also helped to inform purchasing for the university’s Californiana collection.

222

The Alphabet and Elements of Lettering viewed solely as a material, bibliographic object
is an impressive balance between aestheticism and legibility. It adheres to rules concerning
limitations on the amount of typefaces used for the text, but the old style roman type has strong
serifs with ligatures for an added ornament of antiquity and typographic grace. Even though it is
not necessarily a true example of fine printing it has approached this art in that it displays many
of the trappings of a fine press work. The book enjoys a blackletter title in gilt, high quality rag
paper, and comparatively wide margins. 60 Taking note of the book’s author, its close ties with its
institutional residency, and its moderately ornate design, this particular sample has not only
suggested a knowledge of letters, it has also hinted at a privileged assumption of one’s
possession of both the means and the skills for shaping and producing them.
Goudy’s legacy of fine press printing and type design is a child of the William Morris
generation of bookmaking. I was able to examine Morris’s highly regarded fine press edition of
the Caxton edition of The Golden Legend (1892) at the Clark Library. Morris’s Golden Legend
has reached an iconic status in the world of fine printing.61 The insularity of the original 1892
edition reflected a similar quality in the Clark’s research culture, its narrow outreach agenda,
and, especially, in its enclosed physicality as a research space; in all, it intimated its
extravagance. Piper (2012) has drawn attention to how, throughout early modern and modern
history, a book’s frontispiece (meaning, literally, “to look head on”) often took on architectural
facets, especially those which used a depiction of the architectural façade to introduce readers to
both the author and the text (p. 29). In looking at the intricate Burne-Jones woodcuts of the
illustrated title, with the impressively interwoven knotwork vine motif that makeup its borders, I
was reminded, at once, of the vine-covered walls that surround the library grounds (Figure 11).
60
61

70mm x 57mm (2 3/4"x 2 1/4")
SI-D2: B2

223

Figure 11. Engraved title page in Morris’s Golden Legend. Courtesy of the William Andrews
Clark Memorial Library.
Evidently, with its finely decorated capitals, its uniquely crafted Golden Type roman
font, and its laid paper with deckled edges, the book is a luxury object. Morris’s aesthetic
statement is widely noted to be one of the most self-assured declarations in the modern
development of fine press printing in the West (Peterson, 1991). Books, as we understand them
in the West, historically were extremely expensive commodities available almost exclusively to
the rich and wealthy. With a championing of craft over industry in his design, however, Morris—
who we must recall was a Pre-Raphaelite, an aesthete, and a pioneer of the Arts and Crafts
Movement—was protesting against the very same force of mechanization that was a crucial
factor in the democratization of access to books for the broader consumer public (McGann,
1991). Morris’s design aesthetic, if impractical was more than slightly infectious among the
224

more intellectually-minded designers and publishers of the period. And, in accordance with some
of his more complex views on the role of design in industry, a vestige of his design principles
managed to survive in Dent’s Everyman’s Library series—a series later revived in 1991 with the
support of the Knopf and Random House publishers (Peterson, 1991). The homage paid to his
legacy in mass-market works, however, have only afforded an even higher status of rarity and
collectability to the originals, increasing the financial worth and, likewise, the social regard for
books such as the Clark’s copy of The Golden Legend.
Looking contemplatively upon Morris’s Golden Legend, one finds that much of the
aesthetic beauty as well as the grandeur it conveys as an object is achieved in its balance of the
darkness of the ink to the spatiality of the whiteness of the page. The lavishly illustrated
engraved pages fill the space with ornate knotwork, vine bordered scenes whereas the prose
pages were pressed with precision leaving characteristically breathy margins and an especially
spacious tail. In fine press printing, the binary of ink and paper black and white first identified,
really, by Jonathan Senchyne (2012) is all the more intensified. In traditional Western print in
general, and in fine printing in particular, the purity of the white paper is yet another status
symbol of affluence and luxury. “The way whiteness functions in white paper,” noted Senchyne,
“begins to look like the function of the whiteness under racial dualism: it is representative of
supposed refinement and desirability and only loosely associated with the visual experience of a
certain color” (p. 146). Correspondingly, it has been the blackness of the printer’s ink which,
historically, has carried the more negative connotation of (social/moral/visual) impurity. In this
view, the ink is always an instrument of potential ruination through its ability to stain the
whiteness of the paper, just as dangerous texts have the potential to corrupt morality upon
reception (p. 145). Hence, the apparent reluctance on the part of fine press printers such as Eric
225

Gill and the Grabhorn brothers to appropriately portray racially-tinged dimensions of blackness
in their aesthetic choices was deeper than some of the more superficially obvious reasons for
misrepresentation and absence like outright racial exclusion.62 There is the issue, too, of the
balance of dark to light on the page. Such is the case, as attested by each of these printer’s
respective editions of the Song of Solomon. In both instances the image of the blackness is
distorted by the printers, even when that image is directly referenced in the text. In Gill’s
version, the only black figure one finds, much like in the ceiling paintings of the Clark’s drawing
room, is portrayed as a primitive figure in servitude to Europeanized protagonists. In Grabhorn
all of the narratives characters are depicted as white. The “blackness” in the verse “I am black,
but comely/O ye daughters of Jerusalem/As the tents of Kedar,” actually refers to the “sunburnt”
complexion of the Qedar (i.e. of Arabic descent) women, denoting class. Representing the literal
“brownness” of the metaphorical “black” in the binary medium of the inked space on white
paper, as noted by Senchyne, poses an aesthetic challenge to the dichotomized conventions of
Western bibliographic illustration (The Holy Bible: King James version, 2007, p. 330; Senchyne,
2012).
Granting that the construction of racial difference in the materiality of the book object
may seem stark with such comparisons made at the more granular levels of scrutiny demanded
by ethnobibliographic method, but we must recall that, in the library, to this day the “book” is
still perceived as a neutral vessel for literacy acquisition and information consumption.
Overlooking the subtle and, sometimes, not so subtle ways that the book helps to shape that
process of identity construction can contribute to unnoticed misrepresentations of blackness in
both black press literature and the literature of the mainstream. In terms of book production,
62

SI-D6: B3; SI-D7: B4

226

particularly where it concerns typography, typesetting, and design, these misrepresentations
would manifest themselves in undesirable aesthetic characteristics that traditionally have been
avoided in the fine press. As Giampietro (2004) pointed out, in some instances, this form of
bibliographic misrepresentation can be observed in the practice of typographic racial
stereotyping (what he termed “stereotypography”)—or the constructing of racial caricatures
through one’s use of type of letterform design. In such instances, racial mimicry in typography
becomes a performance of letterform minstrelsy. This process can take place almost invisibly
and before the naked eye. One needs only to take a hard look at the “orientalist” letterforms on
the front cover of Leo Politi’s (1978) Mr. Fong’s Toyshop to witness a historical example of this
practice that is hardly an isolated one. It is crucial to recognize, however, that the practice of
stereotypography is rarely the product of conscious or nefarious motives. Instead, its existence is
more commonly propelled by a combination of ill-considered intentions, commercial trends for
marketing, and, in most cases, implicit associations that have emerged through historical
accident. Historical accident, for example, can explain how Giampietro came to view Rudolf
Koch’s (d. 1934) Neuland font and its derivative in Lithos as an exoticized image of black
culture—a form of typographical blackface.63
Koch’s original vision for the Neuland typeface, according to Giampietro, was a marriage
between the modernity of sans and the much older tradition of blackletter. Koch, as it turns out,
was a devoted admirer of Morris’s work, and in some respects, was influenced by his style
(Cinamon, 2000). Koch’s work, however, particularly in sculpture and design, had also been
influenced by the Art Nouveau and Art Deco movements. It conveyed an aesthetic that evoked a
philosophy of “Primitivism”—a term that is now viewed in a pejorative sense. And although Art
The term “blackface” is a “doubled” term meaning both the black letter origin of the font and the performance of
blackface minstrelsy.
63

227

Deco had managed to penetrate “high art,” as Giampietro pointed out, the movement was
associated with jazz music and the “decorative” arts—both of which had been excluded from
“high art” during their heights of their popularity (Giampietro, 2004, para. 14).
When Neuland was adopted in the United States, it quickly proliferated in printed
ephemera and advertisements. The font had been a popular choice for labels and cigar boxes, and
it was often the type of choice in advertisements that used minstrel caricatures to sell their
products. Eventually, as its use moved from pulp fiction to “negro” literature and the black press,
the typeface became an unspoken typographic cue for primitiveness, native Africa, the exotic
jungle, and African Americanness (Giampietro, 2004). Are such implicit associations, however,
examples of stereotypography in every case? How can they be when black authors and
publishers have embraced these fonts for use in their own works? It is easy to point to examples
of its use in shows and movies like Tarzan, Jurassic Park, and The Lion King in defense of the
argument that Neuland has become irreversibly stereotypographical in its connotative
association. It is harder to make that argument when you can point to examples of its use for
black authored works like Alain Locke’s (1925) The New Negro and Richard Wright’s (1940)
Native Son.64 Either way, the frequency to which it shows up in the graphic design and cover art
of works of contemporary African and African American scholarship, black children’s’
literature, and African folkloric anthologies is common enough to warrant further investigation
into such questions.
This practice of stereotypography—a practice which dichotomizes an “otherness” from
Western aesthetics and its ideals—can also be observed in less obvious expressions than exotic
typefaces. It is surely the case, for instance, that Madeline Forgue of the Distaff project and the
64

See, for example, the front cover of the 1993 HarperPerennial edition.

228

Black Cat press never intended to engage in a form of typographic racial mimicry in their
“Greetin’s from a Admirer”—which was printed in 1939 for the Distaff side in Goudy
Gaudeamus. As a woman in the male dominated world of the small press and fine press printers,
she would have had an awareness of the essential inhumanity of such practices when realized in
their most extreme manifestations. This gender disparity, in part, was what the Distaff group of
women bookmakers had been attempting to address with their productions. And the Black Cat
Press, too, it should be noted, printed a number of titles on President Lincoln and emancipation,
demonstrating a belief in the American ideals of liberty and equality for all. Forgue participated
in this mimicry, however, when, in a very tongue-in-cheek way, she purposefully set lines of
poorly composed verse in a way that sought to imply that the typesetting had been done
haphazardly by an amateur printer:
I’M kinda worried ‘bout this greetin. It ain’t the thing a beauty I thought ‘twould be.
SoMeone’s been playin’ with the type, Or I got in the pi or somethin’. As a rank beginner
I ain’t allowed in the good type. buT even though most folks think diffrunt, i says
appearances ain’t so important noHOW. It’s what’s behind em that counts. (para. 8)
The poor design, sloppy composition, and bad speech, likely meant to satirize the ignorance of
the working class, simultaneously combine to signify racial difference. The signification or,
perhaps, meta-signification, operates in the same manner that associatively ties the similar visual
characteristics to Neuland in printed ephemera and African American genre books. In a word, the
representation again falls to “Primitivism.” It cannot be a mere coincidence, then, that Forgue
must complete her illusion of “low” or “vulgar” printing by printing the text on what she calls

229

“rare” bargain-counter paper. Strikingly, it is the only gathering in the text block made up of
thin, dark brown newsprint paper.
Forgue’s tacit mimicry is not anomalous; nor is it without precedent. Beyond the
misappropriation of construct and meaning which has occurred with Neuland, “vulgar” printing
has long provided the basis for a class-based dichotomization of “high” versus “low” culture.
And that dichotomization in American print culture took on racial dimensions alongside the split
fairly early in the history. A chapbook (printed ca. 1800) of late seventeenth century verse that I
was able to inspect at the Clark Library tells the tale. The chapbook, which has the short title of
The Poor Unhappy Transported Felon, is one of the Clark’s comparatively few extant samples
of ephemera that touches upon the institution of African slavery in America.65 In that way, it
offers a relatively early instance of when associations of racial mimicry in typography and
graphic design began to form within the American psyche. Jamel Revel’s lyrics tell a story
wherein whites and blacks were enslaved together. “My fellow slaves were just five Transports
more/With eighteen Negroes, which is twenty four,” described Revel, “We and the Negroes both
alike did fare/Of work and food we have equal share; But in a piece of ground we call our
own/The food we eat first by ourselves were sown” (p. 5). The author goes as far as to express
sympathy for his fellow captives stating, “More pity the negro slaves bestow’d/Than my
inhuman brutal master show’d” (p. 6).As one considers the prevalence of this trope in early black
press poetry, it becomes clear that the informal contraction found in the vernacular lends a
sympathy to the rhyming couplets that starts to approach a form of mimicry. It is the style of
language coupled with the quality of print and materials which work to achieve the effect. As a
chapbook, a format which has relatively few extant items from the seventeenth century on the
65

SI-D9: B6

230

account of their low quality and rapid deterioration, it would have been a comparatively
inexpensive imprint to produce (McKay, et al., 2003). Along such lines, the lower class
vernacular corresponds with the crude, lackadaisical typography, rough kerning, worn-out type,
and cheap wove paper to devalue the object, vulgarize the text, and to create an aura of
undesirability around the chapbook for the wealthy bibliophiles and scholar/collectors of its day.
With this stark contrast between the black press and the fine press and, likewise, fine
printing and the popular press, it can be put forth that the image of black press books and black
literature that has emerged in the consciousness of the mainstream is one that has been
characterized as exotic, subpar, throw-away, and, ultimately, inferior. Fine press printing, in this
image, becomes the ideal from which to define the boundaries of the bibliographic “otherness”
of the black press. And the same racial divisions that have emerged in society have also emerged
in our relationships with the material and physical qualities of the book.
5. II. 1. Organization: Library Catalogs as Access Points to the Black Press
To quickly review, bibliographies are not catalogs. Recall that they had initially existed
as “two sides of the same coin,” but their split from each other began more than two centuries
ago. Recall also that the fundamental difference that had emerged between these two domains is
as follows: whereas catalogs are lists which always locate a material item in a physical place,
bibliographies, particularly descriptive bibliographies, typically use a meticulous, systematic
documentation of the tangible components of the earliest or most authoritative manifestations of
a printed work to describe a largely conceptual abstraction of its ideal copy—a copy text that
transcends the many accidentals, alterations, and discrepancies of its subsequent editions. Hence,
since the start of this applicatory schism, bibliography and cataloging have developed along
231

separate, only occasionally intersecting paths. As I previously noted at length, one of the more
recent moments of intersection occurred with the Amory’s (1996) introduction of
ethnobibliography into the bibliographic discourse. Amory had the insight of a seasoned rare
book library cataloger to use elements of descriptive bibliographic method combined with an
ethnohistorical analysis to comprehend what he considered a bibliographic curiosity (i.e. printed
biblical fragment) wrapped in a unfamiliar cultural artifact (i.e. the medicine bundle). The
subject of bibliographic analysis in Amory’s study, partly by his decision not to disregard the
bearing of the catalog when engaging with bibliography as a research methodology, was actually
a unique physical item as opposed to an abstracted ideal. Returning now to the present study
which, in the process of reexamining our current understanding of black literacy, has
systematically investigated books within the context of a physical environment, considering that
the specific environment in question primarily involves the research and special collections
library, a spatially-oriented, item-level approach similar to Amory’s had to be adopted.
Therefore, my discussion of library cataloging within an ethnobibliographic framework should
not disqualify this study’s legitimacy as a work of bibliography expressly because it is not an
effort in cataloging or even a sustained exploration into cataloging theory.
Having proceeded through history of black press literature and its material production by
focusing on the manner in which these books have, in part, contributed to the construction of
racial identity, it should be clear by this point that this study is principally ethnobibliographic in
its design. Accordingly, it is mainly concerned with discerning the various cultural meanings and
racial dimensions that are constructed through our interactions with those printed manifestations
of knowledge production that we call “books.” Also of concern throughout this analysis,
however, has been the publication metadata tied to these items. The metadata for these books, as
232

it follows, exists in a symbiotic relationship with systems of knowledge organization that
function as blueprints for their categorization, collocation, and spatial placement. Such systems
encompass everything from citation standards and cataloging codes to call numbers and name
authorities. They operate through indexes and directories, in integrated library systems (ILS) and
online public access catalogs (OPAC). Finally, these systems are performed through library
reference interviews, research consultations, and information literacy instruction sessions and
courses. Above all, it seems, these systems of knowledge organization structure the marking,
tracking and retrieving of physical objects and artifacts in library, archival, and museum
collections. It constitutes a virtually invisible set of reference mechanisms and operations which
become invisible to researchers insofar as they serve their purpose to connect readers to their
desired sources.
The conventional systems of knowledge organization that are often embedded within still
larger systems of knowledge production can play a role in a reader’s interaction with the material
text—that is, the item or the particular copy in hand. The various institution-level mechanisms
such as digital catalog records, call numbers, and the identification markings that are built around
such systems are really the products of generations of theoretical development. Having already
discussed the theoretical foundations for library cataloging as they were first articulated by
figures like Dewey and Otlet, it is important to recognize that other theorists such as Anthony
Panizzi (d. 1879) and, perhaps most notably, Charles Cutter (d. 1903) were also highly
influential in the development of the underlying schemas that would come to dominate
knowledge organization throughout most of the twentieth century. The transformative and
historically renowned librarian for the British Library, Panizzi, for one, institutionalized the
author-subject system that had risen to ascendancy during the eighteenth century (Taylor, 1993).
233

Similarly, Cutter’s rules for cataloging and his table for author codes greatly impacted the
direction of knowledge organization in the United States. As indicated in his Rules for a Printed
Dictionary Catalogue (1876), the basis for Cutter’s rules rested on the following core principles:
1. To enable a person to find a book of which either
(A) the author
(B) the title

} is known.

(C) The subject
2. To show what the library has
(D) by a given author
(E) on a given subject
(F) in a given kind of literature
3. To assist in the choice of a book
(G) as to its edition (bibliographically).
(H) as to its character (literary or topical). (p. 10)
In terms of retrieval through the metadata, Cutter called for access points at the level of author
and title as well as subject, form, and edition (p. 10). The title and author (or creator) of a work
were the primary access points. Here, at the summit of industrialism, we entered an information
world wherein bibliographic objects were so voluminous that a pragmatic, standardized approach
with strict rules for documentation and access appeared to have been among the few options
available for dealing with the monumental mission of organizing, cataloging, and tracking everexpanding library collections. In Cutter’s rules, however, description to the physical

234

manifestation of a work (i.e. the item, or object) and access to the intellectual manifestation of
the work (e.g. record metadata) are entirely intermeshed.
Cutter’s pragmatic model, in fact, would not be seriously reconsidered until the “father of
modern cataloging” Seymour Lubetzky (d. 2003) stressed the catalog’s potential function of
collocating works with multiple authorial identities under a unifying, authorized term (Wilson,
The objectives of the catalog and the means to reach them, 1989). Similar to the analytical and
descriptive bibliographic discourse, the challenge for enumerative bibliographic description and
library cataloging was initially presented as one of authorial identification. Some authors
obviously have multiple aliases, spellings, and variants. If the author is the access point to the
texts, how does one account for these differences and still ensure an acceptable rate of recall and
precision in the search results? Having a single name authority to unite all others sought to
ameliorate this dilemma. This idea is also the basis for authority control, name authorities, and
authority records. Applied to guidelines for subject division, vocabulary controlled systems such
as the faceted system of Library of Congress Subject Headings (LCSH), Sear’s List of Subjects
Headings (SLSH) and the National Library of Medicine’s Medical Subject Headings (MeSH)
have attempted to address similar issues involving taxonomic plurality and terminological
variants. Based on the 1961 Paris Principles, the widely adopted Anglo American Cataloging
Rules (1967) formed the cornerstone of late twentieth century cataloging. The subsequent
Michael Gorman and Paul W. Winkler edition. AACR2 (1978), brought the rules in alignment
with the ISBD standard; moreover, it was among the first set of standards to distinguish
description (of the object) from access (to the work) (Denton, 2007). As a project under the
direction of Lubetzky, then, and with the need to both establish and conform to an international
standard in a bibliographic and information universe typified by plurality and arbitrary
235

classification, authority control was more fully integrated into the AACR2 cataloging regime in
its guidelines for a main entry for all records (Joint Steering Committee for Revision of AACR,
1978). Any variants, under this model, would have to be classified as an added entry, bringing a
hierarchical order to the system wherein one version of a work or text is selected for primary
representation above others—namely, the authoritative or original version, creator, title, etc.
Just as Cutter’s rules helped to provide the foundation for the card cataloging system, and
just as the AACR2 and the Machine Readable Cataloging Record (MARC) schema were tailored
to the meet the nascent demands of mechanized and electronic records, the establishment of the
Functional Requirements for Bibliographic Records (FRBR) at the close of the twentieth century
attempted to meet the anticipated expectations of cataloging in the digital age. Built upon
Cutter’s Rules, the International Federation of Library Associations (IFLA) initiated the
framework for FRBR to introduce an entity-relationship model (i.e. work, expression,
manifestation, and item) into cataloging operations. It sought to expand Cutter’s “Principle #2 to
give users more scope and power” (Denton, 2007, p. 47). One major achievement of FRBR, thus
far, is that it has conceptually managed to divide works into intellectual (work/expression) and
physical states (manifestation/item). Another achievement is that it has become the underlying
model for the Resource Description and Access (RDA) guidelines which are currently being
integrated into the library and information cataloging infrastructure. Yet another concerns the
greater elasticity it affords in terms of access points and collocation (Koehler, 2015). One must
always keep in mind, however, that the purpose for all of this effort is primarily intended to serve
collection access.

236

All things considered, when approaching knowledge organization and library cataloging,
we must deal with a network of individuals and mechanisms who work in concert to create both
a cataloging superstructure comprised of models, standards, and guidelines, and an underlying
infrastructure at the ground level of each facility’s collection. Knowledge organization, in fact, is
so inextricably intermeshed with the cataloging and reference infrastructures, that I have grouped
them all under the one umbrella category of “organization.” At work here are really two levels:
firs, there is an abstract level, the information to be identified and retrieved in the form of a
work, which is the domain of reference; next, there is the physical, marked, and tracked object to
be retrieved in the form of an item in the collection, the subject of the identification and
cataloging. On the reference side of the equation, more recently there has been motion in the
direction of user friendliness and models of information seeking behavior (Bates, 1989). New
schemas and markup indexing utilities such as Dublin Core have been specially fitted to capture
the vast array of para-bibliographic information objects born in the digital environment. Yet with
all of the innovate attempts to make these systems more flexible and user friendly they have
remained complex and convoluted. Consequently, such systems commonly require at least some
amount of information literacy instruction for proper use.
Standardization (in cataloging) seeks to simplify the complexity (in classification), but
the simplicity is inherently elusive in accordance with the sheer scope of the mission. With all its
penetration, however, it appears that top-down standardization cannot generate uniformity at the
ground level. When conducting my catalog searches for each of the case studies, it was necessary
for me to be able to read and interpret cataloging metadata that, despite being governed by the
same overarching cataloging rules, varied drastically in terms of the degree of conformity and
implementation. These differences, it can be reasoned, must have emerged in accordance with
237

the distinct practices and resources of each individual facility or institution. In almost every case
it was the same superstructure with different infrastructures.
I found that knowledge organization at the Schomburg Center, for instance, as part of the
larger New York Public Library system, was comparatively streamlined.66 Many of its functions
for retrieval have already been mechanized, the access points for the collections have been
digitized, and reference assistance is readily available to assist with catalog navigation. Yet,
mechanization aside, at the Schomburg Center a researcher is still required to fill out an item
request form for each item, manually, and in holograph, with the necessary information extracted
from the metadata found in the catalog record. Actually, this practice of filling a brief penciled-in
request form was a standard practice across most of the individual cases. Veering away from the
convention, however, the Schomburg also has its own in-house classification system functioning
underneath the NYPL cataloging system layered on top of it. Contrastingly, the Clayton Library
did not have a working collection catalog in operation during the entire time of my research.67 As
a result of this particular situation I decided instead to simply send a list of the exact publishers
and unique items of interest to my research directly to the professional staff. The staff
subsequently followed up with me regarding which items they had managed to identify in the
collection and whether not I wished to have them retrieved for review. This almost entirely
human-driven, analog, and manual version of reference and retrieval service certainly has
precedence in the smaller collections from the early modern to the modern period libraries. And
although the system is somewhat laborious and opaque, it is still functional.

66
67

SIV-D1: REF
SIII-D1-D6: ORG

238

A blend between these two extremes, however, was the reference system in operation at
the Amistad Research Center. Given that my time onsite was to be spent as a visiting researcher,
I was able to correspond with a staff archivist directly concerning materials of interest, and the
staff arranged to have the items that I needed ready upon my arrival.68 In part, I am certain that
both the subject of my research and my own professional history gave me a degree of entrée into
the process that would have been virtually unreachable to those outside of the special collections
field. Unlike the Clayton situation, however, I was able to conduct a catalog search prior to my
first visit. Similar to the situation at the Clark Library, the Amistad’s partnership with the Tulane
University library cataloging system provided me with access to the standardized catalog records
necessary for routine item retrieval. Onsite, source identification and item retrieval were
conducted via the usual channels of the reference interview and the item request form.69
Reference interviews in the Amistad reading room could range from brief, single source
identification sessions to extensive research consultations which could last more than an hour.70 I
was compelled to conduct my online catalog searches offsite, however, because of the fact that
direct access to the Wi-Fi was not available to visiting scholars and the reading room’s internet
terminals had been temporarily out of service. Without the internet, however, one could still
independently consult of a wide range of room reference resources including African American
collection catalogs and finding aids, collection guides, encyclopedias, African language
dictionaries, African American biographical directories, indexes to black periodicals/article, and
numerous bibliographies on black literature.71

68

SII-D1: REF
SII-D2-D3: REF
70
SII-D9:REF
71
SII-D2-D12: REF
69

239

Outside of the reference interview, searching for sources in the library may seem
intuitive, but there are numerous approaches available to researchers and student patrons.
Thomas Mann’s (1993) Library Research Models divides them into the following:
subject/discipline model, the traditional library model, type-of-literature model, actual-practice
model, and the methods-of-searching model. Each model, in Mann’s view, seeks out primary and
secondary sources in accordance with its own set of parameters. The subject/discipline model,
for example, focuses on looking at all the material in a particular subject according to the
literature of a particular discipline, whereas the actual-practice model is an informal approach
that recognizes the way that such research is carried out through recommendation, browsing,
footnotes, and other casual methods of discovery. In my selection of bibliographic specimens I
somewhat intuitively took an approach which combined the traditional and actual-practice
models with the type-of-literature model that is typical of graduate research. I placed an
emphasis on the black press and black press literature. At the Amistad, for instance, after an
advance search in the catalog using the publisher as my primary access point, I identified and
then selected specimen one, Half Black/Half Blacker (1970), an example of black press poetry,
specifically because of its ties to the Blacks Arts Movement.72 All of these processes are
experienced with relative seamlessness, but there are advanced skill sets in reference and
research which are being utilized on both ends to maximize recall in search results, identify
important items for review, and to retrieve those items accordingly.
The cataloging and organization infrastructures which allow human agency to efficiently
move a bibliographic object through space are visible in the markings of their physical traces.
Without special training and instruction, however, such markings remain as incomprehensible as
72

SII-D2: REF

240

the theories that have formed the very basis of the coding schemas and computerized catalog
technology in the first place. The LC call number for specimen one, PS 3566.L79 H3 Dent, both
encodes and refers to the work’s genre and its subjects.73 The class “P” stands for “literature,”
the subclass “PS” represents “American Literature” and the “3500” subclass indicates that it is a
post-1960 work. The collection’s creator (Thomas Dent), the publisher (Haki Madhubuti) and the
author (Sterling Plumpp) are all assigned control numbers and name authorities. Madhubuti, who
was still using his name, Don Lee, at that time, has the name authority of Madhubuti, Haki R.,
1942- (Lee, Don L.). The control numbers include an alphabetical prefix and codes for the year
and the serial number in the authority coding. Moreover, the traces of the tracking system,
stickers, identification slips, and the institutional (“Amistad RC) stamps were marked on the
physical item at various places on the object.74 Collectively, these individual components are
working together to categorize and locate a material item in a physical space.
5. II. 2. Organization: Counter-cataloging Textual Hybridity
I only provided a brief overview of the great amount of complexity involved with
contemporary cataloging and integrated library systems. And it is true that many scholars and
researchers are not aware of the vast amount of sources that they could be overlooking because
they do not perceive nor comprehend the theories which underlie these structures. It is not
common for individuals to consider the complexity of these systems as they use them because
there is a veneer of simplicity surrounding the whole experience of engagement. With all of its
virtues, however, knowledge organization in the West is not without its faults. One of the
troubling of them, notwithstanding claims of objectivity and universality, concerns the biases of

73
74

SII-D2: ID
SII-D7: REC

241

the “organizers” themselves. Librarians admirably wish to address what the institution perceives
as deficiencies in black literacy skills. Rarely do we stop and reflect upon the ways in which the
biases of conventional knowledge organization are tied with that perception. Even more rarely do
we consider how these organizational mechanisms can contribute to cultural erasure over time.
The fact that the last cataloging regime which is only beginning to wane in supremacy was
openly named the “Anglo-American” Cataloging Rules makes a rather unambiguous statement
concerning the nature of the hegemonic power relationship. That point, however, is low-hanging
fruit. Terminology, as it turns out, especially in those instances when that descriptor is meant to
collectively refer to a system of rules for the categorization and compartmentalization of
knowledge, does matter. Much of the criticism in this direction, it seems, has been aimed at the
nineteenth century historicity of cataloging systems like the Dewey Decimal System and its
assumption of Protestant, “Anglo-American” patriarchal values (Fields & Connell, 2004;
Koehler, 2015). It is, at this point, a cliché to lambast the DDC’s 290s for its attempt to reduce
all of the non-Christian religions into a comparatively thin slice of the asymmetrically allocated,
numeric scheme of division; but non-Western literatures suffer the same form of reductive
discrimination (Scott, 1998). And it is fairly well recognized across the field now that certain
terms in the controlled vocabulary systems, considered by some populations to be offensive,
have persisted because the superstructure of cataloging standards can be slow to respond to
outside pressures for change. During the course of this research, for instance, I discovered that
the term “miscegenation”—a term which currently has more of a negative connotation than it did
in the past when interracial marriage and parenting was less socially acceptable—was still being
used as a LC subject heading. I found it being used as a board term (BT) subject entry in the
subject field of Roger’s Sex and Race (1940). It is difficult to imagine of a scenario in actual
242

practice wherein a student or researcher would use such an outmoded term as an access point
when searching with intuitively extrapolated keywords such as “blacks,” “Western civilization,”
and “interracial” is a considerably more readily available possible route of discovery.
It became clear pretty early on in my research that the rigidity of subject headings can
actually serve to bury items in the catalog. The use of headings for reference can produce far
better results in terms of the recall and precision ratio if one is trained in the proper use of
computerized library catalogs; yet, for average patrons a subject search is greatly inhibited by a
widespread unfamiliarity with the controlled vocabulary and the ability to search the catalog
through such means. If, for example, a researcher finds their way to the advanced Boolean search
function of the catalog—a search tool with which one possesses a considerably greater degree of
maneuverability it terms of shaping their search results—this does not guarantee that they will be
able to produce the most desired results. To illustrate this point, limiting a search to the Clark
Library within the UCLA library catalog’s advance search tool, searching for the terms “African
American” and “print”—two major focal points of my research area—yields a lonely two results.
The operator “and” in the Boolean method, it should be mentioned, filters out all results that do
not contain those two keywords. Thus, removing the word “print” increases the results to a more
respectable, but still comparatively small eighteen. Change the term “African American” to
“negro” and nearly double your results at twenty-seven including a remarkably cloaked first
edition of Wheatley’s (1773) Poems on Various Subjects, Religious and Moral. Tellingly, you
will find that carrying out the same search using the subject option in place of the keyword
produces even less results. Searching for the terms “African American” and “print” as the
subjects, a move that might intuitively seem reasonable, will disappointingly return no results.
Removing “print” from the search terms will increase the retrieval from zero to five items of
243

varying relevance. Curiously, replacing “African American” with “negro” in a subject search
will reduce the five results to just two. Complications such as these compelled me to utilize the
publisher as the primary access point for retrieving relevant titles in a routine fashion. It was my
understanding that with all the models for efficiency that were intentionally built into the system,
the advanced search function of the catalog could still lend the impression that it is a device
which is intimidating, unwieldy, and difficult to comprehend. The efficiency of the controlled
vocabulary can be, in this way, to some extent nullified by the pervasive disconnection between
the mental models of researchers and the rules and standards of cataloging theorists and experts
who determine, select, and authorize the expanding body of dominant terms in current usage.
Conventional knowledge organization really breaks down, however, when it attempts to
confront, capture, and edify works and literatures that are inherently antithetical to the rules
which have come to define it. The most unfortunate possible result of this paradoxical
conundrum is the erasure of subaltern representation; and, along such lines, arguably one of the
most potent examples of this phenomenon lies in the erasure of gang literature—the fringe of
urban and street literature—from the larger corpus of cataloged African American literature. The
proliferation of street gangs in underserved inner-city communities is widely viewed as one of
the paramount challenges crippling the lives of black people across the nation (See, 1998).
Cultural critics like Bill Cosby, Stanley Crouch, and Bill O’Reilly have consistently attributed
the late twentieth century rise of gangs and black-on-black violence to a breakdown in family
values and media the problem (Crouch, 1995). This stance maintains that responsibility must be
placed squarely on the shoulders of the individuals who choose to participate in that lifestyle.
Some hold the view that gang activity is symptomatic of what Joy DeGruy first described as a
“post-traumatic slave syndrome”—a reactionary condition in which antisocial behavior in black
244

youth is but one of the effects of the profound sense of hopelessness encapsulated in one’s
experience of the lingering impacts of African slavery and the deep-rooted, multi-generational
psychological conditioning of the black mentality to accept a status of racial inferiority and
servitude (Rossiter, 2015, p. 19). In keeping with arguments that favor the psychological
dimensions of the issue, others have formulated explanations that emphasize the possibility that
the emasculation of the black male in the family dynamics of black households could be another
major factor (Kunjufu, 1985; Priestley, 1974). This notion of a wounded black masculinity which
was introduced into the discourse on race in America in the 1965 report The Negro Family by
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, is closely aligned with explanations for black-on-black violence that
stress the power and influence of “rage” in the black male psyche (Moynihan, 1965). These
feelings of rage are believed to be fueled by the perpetual humiliation and social impotency that
accompanies one’s position as the intended target of institutional racial discrimination. In
addition, there is a belief that the failure to integrate African Americans into mainstream society
and the depressed socioeconomic conditions of the ghetto coupled with the lack of opportunities
for black men to achieve success in the broader workforce are among the primary contributive
factors fueling gang activity. As Cheris Kubrin (2005) perceptively stated, “Growing recognition
of the utility of an integrative approach has led researchers to consider the relationship between
structural disadvantage, cultural and situational responses to such disadvantage, and the
perpetuation of violence within African American communities” (p. 361). In this approach,
mainstream American society must assume some responsibility for the problem of gang violence
because of its long adherence to racially determined social inequity.
As a social phenomenon that has prevalent in majority black neighborhoods for several
decades, discussions on the nature and causes of street gangs are not limited to discourses in the
245

study of social problems and deviant behavior. Some have actually advanced the difficult
position which argues for a more holistic view that acknowledges the positive contributions that
gangs and gang members have made to their communities in the past. Useni E. Perkins, who
took the deeper history of black gangs into consideration in his 1987 analysis Explosion of
Chicago’s Black Street Gangs, noted how earlier in the history, during the 1960s and 1970s,
some of the Chicago gangs had been organizations that helped bring a sense of identity, pride,
and structure for young black men in the community as well as protection from violent white
hostility. Not only had some of the gangs been involved intentionally constructive projects such
as Operation Bootstrap which sought to open a cooperative dialogue between local gangs and
business leaders, but groups such as the Black Panthers were known to have recruited gang
members on the account of their drive and leadership abilities.75 The rapper Tupac Shakur, who
believed American history was founded upon gangs from the Freemasons to the police unions,
felt that the gang members in the ghetto had the potential to redirect their energy from violence
and drug and sex trafficking to community betterment and political activism (Dyson, 2001).
Moreover, James C. Howell and Elizabeth Griffiths (2015) argued that many of the automatic
associations that we make about gangs as a society, such as the idea that “gangs, drugs, and
violence are inexorably linked,” are not based more in myth than in fact (p. 28). They pointed out
how some of the other, less talked about functions of gangs like identity construction, recreation,
and social bonding are often the most important concerns of these marginalized groups.
Regardless of whether one sees gangs only as a destructive social problem or as a
potential source of constructive energy among black youth, however, the fact remains that a
literature exists within even the most shunned and criminalized stratums of contemporary
Slauson gang member Alprentice “Bunchy” Carter founded the Southern California Chapter of this organization
in 1968.
75

246

American society. We are just beginning to understand now that it is not the role of librarians to
judge what is good or bad in terms of what constitutes a literature, and that it serves librarians
best to engage with different knowledge and information systems on their own terms (Srinivasan,
2012). It is true that the more distinguished arbiters of black culture would prefer that all of the
attention be lavished upon literary figures like Langston Hughes and Maya Angelou only to
ignore authors in the likes of Iceberg Slim (b. Robert Beck) and Stanley “Tookie” Williams. It
cannot be denied, however, that Iceberg Slim’s Pimp (1967) has been in print for decades, and
that it continues to circulate widely. We cannot change the fact that Stanley “Tookie” Williams
has authored several successfully published books from prison. And there are enough black
gangsta’ novels in print to fill a city library. Ex-Four-Trey Gangsta Crip Terry L Wrotten, for
instance, wrote his novel To Live and Die in L.A. (2011) to fictionalize his journey out of the
street life and into the life of a fulltime writer. It is the kind of book that one would find sold
almost exclusively in black bookstores, at black book fairs, or by black by black street vendors.
Similarly, the gang lifestyle magazine Allhood Publications includes poetry, local histories, and
biographies that written and published by gang members. I could go on listing titles at length
because, without question, gang members, both former and current, are producing books and
texts. What is at question is the degree to which this literature can be conformed to the standards
of cataloging convention.
Library catalogs have been fashioned in a way that is adequately suited to categorize
academic studies conducted by researchers about gangs. Yet even in these cases challenges
emerge. Consider, for instance, the myriad of categorical terms in use within gang culture. In
Chicago alone there are the Black P. Stones, the Gangster Disciples, the Black King Cobras, and
literally dozens more. Subject headings cannot be expected to be narrowed to a level of
247

specificity that could capture such diversity; and the rapid terminological mutation of these
names is a further impediment to their use in main entry vocabularies. It is next to impossible for
researchers and catalogers to be able assimilate gang terminology from within because the
association of the criminality establishes an incommensurability between the two necessarily
conflicting knowledge-bases and their dichotomized ontologies. Any attempt, in fact, for black
gang culture to communicate and express through print culture is an instance of an unanticipated
bibliographic creolization. It counters the stereotype that black criminality must be synonymous
with black illiteracy, and that gang members uniformly harbor a disdain for reading and writing.
Consider, next, the intense degree to which black gang culture has engaged with letters in the
form of script. The fact that the same scripts used for writing “rhymes” (i.e. lyrical poetry) in
rhyme books are the same that appear on car details, tattoos, gang-writing (i.e. territorial graffiti),
“pieces” (i.e. large-scale works of graffiti art), and graffiti “black books” (i.e. sketch books used
for perfecting graffiti letterforms) shows that this form of textuality is not simply vandalism;
more than that, during the past half-century or so it has really emerged as a subaltern tradition of
letters and literacy.
Any attempt to categorize gang writing and graffiti in accordance with the current
standards in library cataloging is a forced attempt to restrain a medium that defies conventional
categorization. With its layered meanings, graphic symbolism, and coded names urban graffiti is
a hybrid text that is able to convey unique and sometimes vital information both literally on and
about the streets. And, as Gundaker (1998) has likewise suggested, graffiti lacks permanence in
its condition as a mobile text (pp. 184-200). It is a text that is mobilized both through its
vulnerability to being crossed out, written over, or cleaned and in its potential to be
simultaneously expressed and manifested on a mobile surface such as a bus or a subway car. And
248

its hybridity is achieved in |its ability to subject both gothic and roman letterforms to semiotic
reconfiguration. These qualities alone make this form of textuality both resistant to rigid
categorization and, conversely, suited for memetic leakage into the writing cultures of the
mainstream. It is the paradox that makes the erasure of gang print culture, at once, unavoidable
and unfavorable. The situation becomes unfavorable precisely because if one wishes to work to
preserve the memory of these graffiti scripts as such scripts continue to migrate to the world of
digital fonts—that is, if one wishes to do so within an institutional environment such as the
library—to make the history of these letterforms accessible to future students and researchers,
one has only comparatively conventional means of organizing the knowledge (Masilamani,
2008). It is understandable, then, why the Clark Library’s copy of Los Angeles Barrio
Calligraphy—a work which documents the early history of gang writing in East Los Angeles—
can be accessed using the term “calligraphy” as a subject access point, but, curiously enough, not
“gang writing.”

249

Chapter Six: Findings for Collections and Performativity
6. I. Collections: The Collectors and their Bibliophilic Legacies
At this point, I have provided ample evidence to support the assertion that both books and
libraries are not neutral repositories of knowledge. Yet, if the book “in hand” cannot be said to
exist within a vacuum, neither can the collection of which it forms a part. Provenance matters. If
it did not, then a book from George Washington or Thomas Jefferson’s library in the possession
of a library or research collection would be treated as any other, and, along such lines, should be
permitted to circulate if the library was a circulating one. It is virtually inconceivable, however,
that’s such a scenario could play out. Furthermore, a collection’s history, too, is not a triviality.
In the library setting a book can never be a standalone object. Of course, a book can be a
standalone object in the private possession of a single owner, or as an object discarded or
abandoned, but in the library a book is always, at the very minimum, part of a library’s general
collection. Consequently, when discussing the nature of black press literature in its relationship
to literacy, racial identity construction, and especially within the larger context of knowledge
production in the special collections research environment, in addition to looking at the books, it
is also necessary to look at the collections of books as unique entities.
The fact that book collections in rare book and special collections libraries are usually the
product of some collector’s legacy is well known. What receives comparatively less attention is
the way that, in addition to collection development, such legacies can shape the access policies
and daily operations of a library. Even less understood is the impact on the library’s aesthetic in
terms of architecture and interior design. Understanding the role of founding collector(s) in
shaping the future of the special collections libraries that spawn from private ownership into the
250

domain of the academic, I would argue, can provide greater insight into library mediation and its
facilitation of the various processes involved with knowledge production. Consider, for example,
the heightened level of environmental dissonance between the Clark Library and its bordering
Jefferson Park community. The starkness of the contrast, to a considerable degree, in fact, can be
directly attributed to the personal proclivities and aesthetic sensibilities of its founder. Here, the
founder’s legacy cannot be separated from the collection and its spatiality. The legacy of Clark is
one of education, cultural preservation, and research, yet all three of these philanthropic benefits
have been expressly situated within the boundaries of Western civilization. Its cultural semiosis,
then, is literally epitomized by the physical space. Signifiers of Clark’s wealth and pedigree are
still visible in the library’s grand architecture and ornate interior design. Admittedly, by the time
that Clark began his life as a book collector he was approaching his middle ages. Indeed, by the
time that he had begun building his collection in earnest, the family fortune was heading toward
its eventual decline.
William Andrews Clark, Jr. was the son of a copper magnate who made amassed a more
than a hundred million dollars in copper. Having a background in trade, his father was able to
break into the copper industry through rapacious banking practices. Later in life, Clark senior
served as a U.S. Senator from Montana—although many believed that he had bribed his way into
office. Despite his own reputation as a “social climber,” however, Clark ensured that his own
children would be raised in all the trappings and traditions of the aristocratic class. Clark junior,
as one might expect, would make his from Los Angeles by way of Paris, France at the age of six
(Conway & Stevenson, 1985, p. 3). Clark had an international education during his youth which
culminated in 1899 with a bachelors in law from the University of Virginia. The considerable
wealth he would have inherited notwithstanding, Clark did, in fact, continue to maintain business
251

offices both in Butte, Montana and Van Nuys, California where he directed the family’s
extensive mining operations which stretched from Montana to Arizona (Conway & Stevenson,
1985, pp. 3-4).
Clearly, Clark had the means of building an impressive collection. He collected
unsparingly in his personal intellectual interests and pursuits. His collecting began with Dryden
and Shakespeare, peaked with Wilde, and was crowned by an enduring foray into fine printing
(Conway & Stevenson, 1985, pp. 12-14). It is difficult to discern the full extent of Clark’s
bibliophilism. Unquestionably, Clark was a dedicated bookman. This dedication is evident in the
great amount of scholarship that he invested into researching his editions during his collection
building. First and foremost, however, Clark’s chief passion in life was the study and
performance of classical music. And the library itself was named after his father, pointing to his
father’s mutual love of books. His gift of the library to the university was especially admirable
and very much in keeping with the cultural philanthropy of the period, but one cannot ignore the
fact that a greater share of Clark’s philanthropic activities was devoted to his establishment of
the Los Angeles Philharmonic orchestra. Be that as it may, Clark’s biography is written all over
an estate that has continued to function as one of UCLA’s research libraries since his death in
1934. Clark’s zeal for collecting Dryden, for instance, is memorialized in the All for Love themed
ceiling painting found in the drawing room. 76 A painting of Clark’s librarian, Robert Ernest
Cowan, looks pensively upon exclusive concerts of first-rate chamber music alongside portraits
of Clark’s beloved literary greats.

76

SI-D5: INT

252

Figure 12. The William Andrews Clark Jr. bookplate. Courtesy of the William Andrews Clark
Memorial Library.
The provenance of the books and artifacts in the collection can neither be less impressive,
nor daunting than the anthropomorphized spatiality that fortifies the cherished objects as it
relates the biography of Clark in virtually every room and brick; for each of the books, too, that
comprise the library’s core collection, embodies a buried provenance which can provide further
insight into the nature of the objects and the various ways that they have been engaged with over
time. At the Clark Library it is a provenance that can be traced in every owl bookplate that was
symbiotically adhered to the artifact as a permanent reminder of the collector (Figure 12).77 A
number of the Kelmscott press books and materials in the fine printing collection, for instance,
had been acquired by Clark through the connections of Pasadena bibliophile and collector Alice
Millard (Conway & Stevenson, 1985, p. 13). Millard had negotiated the exchange directly
through none other than Sir Sydney Cockerell, private secretary for William Morris. In addition

77

SI-B1: BP

253

to working for Morris, Cockerell, like Millard, Cowan, and Clark, was also a well-respected
collector of books—a collector in a wider network of collectors.
Many of the nation’s great collections began in a gentleman’s private library. The
philanthropic legacies of the collectors have often come at the twilight of their collecting years.
The initial drivers for book collecting at the John Carter Brown, John Pierpont Morgan, and
Henry Huntington in the West, however, were also fueled by the age-old spirit of competition.
Without a doubt, Clark’s resources for collecting were not on an equal footing with Huntington,
and their collecting habits were vastly different, but this spirit of gentlemanly competition must
have been a factor in his acquisitions.
The collecting of Arturo (Arthur) Alfonso Schomburg, founding contributor of the
Schomburg’s collection of “Negro history,” however, was generally not concerned with
competing among the upper echelons of society for the thrill of the hunt and the trophy of the
acquisition. Nor did he ever possess the income to have such purchasing power to collect in
medieval manuscripts, incunabula, or fine printing. He could, however, amass books of rarity
that had been largely undervalued on the account of their status as “Negro literature.” Tellingly,
Schomburg’s original bookplate was based on abolitionist Josiah Wedgwood’s famous 1786
anti-slavery medallion.78 The engraving on the bookplate shows the image of an enslaved
African supplicating in genuflection on top of a banner which reads, “Am I not a man and a
brother.” There are, perhaps, certain qualities or characteristics that many book collectors over
time and throughout the world may have shared with one another—qualities such as a love of
“the hunt,” or the love of learning, or tradition, or craftsmanship, an appreciation for belle lettres,
or even the familiar scent of antiquarian editions. Nevertheless, the fortunes of these two men,
78

SIV-B1: BP

254

Clark and Schomburg—who, it should be noted, were contemporaries, relatively close in age—
differed widely; and so too did their reasons for collecting and, ultimately, their respective
legacies. Racial difference and the dynamics of class and wealth, assuredly, must have formed
some of the strongest roots out of the many that had branched over a lifetime of experiential
divergence.
Schomburg was truly a bibliophile extraordinaire. A largely transatlantic figure
ethnically, he was born on January 24, 1874 in San Juan Puerto Rico to African and German
ancestry (Sinnette, 1989). Still, his mixed identity notwithstanding, from an early age he
identified as a “Negro,” and throughout his life he both spearheaded and promoted the PanAfricanist charge to unite black people throughout the Americas and the world. Like many great
book collectors of the past, Schomburg was a mostly self-educated independent scholar and
bibliographer. He immigrated to the U.S. in 1891, establishing himself in the city of New York,
by working in semi-skilled labor and trades. During these early years, Schomburg even had some
experience working in the printing industry before moving into community organizing and
political activism (Sinnette, 1989). His spent his initial years in this work as a secretary for Las
Dos Antillas in support of the independence movements of Puerto Rico and Cuba. After close to
a decade in the U.S., however, his politics shifted toward combating the racial discrimination of
African Americans (Sinnette, 1989, p. 26).
With a hunger for learning and a sense of purpose to provide a record of black history for
the region’s community of black artists, writers, scholars, and learners, he amassed a massive
collection of materials for research in black history and culture. Unlike Clark, however, as a
mixed race child born out of wedlock, Schomburg did not have the benefit of inheriting neither

255

the wealth nor the prestige attached to his surname (Sinnette, 1989, p. 14). Although restricted by
a limited income, Schomburg’s penetration into the Harlem literati was still very deep. His
collection was looked upon as a vital asset within this community. Schomburg himself had been
active in organizations like the American Negro Academy and other groups and initiatives
devoted to black scholarship. He had been an instrumental figure in the early development of
black freemasonry. And he did his best to serve some the greatest black minds of his day
including Alexander Crummell, Claude McKay, and Marcus Garvey. He once received a direct
appeal, for example, from Amy Jacques Garvey, Garvey's wife, asking him to sign a petition
(with "hundreds of thousands of signatures") of appeal to President Coolidge for her husband's
release (personal communication, May 11, 1925).
For years prior to his service as a New York Public Library curator, Schomburg had been
the unofficial librarian of the African American intellectuals of Harlem. And when his collection
was purchased by the New York Public Library with a Carnegie grant of $10,000 in 1926,
Schomburg not only agreed to personally shepherd the collection’s transition into public hands,
but, by doing so, he would outline its potential for the promotion of black culture and learning
(Sinnette, 1989, p. 137). That same year, Schomburg was able to make his only trip to Europe
where book hunting was to be part of the agenda (Sinnette, 1989, p. 92). Considering that he was
only paid a salary of $2,400 for his truly invaluable service to posterity, it is not shocking that
that he could not make more trips of this kind (Sinnette, 1989, p. 160).79 During his time as
curator from 1932 until his death in 1938, however, Schomburg was regularly consulted by
teachers, librarians, scholars, and writers as an authority of African American studies and
literature. He curated important exhibitions of black artists, organized events, and gave lectures
79

Roughly $30,000 a year in today’s money.

256

in addition to his work as the collection’s curator. A flier for the October 14, 1936 evening
service for the Metropolitan Missions Training Institute which lists Schomburg as giving a talk
called, “The African Background of the Negro,” is reliably illustrative of the kinds of subjects
and issues that he chose to tackle in his lectures.
He not only recommended titles to others, but he received recommendation for books and
new avenues of research from friends and colleagues alike. The African American composer W.
C. Handy, for one, wrote to Schomburg in the summer of 1937 about the music of composer
William Grant Still. Along such lines, much like the fine print editions at the Clark Library, the
provenance of the some of the books in Schomburg’s core collection provide physical evidence
of the collector’s personal friendships and social ties. The particular copy of Hughes’s Not
Without Laughter that I examined during my onsite bibliographic research almost immediately
revealed traces of the long-standing relationship between collector Arthur Schomburg and author
Langston Hughes. The copy was signed by the author. The signature effectively renders the
object into an artifact. However, the instance of a signature here also quietly hints at Hughes
hand in actually shaping Schomburg’s collecting. The wildly generous and enthusiastic tone in a
correspondence that he sent to Schomburg while working and touring in Moscow in 1933 better
elucidates the system of bibliographic reciprocity delineated by the presence of a signed copy of
his debut novel:
I found your letter awaiting me here on my return from Soviet Asia. I was happy to learn
that you met my friends in Havana, and that you also have a high regard for Guillen’s
poetry. I would like very much to aid in putting this poetry into English, but I am afraid I
could do nothing about it soon. If you have anyone else in mind who can do the job now,

257

get hold of them. At present I am putting into English Mayakovsky’s two Negro poems
that he wrote in Havana, and his poem about the Pushkin statue that stands in the heart of
Moscow……A postcard photograph of this statue is enclosed. (2 copies)… Whatever
material of the sort I see, I shall send you. (personal communication, February 5, 1933)
Hughes went on to describe the hidden treasures in the Russian rare book shops, and asked if the
library would like him to make some acquisitions on their behalf.
The fact that one of the Schomburg’s three buildings and two of its event spaces were
later named after Langston Hughes honors the intellectual relationship between the these two
men inasmuch as it commemorates the accomplishments of the author. As we saw with Clark,
the biography of the collector can be wedded both to the physical space and the cultural legacy
of the collection’s greater lifetime. This situation has played out time and time again with
varying degrees of complexity. The longevity and continuity enjoyed by both Clark Library and
Schomburg Center’s collection is certainly not a given. At times, the negotiated conditions of the
transfer between collector and institution can inadvertently be outside of the interests of the local
community. One of Schomburg’s conditions of sale was that the collection was to be part of the
NYPL research collection and not beholden to a particular branch (Sinnette, 1989, pp. 137-139).
Consequently, at certain points, Harlem residents have had to fight to keep the collection from
being absorbed by the “main branch” (Stephen A. Schwarzman Building) on 5th Avenue and 42nd
Street. Schomburg’s original vision, however, had also allowed for the collection’s continued
expansion. And the current, more culturally relevant, renovated facility that houses the vastly
larger twenty-first century collection of black studies materials honors the legacy of the founder
in more than name alone.

258

One of the more interesting examples of the interplay between the collector’s legacy and
the physical residence of the collection can be found in the case of the Mayme Clayton Library
and Museum. The Clayton Library is unique in a number of ways. First, it does not have the
benefits nor the drawbacks of being attached to a larger library system. Secondly, in accordance
with the consent of her eldest son, Avery Clayton (d. 2008)—who was in charge of the collection
in 2004 when the family was searching for a permanent home to house it—the items were
ultimately housed in a public, non-library facility. Lastly, the volume of her collecting, given the
time during which she was collecting and the nature of the materials, was considerably higher
than both Clark and Schomburg. Her original collection tallied at over a staggering 30,000 books
by the time major institutions such as the Huntington Library in Pasadena expressed interest in
acquiring it. The books, were part of larger collection of over a million items.
How did Clayton manage to amass such an impressively voluminous collection?
Summed in brief, it must have been in part due to her strength of mind and strength of character.
She worked professionally as a librarian throughout her adult life, working in the UCLA and
USC library systems, but then her mission for building a collection was very much aligned with
Schomburg’s aspirations to build a central repository for black knowledge and showcase African
American literary and artistic production (MCLM Staff, personal communication, March 3,
2014).80 In the 1970s, she had worked as an organizer and in fundraising, founding educational
nonprofits such as the Western States Black Research and Education Center (WSBREC). And
like Schomburg and many of her other predecessors in black press book collecting, she did not
simply dabble in an independent book selling venture, she became a co-owner of Universal
Books before opening her own book store called “Third World Ethnic Books” (MCLM Staff,
SIII-D1: PROMO. Biographical information received from the MCLM “open house” tour given by the staff on a
regular basis.
80

259

personal communication, March 3, 2014). Born in 1923, just three years before Clark would
officially announce his plans to gift his library to UCLA and Schomburg would sell his
collection to the New York Public Library, Clayton came to enjoy the life of affluence afforded
to the patrician class of African Americans in Los Angeles. Not only did she earn her Master in
Library Science from Goddard College, she also held a doctoral degree in the humanities. She
resided in West Adams on Cimarron Street, fascinatingly enough, only a couple blocks from the
Clark Library (MCLM Staff, personal communication, March 3, 2014). Recall briefly that from
the 1940s through the 1970s West Adams was one of the more popular neighborhoods for
affluent blacks in Los Angeles. Clayton’s academic prestige combined with her role as an
activist for black history and education must have helped her to thrive socially in such a
community. And adding on the fact that she was also a skilled and avid golfer, Clayton acquired
a reputation in the city for being a spirited socialite, worldly in her travels (MCLM Staff,
personal communication, March 3, 2014).
The manner in which Clayton’s biography has been enshrined in the collection space
differs from both the Clark Library and the Schomburg Center in some interesting ways. The
biographical history of Clark cannot be extracted from the building because he had full control of
the choice of architects and the much of the furnishing and interior décor prior to its transfer.
Schomburg, who had comparatively little control over such decisions, relied upon the parent
library system to integrate his legacy into the space and pay tribute to his name therein and
thereafter. However, after the Clayton family accepted Culver City’s invitation to house the
collection in the city’s former courthouse, they had come up with unique ways of
commemorating the founder in a repurposed space. Working with the staff and volunteers, the
family had one of the building’s rooms fully dedicated to Clayton’s memorialization. In this
260

room one finds a quasi-replica of her collection its original “garage-front” state. Having an
exhibit modeled after the collector’s home environment provides the illusion of intimacy that is,
in many respects, based in a level of reality that is inherent to the Clark Library, given that the
gentleman himself had actually habited the space during his lifetime.
In any event, the decision to repurpose a former courthouse into a research library has
had other noteworthy consequences; in particular, there have been certain outcomes related to
what parts of the collection can be accessed, by whom, and how the Clayton family sustains
operations. It is worth here restating here that, in addition to tens of thousands of books, Clayton
also built an extensive periodical collection of newspapers and magazines which was, as it turns
out, part of a larger ephemera collection made up primarily of programs and pamphlets. She
collected manuscripts, photographs, sheet music, and records (MCLM Staff, personal
communication, March 3, 2014). Most remarkably, however, is that Clayton was also a serious
collector and promoter of black films; so much so, in fact, that she founded the Black American
Cinema Society in 1976. Over time, this aspect of her collecting legacy has proven to be
distinctly well-suited to the particular amenities that a courthouse facility has to offer. Whereas a
very small amount of the space has been allotted for readers to conduct onsite research—in fact,
the site did not have an official reading room in any capacity during the time of my research—
the old courtrooms are tailor-made for the library’s regular film series which screens multiple
films a month. In this case, the circumstances of the transfer, its geographic location, and its
physical space together prompted stakeholders to find innovative ways to engage the community
through the collection in a largely nontraditional research environment.

261

6. II. 1. Performativity: African American Vernacular English and Hip Hop Literacies
I have pulled a series of micronarratives from the data in order to unearth some of our
assumptions regarding the neutrality of the book and the traditional library response to the black
literacy crisis. Having done so, it is prudent at this point, to launch into a discussion of the
performance of black literacy in the library setting. As noted in the introduction, previous studies
typically begin with literacy because “the book” is seen only as a material vehicle of textual
transmission. According to this view, the act of reading is committed upon a text as knowledge is
transferred through a pedagogy which favors an “injection” or banking model of education
(Freire, 1970). Using ethnobibliographic method, however, this study has pursued a different
route of investigation to show how racial identity and the book object can be tied together,
particularly within the context of the library research environment. The practice of literacy, then,
within this context, must also be constructed along racial lines.
The bibliocultural relationships that exist among books, race, and the performance of
reading can be inculcated with our earliest encounters with literacy instruction. Multiculturalism
in the classroom, for all the criticisms it had received during its initial implementation, was really
a reaction to a perceived deficiency in pedagogical representation and cultural relevancy in
teaching materials (Ladson-Billings, 1992). And the fact remains that there is a delicate
balancing act that must be performed in the classroom space when the subject of racial difference
is pulled out into the open through, say, the oral recitation of written text. Perhaps the most wellknown example of this phenomenon had occurred when, prior to the release of the sanitized 2011
NewSouth edition, black students in predominately white classrooms had been routinely
compelled to read aloud passages from Mark Twain’s Huckleberry Finn. The absence of black

262

literature in this context, or even the absence or demeaning representation of people of color in
canonical literature, works in concert with the materiality of these texts to forge associations
between letters, communication, identity, and learning at our most formative years.
The further back in the history one looks, the more hostility toward black literacy in the
pedagogy one discovers. A black student in the late nineteenth or early twentieth century was
likely to have learned their ABCs and 123s with a book such as the 1873 version of The Ten
Little Niggers—printed jointly in both London and New York. There are numerous layers of
messaging and interpretation at play here for the black novice reader (Schmidt-Wulffen, 2012).
First and perhaps most immediately perceptible is the blatant disregard for black life; moreover,
this lesson of misanthropic indifference is delivered innocuously in comic illustrations and song
lyrics simultaneously intended to teach children to read and count. One of the more disturbing
lyrical phrases, for example, reads, “Seven little boys chopping up sticks/one chopped himself in
halves, and then there were six” (1873, n.p.). There is a diminutive if not faintly optimistic
message of assimilation for readers of color, too, at the song’s conclusion which reads, “One
little nigger with his nice little wife/ lived all his days a very happy life” (n.p.). The
corresponding illustration depicts a wholesome black couple with the apparently “literate”
husband reading a copy of Daily News in an armchair with his conservatively dressed wife
knitting around the hearth fire in the fashion of the model Victorian home. Yet, again, less
obvious is the peculiar manner in which the black bodies are used to construct the letterforms
and the message that their construction—both in the literal and the figurative senses—conveys to
readers. Unlike the similar example found in Park’s Venus where the letter “U” is symbiotically
superimposed upon the corporeality of the black female buttocks, the young black men that
construct the letters of this songbook communicate the sense that they are laboring, acrobatically
263

to contort themselves into the proper shapes of each letter. Each letter works with the other to
form the word, a word which spells out a number.
These insensitivities, whether overt or covert, being driven by racial difference, constitute
acts of aggression insofar as they attempt to eliminate cultural difference through assimilation.
The chief instrument of assimilation, as astutely noted by Fernandez (2001) in her discussion on
Hirsch’s “cultural literacy,” is the binary. The binaries exposed by her critique are those which
have erroneously propped up the invisible boundaries between written/oral, text/non-text,
book/non-book, literacy/illiteracy, and, ultimately, white/black. How, then, can we start to
recognize and understand the way that black literacy is practiced when we can only see literacy
in terms of binaries? Reaching the point of Fernandez’s argument wherein multiplicity and
performativity are the dominant identifiers, and recognizing, like Richardson, the linguistic
complexity of hip hop literacies, has taken generations serious of scholarship and research into
the literacy question.
In black literacy studies, spoken language has always been a key factor. As early as 1969,
an influential early collection of essays on the subject, Teaching Black Children to Read, began
to highlight some of the more problematical difficulties that can arise from the dichotomization
of dialect, particularly when conventional pedagogies are applied in basic literacy education for
black youth. The first step in a long journey toward the legitimization and broad acceptance of
African American Vernacular English in the mainstream—an aim, admittedly, which has yet to
achieve fruition—arguably started with its earlier recognition as a dialect. In the opening essay
of the collection, “Dialectology and the Teaching of Reading,” Raven MacDavid, Jr. (1969)
observed the phenomenon with a cultural lens:

264

Dialect associations of phonemes and graphemes may vary strikingly from one part of the
culture to another. English patterns of phonemic-graphemic correspondence involve
several layers of cultural convention, and some of the practices of some subcultural
subdialects may be sharply at variance with normal practices of a speaker. These
complexities of association make it difficult for someone not only to spell a word he
normally confines to the spoken informal style, but to pronounce a word which he is
accustomed to meeting only in print. And if words of the last group are frequently
mispronounced in oral reading, there is a reasonable supposition that they will be as
frequently mispronounced in silent reading. (p. 2)
McDavid had the insight to perceive cultural difference in the supposition, but the argument was
still firmly rooted in the autonomous model, and, thusly, it dichotomizes difference in terms of
black and white, literate and illiterate. Moreover, this position fails to acknowledge that there
could be alternative modes of literacy at work in the dialect. For the most part, it seems the
position is still largely maintained in contemporary linguistics.
In Joan Baratz’s (1969) “Teaching Reading in an Urban Negro School System,” an essay
which comes later in the series, the classic argument for the black literacy is laid out in the
typical pragmatist and functionalist terminologies. According to Baratz, black children are
“failing” in schools and suffering from a relative lack of education. This failure, with illiteracy at
its core, contributes not only to the lack of self-esteem, but it also limits one’s potential for
success in the job market (p. 93). Yet, there are also forward-thinking aspects of Baratz’s agenda
(i.e. to understand black dialect and integrate that knowledge into literacy instruction). “All the
linguists studying Negro non-standard English agree that these differences are systematized

265

structured rules within the vernacular,” we are told, and “they agree that these differences can
interfere with the learning of standard English, but they do not always agree as to the precise
nature of these different rules” (p. 100). The first part of the supposition, perhaps inadvertently,
is the most pioneering; for it concedes to the notion that there is a systematic element to AAVE
and challenges the idea that the language is simply being based in syntactical randomness or an
ungrammatical articulation of standard English, no matter how much it thrives on its own
creativity. As noted by Baratz, “This language difference, not deficiency, must be considered in
the educational process of the black ghetto child” (p. 101).
After thirty years of investigation into the issue, the discussion culminated with a
contentious debate that commenced with the Oakland Unified School District Board of
Education’s passing of the 1996 Oakland Resolution on Ebonics. A radical departure from even
the most sympathetically progressive discourse of the period, this resolution boldly declared that
Ebonics—a term that was being used to describe black vernacular in those years—was not
actually a dialect, but a Pan-African language form linguistically rooted to its West African
ancestor (para.2). The resolution required that Ebonics had to be integrated into the classrooms
of Oakland’s schools in order to assist with young black students with literacy education (para.
12). Teachers fluent in both English and Ebonics, it followed, had to be fairly compensated for
their bilingualism (para. 13). Furthermore, under these guidelines “code switching”— a process
which involves oscillating back and forth between different dialects, inflections, tonalities, or
languages in accordance with the circumstances, mores, and decorum in the act of
communication—was likewise viewed as an educationally constructive practice.

266

Recently, a more nuanced understanding of black language has emerged with the
increased usage of the term African American Vernacular English (or Black Vernacular English)
in the discourse in place of Ebonics. Along such lines, the entire issue has been reassessed with
the view that race is a socially constructed phenomenon. In short, when race is looked upon in
this way, AAVE becomes a performative act insofar as it acts to create cultural difference (i.e.
singularity) through the creolization of speech. In Young’s (2007) understanding, then, the
attempt to bridge the cultural divide through code switching in the classroom is not necessarily
an effective method of addressing the problem of AAVE’s status as an inhibitor to education. He
advocated, instead, that teachers practice “code meshing”—or the natural, casual interspersing of
AAVE into standard English lessons—in situations where an integration of the two would be
deemed culturally appropriate (pp. 142-143). This practice, Young observed, was something that
had been naturally occurring anyway, regardless of the numerous attempts by the academy to
designate one as “proper” and the other, frankly, as the “other.” If the definitive characteristics in
black press literature, from its language to its graphic design, both reflect and reinforce the use of
AAVE in black speech, especially as a performative vehicle of black expression, then the radical
notion of allowing for a more robust integration of these alternative communicative modalities
into the apparatuses of academic knowledge production loses its edge. Hip hop literature, in
particular, has a synergetic bond with AAVE that cannot be disentangled. As Richardson (2006)
has argued, the literature, viewed as a whole, constitutes a discourse that is situated within
AAVE. It possesses its own cannon, and it has both a pedagogy and a literacy onto itself.
The pedagogy of hip hop, is clearly one that is characterized simultaneously by poetry
and song. Ironically, the pedagogical framework of The Ten Little Niggers works from a similar
principle. I make note of this curious example not to infantilize the pedagogy. To the contrary,
267

the fact that two diametrically opposed literacies could share an underlying pedagogical
underpinning is a further acknowledgement of the unrecognized ubiquity of the oral in written
culture. The same is true of its inverse, and, as with the case of poetry, there is much that is
written embedded within the oral. These song poems, first and foremost, have functioned as
pneumonic devices. The basic idea behind the song poems that resides within hip hop, when
defined by a broader historical scope, has its precedents in various literary traditions; moreover,
the literary traditions of sacred texts from the Vedas to the Psalms have been especially wedded
to the form. Still, although these songs can be studied in accordance with the accepted
methodologies of musicology and ethnomusicology, in these disciplines, the pedagogical
modalities in the songs themselves are typically examined from an objective as opposed to a
subjective standpoint, creating boundaries between the two modes of producing knowledge and
constructing truth.
It is the synesthetic hearing of the listener and the existential intonation of the performer
which creates the subjective bonds necessary for the activation of these secreted pedagogies into
worldly materialization. The definitive performative characteristic operating here, whether it be
isolated between author and reader, or set within the larger “context” of its place in “the world,’
is interaction. The conundrum that, at once, bears out and undermines truth, perhaps, is best
explained McGann’s (1989) Towards a Literature of Knowledge. To counter the idealism of
Kantian thought which describes poetry and art as cerebral abstractions that are transcendently
divorced from society, McGann articulated that poetry, as a text, was very much a part of the
world, its failures, its controversies, and its limitations. For McGann, the lens of “truthexperience” had supplanted the “author function” and, ultimately, the “truth function” of the text
(pp. 2-8). Essentially, poetry is born from the lives and experiences of the poets, and, in this
268

context, it is saturated with various motives and agendas. In that way, according to McGann,
poetry is political. A poem must have a life beyond its author. That life is defined by the trails of
its reception, interpretation, misinterpretation, quotation, and other forms of interaction.
“Poetry,” McGann posited, “is not irrational; rather, it is the one form of discourse we have
which displays the fact that human reason—the mind—has more comprehensive means for
dealing with the truth than suggested by the traditional arguments of philosophy” (p. 7). Poetry,
then, for McGann, exists within a discourse, and the “physique of poetic discourse is the ultimate
ground of its radical incommensurability, and that physique can take many forms within the
three general areas in which discourse occurs: linguistic, bibliographic, trans-active” (pp. 7-8).
Explained in this way, the performative nature of poetry in its capacity to represent truth,
represents the truth of its mundane, lived experience as a social text. McGann was able to
illustrate his point in his discussions of “the work of Blake, Byron, D. G. Rossetti, and Ezra
Pound,” but an analysis of the work of Shakur could have easily led to the same position—
especially considering that the line between his art and his life, and even the circumstances of his
death, had been remarkably thin (p. ix).
Graft onto this social dimension the interplay of the text with one’s racial identity and
cultural background and arrive at the epistemological purpose that hip hop and its literature
serves for black people across the globe. The Pan-Africanist linking of hip hop with the West
African griot tradition is of particular importance in this regard, for it is the bridge which
connects deejays and rappers with its ancestor in African textuality (Miller, 2004). This
textuality, in particular, as scholars such as Gates (1988) and Fraser (2008) have clearly revealed,
has a comparatively fluid and dynamic structure wherein improvisation within a framework of
established narratives is a valued aspect of the pedagogy that supports it. The textuality, too, has
269

been more amenable to the reconfiguration of these narratives as Fraser has indicated in his
discussion of the continuity of “orature” from The Egyptian Book of the Dead to the Yoruba
tradition of Ifa (Fraser, 2008, pp. 42-43). And, by his account, this continuity had traversed these
historically and geographically distant “modes of articulation” despite the chief difference
among them which has resulted from “the fact that in the ancient Egyptian practice it is the
words that are written down, and in West Africa or Cuba a numerical code on the basis of which
the words are recited and then selected (there being two stages of randomness, one subject to
destiny, and the other to individual choice)” (p. 43).
Translated into contemporary African American literacy practices, this textual
reconfiguration through “orature” can be likened to the arts of freestyling and remixing (Miller,
2004). Such practices, for those who regularly engage with hip hop and its literature,
simultaneously reinforce and perpetuate the truth experience of reception, whether that reception
is aural or visual, or even both. Seen as a whole, what emerges is an alternative ontology which
forms the basis of a counterhegemonic system of knowledge production directly relevant to the
language and moral codes of black youth. Thus, when Richardson (2006) situated the literacies
of hip hop as a legitimate manifestation of African American Vernacular Discourse (AAVD), she
did so with the understanding that these literacies are born out of a transatlantic history and
experience. Being part of a diasporic discourse, in fact, these literacies have been shared among
African Americans and blacks in the West Indies who have mutually informed each other in
terms of linguistic development and stylistic flourish in poetical and rhythmic composition.
Accordingly, hip hop literature itself becomes one of the most quintessentially performative
forms of textuality, not only signifying, but in that process, also contributing to racial identity
construction (Banks, 2010; Grassian D., 2009; Richardson, 2006).
270

If hip hop is effectively a living, breathing example of a constantly evolving AAVD, then
Young was, perhaps, correct when he asserted that his performance of AAVE was really an
exercise in the preservation of his sense of cultural difference and racial autonomy (Richardson,
2006; Young, 2007). Recall that Young felt that his performance of conventional literacy
practices within the mainstream American system of education had really been a performance of
whiteness which resulted in a loss of cultural capital among fellow blacks, especially individuals
in the low-income and working class brackets. His feelings were not limited to his own
experience, as the sentiments are shared by many black academics, especially those working at
major universities with mostly white populations (Harvey, 1998, p. 145). Young wrote:
Literacy habits, like reading novels of a certain kind and speaking what might appear to
be standard English, have always made me seem more queer, more white identified, and
more middle class than I am. When I fail to meet the class, gender, and racial notions that
others ascribe to me, I’m punished. In some ways, living in a mostly white town and
being an assistant professor at a Big Ten school heightens—not lessens, as I had hoped—
the conflict that stems from the sometimes converging, but oftentimes diverging, racial
and gender expectations that are held out for black men and that we hold out for each
other. (p. xv)
The kind of cultural capital which is lost in the above selection, effectively one’s “street
credibility,” is an essential requisite for entry into the social circles where hip hop literacies are
most prominent. The fundamental problem in Young’s reflexive analysis resides in the implicit
awareness that adopting the distinctive combination of language, style, and personal appearance

271

that makes up hip hop culture, particularly as black men, can leave us open to racial profiling and
implicit bias at the hands of our white colleagues.
The casual use of AAVE in formal settings can also have serious consequences. To be
more specific, whereas literacy in both standard English and in AAVE does not generally ensure
one’s success, being literate only in AAVE is likely to ensure failure, at least in terms of the
conventional workplace. The mainstream aversion to AAVE begins at birth with the act of
naming, and it is carried on from there in a subsequent, utter rejection of the various vehicles of
expression that are entirely relevant to the identities of marginalized blacks. In his book Acting
White (2010), Ron Christie cited the research of Roland Fryer and Steven Levitt, and the
subsequent economic analysis of Robert Barro in an argument that attempted to reveal a link
between overtly black names such as “DeShawn, Shanice, and Deja” and poverty and the lack of
social mobility (as cited in Christie, 2010, p. 127). If this research can be applied to the
population at large, then at some of the responsibility for the incommensurability in literacies
here lies with this primal antipathy. Overt admonitions against the style and apparel of African
American youth—a style which is very much informed by hip hop—follow the same line of
vocational impedance. The combination of style and language in particularly inopportune
situations involving law enforcement has proven to be fatal in recent days. Nevertheless, despite
attempts at culture shaming from Bill Cosby and other cultural critics, year after a year finds a
gradual increase in the virtually imperceptible injection of AAVE into the mainstream (Christie,
2010; Grassian D., 2009). Terms like “twerking” and “on fleek” have experienced widespread
usage through internet communication, and, at present, they can even be heard in broadcast

272

media.81 The rise in saturation is perhaps a natural outcome of demographic shifts in this country
which have favored minorities and a maturing hip hop generation.
6. II. 2. Performativity: African American Vernacular English and Library Literacy Practices
Having discussed, in some detail, the specific process in which AAVE can breed its own
discourse within the literacies and literatures of hip hop, the question remains as to the present
degree to which special collections libraries are institutionally open to embracing these
counterhegemonic modes of textual expression and knowledge production (Appendix A). The
environmental dissonance that separates the Clark Library from the relatively sizable population
of black people that live in and around its adjacent neighborhoods also manifests itself within the
unwritten linguistic protocols that define the literacy practices which are performed daily behind
its vine covered walls. The Clark library, if you will recall, had a Caucasian researcher
population of approximately 89% over a two-week period. As one would expect, I found that
during my research there was not a single occurrence of AAVE being used as a medium for
conversation in this research environment. Again, the standards of communicative decorum here
had been set by the conventional models of Western education and library operations. At the
opposite end of the spectrum was the Clayton Library whose 87% black patron population saw
roughly 84% of its representatives communicating comfortably in AAVE. The most fascinating
case, it seems, was the Amistad Research Center which rested in the middle of the spectrum with
23% of its 44% African American population conversant in AAVE. Of particular interest here is
the fact that the distribution between blacks and whites at this site was the closest to being
equally divided. In the face of its geographic isolation from the heart of the New Orleans African
The word “twerk” refers to a feminized, club style of pelvic dancing that is often perceived as being sexually
provocative. The term “on fleek” translates to a well-executed statement of fashion, especially one in involving
apparel and/or cosmetics.
81

273

American community, whites constituted only around a ten percent higher share of the total
patron population. Still, even with the relatively high percent of black students and researchers,
standard English remained the dominant language of communication. The evidence suggested to
me that the relative gravitas of the research atmosphere was enough to effectively suppress the
use of AAVE in the reading room by privileging a strict adherence to an even more professional
version of the standard. In other words, the use of standard English in this context has been a
self-evidently normative literacy practice. This explanation could very well account for the
comparatively reduced presence of AAVE among an African American population which, again,
at the Amistad had been relatively high.
The formality which is engrained in the Clark’s architecture, interior, design, programs,
books, collections, and linguistic predilections, is mirrored in the appearance of its researchers.
There were not any officially advertised dress-code policies in place that I could find, but the
atmosphere of the research environment combined with the nature of the activities which occur
within it seemed to have encouraged researchers to select either formal or semiformal apparel
such as ties, button downs, and dress shoes, and business blouses, scarves, and long skirts for
women. The combination of semiformal and formal attire accounted for 95% of the Clark’s
researcher population. The only barely visible intimation of black culture exhibited among the
researchers (apart from myself) in the reading room came from the only other student researcher
of color there who had stickers depicting black basketball players on her laptop computer—a
practice, I should add, that could also be observed at the Schomburg Center.82 Casual attire was a
popular choice among the Schomburg’s many patrons and visitors, accounting for 66% of the

82

SI-D3: APR; SIV-D8: APR

274

facility’s total population.83 Jeans and t-shirts, sportswear, shorts, high-tops and sneakers were
common enough.84 It is reasonable to infer that Schomburg’s status as a public collection in a
major metropolitan district, not to mention its role as a tourist destination, would have accounted
for the high proportion of casually dressed patrons.
If there was a noticeable outlier among the cases, however, then it would have to have
been between the findings at the Amistad and the Clayton. The Amistad, with its considerably
light presence of AAVE in its reading room, had a considerably high frequency of casually
dressed individuals within its population. I am not suggesting that there is any kind of direct
correlation between the number of AAVE speakers and the casually dressed; I am simply
attempting to get at some sense of the degree to which the special collections reading room
environment is open to these forms of expression. Above all, such forms of (cultural) expression
are, in effect, inseparably intertwined with the performance of literacy in a public setting.
Therefore, the fact that the Clayton Library was the case study that had the greatest amount of
AAVE speakers among its patrons, but, much like the Clark Library, 94% of its patron
population dressed in formal and semiformal wear, had clearly more to do with the age of these
patrons than their choice of linguistic expression. I found that senior patrons and researchers
tended to prefer formal and semiformal wear—the conventional style of dress for the special
collections reading room. For black patrons, these semiformal and formal styles were not
necessarily direct imitations of the American mainstream; rather, what I found was a
combination of adoption and conscious integration of these styles with often subtle, and
sometimes striking differences. One group of senior African American patrons visiting the
Amistad, a group of potential donors, exhibited a fashion reminiscent of the Black Arts
83
84

SIV-D2: APR
SII-D4: APR

275

Movement. Some of the elders, for example, wore bold African print on their apparel and
African style head wraps. Yet, considering that the majority of the Amistad’s patron population
were undergraduate students from Tulane, it is understandable that close to 70% of the
population was dressed casually. Basically the university’s undergraduate student culture had
succeeded in breaking down some of the unspoken expectations in terms of proper reading room
dress and attire; nevertheless, the relatively substantial numbers of black patrons drawn to the
Amistad’s collections by virtue of a cultural affinity have failed to do the same for the
expectations of proper linguistic expression. Whereas seniors and graduate researchers favored
the convention, younger students and the hip hop generation millennials tended to favor a more
casual look.85
It is difficult, if not virtually impossible, to discern all of the ways in which language and
appearance shape the act of performing research in a special collection. It can certainly structure
communication between patrons and staff, but it can also impact the interactions that patrons
have with each other. The impact can be positive, such as in cases where AAVE speakers can
have a more robust conversation about their research on the account of their mutual
understanding of relevant terminologies, or it can be negative, as in the example where a patron’s
habit of listening to rap music through headphones at a high volume was the cause for reading
room quarreling and complaints. Granted, the practice of listening to rap music in the reading
room was one which was almost exclusively limited to the black youth demographic. It is that
very demographic, however, which is in question. And even among this key demographic, the
practice was relatively uncommon. Despite the many changes that have come to libraries with
the advance of digital technology, many readers still opted to study in the conventional manner
85

SII-D9: APR

276

using a laptop or notebooks with a pencil to take notes on their selected books and archival
materials.86 In each case, silent reading and quiet study were still among the most widely shared
literacy practices in special collections research.
6. II. 3. Performativity: Role Reversal in Literacy Instruction at the Amistad Research Center
To end my discussion on the performativity of literacy practices in the special collections
library, and to close the description and analysis of my findings overall, I will note in some detail
one of the most peculiar, yet also one of the most important instances of a performance of black
literacy in the reading room space that I had encountered during my research. I encountered this
instance at the Amistad Research Center in Tulane. My immediate impression of the Tulane
University campus was that it had a relatively high population of white students compared to
students of color. The largest minority presence, in fact, appeared to be concentrated in the
janitorial, grounds keeping, and food service staff. My experience, in fact, is validated by the
demographic data released by Tulane’s own admission’s website which reports a 73.46% for
Caucasians compared to just 3.43% for African Americans (Tulane University, 2015). During
my time spent onsite, very little AAVE was heard being spoken by black students both inside
and outside of the reading room. Moreover, the very slight presence of AAVE, which was often
only peppered in speech with the more popular terms and phrases, was not limited to students of
color. Contrastingly, when, during my time in New Orleans, I made a brief visit to the Dillard
University campus upon the invitation of one of the university’s professors, I noticed that AAVE
had clearly been the preferred form of linguistic expression among students there.

86

SI-SIV: EQ

277

This comparatively high ranking university among the HBCUs had a mostly black
population, and the nearly ubiquitous presence of AAVE seemed to be a fully accepted part of
the campus culture. Much research has already gone into the exploration of this phenomenon. A
study by Lamuel Watson (1998), for instance, found that the environmental factors at HBCUs
contributed to a greater level of satisfaction and success among black students because of the
strong support networks and deep cultural understanding that black students are greeted with on
these campuses. Conditions, according to Watson, are quite the reverse for black students in
“predominantly white institutions” (p. 81). It is likely that the same is true for black students at
Tulane, but that is not the focus of the present study. What is important to note here, however, is
that as a direct result of the Tulane’s special relationship with the Amistad certain opportunities
have been available for the university’s black student body to connect with their history through
primary source research and cultural heritage programs.
One of these programs in particular consisted of a course attached to Tulane’s Student
Service Learning Projects. The Service Learning Projects allow students to earn credits through
community engagement. The Amistad Research Center is technically open to the public, and, as
such, it is a valuable asset to the New Orleans’s robust African American community. Students
that selected the Amistad as their service learning site had the option of concomitantly improving
their foreign language skills by working with a course instructor to assist with the processing and
curation of African language materials. The objectives for the project were defined in the course
catalog:
Amistad holds original materials dating to 1859 that reference the social and cultural
importance of America’s ethnic and racial history and the Yoruba African diaspora.

278

These records include papers, photographs, art and other important documents. The goal
of the Diaspora Yoruba public service course is to help organize, select, catalogue, and
process Yoruba materials as one of Amistad's special collections. Learning about
Diaspora Yoruba through archival collection provides a hands-on approach to studying
the subject matter. (Tulane University, 2014, p. 27)
This course, as it was taught onsite, involved a substantial amount of literacy instruction in a
West African language that has numerous ties to Pan-Africanism and black culture, especially in
Cuba where it is deeply infused in the country’s prevailing religious tradition known as Santeria.
The course instructors were native Yoruba speakers, and they were essentially
responsible for guiding the students through a series of translation work. Yoruba is a tonal
language wherein the difference in tone can change the meaning of a word.87 This distinction, it
stands to reason, could be problematic for non-native speakers when dealing with translation.
These Nigerian born instructors were able to teach their students the nuances of tonality in
Yoruba words and phrases. Needless to say, the process—purely out of necessity—was not one
which reflected the conventional expectations of a quiet research atmosphere. 88 Moreover, in
keeping with the demographics of the campus, the majority of the students enrolled in the course
were white, and relatively very few students of color could be found engaged in this work.89 The
students of color that did participate conducted their work in standard English when
communicating with the instructors or the other students. The English of the instructors, though
accented, was particularly polished. Hence, here we have a case where black instructors are
teaching predominantly white students African literacy in standard English. This example is a
87

SII-D4-D8, D12: EDU, PRCT, ACT
SII-D10: PRCT
89
SII-D4-D8, D12: EDU, PRCT, ACT
88

279

stark reminder, then, of the limits of racial dichotomization in literacy. Here, all of the attempts
to cognitively transform that which is steeped in hybridity and creolization into the singularity of
a single racial identity breakdown in the complexity of lived experience.

280

Chapter Seven: Conclusion
7. I. Contextualization of Spatiality
The problem I sought to address in this research—the problem of the library’s current
response to black literacy—is simple on its face, but underneath there are numerous issues at
question. I have employed an ethnobiblioraphic analysis in order to reframe the discussion in a
different light. We must, however, return our attention toward the greater implications of this
research. What can it recommend for both bibliographic theory and library policy? More
centrally, how exactly has this discussion on black literacy been reframed by my findings? In
order to answer these questions, it is best to refer back to the most recent response to the
perceived crisis coming from Hughes-Hassell et al. (2012) and their pioneering report Building a
Bridge to Literacy for African American Youth. Hughes-Hassell et al., we find, made a number
of recommendations for libraries across the nation to consider when addressing the black literacy
issue, and they are recommendations that any working professional would be hard-pressed to
disregard. Their report suggested that libraries should work to challenge stereotypes by both
identifying and overcoming some of the implicit biases that could deleteriously impact
encounters with black male youth. The authors recommended that librarians actively refuse to
view this demographic through a “deficit-oriented lens that represents the race, culture, language,
and other characteristics of black male youth as limitations” (p. 13). They propose that open and
collaborative spaces are the most amenable to black learning, and further that these spaces
should include interior design choices that reflect the black community (p. 14). They stress the
importance of forging partnerships and fostering mentorships in the community (p. 13). And,
most notably perhaps, the report advocates for a robust integration of “enabling texts” (pp. 5-7).
281

For the most part, my own position is very much in accord with these suggestions—that
is, as discrete, individual ideas that can be applied in a number of cases. Yet before I can close
this study by fully rearticulating the very heart of the issue of there being a crisis in black
literacy, I must begin with a brief summarization, based on my findings, of my own
recommendations for a directional shift in our thinking in terms of our response as an institution.
The situation, I would put forth, should be approached as protocols on the following three orders
of engagement:
1. Contextualization – This first order protocol of engagement seeks to increase the
visibility of dynamics that may exist or may have existed in the past between the
history and culture of a library facility and its collections with the history and
culture(s) of a patron population (e.g. students or researchers) and the communities
that make up the local population (e.g. neighborhood, town, district, county, etc.) of
its residency—this population being the immediate beneficiary of local outreach
efforts.
2. Synthesis – This second order protocol of engagement will continue in its
diversification of collections; however, the diversification shall proceed with an acute
awareness of the relationships between culture and the materiality of bibliographic
objects as cultural artifacts. In doing so, the formal boundaries of both the definitive
qualifiers of what constitutes a bibliographic object and the systems of knowledge
organization by which these objects are cataloged and arranged can undergo a similar
process of diversification.
3. Adaptation – This third and final order protocol of engagement acknowledges the
legitimacy of alternative literacies and counterhegemonic pedagogies to the extent
282

that it allows for an integration of these modalities into its own systems of knowledge
production, effectively committing to transformation on a fundamental level.
The first order, contextualization, will be dealt with here. Simply put, contextualization as a
protocol of engagement (with black literacy) is a conscious acknowledgement that the library,
both institutionally and locally, can never be an objectively neutral entity (Day, 2005; Furner,
2007; Wilson, 1968). Libraries have histories which are political, they have missions with
political aims—like providing literacy instruction to promote civic participation, and they are
often absorbed in the politics of their funders and stakeholders. With regards to the question of a
politicized mission, contextualization helps to identify blind spots and biases. And, most notably
perhaps, this process can also assist with both the detection and the better comprehension of
cases of environmental dissonance. In some instances this first order protocol can begin
lessening the negative impacts of this dissonance.
When I wrote of the dissonance between the Clark Library and the South Los Angeles
African American community, I was writing as a South Los Angeles resident of several years,
aware of the library’s local mystique in the neighborhood. I also framed the discussion as an
issue of access. Some of the recent literature on access in the library and information fields has
focused on information access and remote access to information objects using information
technology (Lievrouw & Farb, 2003). The issues of resource equity and the digital divide have
enjoyed their fair share of attention in studies of this kind (Lievrouw & Farb, pp. 504-527). This
study has looked at access in terms of the local environment and the physical space of the library.
The physical space was of particular importance to the present study because the material
(special/research) collection is nearly always housed within it, and, up until very recently, it is

283

where of the most primary source bibliographic research is actually conducted. I have also
acknowledged that the knowledge organization infrastructure is, in and of itself, a material
structure. It is a structure increasingly populated with encoded digital artifacts that take the form
of remotely accessible digital surrogates. This study has not focused on remote access through
the digitization of special collections (Star & Ruhleder, 1996). Instead, the aim has been to
review samples from the core collections as they are situated in their immediate residencies
because when investigating primary sources, particularly those that are bibliographic in nature, it
is crucial to understand that the digitized versions constitute their own unique surrogate objects,
but they are not the actual artifacts they affect to encode and display.
The center of gravity for special collections as far as knowledge production is concerned
is in the physical space. Accordingly, in this study the role of the library space and its
relationship to the community has supplanted the role of data dissemination in my reframing of
the black literacy question. It has been the key to unlocking a process of contextualization. It is a
process, for instance, that considers the physicality of the library space when establishing a base
of library operations. The current response, in fact, comments astutely on this point:
Effective libraries are also places where Black male youth see their cultural heritage
represented, respected, and celebrated. Cultural diversity is woven throughout the
collection, and in the books, on recommended reading lists, showcased in displays, and
targeted for book discussions, in the pictures on the walls, and the staff who work in the
library. Effective library spaces extend beyond the four walls of the library to provide
both physical and virtual access to resources, services, and programs. (Hughes-Hassell,
Kumasi, Rawson, & Hitson, 2012, p. 14)

284

These are all reasonable and principled goals; nevertheless, no matter the amount of effort and
resources devoted to achieving them, they simply cannot be realized in every circumstance.
Without thorough contextualization, we will fail to understand precisely why and how these
objectives may or may not be achieved from one situation to the next.
Library and information professionals addressing the issue of black literacy,
consequently, in addition to educating themselves about their own building’s history and the
history of their collections, should remember to also familiarize themselves with the African
American community and its culture and history; in other words, librarians should contextualize
when and wherever possible. Let us return, for example, to the Clark Library’s dissonance with
the local African American community. Does this institution have any sense of this culture, or
where it lives? Where does black culture live? Does it live in the rap music playing in parking
lots or in the preachers evangelizing from street corners? Does it exist in the gang signs that a
passerby might be greeted with walking on the block on, say, Los Angeles’s Crenshaw Blvd, or
in the young tattooed gang members “throwing” them up? Maybe it expresses itself in the Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr. Day celebration or the Soul Food festival held annually on that same
boulevard. Perhaps the culture dwells in the barbershops that line this street and so many like it
across the country. It might even live in all of those McDonald’s dine-in chess matches, or in the
many deep and philosophical discussions that occur daily in these places. Does it live, then, in
gospel songs and church hats, or socialize with the Jack and Jills and the Eastside Boys? Does it
dance with the Mardi Gras parades in New Orleans and sound out in their brass bands and
drumlines? Does it laugh with the young basketball players practicing daily in Harlem’s Jackie
Robinson Park, or cook with the Jamaican restaurants that thrive there in the company of shops
that specialize in reggae music and apparel? Did it stand up in the Black Lives Matter rallies of
285

Leimert Park? The answer, of course, is that the culture must live in all of these places and in all
of these instances, as it is driven by the lives of the individuals that, as a network, form the fabric
of these local communities. For that reason, when seeking to understand the Clark Library’s
environmental dissonance with the African American community, it becomes important for us to
understand that black culture resides, too, in the living history of West Adams and its adjacent
neighborhoods, just as African American architect Paul R. Williams’s (d. 1980) Golden State
Mutual Life Insurance building—the former historic center of Los Angeles’s black
middleclass—still stands vacant on the corner of Adams and Western as a towering reminder of
its past glory. Similarly, it is also important that we understand the role that William Andrews
Clark Jr.’s legacy played in shaping the library’s architecture, interior design, and collection
development in order to comprehend the ways in which this legacy has contributed to the
ensuing dissonance over time.

Figure 13. Holding cell at the Mayme A. Clayton Library and Museum
In a sense, the Clark is not wrong for adhering to its Eurocentrism. In order to expose
itself to a broader demographic, however, an imposing and heavily historicized collection such
as Clark’s requires contextualization through cultural attunement in lieu of its lost symbiosis
with its local environment. What is needed is an account of that loss before one can truly rebuild
connections and relationships with the community, incrementally. The risk of opting out of this
286

process and continuing in the edification of cultural difference in policies and operations is a
continued loss of cultural relevancy on the local level. Lost, too, is the opportunity for crosscultural education and exchange. It is not for a lack of historical material or potentially
connective themes. Given that the Clark Library is also home to the UCLA’s Center for 17th and
18th Century Studies, and being that there was a substantial amount of transatlantic literature
produced during that period concerning the transatlantic slave trade, slave revolts, liberation
movements, black entrepreneurship, and other aspects of black history, it has a number of
realizable options for broadening encounters with students of color and expanding outreach to
the local community.
On the other side of things, as we begin to contextualize the library space, we also
discover the latent opportunity to explore our obligation to convention. At this place we can
begin to discern whether or not adherence to the convention in all circumstances is actually the
best practice. I found that each of the African American special collections had adopted the
conventions set by institutions like UCLA’s Clark Library with varying degrees of difference.
None of the Afrocentric special collections offered a complete replica the Eurocentric model, yet
I found that, in some cases, they opted to integrate exclusionary policies that were somewhat
contradictory to the stated mission of improving the conditions for black literacy enrichment in
the library. The report from Hughes-Hassell et al. (2012), for instance, calls for open and
collaborative spaces. Policies designed for the preservation of the traditionally quiet reading
room atmosphere serve as barriers to the possible implementation of this rather reasonable
recommendation. Moreover, the lengthy and intimidating registration forms that readers and
researchers must fill out after passing through the necessary security checks—although,
admittedly, an essential part of circulation and reading room operations—may be at odds with
287

the comfort-levels of local amateur historians, younger students, or novice researchers. They can
act as filters that rest on top of many layers of filters—layers which begin with the power of
exclusion afforded to the space on the account of its intellectual sanctity or architectural
grandiosity.
The reality is that physical spatiality can impact many aspects of access, encounter, and
use of a library’s collection. Of the three African American libraries I focused on in this study,
for example, the Clayton Library demonstrated the greatest potential for innovative uses of its
collections. It was clear that these innovations were at least in part out of necessity and from a
lack of funding and resources. Without a fulltime reading room space and without a working
library catalog, the space shifted its emphasis from research to community engagement. Most of
the activity in the space now entails culturally relevant events that showcase collection items
according to specific themes, all while celebrating the legacy of the collector. The benefits of a
relatively high degree of autonomy and creative potential, however, are inhibited by some of the
structural and aesthetic challenges that are physically embedded within the space. One of major
challenges facing the Clayton library facility involves the repurposing of the building’s old jail
cells retained from its time served as Culver City’s main courthouse (Figure 13). What is there to
do with a real jail cell in a library? The library’s professional and volunteer staff working with
community seniors and local mentors have used this cell in a program to teach black youth about
activism in the Civil Rights Era.90 In simple terms, young black adolescents undergo a simulated
arrest and lock-up to get a sense of what it was like the many activists who had been imprisoned
for protesting during this period. The foremost intention of this activity has been to foster a more
profound appreciation for the struggles of the community’s elders. A deeper contextualizing of
90

SIII-D2: FAC, EDU

288

the current state of incarceration for black youth, however, especially for young black men in
America, would quickly reveal to these stakeholders why their unequivocally good intentions
may be perceived by some as distasteful and potentially damaging to the psyche of this key
demographic.
7. II. Bibliocultural Synthesis
The process of synthesis, the second of three protocols of engagement, moves from the
point of contextualization and begins to recognize that the book, like the library, is not a neutral
entity. It is a recognition that every decision that a library makes which alters the physical
characteristics of the book transforms the various codes that are inherent to that book’s material
production, just as the cold sterility of a standard library binding can serve, effectively, to
institutionalize the first encounter with the book object by covering the earlier typographic and
visual cues in the fashion of a palimpsest manuscript. When it comes to books, the response from
Hughes-Hassell et al. (2012) places all of the attention on the role of the text. The materiality of
the book is virtually a non-factor in the authors’ overall assessments. Yet, alongside market
trends in design and manufacture, there are unspoken materially-embedded codes which are
communicated along the lines of gender, class, nation, and status. My research has shown that
they are also communicated along racial and cultural lines. It is one of the reasons why I believe
that Eastern books, being manufactured differently than those in the West, have a different
aesthetic quality to them than those in the West. It is a phenomenon which reveals itself even in
the typographic stylings of store sign letterforms and the ethnic fonts which are specifically
tailored to meet the design needs for commercial ephemera in major metropolitan ethnic
enclaves.

289

The larger point is that, as special collections, we must be prepared to deal with a range
of diverse bibliographic artifacts in a manner which is in accord with the cultural representation
which such objects are understood to embody or reflect. An African American special collection
in particular should be uniquely methodologically positioned as well as professionally equipped
to integrate this protocol. If possible, each of the nation’s major black studies collections should
open themselves to the acquisition of a book such as Augustus’s Black Queen (1990)—an
independently produced book of poetry. While walking down Crenshaw Blvd. one afternoon I
was stopped by a young black poet who was selling some of his work to interested pedestrians. I
only needed to take a brief look at his book before I knew that I wished to purchase a copy for
myself, which I did for less than five dollars. I also purchased one of his self-produced hip hop
albums on compact disc for around the same price.
The book in hand—a thin, illustrated Xeroxed volume with a staple binding, is
inexpensive looking and unassuming to the naked eye—but examining it with an awareness of
the bibliocultural dimensions wrapped within will give the holder a greater appreciation for what
it represents when it comes to racial identity construction and the production of knowledge in the
black community. The creolization of roman letterforms and a Greco-Roman aesthetic is evident
from the book’s cover page illustration. Here the reader is greeted by a large page border made
of two massive Greek columns, crowned by a decorated balcony, and buttressed by stairs that
lead into the center of the page. In the center one finds a black and white image of our solar
system and galaxy. The type one finds on each page bears a serif-based roman font in italics, but
unlike earlier generations of black literature, legitimization and humanization are not really the
unstated intentions of this instance of typographic cueing. Firstly, being that the poem is
essentially a love poem, and considering the empowering qualities of the verse, it becomes clear
290

that the cues are actually meant to provide an air of romance and elegance to the text.
Simultaneously, a sense of earnestness and strength is signified by the architectural page borders.
It is true that typographic cues may be found in both European and Anglo-American
books which are nearly identical to the example I have just described. So how does one identify
the different racial codes embedded within them? In this case, a better understanding of the
poet’s racial identity will serve to unveil the meaning of that which is stated in the materiality as
a subtlety:
even though we fell into hell
to experience the worst human tragedy
during the dark, weary centuries of U.S. slavery:
A government in a country
seeking to make our destiny
a white universal democracy
by forcing us to give up
the knowledge of our black self
and our glorious past identity (n.p.)
It is poetry, yes, but not poetry that is written in the meter of Keats or the free verse of Milton or
Whitman. It also happens to be the kind of literature intended to connect with black youth on the
street level about their community and their history. Composed almost entirely in an eloquent
291

standard English, Augustus signaled a textual nod to his black readers when he wrote, in this
single instance of AAVE in the poem, “talk to ‘em for you and me/tornados and hurricanes/will
drive all their multitudes insane” (n.p.).
With the understanding that the author is speaking to a specific (black) audience, the
Greek columnar page borders take on a different meaning than if the same design choice was
made by a white poet or publisher. And considering the radical nature of the message compared
to the American mainstream, knowing that it is a self-published book changes the way one looks
at the inexpensive zine-like quality of its production value. Additionally, this is not the kind of
book which is sold in stores or in bookshops. In fact, if I had not been in touch with the
community in the first place, a book like this one would have never come into my hands. It is
true that its scarcity creates its rarity, but it is also true that it is only a small peek into the vast
amount of black literature which is born from and circulates in the streets.
When engaging in a process of bibliocultural synthesis the delineating limits of the book
coming from Bowers, Stokes, and Gaskell are perhaps too rigid (Kallendorf, 2015). For our
purposes, the more expansive views of McKenzie, McGann, and Fraser are to be preferred. Why
exactly would Augustus’s Black Queen be acquired as a work of poetry and not his
accompanying hip hop album, Young Black Brothers Stop Killing One Another? Why does its
musical quality set it in a different category? In approaching these other concerns what is needed
is a new model for the book. We need a model that is, at once, more elastic, dialogical, and
convergent. Based on my research, I have begun to outline such a model. It is a model which
places process at the center of relationships which connects books with their readers (Figure 14).
It is a model of bibliocultural co-emergence.

292

Shaping

Text
Material
Books

Substrate
Medium
Dimension

Reading
Production
Discussion
Circulation

Environment

Aesthetic
Values

Culture

Community
Language

Figure 14. Ethnobibliographic Model of Bibliocultural Co-emergence
Using this model, we can begin to revisit currently prevalent descriptors like binding, paper,
region, type, format, collation, contents, publisher, and language, and rearticulate them into more
flexible terms like container, surface, display, structure, style, substance, composition, culture,
voice, and iteration. It is not as if we should abandon the principles for bibliographic description
established by McKerrow, Greg, and Bowers; rather, it is that we should continue to move in a
direction of bibliographic expansion as opposed to narrowing moving forward, regardless if in
doing so, we risk losing sight of what actually defines what a “book” is. That is how we can truly
start to reform cataloging policy in a further embrace of alternative ontologies (Srinivasan,
2012). And under this new paradigm the code meshed, creolized folksonomies that serve to
organize counterhegemonic knowledge systems can begin to be integrated into the more
conventional cataloging schemas and their corresponding citation regimes (Bowker & Star,

293

1999; Crawford, 2007). And expressed information can attain greater legitimization and literary
warrant by being cataloged bibliographically (Bates, 2006).
7. III. Adaptation as a Response to Black Literacy in the Library
Adaptation, the third order protocol of engagement, unites contextualization with
synthesis in order to open up the library to the possibilities of counterhegemonic innovation. It
offers an altogether different view of the literacy practices of black youth than the currently
reigning understanding of there being an “achievement gap.” Throughout its long history, the
library has harbored a genuine interest with the psychology of reading (Butler, 1933/1961). The
institution has sought to understand their patrons’ reading habits and the different motivations
behind them. And librarians have long been invested in finding new ways to cultivate better
reading habits. As far back as 1933, for instance, we find library theorist Pierce Butler making a
case for a more complex, multi-dimensional view of reading:
The important thing to be observed is that not all reading can be lumped together as a
single and homogeneous behavior activity. Without recognition of the variety of motives
there can be no just discrimination between the different origins of actual performance.
No one actually reads merely because he desires at the moment information, pleasure,
diversion, or occupation. Any one of these needs may be satisfied in other ways. Before a
person will use a book for the purpose he must have, not merely a possible access to
literature, but a psychological impulse in that direction. (p. 69)
The statement is a compelling move forward from the more homogenous view of reading that
librarians held at that time. Yet, although he was able to concede to complexity, Butler was not
willing to abandon the temptation to establish hierarchies among these various motives. Much in
294

keeping with the civilizing missions of late nineteenth and early twentieth century progressive
librarianship, he pointed out the many literacy practices that he believed were psychologically
unhealthy:
Reading motives other than the desire for information may be equally morbid. In some
forms they are downright vicious. Here must be classed any engrossing delight in the
literary dalliance with pornography, crime, and anti-social unconventionality. In a similar
fashion a use of books for diversion and pastime may sometimes be the weakling’s flight
from reality. (p. 68)
For better or for worse, Butler issued a moral decree by this exercise in textual ostracizing.
Under this paradigm, reading to obtain knowledge for knowledge’s sake alone is depicted as the
most praiseworthy kind of reading.
The true centerpiece in the response from Hughes-Hassell et al. (2012) is the imperative
to commit to Tatum’s vision for the integration of “enabling texts” (pp. 5-7). This imperative,
however, essentially follows in the footsteps of Butler’s normative path because it seeks to
provide literacy in an autonomous mode for aims which have socioeconomic development and
civic participation at their source. The results are intended to be both socially and culturally
constructive. “Effective library resources,” the authors noted, “also include enabling texts—texts
that are developmentally appropriate to both the reading level and the physical and social
developmental level of Black male youth—and counterstories” (p. 15). Under Tatum’s guidance
this normative path of literacy development is redirected from the larger American society
toward the improvement of the black male psyche. The project to use texts and literacy
instruction to inculcate certain values is a moralizing one. In Tatum’s manual for teaching black
295

male adolescents, Reading for their Life (2009), this moralizing project is transparently outlined
in clear terms (p. 136). Tatum advocated for the selection of texts that, in addition to improving
literacy skills, could also help to develop the self-respect and moral compass of young black
men.
Given the overall state of black literature in public schools and libraries, the imperative
for the integration of “enabling texts” assuredly has its virtues. Nonetheless, adaptation, as a
protocol of engagement, attempts to move beyond the moralizing of literacy practices in the
library setting. If libraries and books are not neutral entities, neither are the programs for literacy
instruction. These programs are not historically unblemished or wholly constructive. The
acquisition of Western literacy practices are thought to be a civilizing process, it should be noted,
from the perspective of the Westerner, but we must always remember that for those whose
indigenous culture and language lies vulnerable to creolization or erasure from conventional
literacy instruction, the process of learning to read and write in this way may not seem so
benevolent. Furthermore, the moralizing of literacy—for religious or civic values, for learning,
or even for economic success— signifies a condescension, especially if involuntarily foisted
upon the recipient. So what is needed in our mission is to accept black literacy practices for what
they are and how they are truly lived. We must accept, too, that traditional education is not the
only means toward achieving financial stability for those who lack it. And we even must accept
the high likelihood and, in many cases, the stark reality that there will be a great deal contained
in both Western canonical literature and black press literature that depicts negative stereotypes—
even the more malicious stereotypes that can potentially reinforce a negative self-image among
blacks. Under the first order protocol of engagement, however, we can contextualize these
stereotypes and reduce their potential for causing harm; and through synthesis, we can further
296

identify and contextualize the racial coding found not only in the text of a bibliographic object,
but in its materiality.
Lastly, embracing adaptation means being open to the argument that there is not really a
crisis in black literacy at all (Graff, 1987; Fernandez, 2001; Richardson, 2006). If a crisis does
exist somewhere, it is more likely that is located in our perception and in our misunderstanding
of the incommensurability between two, often dialectally opposed knowledge systems. The
achievement gap, in accordance with this view, can never be permanently reduced to zero unless
there is a total and complete cultural assimilation among black people into the white American
cultural mainstream. If we were to achieve such an end, however, we also stand to lose
something of ourselves as a people. Hughes understood this conundrum, as did Dunbar before
him; and James Weldon Johnson could also perceive it during his lifetime. His discussion on the
mainstream attitude toward ragtime music, I think, is analogous to the present discussion of
black literacy, especially when it comes to the literacies of hip hop:
American musicians, instead of investigating ragtime attempt to ignore or dismiss it with
a contemptuous word. But that has always been the course of scholasticism in every
branch of art. Whatever new thing the people like is pooh-poohed; whatever is popular is
spoken of as not worth the while. The fact is, nothing great or enduring, especially in
music, has ever sprung full-fledged and unprecedented from the brain of any master; the
best that he gives to the world he gathers from the hearts of the people, and runs it
through the alembic of his genius. In spite of the bans which musicians and music
teachers have placed upon it, the people still demand and enjoy ragtime. One thing cannot
be denied; it is music which possesses at least one strong element of greatness; it appeals

297

universally; not only the American, but the English, the French, and even the German
people, find delight in it. In fact, there is not a corner in the civilized world which it is not
known, and this proves its originality, for if it were an imitation, the people of Europe,
anyhow, would not have found it a novelty. Anyone who doubts that there is a peculiar
heel-tickling, smile-provoking, joy-awakening charm in ragtime needs only to hear a
skillful performer play the genuine article to become convinced. I believe that it has its
place as well as the music which draws from us sighs and tears. (1915/1995, p. 47)
The word “ragtime could be easily replaced with “hip hop” and the meaning would still stand.
And still, like ragtime, there continues to be resistance to the creative, communicative modalities
that thrive in the cultural experiences of black youth.
It becomes a question, really, of integration versus segregation, for what confronts us are
twenty-first century institutions which are fundamentally segregated along racial lines. This idea
may or may not be acceptable to you depending on your individual position on integration, but
what is more troubling, perhaps, is the fact that these African American collections have adopted
different elements of the Western model largely without a critical look into the extent to which
this model can exist in accord with the cultures of African American people. The library’s
answer to this kind of diversity has been to try to “fit a square peg into a round hole.” Instead, the
shapes need to work like a mosaic in order to forge an environment which is kaleidoscopic in its
dimensionality and interconnectedness. The inclination to appreciate cultural difference in these
contexts is multiculturalism at its best.
As Tatum (2009) appropriately stated, “Connections among reading, writing, speaking,
and action are salient in the history of the literacy development of African American males, from
298

old men on the corner talking shit to the literature on guerilla warfare” (p. 136). When it comes
down to it, we, as black people, are aware of our own literacies, and by extension, of our value as
a people. And by following the protocol of adaptation, be it in a segregated or integrated context,
the library can serve as a bridge between conventional literacy practices and the literacy practices
of the black community. Tupac Shakur had been influenced by the work of William
Shakespeare. If a young African American hip hop enthusiast discovers this aspect of Shakur’s
biography and desires to learn more about Shakespeare as a result, I have little doubt that this
individual would be culturally enriched by this newfound learning. However, the benefit of this
cultural enrichment can only truly be appreciated with an understanding that the poetry of Shakur
is also a legitimate source of cultural enrichment for this young black reader. Each corpus must
stand by its own merits. And that way, through adaptation, we can actually begin doing the truly
difficult work of integrating new and alternative pedagogies into the framework of library
literacy instruction and special collections operations. We can start to look at the value of
embracing remix culture, the doubled text, graffiti, and hip hop literacies in future African
American research collections (Gates, 1988; Gundaker, 1998; Miller, 2004; Richardson, 2006;
Young, 2007). We can learn lessons from nonprofits like Words Beats & Life and the Temple of
Hip Hop who have achieved some success in a cultural convergence of this kind by using hip
hop as a medium to reach black youth for educational purposes (Words Beats & Life, 2014).
Now, building living collections of graffiti art black books that could be marked-up by
patrons, or establishing turntable remixing stations in a special collections reading room might
seem antithetical to current best practices because such measures require seriously rethinking
everything from preservation to security concerns; but those are exactly the kinds of steps that
could bridge the perception gap in the library’s understanding of black literacy. From here we
299

could change not just the process, but also the objects of knowledge production. And as these
new productions, as they proceed through the administrative cycle, become increasingly relevant
to students of color, they stand to generate a renewed interest and enthusiasm for learning among
those who have become disinterested in the (mainstream) educational process as a result of a
cultural divide.

300

Appendix A
Tables and Graphs
Table 1. Case Study I – Demographics

Case Study I: Racial Demographics
Race

Density
4%

4%

2%

1%

0%

White

White
Black
Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native
Patron
Total
SD =


75
3
3
2
1
0

Black
Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native
89%

84
27.3007936
14

Table 2. Case Study I – Language

American
Vernacular
English
African
American
Vernacular
English
Patron
Total
SD =
 =

Case
Study I

84

0
84
42
42

Density

Column1

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

Case Study I
American
African Patron Total
Vernacular American
English
Vernacular
English

Language

301

Table 3. Case Study II – Demographics
Race
White
Black

Density

Case Study II: Racial
Demographics

55
45

0%
0%

Nonwhite

3% 0%

0
White
Black

Latino
Asian
Native
Patron
Total
SD =
=

Nonwhite

44%

0
3
0

53%

Latino
Asian
Native

103
23.4194838
17.1666667

Table 4. Case Study II – Language

American
Vernacular
English
African
American
Vernacular
English
Patron
Total
SD =


120
100

79

Density

Column1

Case
Study II

80
60
40
Case Study II

20

24
103
27.5
51.5

0
American
African
Vernacular American
English Vernacular
English
Language

302

Patron
Total

Table 5. Case Study III – Demographics
Race
White

Black

Density

Case Study III: Racial
Demographics

10

1%

97

3% 0%

0%
9%
White
Black

Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native
Patron
Total
SD =


1
3
0
0

Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native

87%

111
35.273928
18.5

Table 6. Case Study III – Language

American
Vernacular
English
African
American
Vernacular
English
Patron
Total
SD =


Case
Study III

17

120
100

Density

Column1

80
60
40
Case Study III

20

94
111
38.5
55.5

0
American African
Vernacular American
English Vernacular
English
Language

303

Patron
Total

Table 7. Case Study IV - Demographics

Race

Case Study IV: Racial
Demographics

Density

1%

White
Black
Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native
Patron
Total
SD =

2%

2% 0%
15%

49
265
3
7
8
0

White
Black
Nonwhite
Latino
Asian
Native

80%

332
95.1992063

Table 8. Case Study IV – Language

American
Vernacular
English
African
American
Vernacular
English
Patron
Total
SD =


Case
Study IV

350
300
250

196

Density

Column1

200
150
100
Case Study IV

50

136
332
30
166

0
American African
Vernacular American
English Vernacular
English

Language

304

Patron
Total

Table 9. Appearance (cross-latitudinal analysis)
SemiFormal

Formal
Case
Study I
Case
Study II
Case
Study
III
Case
Study
IV

Casual

Patron
Uniform Total

Standard
Deviation Mean

50

30

4

0

84

20.3224

21

15

18

70

0

103

26.44215

25.75

37

68

6

0

111

27.1512

27.75

33

79

220

0

332

83.92556

83

Performativity: Appearance (cross-latitudinal analysis)

350
300

Density

250
200
150

Case Study IV
Case Study III
Case Study II
Case Study I

100
50
0

Appearance

Case Study I

Case Study II

Case Study III

305

Case Study IV

Appendix B
Descriptive Bibliographic Entries for Representation
Bibliographic Sample SI-B1
Title: The||Alphabet||AND ELEMENTS OF LETTERING||REVISED AND
ENLARGED||WITH MANY FULL-PAGE PLATES AND OTHER||ILLUSTRATIONS
DRAWN & ARRANGED||BY THE AUTHOR ||FREDERIC W. GOUDY|| L.H.D., LITT.D.||
[printer's device]|| BERKELY AND LOS ANGELES||UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA||1942
[in Blackletter and Old Style]
Publication: 1st edition, Goudy Edition. Los Angeles, CA: UC Press, 1942 (1st Kennerley ed.
1918, W. E. Rudge). Composed by University of California Press. Printed by University of
California Press (letterpress)
Binding: Publisher's Cloth (Pasteboard) Binding: [University of California Press] solid color
maroon Smyth sewn, Bancroft Linen with gilding
Bookplate: Ex Libris: William Andrews Clark. Owl on books with globe, Lex [in Gothic]
Frontispiece: Front page illustration by F. Goudy
Acknowledgements: "In memory of Bertha M. Goudy"
Para-text: 5 endleaves; pastedown; frontispiece; publisher's note; title page; preface;
introduction; contents; marginalia; headlines; pagination
Collation: 4to
Pagination: [15], [1], 1-158
Paper: American 100% Rag paper, cream white, sub. 60
Watermark: n/a
Size: 241mm x 317mm (9 1/2" x 12 1/2")
Margin: 70mm x 57mm (2 3/4"x 2 1/4")
Type: Roman (Various Monotype: University of California Old Style hand set, Monotype
University of California Old Style on title page and other display). Great Primer to Double Pica
Illustration: Designed by Samuel T. Farquhar, Frederic W. Goudy, A.R. Tommasini. Illustrations
from Oakland National Engraving & Gravure Company. Includes plates by F. Goudy
Ornamentation: Lombardic initials (ornamental capital)
306

Contents: CONTENTS, [xiii]; CHAPTER INTRODUCTION, 1; FIG. 1 INSCRIPTION ON
THE ARCH AT ROME [CIRCA A.D. 72]; I: THE BEGINNINGS OF THE ALPHABET, 5;
FIG 2 CUNEIFORM WRITING ON A CHALDEAN CLAY BRICK, FIG 3 FORMS OF
LETTERS IN FIVE SUCCESSIVE ALPHABETS;II: WHAT LETTERS ARE, 22; FIG. 4 AN
OSCAN INSCRIPTION, FIG. 5 GREEK LETTERS FROM THE TEMPLE OF POSEIDON ON
LAKE TAENARUS IN LAKONIA. [476-473 B.C.], FIG. 6. GREEK LETTERS FROM AN
INSCRIPTION IN THE TEMPLE OF ATHENE POLIAS. [THIRD CENTURY B.C.]
ALMOST EXACT SIZE, THE LETTERS WERE FILLED IN WITH RED AFTER CUTTING,
FIG. 7 ROMAN STONE-CUT CAPITALS, PROBABLY SECOND CENTURY. EXTACT
SIZE. FROM A RUBBING MADE BY THE AUTHOR FROM A TABLET IN THE LOUVRE;
III: LETTERS IN GENERAL, 30; FIG. 8 LETTER 'O' AS CONSTRUCTED BY GEOFROY
TORY, FIG 9. LETTERS, SHOWING CONSTRUCTION, FROM AN OLD ITALIAN BOOK,
37; FIG. 11 'FORUM' CAPITALS BY F.W.G. [1911], SIGEAN TABLET, ILLUSTRATING
BOUSTROPHEDON, FIG. 13 SIGNET OF CAIUS JULIUS CAECILIUS HERMIAS, FIG. 14
STONE-CUT CAPITALS FROM THE TRAJAN COLUMN. [A.D. 114], FIG. 15 LETTERS
FROM AN INSCRIPTION IN THE CHURCH OF ANASTASIA [A.D. 1261]. SHOWING AN
UNUSUAL FORM OF AN INSCRIPTIONAL 'Y,' A LETTER OF LATE IMPORTATION
INTO THE LATIN AND ORIGINALLY USED ONLY IN WORDS BORROWED FROM THE
GREEK. FROM A RUBBING MADE BY THE AUTHOR; CHAPTER V: LETTERS BEFORE
PRINTING, 48; FIG. 16 SQUARE CAPITALS FROM VIRGIL'S AENEID. [FOURTH
CENTURY], FIG. 17 RUSTIC WRITING OF THE FIFTH CENTURY, FIG. 18 ROMAN
UNCIALS OF THE SEVENTH CENTURY, WITH RUSTIC INITIAL FROM THE
SPECULUM OF ST. AUGUSTINE, FIG. 19 ROMAN SEMIUNCIALS, FIG. 20 IRISH
UNCIALS, FIG. 21 ENGLISH UNCIALS, FIG. 22 SQUARE CAPITALS, UNCIALS, AND
MINUSCULES IN A CAROLINE MS. [TOURS, NINTH CENTURY], FIG. 24 GOTHIC
TYPES OF EHRHARD RATDOLT. [ENLARGED]; VI: THE NATIONAL HANDS, 59; FIG.
25 'LOMBARDIC' [PAINTED] CAPITALS BY F.W.G., FIG. 26 PAINTED LOMBARDIC
CAPITALS OF THE FOURTEENTH CENTURY, FIG. 27 LOMBARDIC WRITING OF THE
THIRTEENTH CENTURY, FIG. 28 LOMBARDIC CAPITALS OF THE THIRTEENTH
CENTURY, FIG. 29 'LOMBARDIC' CAPITALS BY F.W.G. FIG. 30 'CAXTON' INITIALS
[F.W.G. FOR A.T.F.CO.], FIG. 31 SPANISH CAPITALS, FROM ARISTOTLE'S ETHICS.
[CIRCA 1458]; VII: THE DEVELOPMENT OF GOTHIC, 65; FIG. 32 24-PT. 'TORY,' 12-PT.
'FRIAR,' AND 24-PT. 'MEDIAEVAL', FIG. 33 MEDIEVAL GOTHIC MINISCULES, FIG. 34
VARATIONS OF GOTHIC CAPTIAL 'A', FIG. 35 'GOUDY TEXT' CAPITALS, DRAWING
FOR TYPE, FIG. 36 'GOUDY TEXT' LOWER CASE, DRAWING FOR TYPE, FIG. 37
DRAWING FOR 'LINING GOTHIC' TYPE BY F.W.G. [1924]; VIII: THE BEGINNINGS OF
TYPRES, 72; FIG. 38 TYPES CUT FOR THE NATIONAL PRINTING OFFICE AT PRESS
FROM THE TYPES OF THE BAMBERG BIBLE OF 36 LINES, FIG. 39 ASHENDENE
PRESS TYPE, BASED ON THE TYPE OF SWEYNHEIM & PANNARTZ, FIG. 40 18-PT
'GOUDY MODERN'; CHAPTER IX: THE QUALITIES OF LETTERING, 81; FIG. 41
307

'HADRIANO' TYPE BY F.W.G., BASED ON STONE-CUT LETTERS OF THE FIRST
CENTURY, 42. SIX VARIATIONS OF LOMBARDIC 'A', FIG. 43 DEVELOPMENT OF
LOWER-CASE 'G' FROM THE ROMAN UNCIAL; X: SOME PRACTICAL
CONSIDERATIONS, 90; FIG. 44 LOMBARDIC PEN FORMS. [13TH CENTURY], 90. XI.
NOTES ON THE PLATES, 93; FIG. 45 KEY TO PLATES, FIG. 46 'GOUDY LANSTON,'
ILLUSTRATING JENSON'S PRINCIPLE OF SPACING TYPES, FIG. 47 24-PT. 'GOUDY
OPEN,' A MODERN TYPE FACE, FIG. 24-PT. 'KENNERLEY ITALIC' CAPITALS. THE
PLATES ['A' TO '&'], 105
Bibliographic Sample SI-B2
Title: THE GOLDEN LEGEND [in Golden Type]; THE GOLDEN LEGEND||Of Master
William Caxton||Vol. II| [in Golden Type]; THE GOLDEN LEGEND||Of Master William
Caxton||Vol. III [in Golden Type]
Publication: In three volumes, one of 500 copies. Frederick Ellis (ed.). Upper Mall
Hammersmith, Middlesex County: Kelmscott Press, (finished) Sept. 12, 1892. Printed by
William Morris (d. 1896). Originally written by Jacob de Voragine (d. 1298), translated and
reversion by William Caxton (d. 1492)
Binding: Fine Press (Pasteboard) Binding: light granite colored paper on pasteboard, half
Holland linen shelf back, covered raised bands and printed paper label on spines [in Troy Type]
Bookplate: Blue and gold special edition bookplate with owl image with William Andrews Clark
[in Sans]
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: 4 endleaves; pastedown; half-titles; title page; preface; 4 column table; colophon;
collation marks; marginalia; pagination
Collation: 4to (in eights)
Pagination: Three large quarto volumes. xii, [2], 103, [4], [1], [105]-244, [1], [1], [245]-464; [1]
[1], 465-864; [1], [1], 865-1286, [2]
Paper: Laid paper with deckled edges (Vol. 3, pp. 371-2 uncut)
Watermark: Daisy
Size: 208mm x 290mm (8 1/4" x 11 1/2")
Margin: 65mm x 55mm (2 1/2" x 2")
308

Type: Roman (Morris Golden Type) [42 line]
Illustration: 2 wood-engravings depicting hagiographic imagery. Illustrations are wood
engravings designed by Sir Edward Burne-Jones. Decorative woodcut borders and initials.
Woodcut title designed by William Morris
Ornamentation: Decorative initials (ornamental capitals
Contents: Volume I. Title [a1] [i-ii]; Preface by William Caxton [a2-a3] [iii-v]; Table [a3-a4] [vviii]; Another Table By Letter [a5-a6] [xi-xii]; Wood-cut title (Burne-Jones); Text, "Of Thaduent
Of Our Lorde" [b1-h4] [1]; Text, "The Lyf Of Adam" [h5-r2] [105]; Woodcut illustration; Text,
"The Lyf Of Saynt Andrew" [r3-z8] and [aa1-gg8] [245]. Volume II. Title; Text [hh1-zz8]
[aaa1-iii8 [465]. Volume III. Title; Text [kkk1-zzz8] [aaaa1-mmmm6] [865]; Colophon [1276];
"A List Of Some Obsolete Or Little Used Words" [nnnn1-nnnn3] [1277], "Memoranda,
Bibliographical & Explanatory" [nnnn3-nnnn5]; Colophon [nnnn6] [1286]

Bibliographic Sample SI-B3
Title: THE SONG OF SONGS [dingbat] BEING||LOVE SONGS FROM
ANCIENT||PALESTINE [dingbat]||TRANSLATED BY MORRIS JASTROW
Publication: Copy 122/310. San Francisco, CA: Book Club of California, 1922. Printed by
Edwin & Robert Grabhorn. Translated by Morris Jastrow. Preface by Helen B. Jastrow.
Introduction by Franz Cumont
Binding: Limp Parchment (Pasteboard) Binding: a light parchment with gilt title on spine
Bookplate: Cream and gold special edition bookplate with owl image with William Andrews
Clark [in Sans]
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: 3 endleaves; half-title; pastedown; title page; preface; introduction; colophon; collation
marks
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [10] 1-28
Paper: Wove [Whatman] paper (handmade, high quality
Watermark: Text [England]; MAN 1921
309

Size: 120mm x 195mm(5" x 7 7⁄8")
Margin: 50mm x 35mm (2" x 1 3/8")
Type: Roman (Goudy Antique). Printed in black and red; captions and colophon in red; initials in
blue [23 line]
Illustration: One headpiece illustration (Two lovers kissing and embracing in the woods) by
Harold von Schmidt
Ornamentation: Dingbat, Initials by Joseph Sinel
Contents: Preface, iii; introduction, v; I. Love's Ecstasy [3]; II. The Saucy Maiden; III. Love's
Song [4]; IV. The Delights of Love [5]; V. Love's Consummation [6]; VI. SPRINGTIDE OF
LOVE [7]; VII. Foxes in the Vineyards; VIII. Love's Dream [9]; IX. The Bridal Procession [10];
X. The Beauty of the Beloved [11]; XI. Come and Be my Bride; XII. Sweetness of the BRIDE
[12]; XIII Love's Sweet Fruitage [13]; XIV Another Sweet Dream [14]; XV. The Beauty of the
Lover [16]; XVI. Love's Garden [18]; XVII. Beautiful Beyond Compare [19]; XVIII. Dance of
the Bride [21]; XIX. Love in the Fields [23]; XX. Be My Brother [24]; XXI. The Power of Love
[25]; XXII. The Chaste Maiden [26]; XIII. My Vineyard is Mine [27]; Colophon [28]

Bibliographic Sample SI-B4
Title: THE||SONG OF SONGS||CALLED BY MANY THE CANTICLES OF CANTICLES
||PRINTED AND PUBLISHED AT THE GOLDEN COCKERELL||PRESS AT WALTHMAN
ST. LAWRENCE IN BERKSHIRE||IN THE YEAR MCMXXV [printer's device (Cockerell)] [in
Roman (Caslon)]
Publication: Waltham St. Lawrence, Berkshire: Golden Cockerell Press, 1925
Binding: Fine Press (Pasteboard) Binding: cream to beige colored cloth with gilt title on spine
and Cockerell device on front cover
Bookplate: Ex Libris: William Andrews Clark. Owl on books with globe, Lex [in Gothic]
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: 4 endleaves; title page; and pastedown; preface
Collation: 4to [a]⁴ (-a4), b-f⁴
Pagination: [8], 9-10, 13-42, 43-44
310

Paper: Batchelor handmade paper
Watermark: J. Batchelor Hand; book with crown and cross
Size: 185mm x 250mm (7 1/4" x 10")
Margin: 60mm x 40mm (2 3/8" x 2 1/4")
Type: Roman (Caslon Old Face type). Printed in black and red. Great Primer [20 line]
Illustration: 11 wood engravings by Eric Gill depicting various erotic scenes
Ornamentation: 9 elaborate ornaments by Eric Gill
Contents: Preface [9]; ACT I. Scene I. IN SOLOMON'S HAREM [17]; Scene II. [18]; ACT II.
Prologue [23]; SERENADE [24]; ACT III. [28]; ACT IV. Scene I. [34]; ACT IV. Scene II. [35];
ACT IV. Scene III. [38]; ACT IV. Scene IV. [41]; EPILOGUE [42]; Illustration [43]; Colophon
[44]

Bibliographic Sample SI-B6
Title: The Poor Unhappy||Tran⌠sported Felon's ||Sorrowful ACCOUNT||OF||His Fourteen Years
Tran⌠sportation || at Virginia in America||In SIX PARTS||BEING||A remarkable and ⌠uccinc_t
Hi⌠story of the LIFE||of JAMES REVEL, the unhappy sufferer ||Who was put Apprentice by his
Father to a Tinman, near Moor-||Fields, where he got into bad Company and before long
ran||away, and went a robbing with a Gang of Thieves, but his||Master ⌠oon got him back: Yet
would not be kept from his||old Companions, but went a thieving with them again; for which he
was tran⌠ported fourteen Years. With an Account of the Way the tran⌠ports work, and the
Punishment they receive for com||mitting any Fault.|| Concluding with a Word of advice for all
young Men [printer's device (ship)]
Publication: Printed and sold (ca. 1800) at Aldemary Churchyard. Written by James Revel (ca.
1680) [One Penny]
Binding: Chapbook
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: Title page serves as front cover; pagination
311

Collation: 4to
Pagination: [2], 3-8
Paper: Early wove paper (very poor quality with heavy foxing and discoloration) [trimmed]
Watermark: n/a
Size: 165mm x 100mm (6 1/2" x 4")
Margin: 25mm x 42mm (1" x 1 11/16")
Type: Roman (Old Style)
Illustration: n/a
Ornamentation: *Unintelligible string of letters and numbers at the head of page
Contents: PART I [1]; PART II [3]; PART III [5]; PART IV [6]; PART V [7]

Bibliographic Sample SII-B1
Title: Half Black||Half Blacker||by||Sterling Plumpp||INTRODUCTION BY DON L. LEE||third
world press||[printer's device]|| Chicago, Ill. 7850 South Ellis Ave. 60619 [in Roman (Sans)]
Publication: 1st edition, 2nd printing. Chicago, IL: Third World Press, 1970, 1971. Cover design
by Brother Omar Lama [$4.00]
Binding: Illustrated Paperback Staple Binding: title/author name in street lettering with
illustration of black male and tower on a brick wall motif on the front cover and a photograph of
the author on the back cover
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: "For my wife, inspirer: Falvia"
Paratext: Title page; Third World Press "Statement of Purpose" and publications list (front and
back); acknowledgements; table of contents; introduction; pagination
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [6], 7-32
Paper: Chemical wood paper
312

Watermark: n/a
Size: 135mm x 215mm (5 5/16" x 8 1/2")
Margin: 17mm x 10mm (11/16" x 3/8")
Type: [Mimeograph] Roman (Transitional); Sans Serif
Illustration: Image on front cover (see binding). Author's photograph on back cover. Cover
design by Brother Omar Lama
Ornamentation: n/a
Contents: An Introduction that' s Really Not Needed, 7; From Manless Sisters to Big Bad Black
Rappers, 9; Black Messages, 10; The Living Truth, 11; Heaven Here, 12; Last Ride, 12; Three
Black Movements, 13; Wide River to Cross, 16; Flight, 18; Tabulator, 20; I See the Blues, 21;
Daybreak, 23; Egypt, 24; To Return, 25; Lucille, 26; I Told Jesus, 27; Calling on a Black God,
28; Black Psalms, 29; The Promise, 20; Half Black, Half Blacker, 31

Bibliographic Sample SII-B10
Title: NKÔMBÔ||© copyright Dec. 1968 Free Southern Theater [in a lower case script, set in an
African spear border]||Cover design/Judy||Richardson||Artwork/Val||Ferdinand
Publication: 1st [mock up] edition. New Orleans, LA: Free Southern Theater, 1968. P.O. Box
51536 N.O.L.A. 70150. Artwork by Val Ferdinand. Cover by Judy Richardson
Binding: Cardboard Paper Wrappings: dark tan wrapping with staples and tape fasteners.
Subtitle[?] "Echoes from the Gumbo, FST" on front cover in bold [poster] script letterforms
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: Front cover serves as title page. Introduction (Echoes from the Gumbo); Nkombo
contributor list; contents (back cover)
Collation: 4to [single sheets]
Pagination: [7], 8-67
Paper: Chemical wood paper (multi-colored typing paper)
313

Watermark: n/a
Size: 215mm x 280mm (8 1/2" x 11")
Margin: 55mm x 41mm (2 1/8" x 1 5/8")
Type: Sans Serif (Humanistic)
Illustration: Artwork by Val Ferdinand. Cover by Judy Richardson
Ornamentation: Poster lettering, including bubble and cartoon script
Contents: Introduction, 7; Contents, 9; The New Integrationist, 11; The Cure All, 12; A Sign on
A Vacant, 12; Statistics, 13; Two Poems/ Sketches from a Black-Nappy-Headed Poet; Pains
With a Light-Touch, 14; On the Discovery of Beautiful Black Women, 15; The Beauty of It, 16;
Only A Few Left, 17; Bloodsmiles, 18; The Self-Hatred of Don L. Lee, 19; The Only One, 20; In
the Interest of Black Salvation, 21; The Black Christ, 22; The Primitive, 24; The negro, 25; The
Wall, 26; Message To A Black Soldier, 27; Contradiction In Essence, 28; A Poems for Black
Minds, 29; The Death Dance, 30; The Traitor, 32; No More Marching, 33

Bibliographic Sample SIII-B2
Title: The American||Negro Writer||AND HIS ROOTS||SELECTED PAPERS FROM||THE
FIRST CONFERENCE OF NEGRO WRITERS||MARCH, 1959||PUBLISHED BY
THE||American Society of African Culture||1960. NEW YORK CITY|| 15 East 40th St. New
York 16, N.Y. [in Roman with Italics]
Publication: 2nd printing, 1963. New York, NY: American Society of African Culture, 1960.
Conference Planning Committee, John O. Killens, Chairman; William Branch, John Henry
Clarke, Julian Mayfield, Loften Mitchell, Sarah E. Wright. Standard Press and Graphics,
Inc./New York City
Binding: Hard Paper Staple Binding: two-tone salmon and beige wrappings with title [in Roman]
on bottom half of page over a modern abstract design consisting of short, bold, ascending lines
which form a column behind the title's lettering [Pamphlet]
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: Half-title; title page; preface; contents; copyright; pagination
314

Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [6],1-70, [2]
Paper: Machine wood paper
Watermark: n/a
Size: 135mm x 210mm (5 5/16" x 8 1/4")
Margin: 28mm x 22mm (1 1/8" x 7/8")
Type: Roman (Transitional)
Illustration: Abstract design on front cover
Ornamentation: Triple line borders on titles and subtitles
Contents: Preface, iii; I. SAUNDERS REDDING, The Negro Writer and His Relationship to His
Roots, 1; SAMUEL W. ALLEN, Negritude and its Relevance to the American Negro Writer, 18;
JOHN HENRY CLARKE, Reclaiming the Lost African Heritage, 21; II. JULIAN MAYFIELD,
Into the Mainstream and Oblivion, 29; AURTHUR P. DAVIS, Integration and Race Literature,
34; III. LANGSTON HUGHES, Writers: Black and White, 41; WILLIAM BRANCH,
Marketing the Products of American Negro Writers, 46; IV. ARNA BONTEMPS, Ole Sis
Goose, 51; LOFTEN MITCHELL, The Negro Writer and His Materials, 55; SARAH E.
WRIGHT, Roadblocks to the Development of Negro Writers, 61

Bibliographic Sample SIII-B3
Title: REVOLUTION||a poem||by||EBON||[printer's device]||Third World Press [space] Chicago,
Illinois
Publication: 1st edition, 2nd printing. Chicago, IL: Third World Press, 1968. © 1968 by Ebon
Dooley (Leo Thomas Hale), Third World Press, c/o Ellis Bookstore, 6447 South Cottage Grove
Ave. Chicago, Ill. 60637. Cover art by Jeff Donaldson. Photography by Robert Sengstacke
[$1.00]
Binding: Hard Paper Staple Binding: illustrated with photograph on back cover
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: "Dedicated to Leo and Beatrice"
315

Paratext: Title page; Third World Press statement of purpose; publications list (front and back);
acknowledgements; pagination
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: 31, [1]
Paper: Chemical wood paper
Watermark: n/a
Size: 135mm x 215mm (5 5/16" x 8 1/2")
Margin: 40mm x 15mm (1 5/8" x 5/8")
Type: Sans Serif
Illustration: Illustration on front cover (Jeff Donaldson). Photographic image on back cover
(Robert Sengstacke)
Ornamentation: n/a
Contents: BLACK, WHITE, THE POET, THE POEM, 3; BLACK IS BEAUTY FULL, 4;
LEGACY IN MEMORY of 'TRANE, 5; DANCING GIRL for Gaye, 7; SKETCHES FOR A
BLACK WOMAN, 8; TO OUR FIRST BORN, OR THE PROPHET ARRIVES, 9; PRELUDE:
A WARNING, 10; THE PROPHETS WARNING, OR SHOOT TO KILL, 11; PORTRAIT of
the ENEMY, 12; WHITE XMAS, 13; PORTRAIT OF KING TOAD, OR HOME ON THE
RANGE, 14; PRESIDENTIAL PRESS PARLEY, 15; VIET NAM COTILLION, OR
DEBUTANTE BALL ON THE PENTAGON, OR THE STATUE OF LIBERTY HAS HER
BACK TO HARLEM, 16; PRELUDE: Prayer, 17; WEDNESDAY NIGHT PRAYER
MEETING, OR RAPPIN' TO MY BOY, 18; DEATH of the ENEMY, 19; THE EASTER
BUNNY BLUES, or ALL I WANT FOR XMAS IS THE LOOP, 20; TRUTH OR
CONSEQUENCES, OR WILL THE REAL JESUS CHRIST PLEASE STAND UP, OR
AMERICA THE BEAUTIFUL, OR AN HISTORICAL ACCOUNT OF THE MOVEMENT
1619 TOMORROW OR.......,27; AFTERMATH, 30; QUERY, 31

Bibliographic Sample SIII-B4
Title: [ornamental border] SEX AND RACE [in Old Style (Handtool)]||NEGRO-CAUCASIAN
MIXING||IN ALL AGES AND ALL LANDS||BY||J. A. ROGERS||Author, From Superman to
Man; World's Great||Men of Color: Nature Knows No Color-Line, etc. [in Garamond]||[single
line break] Volume I [in Italics]||THE OLD WORLD||[double line break] J. A. Rogers
[ornamental line break] HELGA M. ROGERS 1270 Fifth Ave. New York, N. Y. 10029
316

Publication: 9th edition. New York, NY: Rogers, 1967. © Helga M. Rogers New York, NY
[$6.95]
Binding: Hardcover Binding: faux leather on pasteboard binding with gilt title on front cover and
spine [in Cartoon]. Includes red toned illustrated book jacket with title in vernacular [Swash]
script letterforms on front cover and spine
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: Photographic plate of painting depicting Queen Charlotte Sophia of Great Britain
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: 7 endleaves; pastedown; frontispiece; half-title; title page; foreword (1952); comments
on the works of J. A. Rogers; "The Author" biographical statement; appendices; notes;
references; list of illustrations; headlines; pagination
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [2], [1], 1-303, [1]
Paper: Machine wood paper
Watermark: n/a
Size: 155mm x 225mm (6" x 8 3/8")
Margin: 30mm x 18mm (1 3/16" x 3/4")
Type: Roman (Old Style, Transitional)
Illustration: Approximately 46 illustrations. Photographic plates portraying various examples of
black and biracial peoples throughout World History and Western Civilization (pp. 8, 9, 13, 267, 33,35,38-41, 43, 45, 47, 49, 53, 55,64-5, 69, 73, 75, 81, 83, 87, 93-4, 98-9, 102, 104, 106-7,
109, 113, 117, 123, 125, 139, 155, 157, 159-61, 163, 165, 167, 171, 173, 175, 177, 179, 181,
183, 185, 193, 197, 199, 203, 205, 216, 218, 220, 225, 227, 236-7, 247, 249, 253, 255, 267, 269,
271, 279, 280)
Ornamentation: Ornamental, bold, and asterisk line breaks and page border
Contents: I. RACE TODAY, 1; II. WHICH IS THE OLDEST RACE?, 21; III. THE MIXING
OF BLACK AND WHITE IN THE ANCIENT EAST, 37; IV. BLACK AND WHITE IN
SYRIA, PALESTINE, ARABIA, PERSIA, 58; V. WHO WERE THE FIRST INHABITANTS
OF INDIA?, 62; VI. WHO WERE THE FIRST CHINESE?; VII. THE NEGRO IN ANCIENT
GREECE, 79; VIII. NEGROES IN ANCIENT ROME AND CARTHAGE, 86; IX. WERE THE
JEWS ORIGINALLY NEGROES?, 91; X. RACE MIXING UNDER ISLAM, 95; XI. RACE
317

MIXING UNDER ISLAM (cont'd), 111; XII. MIXING OF WHITE AND BLACK IN AFRICA
SOUTH OF THE SAHARA, 120; XIII. MISCEGENATION IN SPAIN, PORTUGUAL, AND
ITALY, 151; XVI. MISCEGENATION IN HOLLAND, BELGIUM, AUSTRIA, POLAND,
RUSSIA, 169; NEGRO-WHITE MIXING IN GERMANY, ANCIENT AND MODERN, 176;
THE MIXING OF WHITES AND BLACKS IN THE BRITISH ISLES, 196; XIX.
MISCEGENATION IN FRANCE, 221; XX. ISABEAU, BLACK VENUS OF THE REIGN OF
LOUIS XV; THE BLACK NUN-MULATTO DAUGHTER OF MARIA THERESA, QUEEN
OF FRANCE, 246; XXII. BAUDELAIRE AND JEANNE DUVAL, 254; APPENDICES, Racemixing in European Literature, 261; Did the Negro Originate in Africa or Asia?, 263; Black God
and Messiahs, p. 265; History of the Black Madonnas, 273; Notes and References to the Negro
under Islam, 284; List of the Illustrations and Notes on Them, 288

Bibliographic Sample SIII-B6
Title: A NARRATIVE OF||THE NEGRO||[single line break] ||BY||MRS. LEILA AMOS
PENDLETON||Formerly a Teacher in the Public Schools of Washington D.C.; founder||(in 1898)
of the Alpha Charity Club of Anacostia, and for thirteen years|| it's president, founder and
president of the Social Purity Club of||Washington; Vice-President for the District of Columbia
of the||Northeastern Federation of Women's Club; Secretary of||the National Association of
Assemblies of the Order of ||the Golden Circle, Auxiliary to the Scottish||Rite of Freemasonry, S.
J., U.S.A.|| [printer's device (winged torch with book)]||WASHINGTON D.C.|| Press of R. L.
PENDLETON, 609 F. STREET, N. W. ||1912 [in Roman]
Publication: 1st edition. R. L. Washington D.C.: Pendleton Press, 1912. © Copyrighted by Mrs.
Leila Amos Pendleton, 1912. Printed at 609 F St. N.W., Washington D.C.
Binding: Publisher's Cloth (Pasteboard) Binding: navy blue crisscross, diamond-pattern cloth
with blind stamped rectangular border and title in gilt on front cover
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: Photographic plate of author
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: 5 endleaves; pastedown; title page; frontispiece; preface; contents; headlines;
pagination
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [4], 5-217, [2]
318

Paper: Wove paper
Watermark: n/a
Size: 140mm x 210mm (5 1/4" x 8 1/4")
Margin: 30mm x 25mm (1 3/16 x 1")
Type: Roman (Old Style) with initials in Slab Serif
Illustration: Map of Africa, 8; Ancient Civilization, 13; Rionga, a Native Chief Receives Baker,
19; A Native Youth of Modern Africa, 26a; Native King and Council, Hinterland, Sierra Leone,
38; Liberian Soldiers and Citizens, 44; The President's Palace, Port Au Prince, Haiti, 54; A
Maroon Town in Jamaica, 64; Ancient Slavery; 74; Phillis Wheatley, 90; Negroes In The Battle
of Bunker Hill, 101; Negro Sailors in the War of 1812, 108; Bishop Richard Allen (Founder of
the African Methodist Episcopal Church), 119; Frederick Douglass, 133; John Brown at Harper's
Ferry, 146; Battle of Fort Wagner, 157; Howard University, 168; Dr. Booker T. Washington,190
Dr. W. E. Burghardt Dubois, 196
Ornamentation: Vignette (on p. 202)
Contents: Preface [3]; Chapter I. A TALK WITH CHILDREN, 5; Chapter II. GEOGRAPHY OF
AFRICA, 9; Chapter III. ANCIENT CIVILIZATION, 13; Chapter IV. EXPLORATIONS IN
AFRICA, 19; Chapter V. MODERN AFRICA, 27; CHAPTER VI. SIERRA LEONE, 38;
Chapter VII. LIBERIA, 44; Chapter VIII. HAITI and Santo Domingo, 54; Chapter IX. BRAZIL,
JAMAICA, AND BERMUDA, 64; Chapter X. SLAVERY, 74; Chapter XI. THE NEGRO IN
THE COLONIES, 81; Chapter XII. THE DAWNING LIGHT, 90; Chapter XIII. THE NEGRO
IN THE REVOLUTIONARY WAR, 101; THE NEGRO IN THE FIRST HALF OF THE
NINETEENTH CENTURY, 108; THE LIGHT GROWS BRIGHTER, 119; Chapter XVI.
FREDERICK DOUGLASS; Chapter XVII. AN EVENTFUL DECADE, 146; Chapter XVIII.
THE NEGRO IN THE CIVIL WAR, 157; Chapter XIX. FIFTEEN YEARS OF FREEDOM,
168; XX. HELPS AND HINDERANCES, 178; Chapter XXI. TWO WAYS OF THINKING,
189; Chapter XXII. THE LIGHT DIFFUSED, 202; CONTENTS, 219

Bibliographic Sample SIV-B1
Title: BIBLE MASTERY||[single line break] We get a general knowledge of the Bible by
reading it, and a clearer insight|| to its truths by studying its|| subject matter||[line break]||By||Rev.
Sterling N. Brown, A. M., D. D.,||Howard University||Washington D. C. ||[single line
break]||FOURTH EDITION||[single line break]

319

Publication: 4th edition. Washington, D.C.: Murray Bros. Print. Co., 1925. ©1925. Printed by
Murray Bros. Printing Co.
Binding: Library Binding (Ocker & Trapp Co.)
Bookplate: The New York Public Library. The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
Image of chained, enslaved person of African descent in supplicating genuflection. Engraved by
P. Reason after Wedgewood's abolition medallion
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: Dedication: "To that company of young men whom the author has
instructed from time to time, during a period of many years, at the Howard University School of
Religion, and to all seekers after a general knowledge of God's Word"
Paratext: 9 endleaves; pastedown; title page; dedication; preface to first edition; preface to
second edition; preface to third edition; preface to forth edition; commendations; contents;
introduction; headlines; citations; tables; graphs; pagination
Collation: 16mo
Pagination: [9], 255, [12]
Paper: Wove paper
Watermark: n/a
Size: 100mm x 165mm (4" x 6 1/2")
Margin: 16mm x 15mm (5/8" x 5/8")
Type: Roman (Old Style)
Illustration: n/a
Ornamentation: n/a
Contents: Preface, iii; Commendations, viii; Contents, ix; INTRODUCTION, Reading the
Bible, 1; Studying the Bible, 4; Scope of the Book, 10; PART ONE, Bible Introduction, 11;
Book Outlines of Old and New Testaments, 29; Important Question, 60; Chronological Table,
100; Chronological Table, 100; Bible Lands, 101; PART TWO, Bible History, Period 1. The
Beginning of the Human Race, 110; Period 2. The Chosen Family, 139; Period 3. The Israelitish
People, 149; Period 4. The Israelitish Kingdom, 167; The Divided Kingdom: Kingdom of Israel,
184; The Kingdom of Judah, 206; Contemporary History, 221; Period 5. Period of Jewish
Province. 227; The Captivities, 227; The Restorations, 229; Interval Between the Old and New
320

Testaments, 230; Period 6. The Life of Christ, 233; Period 7. The Apostolic Church, 246; The
Institutions of the Bible, 250; PART THREE, Historical Tables, 257

Bibliographic Sample SIV-B2
Title: [ornamental (sunflower) border] NOT WITHOUT
LAUGHTER||BY||LANGSTON||HUGHES||ALFRED A. KNOPF||[Borozi printer's
device(running wolf)]||NEW YORK 1930 LONDON [in Sans Serif (Bold)] [in black and
maroon]
Publication: New York, NY: Knopf, 1930. © Alfred A. Knopf. "Manufactured in the United
States of America." Printed by the Plimpton Press and H. Wolff Book Manufacturing Company
Binding: Library Binding (Ocker & Trapp Co.). Originally bound by the H. Wolff Book
Manufacturing Company
Bookplate: n/a
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: "To J. E. and Amy Spingarn"
Paratext: 5 endleaves; pastedown; author inscription; half-title, title page; headlines, pagination
Collation: 8vo
Pagination: [8], 3-324
Paper: Wove paper (high quality, cut, with blue tint on head edge)
Watermark: n/a
Size: 130mm x 185mm (5 1/8 x 7 1/4")
Margin: 30mm x 25mm (1 3/16" x 1")
Type: Roman (Bodoni)
Illustration: n/a
Ornamentation: Broad acanthus leaf borders with decorated initials
Contents: I. Storm, 3; II. Conversation, 16; III. Jimboy's Letter; IV. Thursday Afternoon, 38; V.
Guitar, 50; VI. Work, 62; VIII. Dance, 58; IX. Carnival, 107; X. Punishment, 121; XI. School,
130; XII. Hard Winter, 138; XIII. Christmas, 153; XIV. Return, 168; XV. One by One, 176;
321

XVI. Nothing but Love, 188; XVII. Barber-Shop, 195; XVIII. Children's Day, 205; XIX. Ten
Dollars and Costs, 215; XX. Hey, Boy!, 221; XXI. Beyond the Jordan, 243; XXII. Beyond the
Jordan, 243; XXIII. Tempy's House, 250; XXIV. A Shelf of Book, 258; XXV. Pool Hall. 265;
XXVII. Beware of Women, 282; XXVIII. Chicago, 294; XXIX. Elevator, 309; XXX. Princess of
the Blues

Bibliographic Sample SIV-B3
Title: [single line border in green] CHORDS and DISCORDS ||[double
underline]||BY||WALTER EVERETT HAWKINS|| [printer's device (acanthus leaf vine wrapped
around a t-shaped Greek column]||Author of "Sweet Dreams of You"||[single line
break]||1909||The MURRAY BROTHERS Press||Washington D.C. [in Roman]
Publication: 1st edition. Washington D.C.: Murrary Bros. Press, 1909. © Walter E. Hawkins
Binding: Library Binding
Bookplate: The New York Public Library. The Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture.
Image of chained, enslaved person of African descent in supplicating genuflection. Engraved by
P. Reason
Frontispiece: Photographic plate of author
Acknowledgements: Dedication: "To the memory of a resolute Father, whose stern Christian
Character finds agreeable balance in the pliant devotions of a kindly Mother, and to a galaxy of
Brothers and Sisters, whose kind indulgences have inspired my dreams, I dedicate this volume
Paratext: 5 endleaves; pastedown; title page; contents; dedication; introductory; preface;
pagination
Collation: 16mo
Pagination: [4],5-80, [5]
Paper: Thick wove paper (high quality)
Watermark: n/a
Size: 106mm x 170mm (4 1/8" x 6 3/4")
Margin: 12mm x 12mm (1/2" x 1/2")
Type: Roman
322

Illustration: n/a
Ornamentation: Single line page borders in green and two oversize initials
Contents: Contents, [3]; Dedication, [4]; Introduction, 5; Preface, 7; A Spade is Just a Spade, 18;
Be True, 19; Criticism on Biography, 17; "Dixon Shall Not Play Tonight," 78; Dunbar, 68;
Evolution, 51; Here and Hereafter, 66; Immortality, 32; Love's Unchangeableness, 47; Money,
29; Ode to Ethiopia, 32; Off to the Fields of Green, 9; "Remember Brownsville," 60; Song to
Our Women, 66; Steptoe Brown, 74; Song to the Pilot, 72; The Black Soldiers, 44; The Church
Seeker, 35; The Birth, 14; The Falling of a Star, 21; The First Lie, 54; The Mob Victim, 63; The
Poet's Adieu, 81; The Song of the Free, 69; The Voice in the Wilderness, 56; The Warbler and
the Worm, 41; Too Much Religion, 20; To Booker T. Washington, 48; To the Hypocrit, 37; To
"The Guardian," 25; To W.E. Burghardt DuBois, 39; Wail on a Wicked Bachelor, 15; Where Air
of Freedom is, 30; Wrong's Reward, 27

Bibliographic Sample SIV-B6
Title: Trey Ellis [in Sans] PLATITUDES [in Roman]|| & "The New Black Aesthetic"||With a
new foreword by Bertram D. Ashe||Northeastern University Press||Boston
Publication: 1st edition. 2nd printing. The Northeastern library of Black Literature Series.
Boston, MA: Northeastern University Press, 2003 [1988]. © 1988 Trey Ellis. Vintage Books,
republished by Northeastern by agreement with Trey Ellis Productions, Inc. Library of Congress
in Publication data. Reprint. Originally Published by Vintage Books: New York, NY. ISBN-I5553-5860. Manufactured in U.S.A. Printed and bound by Sheridan Books, Ann Arbor Michigan
(pbk: alk: paper). Photographs by Lorna Simpson. Foreword by Bertram D. Ashe
Binding: Paperback (Adhesive) Binding: Two African American young adults engaging each
other in front of the entrance of a deli/café)
Bookplate: Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. Geometric Abstract African
Design
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: n/a
Paratext: End leaf; half-title; title page; other title's list; contents; foreword; [meta]narrative
references; pagination; synopsis; promotional blurbs (include Ishmael Reed, Henry Louis Gates
Jr., Clarence Major, and John A. Williams)
Collation: 12mo
323

Pagination: [8], 203, [1]
Paper: Chemical wood paper (House Natural Hi-bulk, acid-free stock)
Watermark: n/a
Size: 132mm x 205mm (5 3/16" x 8")
Margin: 30mm x 22mm (1 3/16" x 7/8")
Type: Roman (Transitional and Modern), Sans Serif
Illustration: 8 photographs by Lorna Simpson, mostly architectural
Ornamentation: Section dividers
Contents: foreword, viii; Platitudes, 3; The New Black Aesthetic, 185

Bibliographic Sample SIV-B9
Title: VENUS [downward in Sans Serif]|| A Play by||SUZAN LORI-PARKS||Theatre
Communications Group
Publication: 1st edition. New York, NY: Theatre Communications Group, 1997. © 1990, 1995,
1997 by Suzan-Lori Parks, Venus, published by Theatre Communications Group, Inc. 355
Lexington Ave., New York , NY 10019, September, 1997. Cover design by Paula Scher. Text
design by Lisa Govan [$12.95]
Binding: Illustrated Paperback (Adhesive) Binding: glossy cover with illustrated title embedded
within a solid blue and black colored image of Sarah "Saartjie" Baartman on front cover and
author photograph and commentary on back cover
Bookplate: Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. Geometric Abstract African
Design
Frontispiece: n/a
Acknowledgements: "With Loce from The Rockefeller Foundation's Bellagio; Theater
Communications Group; Liz Diamond; Bonnie Metzgar; Stephanie Ellen; David Harris; Saartjie
Baartman." "Le travail humain," Jean-Luc Godard, the film Masculin * Feminin, 1966 Agros
Film "You don't believe in history," Virginia Woolf, Between the Acts © 1941 V. Woolf,
Harcourt Brace, Jovanovich, NY

324

Paratext: Half-title; production history; role list; character list; list of scenes; author notes,
running titles (bottom page); glossary of medical terms; glossary of chocolates; author
biography; author photograph
Collation: 12mo
Pagination: [1], 168
Paper: Publisher's stock paper (pbk. : alk. paper)
Watermark: n/a
Size: 132mm x 210mm (5 3/16" x 8 1/4")
Margin: 21mm x 15mm (13/16" x 5/8")
Type: Roman (Transitional) and Sans Serif
Illustration: n/a
Ornamentation: Ornamental Initial
Contents: Production History, vi; The Roles, The Characters, vii; List of Scenes, viiii; Author's
Notes: From "The Elements of Style," ix; Overture, 1; Scene 31, 10; Scene 31: May I Present to
you "The African Dancing Princess/She'd Make a Splendid Freak, 10; Scene 30: She Looks like
She's Fresh Off the Boat, 19; Scene 29: "For the Love of the Venus." Act I, Scene 3, 25; Scene
28: Footnote #2, 28; Scene 27: Presenting the Mother Showman and Her Great Chain of Being,
29; Scene 26: "For the Love of the Venus." Act II, Scene 9, 38; Scene 25: Counting
Down/Counting the Take, 40; Scene 24: "But No One Ever Noticed/Her Face Was Streamed
with Tears, 42; Scene 23: "For the Love of the Venus." Act II, Scene 10, 48; Scene 22: Counting
the Take/The Dead That Was, 50; Scene 21: The Whirlwind Tour, 58; Scene 20A: The Venus
Hottentot Before the Law (Footnote #6 Historical Extract: Musical. From R. Tolle-Scott's "The
Circus and the Allied Arts"), 62; Scene 20B: The Venus Hottentot Before the Law (continued)
(Historical Extract), 64; Scene 20C: The Venus Hottentot Before the Law (continued)
(Dictionary Extract: From Webster's Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary, page 545), 65; Scene
20D: The Venus Hottentot Before the Law (continued) (Witness 1 and Witness 2), 68; Scene
20G: The Venus Hottentot Before the Law (continued) (Exhibit B), 70; Scene 20H: The Venus
Hottentot Before the Law (continued) (Witness 3 and Witness 4), 71; Scene 20I: The Venus
Hottentot Before the Law (continued) (Historical Extract), 74; Scene 20J: The Venus Hottentot
Before the Law (conclusion) (Historical Extract), 78; Scene 19: A Scene of Love(?), 79; Scene
18: She Was Always My Favorite Child, 81; Scene 17: You Look Like You Need a Vacation,
85; Intermission, Scene 16: Several Tears from Now: In the Anatomical Theatre of Tübingen:
The Dis(-re-)memberment of the Venus Hottentot, Part I, 91; [Intermission (continued):
(Historical Extract. Musical: The Song of Jack Higgenbottom)], 99; Scene 15: Counting Down,
325

100; Scene 14: In the Orbital Path of the Baron Docteur, 101; Scene 13: Footnote #7; Scene 12:
Love Iduhnt What/She Used to Be, 11; Scene II: "For the Love of the Venus." Act II, Scene 12,
121; Scene 10: Footnote #9, 124; Scene 9: Her Charming Hands/ An Anatomical Columbus,
125; Scene 8: "For the Love of the Venus: Act III, Scene 9, 132; Scene 7: She'll Make a Splendid
Corpse, 135; Scene 6: Some Years Later in Tübingen (Reprise), 147; Scene 5: Who is She to
Me?, 150; Scene 4: "For the Love of the Venus" (Conclusion), 153; Scene 3: A Brief History of
Chocolate, 155; Scene 2: The Venus Hottentot Tells the Story of Her Life, 157; Scene 1: Final
Chorus, 160

326

References

Alkalimat, A. (2006, October 16). Dictionary of literary biography on Ebon, http://hnet.msu.edu/cgi-bin/logbrowse.pl?trx=vx&list=h-afroam&month=0610&week=c&msg=KzOgnZ6TY3zIKGiXBsio5Q&user=&pw=.
Retrieved from H-Net: Humanities and social sciences online.
Allen, E. J. (1996). Making the strong survive: The contours and contradictions of message rap.
In W. E. Perkins, Droppin' science: Critical essays on rap music and hip hop culture (pp.
159-185). Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
American Library Association. (2004). Advocacy: Core values of librarianship. Retrieved from
ALA: American Library Association Web site:
http://www.ala.org/advocacy/intfreedom/statementspols/corevalues
American Library Association. (2015, June 24). ALA news: ALA’s Office for Diversity, Literacy
and Outreach Services and ProLiteracy receive IMLS grant to expand adult literacy
services through libraries. Retrieved from American Library Association:
http://www.ala.org/news/press-releases/2015/06/ala-s-office-diversity-literacy-andoutreach-services-and-proliteracy-receive
Amistad Research Center, and Johnson, C. H. (2005). The founding and development of the
Amistad Research Center. From a lecture given at the Mayo Lecture at the Texas A & M
on February 25, 2005. College Station: Amistad Research Center.
Amodio, D. M. (2013). Implicit prejudice and the regulation of intergroup responses: Theoretical
contributions of the social neuroscience approach. In B. Derks, D. Scheepers, N.
Ellemers, B. Derks, D. Scheepers, & N. Ellemers (Eds.), Neuroscience of prejudice and
intergroup relations (pp. 167-184). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Amory, H. (1996, Spring). The trout and the milk: An ethnobibliographical talk. Harvard
Library Bulletin, 7(1), 50-65.
Anstey, P., & Vanzo, A. (2012, December 01). The origins of early modern experimental
philosophy. Intellectual History Review, 22(4), 499-518. Retrieved from
http://tandfonline.com/10.1080/17496977.2012.725552
Appiah, A., & Gates, H. L. (1999). Africana: The encyclopedia of the African and African
American experience. (A. Appiah, & H. L. Gates, Eds.) New York:: Basic Civitas Books.
Aron, A. (2014). Statistics for the Behavioral and Social Sciences:A Brief Course: Pearson New
International Edition. Harlow: Pearson Education Limited.
327

Asante, M. K. (1990). Kemet, Afrocentricity, and knowledge. Trenton, N.J: Africa World Press.
Asante, M. K., Yoshitaka, M., & Yin, J. (2008). The global intercultural communication reader.
New York: Routledge.
Augustus. (1990). Black Queen. Los Angeles: The Final Poet.
Azuma, H. (2009). Otaku: Japan's database animals. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.
Bacon, F. (1605). The advancement of learning: Book II. In F. Bacon, J. Spedding, R. L. Ellis, &
D. Heath (Eds.), The works of Francis Bacon (2011 ed., Vol. 3, pp. 283-336).
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Banks, A. J. (2010). Digital griots: African American rhetoric in a multimedia age. Carbondale,
Ill: Southern Illinois University Press.
Baratz, J. (1969). Teaching reading in an urban negro school system. In J. C. Baratz-Snowden, &
R. W. Shuy (Eds.), Teaching black children to read (pp. 92-116). Washington: Center for
Applied Linguistics.
Barthes, R. (1977). The death of the author. In R. Barthes, Image, music, text (pp. 142-148). New
York:: Hill and Wang.
Bates, M. J. (1989, May 01). The design of browsing and berrypicking techniques for the online
search interface. Online Review, 13(5), 407-424.
Bates, M. J. (2006). Fundamental forms of information. Journal of the American Society for
Information Science and Technology, 57( 8), 1033-1045.
Baudrillard, J. (2008). The perfect crime. London: Verso Books.
Belanger, T. (1977). Book collecting: A modern guide. In J. Peters (Ed.). New York: R.R.
Bowker.
Bendix, R. (1997). In search of authenticity: The formation of folklore studies. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press.
Bey, D. (2012). Swagger. In R. Walker, & R. Walker (Ed.), Black cool: One thousand streams of
Blackness. Berkeley, CA: Soft Skull Press.
Bhabha, H. K. (1994). The location of culture. London: Routledge.
Bidwell, J. (1991). Bible collections in Los Angeles. In A Thousand years of the Bible: An
exhibition of manuscripts from the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, and printed books
328

from the Department of Special Collections, University Research Library, UCLA (pp. 115). Malibu: J. Paul Getty Museum.
Bourdieu, P. (1986). The forms of capital. In J. Richardson (Ed.), Handbook of Theory and
Research for the Sociology of Education (pp. 241-258). New York: Greenwood.
Bowers, F. (1949). Principles of bibliographical description. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Bowers, F. (1975). Bibliography and modern librarianship. In F. Bowers, Essays in bibliography,
text, and editing (pp. 75-93). Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Bowers, F. (1975). Bibliography, Pure Bibliography, and Literary Studies. In F. Bowers, Essays
in bibliography, text, and editing. (pp. 37-54). Charlottesville: University Press of
Virginia.
Bowers, F. (1975). The four faces of bibliography. In F. Bowers, Essays in bibliography, text,
and editing. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Bowker, G. C., & Star, S. L. (1999). Sorting things out: Classification and its consequences.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.
Boyd, M. J. (2004). Wrestling with the muse: Dudley Randall and the Broadside Press. New
York: Columbia University Press.
Boyd, R. L., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2015, May 08). Did Shakespeare write Double Falsehood?
Identifying individuals by creating psychological signatures with text analysis.
Psychological Science: A Journal of the Association for Psychological Science, 26(5), pp.
570-582. doi:10.1177/0956797614566658
Bradshaw, H. (1889). Collected papers of Henry Bradshaw. (F. Jenkinson, Ed.) Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Branch, K., & Dusenbury, C. (1993). Sourcebook for bibliographic instruction. Chicago:
Bibliographic Instruction Section, Association of College and Research Libraries, a
Division of the American Library Associaiton.
Brann, N. L. (1981). The Abbot Trithemius (1462-1516): The renaissance of monastic
humanism. Leiden: Brill.
Brooks, J. (2012). The unfortunates: What the life spans of early black books tell us about book
history. In L. L. Cohen, & J. A. Stein (Eds.), Early African American print culture (pp.
40-52). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

329

Bryant, A. (2002, January 01). Re-grounding grounded theory. Journal of Information
Technology Theory and Application, 4(25), 25-42. Retrieved from
http://aisel.aisnet.org/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1186&context=jitta
Buckland, M. K. (2003). Five grand challenges for library research. Library Trends, 51(4), 675686.
Bunson, M. (1991). The encyclopedia of ancient Egypt. New York: Facts on File Publications.
Burke, C. B. (2014). Information and intrigue: From index cards to Dewey decimals to Alger
Hiss. Cambridge, Massachusetts : The MIT Press.
Butler, P. (1961). An introduction to library science. Chicago: University of Chicago Press
(Original work published in 1933).
Canagarajah, A. S. (1996, January 1). "Nondiscursive" requirements in academic publishing,
material resources of periphery scholars, and the politics of knowledge production.
Written Communication, 13(4), 435.
Canning, C., & Postlewait, T. (2010). Representing the past: Essays in performance
historiography. Iowa City: University of Iowa Press. Retrieved from
http://site.ebrary.com/lib/alltitles/docDetail.action?docID=10409357
Carmicheal, J. V. (2006). Southern librarianship and the culture of resentment. In C. K. Malone,
H. G. Anghelescu, & J. M. Tucker (Eds.), Libraries and culture: Historical essays
honoring the legacy of Donald G. Davis Jr (pp. 103-127). Austin: University of Texas
Press.
Center for Urban Research, The Graduate Center, City University of New York. (2011).
[Graphic illustration]. Center for Urban Research. Retrieved from CUNY Graduate
Center: http://www.urbanresearchmaps.org/plurality/blockmaps.htm#tabs-1b
Chappell, W. (1970). A short history of the printed word (Borzoi Books ed.). New York: Alfred
A. Knopf.
Chin, J. L. (2004). The psychology of prejudice and discrimination. Westport, Conn: Praeger
Publishers.
Christie, R. (2010). Acting white: The curious history of a racial slur. New York: Thomas Dunne
Books/St. Martin's Press.
Christopoulos, M., Karakantza, E. D., & Levaniouk, O. (2010). Light and darkness in ancient
Greek myth and religion. Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield.

330

Chu, C. M. (1999, July 1). Literary practices of linguistic minorities: Sociolinguistic issues and
implications for literacy services. Library Quarterly, 69, 339-359.
Cinamon, G. (2000). Rudolf Koch: Letterer, type designer, teacher. New Castle, Del: Oak Knoll
Press.
Clarke, A. (1806). The bibliographical miscellany; or supplement to the bibliographical
dictionary (Vol. II). London: W. Baynes.
Clarke, A. (1834). The life and labours of Adam Clarke, LL. D: To which is added an historical
sketch of the controversy concerning the Sonship of Christ, particularly as connected
with the proceedings of the Wesleyan-Methodist Conference. London: John Stephens.
Clarke, A., & Harwood, E. (1804). A bibliographical dictionary; containing a chronological
account ... of ... books: In all departments of literature ... with biographical anecdotes ...
Dr. Harwood's View of the classics... English translation of each Greek and Latin classic
(Vol. VI). London: W. Baynes.
Clarke, K. (2014, August 22). The Breakfast Club airs an embarrassing audio clip of Floyd
Mayweather attempting to read a drop. The Source.
doi:http://thesource.com/2014/08/22/the-breakfast-club-airs-an-embarrassing-audio-clipof-floyd-mayweather-attempting-to-read-a-drop/
Cmeil, K. (2010). Libraries, books, and the information age. In A. Weedon (Ed.), A history of the
book in the West (Vol. 5, pp. 324-346).
Cohen, L. L., & Stein, J. A. (2012). Early African American print culture. (L. L. Cohen, & J. A.
Stein, Eds.) Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Cole, D. J., Browning, E., & Schroeder, F. E. (2002). Encyclopedia of modern everyday
inventions. Westport, Conn: Greenwood Press.
Colored printers celebrate birthday. (1915). American Printer and Lithographer, 61, p. 601.
Comparato, F. E. (1971). Books for the millions: A history of the men whose methods and
machines packaged the printed word. Harrisburg, Pa: Stackpole Co.
Conway, W. E., & Stevenson, R. (1985). Williams Andrews Clark, Jr. his cultural legacy.
Pasadena, CA: The Castle Press.
Cooper, S. T., Lynch, D., & Kurtz, J. G. (2008). West Adams. Charleston, S.C.: Arcadia Pub.
Coordinating Council of Literary Magazines. (1973). [Grant]. Tom Dent Papers 1861-1998, The
Amistad Research Center (Box 43, Folder 4). New Orleans, LA: Tulane University.
331

Cossette, A. (2009). Humanism and libraries: An essay on the philosophy of librarianship.:. (R.
Litwin, Trans.) Duluth, MN: Library Juice Press.
Crais, C. C., & Scully, P. (2009). Sara Baartman and the Hottentot Venus: A ghost story and a
biography. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Crawford, W. (2007). Balanced libraries: Thoughts on continuity and change. Morrisville, NC:
Lulu.
Crompton, H. P. (2003). Knowledge production and management in the 21st century.
Manchester: Manchester Business School. Retrieved February 23, 2015, from
http://www.ribm.mmu.ac.uk/wps/papers/03-02.pdf
Crouch, S. (1995). The all-American skin game, or, The decoy of race: The long and the short of
it, 1990-1994. New York: Pantheon Books.
Cutter, C. A. (1876). Rules for a printed dictionary catalogue. In U. States, Public libraries in the
United States of America: Their history, condition & management: A special report of the
U.S. Commissioner of Education (pp. 1-85). Washington D.C.: Rowman and Littlefield.
Retrieved from http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=wu.89101448959;view=1up;seq=5
Darnton, R. (2009). The case for books: Past, present, and future. New York, NY: PublicAffairs.
Davis, J. H. (2007). What do white Americans want to know about black Americans but are
afraid to ask [sic]. Xlibris Corporation.
Dawes, L. (1978). Libraries, culture, and blacks. In D. Gerard (Ed.), Libraries in society: A
reader (pp. 131-138). London: Clive Bingley.
Day, R. E. (2005). Postructuralism and information studies. In B. Cronin (Ed.), Annual review of
information science and technology (Vol. 39, pp. 575-609). Medford, N.J.: Information
Today, Inc.
Deleuze, G., & Guattari, F. (1987). A thousand plateaus: Capitalism and schizophrenia ((2012)
ed.). London: Continuum.
Dent, T. (1971, March). [Photograph]. Tom Dent papers, 1886-1998, Amistad Research Center
(Box 5, Folder 7). New Orleans, LA: Tulane University.
Dent, T. (1972). [Account book]. Tom Dent papers, 1861-1998, The Amistad Research Center
(Box 43, Folder 3). New Orleans, LA: Tulane University.
Dent, T., & Salaam, K.-Y. (1974, June). Tom Dent papers, 1861-1998, The Amistad Research
Center (Box 43, Folder 1). Nkombo(N9). New Oreleans, LA: Blkartsouth (Tulane
University).
332

Denton, W. (2007). FRBR and the history of cataloging. In A. G. Taylor (Ed.), Understanding
FRBR: What it is and how it will affect our retrieval tools (pp. 34-57). Westport, Conn:
Libraries Unlimited.
Dibdin, T. F. (1817). The bibliographical decameron, or, Ten days pleasant discourse upon
illuminated manuscripts, and subjects connected with early engraving, typography, and
bibliography (Vol. 1). London: W. Bulmer and Co., Shakespeare Press. Retrieved from
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=nyp.33433069139578;view=1up;seq=191
Dick, A. L. (1999, July 01). Epistemological positions and library and information science.
Library Quarterly, 69(3), 305-323.
Diderot, D. (1751). Observations on Bacon's Division of the Sciences. The Encyclopedia of
Diderot & d'Alembert Collaborative Translation Project(2009). (R. N. Schwab, & W. E.
Rex, Trans.) Ann Arbor, MI: Michigan Publishing, University of Michigan Library.
Retrieved from http://hdl.handle.net/2027/spo.did2222.0001.085
Dooley, E. (1968). Revolution: A poem. Chicago, Ill: Third World Press.
Draud, G. (1611). Bibliotheca classica, siue, catalogus officinalis: In quo singvli singvlarvm
facvltatvm ac professionvm libri, qvi in qvavis fere lingva extant, qviqve intra hominvm
fere memoriam in publicum prodierunt, secundum artes & disciplinas, earumq...
Francofurti: apud Nicolaum Hoffmannum, Impensis Petri Kopffij. Retrieved from
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015028306226
Du Bois, W. E. (1903). The souls of black folk (1995 Signet Classic ed.). New York, N.Y:
Penguin Putnam Inc.
Duke, C., & Ming, K. (2014). Who among us may be literate? Closing the gap between literacy
and diversity. In C. Dukes, K. Ming, I. Bogotch, & C. M. Shields (Eds.), International
handbook of educational leadership and social (in)justice (Vol. 29, pp. 117-137).
Springer Netherlands. doi:10.1007/978-94-007-6555-9_8
Dunkin, P. S. (1951). How to catalog a rare book. Chicago: American Library Association.
Dyson, M. E. (2001). Holler if you hear me: Searching for Tupac Shakur. New York: Basic
Civitas Books.
Eden, B. L. (2015). Leading the 21st-century academic library: Successful strategies for
envisioning and realizing preferred futures. London: Rowman & Littlefield.
Edwards Printing, Inc. (1973). [Receipt]. Tom Dent papers, 1861-1998, Amistad Research
Center (Box 43, Folder 4). New Orleans, LA: Tulane Unvisersity.
333

Ellis, T. (2003). Platitudes: & the new black aesthetic. Boston: Northeastern University Press.
Ernest, J. (2011). A nation within a nation: Organizing African-American communities before
the Civil War. Chicago:: Ivan R. Dee, Inc.
Fabricius, J. A., Harless, G. C., & Heumann, C. A. (1790). Ioannis Alberti Fabricii ...
Bibliotheca graeca: Sive, Notitia scriptorvm vetervm graecorvm qvorvmcvmqve
monvmenta integra avt fragmenta edita exstant tvm plerorvmqve e mss. ac deperditis ab
avctore tertivm recognita et plvrimus locis avcta. Hamburgi: Apud Carolvm Ernestvm
Bohn.
Fernandez, R. (2001). Imagining literacy: Rhizomes of knowledge in American culture and
literature. Austin: University of Texas Press.
Fields, A. M., & Connell, T. H. (2004, August 24). Classification and the definition of a
discipline: The Dewey Decimal Classification and home economics. Libraries & Culture,
39(3), 245-259. Retrieved from
http://muse.jhu.edu/login?auth=0&type=summary&url=/journals/libraries_and_culture/v
039/39.3fields.pdf
Fluck, W., & Claviez, T. (2003). Theories of American culture, theories of American studies.
Tübingen: Gunter Narr.
Forgue, M. (1939). Greetin's from a admirer. In D. Side, Goudy Gaudeamus: In celebration of
the dinner given Frederic W. Goudy on his 74th birthday, March eighth, 1939. New
York.
Foucault, M. (1970). The order of things: An archaeology of the human sciences . New York:
Vintage Book.
Fox, C. (2013). "Give this copy of the Kourier magazine to your friend. You will help him. You
will also help society": 1920s KKK print, propaganda, and publicity. In R. Schreiber
(Ed.), Modern print activism in the United States (pp. 104-122). Farnham, England:
Ashgate.
Francese, J. (2009). Perspectives on Gramssci: Politics, culture, and social theory. London:
Routledge. Retrieved from
http://www.academia.edu/3673748/The_Politics_Culture_and_Social_Theory_of_Grams
ci_A_Multidisciplinary_Perspective_Routledge_Studies_in_Social_and_Political_Thoug
ht
Frankfort, H. (1956). The birth of civilization in the Near East. Garden City, N.Y: Doubleday.

334

Fraser , R., & Hammond, M. (2008). Books without borders: The cross-national dimension in
print culture (Vol. 1). Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.
Fraser, R. (2008). Book history through postcolonial eyes: rewriting the script. London:
Routledge.
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum.
Fryer, R. G., & Levitt, S. D. (2004). The causes and consequences of distinctively black names.
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 119(3), 787-805.
Furner, J. (2007, January 01). Dewey Deracialized: A critical Race-theoretic perspective.
Knowledge Organization, 34(3), 144-168.
Gaskell, P. (1972). A new introduction to bibliography. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gates, H. L. (1988). The signifying monkey: A theory of Afro-American literary criticism
(Twenty-fifth anniversary edition (2014) ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gessner, C. (1545). Biblioteca uniuersalis, siue, Catalogus omnium scriptorum locupletissimus,
in tribus linguis, Latina, Graeca, & Hebraica. Zurich: Christoph Froschauer. doi:
http://www.mdz-nbn-resolving.de/urn/resolver.pl?urn=urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb110618082
Gessner, C. (1548). Pandectarum sive Partitionum universalium libri XXI. Zurich: Christoph
Froschauer.
doi:http://www.enzyklopaedie.ch/fronti/titelbilderfaksmimiles/GessnerPandecta.jpg
Gestetner Company. (1970). [Invoice No. 9402]. Nkombo Publications records, 1968-1974, The
Amistad Research Center (Box 6, Folder 20) . New Orleans, LA: Tulane University.
Gex, Q. V. (1974, June). Songs from the gumbo. Nkombo(N-9), pp. 6-13.
Giampietro, R. (2004). New black face: Neuland and Lithos as stereotypography. Retrieved from
Lined and unlined: http://blog.linedandunlined.com/post/404938892/new-black-faceneuland-and-lithos-as
Gibbons, M., Limoges, C., Nowotny, H., Schwartzman, S., Scott, P., & Trow, M. (1994). The
new production of knowledge: The dynamics of science and research in contemporary
societies. London: SAGE Publications.
Gilmore, G. E. (2010, April). Somewhere’ in the nadir of African American history, 1890-1920.
Retrieved from Freedom’s Story, TeacherServe©:
ttp://nationalhumanitiescenter.org/tserve/freedom/1865-1917/essays/nadir.htm
335

Gilroy, P. (1993). The black Atlantic: Modernity and double consciousness. Cambridge, Mass:
Harvard University Press.
Ginzburg, C. (2001). Wooden eyes: Nine reflections on distance. (M. H. Ryle, Trans.) New
York: Columbia University Press.
Giovanni, N. (1969, August). Revolution. Negro digest, 18(10), p. 95.
Goebel, B. A., Hall, J. C., & National Council of Teachers of English. (1995). Teaching a "new
canon"?: Students, teachers, and texts in the college literature classroom. Urbana:
National Council of Teachers of English. Retrieved from
https://archive.org/stream/ERIC_ED384912/ERIC_ED384912_djvu.txt
Gooding-Williams, R. (1998, January 01). Race, Multiculturalism and Democracy.
Constellations Oxford, 5(1 ), 18-41.
Goody, J. (1968). Introduction. In J. Goody (Ed.), Literacy in traditional societies (pp. 1-26).
Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Goody, J., & Watt, I. (1968). The consequences of literacy. In J. Goody (Ed.), Literacy in
tradtional societies (pp. 27-68). Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Gordon, B. M. (1993, January 01). African-American cultural knowledge and liberatory
education: Dilemmas, problems, and potentials in a postmodern American society. Urban
Education, 27(4), 448-70. doi:ueesxe.sravgeedpub.com
Gore, D. F., Theohari, J., & Woodard, K. (2009). Want to start a revolution?: Radical women in
the Black freedom struggle. New York: New York University Press.
Goudy, F. W. (1942). The alphabet and elements of lettering revised and enlarged with many
full-page plates and other illustrations drawn and arranged by the author. Berkeley,
Cal.: University of California Press.
Graff, H. J. (1987). The labyrinths of literacy: Reflections on literacy past and present. London:
Falmer Press.
Grassian, D. (2009). Writing the future of Black America: Literature of the hip-hop generation.
Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Grassian, E. S., & Kaplowitz, J. R. (2009). Information literacy instruction: Theory and practice.
New York: Neal-Schuman Publishers.
Greg, W. (1966). A rationale of copy-text. In W. Greg, & J. Maxwell (Ed.), Collected papers
(pp. 374-391). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
336

Greg, W. (1966). What is bibliography. In W. Greg, & J. Maxwell (Ed.), Collected papers (pp.
75-88). Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Greg, W. W. (1903, July). The bibliographical history of the first folio. 15, 258-285. Retrieved
June 05, 2015, from
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=hvd.32044086728144;view=1up;seq=5
Greg, W. W. (1966). Bibliography: An Apologia. In W. W. Greg, Collected papers (pp. 247267). Oxford: Clarendon.
Griffith, A. T. (2009, May). A Study of the literacy experiences and related life experiences of
incarcerated black adolescent males. Tucson, AZ, U.S.A.: ProQuest.
Grosser, K. (1991). Human networks in organizational processing. Annual Review of Information
Science and Technology, 26, 349-402.
Gundaker, G. (1998). Signs of diaspora/diaspora of signs: Literacies, creolization, and
vernacular practice in African America. New York: Oxford University Press.
Gutjahr, P. C., & Benton, M. (2001). Illuminating letters: Typography and literary
interpretation. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.
Guzzetti, B. J., Alvermann, D. E., & Johns, J. L. (2002). Multicultural literacy. In Literacy in
American: N-Z (pp. 364-368). Santa Barbara, California: ABC-CLIO.
Hall, S. (1997). The spectacle of the 'other'. In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation: Cultural
representations and signifying practices (pp. 223-290). London: Sage Publications in
association with The Open University.
Harding, S. G. (2002). Is science multicultural?: Postcolonialisms, feminisms, and
epistemologies. Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana Univ. Press.
Harker, B. (2005). Jazz: An American journey. . Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson Prentice Hall.
Harris, J. L., Kamhi, A. G., & Pollock, K. E. (2000). Literacy in African American communities.
Mahwah, N.J: L. Erlbaum.
Harris, J. L., & Hartley, J. (2000). Reading the typography of text. In J. L. Harris , A. G. Kamhi,
& Pollock, K. E., Literacy in African American communities (pp. 109-127). Mahwah,
N.J: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Harris, M. H. (1995). History of libraries in the western world. Metuchen, N.J.: Scarecrow Press.
Harter, E., & Glick, M. (1939). Goudy's Types in Use. In C. Morley, Goudiamus igitur: To
Frederic W. Goudy on his seventy-fourth birthday. Stanford, Conn.: Overbrook Press.
337

Harvey, W. B. (1998). Doing what comes unaturally: Increasing African American faculty
presence in predominantly white colleges and universities. In K. Freeman (Ed.), African
American culture and heritage in higher education research and practice (pp. 133-142).
Westport, Conn: Praeger.
Heraclitus, & Robinson, T. M. (1991). Fragments. (T. M. Robinson, Ed., & T. M. Robinson,
Trans.) University of Toronto Press.
Hieronymus, S. E., & Erasmus, D. (1549). Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum ... ex
nouissima recognitione D. Erasmi ... Item, Vita Pauli Eremitae. Vita Sancti Hilarionis.
Vita Malchi captivi Monachi. ... Additus est et libellus variorum exemplorum de
Apostolis, Martyribus, Episcopis, etc. Frankfurt: Brubach. doi: http://www.mdz-nbnresolving.de/urn/resolver.pl?urn=urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb10922133-8
Hirsch, J. E., Kett, J. F., & Trefil, J. S. (1988). Cultural literacy: What every American needs to
know. New York: Vintage Books.
Hitson, A. (2013). Professional development for school and public librarians. Retrieved
February 21, 2015, from Libraries, Literacy, and African American Male Youth:
http://librariesliteracyandaamaleyouth.weebly.com/
Hodges, G. R. (2010). David Ruggles: A radical black abolitionist and the Underground
Railroad in New York City. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Holder, R. W. (2009). A companion to Paul in the Reformation. Leiden: Brill.
Hollinger, D. A. (1995). Postethnic America: Beyond multiculturalism. New York: BasicBooks.
hooks, b. (2012). Forever. In R. Walker, Black cool: One thousand streams of Blackness (pp. 7180). Berkeley, CA: Soft Skull Press.
Horner, S. L. (2000). A cultural-ecological theory. In J. L. Harris, A. G. Kamhi, & K. E. Pollock
(Eds.), Literacy in African American communities. Mahwah, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Howell, J. C., & Griffiths, E. (2012). Gangs in America's communities. Thousand Oaks, Calif:
SAGE Publications.
Howell, J. C., & Griffiths, E. (2015). Gangs in America's communities. Thousand Oaks, Calif:
SAGE Publications.
Hughes, L. (1930). Not Without Laughter. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Hughes-Hassell, S. (2013, January 28). Sunrise service call to action. Retrieved February 21,
2015, from Building a Bridge to Literacy for African American Male Youth: A Call to
338

Action for the Library Community Web site:
http://bridgetolit.web.unc.edu/?page_id=831
Hughes-Hassell, S., & Rawson, C. (2014, February 4). It's time to act: Let’s focus on the wellbeing of African-American male youth. American Libraries, January/February.
Retrieved from http://www.americanlibrariesmagazine.org/article/it-s-time-act
Hughes-Hassell, S., Kumasi, K., Rawson, C. H., & Hitson, A. (2012). Building a bridge to
literacy for African American male youth: A call to action for the library community.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, School of Information and
Library Science. Retrieved March 8, 2015, from
http://bridgetolit.web.unc.edu/files/2012/09/Building-A-Bridge-to-Literacy-for-AfricanAmerican-Males.pdf
Hutner, G., & Mohamed, F. G. (2013, September 6). Hunter Deathwatch: The real humanities
crisis is happening at public universities. New Republic. Retrieved February 23, 2015,
from http://www.newrepublic.com/article/114616/public-universities-hurt-humanitiescrisis
Jackson III, C. J. (2014, August). 50cent. Retrieved from Instagram:
https://instagram.com/p/r9y3DQMLyI/
Jerchower, J., & Lerner, H. G. (2007). Johann Heinrich Hottinger and the Systematic
Organization of Jewish Literature. Judaica Librarianship, 13, 1-25.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.14263/2330-2976.1080
Johnson, J. W. (1995). The auto-biography of an ex-colored man. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover
Publications, Inc. (Original work published 1915).
Johnson, S. C. (1999). The role of the Black church in family literacy. New York, New York:
Peter Lang.
Joint Steering Committee for Revision of AACR. (1978). Anglo-American cataloguing rules.
Second edition. (M. Gorman, & P. Winkler, Eds.) Chicago: American Library
Association.
Josey, E. J. (1972). What black librarians are saying. Metuchen, N.J: Scarecrow Press.
Joyce, D. F. (1983). Gatekeepers of black culture: Black-owned book publishing in the United
States, 1817-1981. Westport,, Conn: Greenwood Press.
Joyce, D. F. (1991). Black book publishers in the United States: A historical dictionary of the
presses, 1817-1990. New York: Greenwood Press.
339

Kallendorf, C. (2015, December). The medium is the message: From manuscript to the hand
press to the compurter age. (D. L. Gants, Ed.) The Papers of the Bibiographical Society
of North America, 429-459.
Katz, W. A. (1998). Cuneiform to computer: A history of reference sources. Lanham, Md:
Scarecrow Press.
Kent, A., & Hall, C. M. (2002). Encyclopedia of library and information science: Volume 70.
New York: M. Dekker.
Keyes, C. L. (2002). Rap music and street consciousness. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Kitto, J. B. (Ed.). (1863). The Journal of Sacred Literature and Biblical Record (Vol. 3).
London: A. Heylin,.
Koehler, W. C. (2015). Ethics and values in librarianship: A history. Lanham: Rowman &
Littlefield.
Kubrin, C. E. (2005, August). Gangstas, thugs, and hustlas: Identity and the code of the street in
rap music. Source Problems, 52(3), 360-378. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/4488128
Kumasi, K. (2008). Seeing white in black: Examining racial identity among African American
youth in a culturally responsive book club. Indiana University.
Kumasi, K. (2010, November 2). Cultural Inquiry: A Framework for Engaging Youth of Color in
the Library. The Journal of Research on Libraries and Young Adults, n.p. Retrieved from
http://www.yalsa.ala.org/jrlya/2010/11/cultural-inquiry-a-framework-for-engagingyouth-of-color-in-the-library/
Kunjufu, J. (1985). Countering the conspiracy to destroy Black boys (Vol. 1). Chicago: Afro-Am
Pub. Co.
Ladson-Billings, G. (1992, Autumn). Reading between the lines and beyond the pages: A
culturally relevant approach to literacy teaching. Theory into Practice: Literacy and the
African-American Learner, 31(4), 312-320. Retrieved February 21, 2015, from
http://rt11.wikispaces.com/file/view/reading+between+the+lines.pdf
Ladson-Billings, G. (1995, Summer). But that's just good teaching!: The case for culturally
relevant pedagogy. Theory in Practice, 34(3), 159-165. Retrieved March 15, 2015, from
http://equity.spps.org/uploads/but_that_s_just_ladson-billings_pdf.pdf

340

Latour, B. (1988). The politics of explanation: An alternative. In S. Wooglar (Ed.), Knowledge
and reflexivity: New frontiers in the sociology of knowledge (pp. 155-175). London: Sage
Publications.
Lavalette, W. A. (1878, September 17). U.S.A. Patent No. 208,184. Retrieved from
https://docs.google.com/viewer?url=patentimages.storage.googleapis.com/pdfs/US20818
4.pdf
Lee, J. S.-J. (2010). The American slave narrative and the Victorian novel. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Lewis, S., Simon, C., Uzzell, R., Horwitz, A., & Casserly, M. (2010). A Call for Change: The
Social and Educational Factors Contributing to the Outcomes of Black Males in Urban
Schools. The Council of the Great City Schools. Washington, DC: The Council of the
Great City Schools. Retrieved January 19, 2015, from
https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/3273936/A%20Call%20For%20Change%20Revised.pdf
Lievrouw, L. A., & Farb, S. E. (2003). Information and equity. In B. Cornin (Ed.), Annual review
of information science and technology (Vols. 37, 1, pp. 499-540). Medford, N.J.
Lindberg, D. C., Numbers, R. L., & Porter, R. (2003). The Cambridge history of science: The
modern physical and mathematical sciences (Vol. 5). (M. J. Nye, Ed.) Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Los Angeles Times. (2015, August). Mapping L.A.: Leimert Park. Retrieved from Los Angeles
Times Local: http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/neighborhood/leimert-park/
Los Angeles Times. (2015, August). Mapping L.A.: West Adams. Retrieved from Los Angeles
Times Local: http://maps.latimes.com/neighborhoods/neighborhood/west-adams/
Losen, D. J. (2015). Closing the school discipline gap: Equitable remedies for excessive
exclusion. New York: Teachers College Press.
Lyman, E. D. (2014, August 05). The Page Refigured. Performance Research. 7(1), 90-100.
Retrieved from
http://umassvenus.weebly.com/uploads/1/3/6/6/13666361/lyman_verbal_and_visual_lang
uage_.pdf
MacDavid, Jr., R. (1969). Dialectology and the teaching of reading. In J. C. Baratz-Snowden, &
R. W. Shuy (Eds.), Teaching black children to read (pp. 1-14). Washington: Center for
Applied Linguistics.

341

Manings, A., Lear, N., Knight, V. (Producers), & Kenwith, H. (Director). (1974). Good times:
Season one [Motion Picture]. Golden Valley, MN: Mill Creek Entertainment (2014).
Mann, T. (1993). Library research models: A guide to classification, cataloging, and computers.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Margo, R. A. (1990). Race and schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An economic history.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Masilamani, R. (2008). Documenting illegal art: collaborative software, online environments and
New York City's 1970s and 1980s graffiti art movement. Art Documentation: Journal of
the Art Libraries Society of North America, 27(2), 4-14. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/27949489
Matthews, J. S., Kizzie, K. T., Rowley, S. J., & Cortina, K. (2010, August 01). African
Americans and Boys : Understanding the Literacy Gap, Tracing Academic Trajectories,
and Evaluating the Role of Learning-Related Skills. Journal of Educational Psychology,
102(3), 757-771.
Maude, A. (1924). Tolstoy on art. London: Humphrey Milford.
McGann, J. J. (1989). Towards a literature of knowledge. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
McGann, J. J. (1991). The textual condition. Princeton, N.J: Princeton University Press.
McGann, J. J. (2005, Winter). Culture and technology: The way we live now, what is to be done?
New Literary History, 71-82. doi:10.1353/nlh.2005.0024
McHenry, E. (2002). Forgotten readers: Recovering the lost history of African American literary
societies. Durham: Duke University Press.
McKay, B., Sanderson, P. J., McIntosh, H., Melinsky, C., Moss, G., & Whalen, K. (2003). An
introduction to chapbooks. Oldham, England: Incline Press.
McKenzie, D. F. (1985). The book as an expressive form. In D. F. McKenzie, Bibliography and
the sociology of texts. (1999 ed., pp. 7-21). London: The British Library.
McKenzie, D. F. (2002). Printers of the mind: Some notes on bibliographical theories and
printing house practices. In D. F. McKenzie, P. D. McDonald, & M. F. Suarez, Making
meaning: "Printers of the mind" and other essays (pp. 13-86). Amherst: University Of
Massachusetts Press.
McKerrow, R. B. (1910, January 01). Some notes on the Letters I, J, U and V in the sixteenth
century printing. The Library, 3, 239-259.
342

McKerrow, R. B. (1927). An introduction to bibliography for literary students. Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Metropolitan Missions Training Institute. (1936, October 14). [Program] The order for the
evening service. Arthur A. Schomburg Papers (1724-1938), Schomburg Research Center
in Black Culture (Reel 5). New York Public Library.
Miller, P. D. (2004). Rhythm science. Cambridge, Mass: Mediawork/MIT Press.
Mitgang, H. (1982, February 20). 'Road to Freedom' show at library. Retrieved from The New
York Times: http://www.nytimes.com/1982/02/20/arts/road-to-freedom-show-atlibrary.html
Monjauze, M., Cox, G., & Robinson, S. (2008). Tupac remembered: Bearing witness to a life
and legacy. San Francisco: Chronicle Books.
Moon, F. F. (2007). Faith-based entrepreneurship. Library Faculty and Staff Publications and
Presentations (pp. 1-19). San Marcos: Texas State University Libraries and Media
Centers. Retrieved from
http://digitalscholarship.tnstate.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1005&context=lib
Morrison, S., & Carter, H. (1967). John Fell: The university press and the 'Fell' types. London:
Oxford University Press.
Moynihan, D. P. (1965). The Negro family: The case for national action. Office of the Assistant
Secretary for Administration and Management, United States Department of Labor.
Washington D.C.: Office of Policy Planning and Research. Retrieved from
http://www.dol.gov/oasam/programs/history/webid-meynihan.htm
Nash, G. B., Crabtree, C. A., & Dunn, R. E. (1997). History on trial: Culture wars and the
teaching of the past. New York:: A.A. Knopf.
National Oceanic & Atmospheric Administration; National Environmental Satellite, Data, and
Information Service. (2004). Climatography of the United States No. 20 1971-2000.
Commerce, U.S. Department of. Asheville, NC: National Climatic Data Center.
Retrieved from http://drought.unl.edu/archive/climographs/pdf/NewYorkCity.pdf
Nkombo Publications. (1970). [Subsrciption list]. Nkombo Publications records, 1968-1974,
Amistad Research Center (Box 6, Folder 19). New Orleans, LA: Tulane University.
Nkombo Publications. (1971). [Miscellaneous financial records]. Nkombo Publications records,
1968-1974. The Amistad Research Center (Box 6, Folder 9). New Orleans, LA: Tulane
University.
343

Oakland Unified School District Board. (1996, December 18). Resolution of the Board of
Education adopting the report and recommendations of the African-American Task
Force. Oakland: Oakland Unified School District Board. Retrieved from
https://www.linguistlist.org/topics/ebonics/ebonics-res1.html
Obiwu. (2007, January 01). The Pan-African Brotherhood of Langston Hughes and Nnamdi
Azikiwe. Dialectical Anthropology, 31, 143-165. doi:10.1007/s10624-007-9029-2
Oyebade, B. (1990, December 01). African Studies and the Afrocentric Paradigm: A Critique.
Journal of Black Studies, 21(2), 233-38. Retrieved July 24, 2015, from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/2784476
Palmquist, P. E., & Kailbourn, T. R. (2000). Pioneer photographers of the far west: A
biographical dictionary, 1840-1865. Stanford, Stanford University Press.
Parks, S.-L. (1997). Venus: A play. New York: Theatre Communications Group.
Peterson, W. S. (1991). The Kelmscott Press: A history of William Morris's typographical
adventure. . Berkeley: University of California Press.
Piper, A. (2009). Dreaming in books: The making of the bibliographic imagination in the
Romantic age. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press.
Piper, A. (2012). Book was there: Reading in electronic times. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Plato. (1952). Gorgias. (W. Hembold, Trans.) New York: Macmillan.
Pollard, A. W. (1912). Fine books. London: Methuen.
Pollard, A. W. (1976). The arrangment of bibliographies. In A. W. Pollard, N. Harrocks, & R. F.
W. (Eds.), Alfred William Pollard: A selection of his essays (Vols. Great bibliographers
series, no. 2, pp. 130-143). Metuchen, N.J: Scarecrow Press.
Pratt, M. L. (1992). Imperial eyes: Travel writing and transculturation. London: Routledge.
Pride, A. S., Myrdal, G., Caughey, J., McGill, R., Fleming, K., Jones, J.,. . . Lindmarker, I.
(1968). The Black American and the press. (J. Lyle, Ed.) Los Angeles: W. Ritchie Press.
Priestley, E. (1974). Flame and smoke. Los Angeles: Turnaround Printers.
Rare Book School. (2015). Retrieved from About Rare Book School:
https://rarebookschool.org/about-rbs/

344

Rayward, W. B. (1967, July 1). The UDC and FID: A Historical Perspective. The Library
Quarterly, 37(3), 259-278. Retrieved 29 5, 2015, from
http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~wrayward/otlet/UDCandFIDAhitoricalPers.pdf
Rayward, W. B. (1994). Visions of Xanadu: Paul Otlet (1868-1944) and hypertext. Journal of
the American Society for Information Science , 45. Retrieved January 19, 2015, from
Rayward's Homepage: http://people.lis.illinois.edu/~wrayward/otlet/xanadu.htm
Richard Dattner and Partners Architects. (2009). Dattner Architects. Mulgrave, Vic: Images
Publ.
Richardson, E. B. (2006). Hiphop literacies. London: Routledge.
Rocha, V. (2015, August 24). Group of black women kicked off Napa wine train after laughing
too loud. Los Angeles Times. Retrieved from Los Angeles Times:
http://www.latimes.com/local/lanow/la-me-ln-black-women-kicked-off-napa-wine-train20150824-htmlstory.html
Rocha, V. (2015, August 25). Woman kicked off Napa wine train says still humiliated despite
apology. Los Angeles Times.
Rossiter, C. S. (2015). Ain't nobody learnin nothin: The fraud and the fix for high-poverty. New
York: Algora Publishing.
Ryan, D., & Minneapolis Institute of Arts. (2001). Letter perfect: The art of modernist
typography, 1896-1953. Rohnert Park: Pomegranate.
Salaam, K.-Y. (1974, June). Food for thought. Tom Dent papers, Amistad Research Center (Box
43, Folder 1) . Nkombo(N-9), 4-6. New Orleans, LA: Blkartsouth (Tulane University).
Sandys, J. E. (1998). The eighteenth century in Germany, and the nineteenth century in Europe
and the United States of America (Vol. 3). Bristol: Thoemmes.
Schmidt-Wulffen, W.-D. (2012). "Ten little niggers": Racial discrimination in children's books.
London: Global Book Marketing (Lit).
Schorch, P. (2013, March). Contact zones, third spaces, and the act of interpretation. Museum &
Society, 11(1), 68-81.
Schreiber. (2013). Modern print activism in the United States. Famham: Ashgate.
Scott, M. (1998). Dewey Decimal Classification, 21st edition:
A study manual and number building guide. Englewood, CO: OCLC Forest Press.
Retrieved from
345

file:///C:/Users/Jesse/Downloads/dewey_decimal_classification__21st_edition__a_study_
manual_and_number_building_guide%20(2).pdf
See, L. A. (1998). Human behavior in the social environment from an African American
perspective. New York: Haworth Press.
Senchyne, J. (2012). Bottles of ink and reams of paper: Clotel, racialization, and the material
culture of print. In L. L. Cohen, & J. A. Stein (Eds.), Early African American print
culture (pp. 141-158). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Shakur, T. (1996). On All eyez on me. Los Angeles: Death Row, Interscope.
Shakur, T. (1999). The rose that grew from concrete. New York: Pocket Books.
Shanbhag, S. (2006, Spring). Alternative models of knowledge production: A step forward in
information literacy as a liberal art. Library Philosophy and Practice.
Shor, I. (1999). What is critical literacy? Journal of Pedagogy, Pluralism and Practice, 1(4), n.p.
Retrieved February 22, 2015, from http://www.lesley.edu/journal-pedagogy-pluralismpractice/ira-shor/critical-literacy/
Sinnette, E. (1989). Arthur Alfonso Schomburg, black bibliophile & collector: a biography. New
York, N.Y.: New York Public Library.
Srinivasan, R. (2012, August 07). Re-thinking the cultural codes of new media: The question
concerning ontology. New Media and Society, 15(2), 203-223. doi:DOI:
10.1177/1461444812450686
Stake, R. E. (2006). Multiple case study analysis. New York: Guilford Press.
Stake, R. E. (2010). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, Calif. : u.a.: Sage Publ.
Star, S. L., & Ruhleder, K. (1996, March 01). Steps toward an ecology of infrastructure: Design
and access for large information spaces. Information Systems Research, 7(1), 111-134.
Stewart, E. L. (1998). African American music: An introduction. New York: Schirmer Books.
Stokes, R. B. (1969). The function of bibliography. London: Deutsch.
Street, B. (2006). Autonomous and ideological models of literacy: Approaches from New
Literacy Studies. Media Anthropology Network(17), 1-15. Retrieved from
http://www.philbu.net/media-anthropology/street_newliteracy.pdf
StriveTogether. (2014). Self-Regulated Learning and Study Skills. Retrieved February 22, 2015,
from StriveTogether: Every child. Cradle to career Web site:
http://www.strivetogether.org/self-regulated-learning-and-study-skills
346

Suarez, M. F., & Woudhuysen, H. R. (2013). The book: A global history. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Tanselle, T. (1992). A Description of descriptive bibliography. Studies in bibliography, 45, 1-30.
Tatum, A. W. (2006, February). Engaging African American males in reading. Educational
Leadership, 63(5), pp. 44-49. Retrieved February 22, 2006, from
http://www.ascd.org/ASCD/pdf/journals/ed_lead/el200602_tatum.pdf
Tatum, A. W. (2009). Reading for their life: (Re)building the textual lineages of African
American males. Portsmouth, N.H.: Heinemann.
Taylor, A. G. (1993). Cataloguing. In R. Wedgeworth (Ed.), World encyclopedia of library and
information services (pp. 177-181). Chicago: American Library Association.
Taylor, M. C. (2001). The moment of complexity: emerging network culture. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press.
Teige-Mocigemba, S., Klauer, K. C., & Sherman, J. W. (2010). A practical guide to Implicit
Association Tests and related tasks. In B. Gawronski, B. K. Payne, B. Gawronski, & B.
K. Payne (Eds.), Handbook of implicit social cognition: Measurement, theory, and
applications. (pp. 117-140). New York: Guilford Press.
The City of New York. (2011). NYC2010 Results from the 2010 Census: Population Growth and
Race/Hispanic Composition. Department of City Planning, New York. Retrieved from
http://www.nyc.gov/html/dcp/pdf/census/census2010/pgrhc.pdf
The Grammy Museum. (2015). All eyez on me: The writings of Tupac Shakur. Retrieved from
Grammy Museum at L.A. Live: http://www.grammymuseum.org/on-display/specialexhibits/all-eyez-on-me-the-writings-of-tupac-shakur
The Holy Bible: King James version. (2007). Peabody, MA: Hendrickson Bibles.
The New York Public Library. (2015). About the Schomburg Center for Research in Black
Culture. Retrieved from New York Public Libary:
http://www.nypl.org/about/locations/schomburg
The New York Public Library. (2015). Schomburg Center event spaces. Retrieved from New
York Public Library: http://www.nypl.org/spacerental/event-spaces/schomburg
The New York Times. (1982, November 19). 2 black activists seized in protest. The New York
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/1982/11/19/nyregion/the-city-2-blackactivists-seized-in-protest.html

347

The World Book, Inc. (1990). Reading. In The World Book encyclopedia (Vols. Q-R, pp. 156165). Chicago: World Book.
Thompson, J. E. (1999). Dudley Randall, Broadside Press, and the Black arts movement in
Detroit, 1960-1995. N.C., Jefferson: McFarland.
Todd, W. E. (1909). Fireside Musings (2nd ed.). Washington, D. C.: Murrary Brothers Printing
Company .
Traister, D. (2003, September 06). Public Services and Outreach in Rare Book, Manuscript, and
Special Collections Libraries. Library Trends, 52(1), 87-108. Retrieved from
http://muse.jhu.edu/journals/library_trends/
Trevaldwin, A. J., & Aylward, F. G. (1895). Exchanges. (W. K. Wright, & A. J. Jewers, Eds.)
Journal of the Ex Libris Society, 4, 3-6.
Trithemius, J. (1531). Catalogus scriptorum ecclesiasticorum sive illustrium virorum, cum
appendice eorum qui nostro etiam seculo doctissimi claruere Per venerabilem virum,
dominum Iohãnem a Trittenhem Abbatẽ Spanhemensem, disertissime concriptus.
Cologne: Quentell. doi:http://www.mdz-nbnresolving.de/urn/resolver.pl?urn=urn:nbn:de:bvb:12-bsb11061808-2
Trithemius, J., Heynlin, J., Brant, S., & Amerbach, J. (1494). Liber de Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis. Basel: Johann Amerbach. Retrieved from http://tudigit.ulb.tudarmstadt.de/show/inc-iv-2/0294
Tulane University. (2014). Diaspora Yoruba. 2014-2015 public service course catalog. New
Orleans.
Tulane University. (2015). Undergraduate Admission. Retrieved from Tulane University:
http://admission.tulane.edu/apply/gettinginto.php
Villepastour, A. (2010). Ancient text messages of the Yorùbá bàtá drum: Cracking the code.
Farnham, England: Ashgate.
Vincent, R. (1996). Funk: The music, the people, and the rhythm of the one. New York: : St.
Martin's Griffin.
Wagner, B., & Reed, M. (2009). Early printed books as material objects: Proceedings of the
conference organized by the IFLA Rare Books and Manuscripts Section, Munich, 19-21
August 2009. Berlin: De Gruyter Saur.
Walsby, M., & Constantinidou, N. (2013). Documenting the Early Modern Book World:
Inventories and Catalogues in Manuscript and Print. Leiden: Brill.
348

Ward, J. (1991, Spring). Southern black aesthetics: The case of "Nkombo" magazine. Mississippi
Quarterly, 44.2(143), 143-150.
Warne's juvenile drolleries: The ten little niggers. (1873). London, NY: Frederick Warne and
Co.
Washington, N. (2006). Why do Black people love fried chicken?: And other questions you've
wondered but didn't dare ask. Venice, CA: Your Black Friend.
Watkins, W. H. (2005). Black protest thought and education. New York: P. Lang.
Watson, L. (1998). The college experience: A conceptual framework to consider for enhancing
students' educational gains. In K. Freeman (Ed.), African American culture and heritage
in higher education research and practice (pp. 75-93). Westport, Conn: Praeger.
Wedgeworth, R. (1993). World encyclopedia of library and information services. Chicago:
American Library Association.
Wegemer, G. (1990, December). Ciceronian humanism in More's Utopia. Moreana, XXVII(104),
5-26. Retrieved March 16, 2015, from
http://www.thomasmorestudies.org/moreana/Moreana104pages5-26.pdf
Wilson, P. (1968). Two kinds of power: An essay on bibliographical control. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Wilson, P. (1989). The objectives of the catalog and the means to reach them. In E. Svenonius
(Ed.), The conceptual foundations of descriptive cataloging (pp. 1-4). San Diego:
Academic Press.
Wimsatt, W. K. (1954). The verbal icon: Studies in the meaning of poetry. Lexington, KY:
University of Kentucky Press.
Wisner, W. H. (2000). Whither the postmodern library?: Libraries, technology, and education in
the information age. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland & Co.
Words Beats & Life. (2014). The cause: Relentlessly demonstrating the transformative power of
hip hop. Retrieved February 28, 2016, from Words Beats & Life, Inc.:
http://www.wblinc.org/cause/
World Book, Inc. (1990). In The World Book encyclopedia (Vol. A). Chicago: World Book.
XXL Staff. (2011, May 31). Book of rhymes. XXL. Retrieved from
http://www.xxlmag.com/news/2011/05/book-of-rhymes-may-2011-issue/2/
Young, R. J. (1996). Antebellum black activists: Race, gender, and self. New York: Garland Pub.
349

Young, V. A. (2007). Your average nigga: Performing race, literacy, and masculinity. Detroit:
Wayne State University Press.
Young, W. H. (2013, September 5). Common core state standards: The achievement gap.
Retrieved from National Association of Scholars:
https://www.nas.org/articles/common_core_state_standards_the_achievement_gap
Yvette. (2014, August 22). 50 Cent told the truth, Floyd Mayweather can barely read. Retrieved
from BlackLikeMoi: Words About People Who Look Like You Web site:
http://blacklikemoi.com/2014/08/50-cent-told-truth-floyd-mayweather-can-barely-read/

350

