ECO EPHEMERAL
WORKS BY THOMAS FERRELLA & ARTISTS’ BOOKS
FROM SPECIAL COLLECTIONS, UW-MILWAUKEE LIBRARIES

by

Pamela Caserta Hugdahl

A Thesis Submitted in
Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of

Master of Arts
in Art History

at
The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
December 2016








ProQuest Number: 10241509





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10241509
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

ABSTRACT
ECO EPHEMERAL
WORKS BY THOMAS FERRELLA & ARTISTS’ BOOKS
FROM SPECIAL COLLECTIONS, UW-MILWAUKEE LIBRARIES
by
Pamela Caserta Hugdahl

The University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2016
Under the Supervision of Professor Jennifer Johung

This thesis essay and accompanying exhibition approach environmental concerns through
an art historical perspective by considering works of art by Thomas Ferrella, M.D. and artists’
books from Special Collections at UW-Milwaukee Libraries. The exhibition evades conventional
boundaries of galleries in order to present artists’ books in their intended manner and to display
Ferrella’s outdoor installations in context with UWM’s award-winning sustainability initiatives.
The results exemplify how we shape earth and in turn how our actions upon earth impact us,
emphasizing human interdependence on fragile ecosystems. Ferrella’s artworks and medical
expertise in combination with the content in the artists’ books and UWM sustainability initiatives
argue for a holistic approach to environmentalism that is yet to be embraced by much of the
world’s human population.

ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS

List of Figures ................................................................................................................................ iv
List of Works ...................................................................................................................................v
Acknowledgments......................................................................................................................... vii

Introduction ....................................................................................................................................1
UWM Sustainability Initiatives ....................................................................................................2
Environmentalism in Art ..............................................................................................................4
Thomas Ferrella and his Greatest Inspiration, Aralina Ferrella ..............................................6
Thomas Ferrella’s Way to Art ......................................................................................................8
Ferrella as a Maker of Eco-art ...................................................................................................12
A Common Thread Between Book Arts and Environmentalism ............................................17
Of Lasting Importance ................................................................................................................27
Notes ..............................................................................................................................................37
Bibliography ..................................................................................................................................39

iii

LIST OF FIGURES

Figure 1. Thomas Ferrella, 1 World, Madison, 2016 .....................................................................29
Figure 2. Thomas Ferrella, What Shapes Us, UW-Milwaukee, 2016............................................30
Figure 3. Thomas Ferrella, Imagine from the Drift series, 2014-2016 ..........................................30
Figure 4. Cistern in the “Spiral Garden,” UW-Milwaukee, 2013 ..................................................31
Figure 5. Thomas Ferrella, Selections from What We Shape, UW-Milwaukee, 2016 ..................31
Figure 6. Thomas Ferrella, Endangered Wisconsin, 2011 .............................................................32
Figure 7. Sarah Bryant, Biography, 2010 ......................................................................................33
Figure 8. Julie Chen, Family Tree, 2013 .......................................................................................33
Figure 9. Eddee Daniel, Wildlife Sanctuary, 2016.........................................................................34
Figure 10. Fred Hagstrom, Forces and Fossils, 2011....................................................................34
Figure 11. Karen Kunc, Air, Water, Oil, 2010 ...............................................................................35
Figure 12. Denise Levertov, Batterers, 1996 .................................................................................35
Figure 13. Regula Russelle, On Hospitality, 2014.........................................................................36
Figure 14. Jody Williams, Still Sense, 2008 ..................................................................................36

iv

LIST OF WORKS

Sarah Bryant
Biography 2010 (fig. 7)
Aurora, NY: Big Jump Press
8¾ x 5½ x ¾ in.
Edition 23 of 75
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Julie Chen
Family Tree 2013 (fig. 8)
Berkeley, CA: Flying Fish Press
2¾ x 9 x 9¼ in.
Edition 36 of 50
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Eddee Daniel
Wildlife Sanctuary 2016 (fig. 9)
MagCloud
8 x 8 x ¼ in.
Unlimited copies
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Thomas Ferrella
Endangered Wisconsin 2011 (fig. 6)
oil, acrylic, wood
38 x 38 inches overall
Courtesy Thomas Ferrella

Thomas Ferrella
Imagine from the Drift series 2014-2016 (fig. 3)
wood (reclaimed lumber)
36 x 24 inches (approximate dimensions)
Courtesy Thomas Ferrella

Thomas Ferrella
What Shapes Us 2016 (fig. 2)
wood (Sandbar Willow sticks)
10 x 100 feet (approximate dimensions)
Courtesy Thomas Ferrella

v

Thomas Ferrella
What We Shape 2016 (fig. 5)
(names of endangered and invasive species written on pathways in biodegradable pigments)
dimensions variable
Courtesy Thomas Ferrella

Fred Hagstrom
Forces and Fossils 2011 (fig. 10)
Edited by Dylan Thomas, Ernst Haeckel and Strong Silent Type Press. St. Paul, MN: Strong Silent Type
Press
15⅝ x 11⅛ x 1 in.
Edition 4 of 20
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Karen Kunc
Air, Water, Oil 2010 (fig. 11)
Avoca, NE: Blue Heron Press
8 x ¼ x 10½ in.
Edition 5 of 10
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Denise Levertov
Batterers 1996 (fig. 12)
Edited by Claire Van Vliet, Kathryn Vigesaa Lipke and Janus Press. West Burke, VT: Janus Press
12⅛ x 15¼ x 2⅞ in.
Edition of 100
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Regula Russelle
On Hospitality 2014 (fig. 13)
St. Paul, MN: Cedar Fence Press
7¼ x 7¼ x 3¾ in.
Edition of 6
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

Jody Williams
Still Sense 2008 (fig. 14)
Minneapolis, MN: Flying Paper Press
2¾ x 2¾ x 2¾ in.
Edition 41 of 75
UW-Milwaukee Libraries Special Collections

vi

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

I would like to extend sincere gratitude to the many people who supported me in pursuing
my graduate education. Thank you to Professor Jennifer Johung for allowing me to take on this
project and for trusting me to see it through. A special thank you to Max Yela for welcoming me
into Special Collections and for reviewing my thesis. At Golda Meir Library I would also like to
thank Alice Ladrick, Anna Michelle Martinez-Montavon, Steven Burnham, Kim Silbersack,
Katherine Bowes, Molly Susan Mathias, Steven Keltner and all the others who assisted with this
project. I am also thankful to Chief Sustainability Officer Kate Nelson for revealing how to
navigate behind the scenes at UWM and for her integral role in securing UWM’s title as a Green
Ribbon School. Thank you to the Physical Environment Committee, Jim Olson, Randy Trumbull
Holper, Steve Wilke and Alex Alexopoulos for supporting the logistical aspects of the
exhibition. Chris Schmid and Charles Licht at UWM Print and Copy Services have also been
gracious and I additionally appreciate the support I received from Union Marketing. I also want
to thank the Helen Bader Institute for Nonprofit Management for its important impact on my
graduate education and the Department of Art History for the exciting and unusual opportunity to
put on a thesis exhibition in pursuit of a Master’s of Arts.
I am especially thankful for the generous financial support for the exhibition received
through the Jeffrey R. Hayes Graduate Research Award administered by the Department of Art
History and from Jan Serr and John Shannon. These contributions made the exhibition possible
and gave me assurance that the project is meaningful.
I am indebted to Thomas Ferrella for his unwavering commitment to the project, his
willingness to create new work within the parameters of the exhibition, for collaborating like an
old friend, for allowing me to get to know him, his family and friends and for permitting me to

vii

share his stories herein. Thank you also to Jenie Gao, James Barry and the others who have
helped Ferrella prepare the installations on campus. I would also like to take this opportunity to
congratulate Maia Ferrella and Paul Schwartz as they embark on the journey of life together.
As for those who are near and dear, thank you to my mother for always encouraging me to think
and act independently. Thank you to Mary McDunn, my close mentor and unofficial editor of
this catalogue. Thank you to my dad, Sally and to all of my brothers and sisters for
encouragement and tender competition. I owe my brother-in-law Stephen Pestalozzi and my old
friend Lauren Stromquist special consideration, for without their assistance this catalogue would
not have been possible. I am deeply appreciative of my life partner, Devon Hugdahl, who is ever
supportive of my endeavors and keeps the family well fed. Thank you also to Grandma Linda for
being available at a moment’s notice to entertain our daughter. Finally, thank you to my dear
daughter Lena for her patience with me over the past three years, leading up to my graduate work
and during the long hours I have spent reading and writing. Thank you Lena for picking up litter
and repeating our mantras about caring for the environment. Please never stop caring for this
green earth.

viii

Introduction
Artists’ books in Special Collections at UW-Milwaukee Libraries and regional artist
Thomas Ferrella share a story about a world we shape, that in turn shapes us. It is a story of
beauty, growth and rejuvenation, but it is also a story about carelessness, disruption and loss.
Through the lens of a self-taught artist and the perpetually avant-garde medium of book arts, this
exhibition attempts to turn the page in the way we approach environmentalism; this page is on
what shapes us.
ECO Ephemeral temporarily distorts routines at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
(UWM) by marking the paths we traverse and by transforming the green spaces we cross. One
who sets foot on the Kenwood Campus might walk on ephemeral hand painted names of
endangered species, highlighting Ferrella’s intent to demonstrate how we impact our
surroundings. Passing through Ferrella’s serpent-like sculptural installation along Downer
Avenue prompts one to consider individual influences on the land. One might also appreciate a
painting of Wisconsin wildlife before realizing that the seemingly ubiquitous species are all
endangered. Students of life will also find their way to Special Collections on the fourth floor of
Golda Meir Library to see one of UWM’s inspiring green solar rooftops and to browse intricate
artists’ books that explore environmental considerations from divergent perspectives. The artists’
books included are by regional and internationally acclaimed artists Sarah Bryant, Julie Chen,
Eddee Daniel, Fred Hagstrom, Karen Kunc, Denise Levertov and Claire Van Vliet, Regula
Russelle and Jody Williams.
This exhibition is nontraditional in that all but one of the works are touchable and none
are housed in a gallery. Hopefully it succeeds in breaking the limitations of gallery installations
of artists’ books by inviting viewers to experience the books in their entirety. For a few short

1

weeks the exhibition will take root on campus, and after that, it will leave lasting traces through
its presence online and in Special Collections. This exhibition also aims to acknowledge the
ways in which we can and do make a difference right here at the UWM. My hope is that the
overall project aids in dialogues about how we shape Earth, and in turn, how our actions shape
us. Ferrella’s installations, the artists’ books in Special Collections and UWM’s sustainability
initiatives impose an opportunity to “imagine” new ways for sustaining and revitalizing our
world.

UWM Sustainability Initiatives
UWM is proud to be named a Green Ribbon School by the U.S. Department of
Education. This honor is attributed to schools that demonstrate measurable success in reducing
waste, energy use and emissions. UWM is the only UW System institution that is currently
recognized with this distinction, but hopefully it serves as a pioneer in the “greening” of
campuses across the country.
The initiatives that helped UWM receive such prestigious recognition include rooftop
gardens, solar panels, a wind turbine, community gardens, E-waste recycling, bicycle
friendliness and stormwater management, to mention but a few.1 The students also benefit from
collaborations between UWM Restaurant Operations, the Food and Garden Club, the Institute for
Urban Agriculture and Nutrition, and the Conservation and Environmental Science’s
permaculture course. These entities come together to provide healthy, organic, local foods to
students year round.2 The school notes in its application for the award: “since 2008, UWM has
reduced its energy use per square foot by 27% (avoiding $11.9 million in energy costs between

2

2010 and 2015)” and “Overall, UWM has reduced its greenhouse gas emissions [by] over 20% at
the main Kenwood Campus.”3
In addition to interdisciplinary emphasis on environmentalism and sustainability in the
arts and humanities, UWM offers nearly two hundred programs that devote specific attention to
environmental wellness. Such programs are offered through the School of Architecture’s
Institute for Ecological Design, the Institute for Urban Agriculture and Nutrition, the Master of
Sustainable Peacebuilding program, the undergraduate degree program in Conservation and
Environmental Sciences, Graduate and Doctoral degrees offered at the School of Freshwater
Sciences, the Water Technology Certificate, and through programs supported by the Center for
Community-Based Learning, Leadership, and Research.4
The compact urban campus includes over eleven acres of natural forest in Downer
Woods, as well as intentional native prairies and engineered stormwater gardens. The
combination of systems now prevents an annual 16.5 million gallons of stormwater from flowing
into the Milwaukee street sewers.5 The school also adopted a Natural Lawn Care program in
2014, doing away with all synthetically formulated fertilizers and pesticides.6 Further, the school
switched over to environmentally conscious cleaning solutions, which, according to the school,
contribute to better staff morale, better oversight of chemicals, reduced water consumption and a
notable reduction in cleaning expenses.7
Although the UWM Office of Sustainability has spearheaded many of the green
initiatives on campus, Chief Sustainability Officer Kate Nelson highlights the strong institutional
support for sustainability. The achievements that have been made at UWM in the past few years
came to fruition because people from across the UWM community, including students, faculty,

3

staff and student organizations, were eager to adopt healthier options for campus and the
environment.8

Environmentalism in Art
“Eco” is the prefix that represents the word “ecology,” a term that refers broadly to how
people interact with their physical and social environments. The term also refers to how
organisms interact with their environment. Problematizing the history of “ecology,” Hiroko
Shimizu, one of the contributors to the exhibition catalogue Eco-Art, maintains, “the term
ecology has mixed the layers of traditional views of nature and the scientific objectivity of the
West. It is traditionally said in Japan that nature and human beings are recognized not as separate
entities but as a state of interrelation.” She goes on to explain that ecology is a perception that
existed long before anyone labeled it.9 In other words, human actions are part of ecology and we
have the capability of influencing everything in our environment, either in a positive, negative or
neutral way. It is important to approach this discussion through global perspectives because
environmentalism is a global concern and one that requires many voices and interpretations to
reach sensible outcomes. For this exhibition however, it is equally relevant to look at how artists
in the region respond to environmentalism.
Scientists, art historians and artists generally point to the mid-twentieth century as the
beginning of the contemporary movement in environmentalism. However, many will also point
to earlier catalysts, such as John Muir and Aldo Leopold. Even Thomas Cole is lauded for his
nineteenth-century landscape paintings that are as much about Manifest Destiny as they are
about preservation. Linda Weintraub and Andrew Brown largely refer to the 1960s and Rachel
Carson’s book Silent Spring as the beginning of the environmental movement.10 Weintraub also

4

notes events that occurred in the 1960s, which spurred the debate in the West, including smog
that was linked to 750 deaths in London, an oil tanker crash off the coast of England in 1967 and
an oil spill in 1969 off the coast of Santa Barbara, California.
Recently, Weintraub and Brown have put forth efforts to define which artists created
early examples of works that fit within current notions of environmentalism in art. Weintraub is a
scholar of eco-art who developed her expertise on the topic through her interest in the avantgarde. Her definition of eco-art relies on the concept of ecocentrism, which is a term that was
coined by activists in the 1970s. Weintraub asserts, “Ecocentrism refers to the principle that
humans are not more important than other entities on Earth. It is the opposite of
anthropocentrism, which interprets reality in terms of human values and experiences.”11 With
respect to the early stages of the eco-art movement, Weintraub elaborates:
Although eco art has been hovering in the wings of the art scene for over half a century,
two phenomena are converging that might ultimately cast it in a leading role in the
current era’s cultural chronicle. First, its mission is becoming ever more crucial, as the
Earth’s ability to sustain current and future generations of humans becomes more
precarious…. Second, the number of international artists rejuvenating the planet has
reached a critical mass.12

Sustainability is key to Weintraub’s interpretation of eco-art, whereas others are content
to include any art that has something to do with plants, natural phenomena or global position. By
her definition, “Four attributes refine the identification of eco art with ecology: topics,
interconnection, dynamism, and ecocentrism.”13 Through her in-depth analysis of eco-art,
Weintraub has staked a claim on the term, confining it to art that deals specifically with
environmental sustainability. Although this approach limits the genre of environmentalism in art,
it allows us to appreciate eco-art by artists with diverse bodies of work. It also gives artists
flexibility where they might otherwise be designated as eco-artists. The works chosen for this

5

exhibition exemplify this situation by offering multi-layered readings that support ecocentric
principles.

Thomas Ferrella and his Greatest Inspiration, Aralina Ferrella
Thomas Ferrella (b. Detroit, 1956) is a self-taught artist whose artistic sensibilities range
from sentimental to punchy, utilizing a variety of mediums including photography, painting and
sculpture. He has incorporated text into many of his artworks and has collaborated with poets on
several projects, which aids in aligning his sculptural work with artists’ books. Although the
themes in his artistic oeuvre vary widely, he says of his own work, “my inspiration comes from
my assessment and love of the natural world.”14
One of the aspects that drew me to Ferrella’s work is that even a cursory Internet search
reveals he works in many different mediums and on scales both small and large. Ferrella’s multimedia sensibilities are not necessarily seen as an asset to some in the art world however. A
gallery told him they could no longer represent him because clients were confused by his wide
range of skills. To their point, the Internet reveals that he was a doctor, plays in an
improvisational soundscape band, and that he is a painter, photographer and sculptor.15 I fail to
see the problem, but apparently Ferrella’s varied interests have been a deal-breaker for some. I
do understand that initial knee-jerk reaction of realizing that an artist was a doctor though. Upon
meeting another Madison-based artist recently, I explained that I was working with Ferrella on
this project. He quickly searched his mental Rolodex and said, “Thomas Ferrella? Isn’t he that
E.R. doctor who went crazy and started making art?” The term “crazy” is relative, but in a way it
rings true for many self-taught artists.16

6

Ferrella’s professional career as an emergency room doctor influences his art in subtle
ways, but he is perhaps most influenced by his mother, Aralina Ferrella (b. 1925), and her artistic
practice. He is quick to show off her works, from her miniature sculptures made from spent
chewing gum to wall-mounted, framed objects made from tar that she peeled off the street in
response to the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill.
Ferrella’s parents are both first generation Italian-Americans, raised in the rural town of
Stonewood, West Virginia. He describes his parents’ families as dirt-poor coal mining families
in a town filled with Italians. Both of his grandfathers died rather young, one probably from a
ruptured appendix and the other in a coal mine accident, leaving the mothers of both his parents
widowed and impoverished at the height of the depression. There was hardly a better place to
learn about resourcefulness in America than in homes such as these. His mother dropped out of
high school to care for her own ailing mother in the brick house her father built. There was no
running water and the loo was out back. Ferrella remarks, “When I was growing up, Mom was
cooking everything.” True to her depression-era formative years, Mrs. Ferrella went to farms and
bought food by the bushel. She made her own sausage and pasta and sewed almost all of the
children’s clothes and Halloween costumes. Ferrella’s Polish friends in Detroit were bewildered
by capicola, prosciutto and all of the other Italian delicacies at his house.
His father, James Ferrella (b. 1925), served in WWII and soon after went to work at a car
factory in Detroit while attending night school for accounting on the GI Bill. Ferrella comments
that his father has absolutely no artistic inclinations: “He likes to fix things and read
newspapers.” Ferrella quips that his father is incredibly personable and is frequently “the life of
the party unless you have heard his stories and jokes more than fifty times. He should have been
a stand-up comedian.” After becoming an accountant he spent a remarkable forty years with the

7

Sheller-Globe Corporation, making a life for his family that his own father could have hardly
dreamed; complete with atomic-motif barkcloth curtains and modern furniture. Shortly after the
transformative 1967 riot in Detroit, corporate headquarters moved to Toledo and the Ferrella
family followed.
At some point, Ferrella’s mom started developing a collection of bones and pieces of
found broken glass that she displayed on windowsills all throughout the house and in the garden.
Her curio collections grew and she began making ornaments from the leftover pieces of hog
intestines used for making sausage. She would inflate the intestines and turn them into knotted
designs and hang them in the utility room to dry, resulting in three-dimensional, semi-translucent
sculptures. She followed that inclination and in her early sixties she blossomed as an artist. She
decided to pursue her newfound passion and secured a studio space in a beautiful old brick
convent in downtown Toledo. Surrounded by other artists, “she hit her stride” in Ferrella’s
words. “Dad would dig up bushes from the yard and she would spray them off, invert them and
embellish them with found objects.” One must wonder whether her resourcefulness stems back
to the depression or if there is something genetic at work. Ferrella is quick to mention his
admiration, stating, “I think she’s an amazing artist…to take chewed bubble gum, dryer lint, tar
from the street and to make it into something eclectic, fun and beautiful.” He describes her
influence on his work as having given him the flexibility of seeing that anything can be made
into art and to not shy away from unfamiliar mediums.

Thomas Ferrella’s Way to Art
Ferrella received his bachelor’s degree in Zoology from Miami University, Oxford, OH.
His interest in art was cursory but from the age of sixteen he always had access to a darkroom.

8

He toyed with the idea of becoming a photographer, partly influenced by his dad’s 8-millimeter
projector that was always running at home and his love of the outdoors. He was also attracted to
the abstract and he loved how photography could fool the eye and mind. While he was applying
to medical school he simultaneously submitted applications for several fine arts programs in
photography, but a conventional profession was strongly encouraged and seemed to make sense
for him. Ferrella recounts the circumstances, “I had a friend who lived ‘on the other side of the
tracks’ in Toledo whose dad was a doctor and I was attracted to their lifestyle. Yet, I also
remember my brother being pre-med and being frustrated until he decided he was going to be an
artist.” Ferrella went on to describe the hell that broke loose at home as his brother, Andre, was
at odds with his parents’ expectations. Andre stayed the course and went on to be an artist.
Ferrella recollects, “I was somewhat torn between the two disciplines. I happened to be good at
math and science, with a strong attraction to human anatomy.”
Ultimately, Ferrella was accepted to medical school. He relays that he chose that path out
of ego more than anything else. In his words, he “became a physician for all of the wrong
reasons” and not out of altruism or a desire to help others. Despite his success in medical school,
he felt out of sorts and contemplated dropping out or switching his focus to wilderness or high
altitude medicine research. It wasn’t until his last rotation in medical school that he found a
practice that suited his personality – emergency medicine. He pursued this new passion and
graduated from the Medical College of Ohio (now University of Toledo) in 1983 and went on to
receive his board certification in Emergency Medicine in 1988.
Meanwhile, Andre pursued his MFA in Madison. After a trip to Europe (where you could
get real coffee and pastries) Ferrella visited his brother and instantly liked Madison. “State
Street, Miles Davis, the lakes, coffee shops, this is cool, right?” Santa Cruz and Santa Fe were

9

also on his short list, but he ended up moving to Madison before setting out to find a job. He
started out as a freelance emergency room doctor with a company that sent him all over
Wisconsin. In 1990 he became a founding partner at Meriter Hospital in Madison where he
carried out his respectable thirty-year career as an emergency medicine physician.
In 2013 Ferrella retired, although he emphasizes that quality of life was always more
important to him and his family, following a work to live lifestyle rather than a live to work
edict. About fifteen years ago he started exploring his creative inklings again. “Honestly, I think
I had a stroke because now all I can think of is being creative… I want to paint, I want to carve
wood.” Now it is as if he is he is putting himself through the rigors of a fine arts program,
emphasizing artistic exploration, assertively applying for shows and grants, building connections
and “paying his tuition.”
Ferrella is certainly making his way into the art scene but he feels he is often discounted
because he doesn’t have the connections or a degree in the arts. To say he doesn’t have
connections isn’t exactly accurate though. Landscape painter Jonathan Wilde, the son of
acclaimed Madison artist, John Wilde, is a friend of Ferrella’s. Wilde is Ferrella’s go-to guy for
all things about painting, bringing him questions such as, “can you mix stand oil with turpentine,
spray or brush varnish, put thin paint over thick paint or paint on such-and-such a substrate?”
Ferrella’s painting style is similar to cataloging. He paints what he sees as accurately as
possible in the most vivid, yet realistic, colors. When asked how he learned to paint he
responded, “That just came out of nowhere… This excites me because nobody taught me to do
this. I know this is not high art, but I’m a bit like a kid in a candy store. It’s super exciting to eat
the really good candy.” I reminded him of a Picasso quote and he immediately bristled that he

10

didn’t want to be compared to Picasso. I pressed on, “a quote about unlearning everything from
art school.”17 Ferrella agreed:
The best art comes from kids, up until right around third or fourth grade. They are just
streaming directly. The reason I know this is because I spent a lot of time with my kids,
and between third and fifth grade the teachers start teaching art rules and then they get
intimidated and realize they aren’t following the rules. They beat the creativity out them.
Everybody has this creative spirit. It just gets buried. Maybe that’s why I’m like a kid in a
candy store, because I’m tapping into that creative spirit once again.

Ferrella first started painting while laid up with a broken hip that he sustained after being
run off the road while biking. His mother traveled from Toledo to help him recover and she set
up a painting space for him. Now, painting is reserved for his downtime, when he doesn’t have
other pressing projects. He paints from his photographs, things he remembers and things he
recalls from landscapes. At the moment, it is what he loves most of all his artistic mediums. He
explains, “I’m attracted to painting because it’s meditative. You really get lost in the image you
are creating and you are only limited by your skill and your imagination. Everything is possible
on a little two-dimensional square… I will put in a fourteen-hour day and not blink an eye.”
In all of his mediums, Ferrella tends to work in series. He enjoys taking a visual cue,
developing an idea and figuring out how to engineer it. For his current project on race, called 1
World, he has photographed over sixty people behind frosted glass. Describing his process, he
comments, “I know those portraits of people blending together are beautiful… so, how do I use
that? Problem solving is fun and frustrating, but to see it come to fruition is really exciting.”
From that specific series he created a large pentagonal wood frame and inserted five prints of
these portraits. He attached the frame structure to a bicycle wheel hub and hung it from a tree. It
spins in the wind and because of this motion and the blurred images, the skin tones of all the
people blend together, hence emphasizing our sameness (fig. 1). He remarks that he is fortunate

11

to have a friend in Enrique Rueda of Madison, whom he sees as a kindred soul. Ferrella bounces
many of his ideas off of Rueda who is a musician, video engineer, designer and a master
woodworker. Although his friends are his foremost source for advice on his projects, Ferrella
jokes that he also attends YouTube University. He uses Google, accesses other resources around
town and talks to people he considers art-friendly to figure out how to approach projects:
I’m in awe of a lot of artists, but I also feel like they are just people who are passionate
and happen to push boundaries. I have this same underlying passion. I don’t get
intimidated by doing something new. I just figure, somebody else can weld, why can’t I
weld, paint, glue, sew paper…? If I can’t, I just work to develop those skills.

Ferrella as a Maker of Eco-art
Ferrella makes eco-art as a reflection on the state of affairs in the environment, and how
(to put it mildly) messed up everything is with environmental and climate change receiving little
notice. He is profoundly concerned about losing species and natural occurrences, many of which
we may never know existed. He is perturbed by the overwhelming attitude that nature is a
resource for humans to manipulate and control, a perspective that he asserts has resulted in a lack
of clean water and clean air, the rise in cancer rates, autism, new viruses crossing over into
humans, and the introduction of invasive species that affect animals, plants and entire ecosystems. Through ECO Ephemeral, he hopes to put a personal touch to those losses that will
resonate with viewers.
One example of direct human influence that he cites is the blight resulting from ballast
water in ocean-going ships that carried zebra mussels into the Great Lakes. Another is the use of
honeysuckle as an ornamental garden plant, only for it to spread and invade forests and choke the
indigenous woodland ecosystem. Lyme disease also illustrates human influence turning on itself.
Ferrella vehemently condemns the mismanagement of the deer population in Wisconsin, which

12

has allowed unprecedented population growth with few extant natural predators. This system
provides deer ticks with an endless blood supply, which keeps the debilitating disease at
epidemic proportions in this state. Nonetheless, deer are allowed to propagate at high levels
because of the money generated during hunting season.
There is no question that we have sacrificed the health and wellbeing of humans because
of policies that do not go far enough to preserve naturally occurring eco-systems. Ferrella notes
the huge elevation in the rate of asthma related to air quality, the rise of ozone, the recent
Volkswagen debacle, and the use of synthetic products that give off fumes in homes and
workplaces. He further comments on the rise of breast cancer, hypertension, obesity, Zika,
Ebola, SARS, HIV, and syphilis as byproducts of tampering with the environment. Ferrella
acknowledges that his eco-art is influenced in part by his medical career. “You can’t understand
these statistics and not believe they are related to our environment.” He also remarks on the
hundreds of above ground nuclear bomb tests that were conducted in Nevada and Utah. All of
the fallout that blew east over America’s breadbasket coincidently fell on the film set of The
Conqueror (1956), staring John Wayne. The director, Dick Powell died of cancer just seven
years after the film came out and forty-five other cast and crewmembers died of cancer over the
next two decades. Ferrella points out that there are many diseases that seemingly came out of
nowhere during the twentieth century, such as Polycystic Ovarian Syndrome. He believes these
unpleasant trends are based on how we are treating our environment, food system, animals, and
ourselves, and yet collectively we still uphold an attitude of conquering the environment at all
costs. He asks, “are we in some perverted way just feeding the health industrial complex?”
The four series that Ferrella presents in this exhibition engage with various UWM
sustainability initiatives and larger biological rights issues that potentially affect the world over.

13

Perhaps the most visible installation is What Shapes Us (fig. 2). This is a site-specific installation
located along Downer Avenue, in a clearing near Edgewood Avenue.
The installation consists of thin dried Sandbar Willow sticks that pierce the ground in
close configurations, forming curves, waves and passageways. This installation is meant to
inspire people to think about wind, water and time, and how these factors shape our environment
and us. Like mandalas or totems, Ferrella feels that “the use of organic forms unites the viewer
with the natural world on a subconscious level.” Pushing this inquiry further, consider what we
also shape, how we use our resources and how we could use resources that are more practical or
appropriate given issues of sustainability.
The Sandbar Willow used in this installation is a native species that was harvested from
southeastern Wisconsin. Although it is indigenous to Wisconsin and is useful in many ways, it
can be invasive if it is not properly controlled by grazing fauna, wildfires or through human
management. It is used for erosion control but at the same time it can quickly choke streams and
interrupt trout pathways and other ecosystems. Native Americans traditionally used it for a wide
range of domestic purposes including the construction of homes, sweat lodges and hunting.
When freshly cut, the willow sticks are pliable and it is especially satisfying to peel the bark that
exudes a subtle refreshing aroma. The moist bark is used in weaving strong basketry and also has
medicinal properties. Sandbar Willow is currently a popular material for privacy screens and
fences and it is well suited for such commercial products because of its ability to grow rapidly.18
At the close of the exhibition, the willow will be removed, leaving small holes that aerate
the soil in conjunction with UWM’s natural lawn care practices. UWM Facility Services
implements the Natural Lawn Care program through composting, overseeding and aeration
without the use of synthetic fertilizer or pesticides.19 Ultimately, the grass is more resilient, but

14

more importantly, the program benefits the health of people, pets, insects and microorganisms. It
also reduces the nitrates that flow into the Lake Michigan watershed.
In the context of twentieth-century land art, there are some parallels to Ferrella’s willow
installations. His ideologies are perhaps most akin to Andy Goldsworthy’s, but one could go as
far as to draw out similarities between his work and Michael Heizer’s. Of the artists associated
with the Land Art movement, Andrew Brown states:
they were leading the charge of a new avant-garde that would alter radically the way
artists viewed and engaged with natural objects and processes. These pioneers showed
not only that art could be placed within the environment and be made from it, but also
that the art could change that environment forever.20
Unlike many of the artists associated with the Land Art movement, Ferrella has not made an
indelible site-specific installation to date, and perhaps never will given his strong considerations
towards Manifest Destiny-type attitudes.
Nestled in what is commonly referred to as the “Spiral Garden” between Klotsche Center
and the Heating Plant, Ferrella situated a sign that reads, “imagine” (fig. 3). This sign comes
from Ferrella’s larger installation series called Drift. Each diminutive, reclaimed lumber sign in
the series is engraved with a different single word that can be associated with the location where
it is posted. Vondra Engraving, Inc. appreciates the project so much that they engrave the signs
gratis.
Ferrella often incorporates text into his art, and has collaborated with poets on several
projects, making this work a circuit between his works installed around the campus and the
environmentally charged artists’ books in Special Collections. The guerrilla-like placement of
these signs is intended to be very informal, often disregarding land ownership or ordinances. At
UWM the placement of the sign was vetted, but only one is included in the exhibition, so as to
keep with Ferrella’s intentions for the series of solitary units that are far-flung.

15

Imagine is especially appropriate for the garden spearheaded by Professor James Wasley
in the School of Architecture and Urban Planning, designed in collaboration with landscape
architect Gerard Rewolinski and then students Joel Springsteen, Michael Kautzer and Andrew
Manto.21 Made possible in part by the Milwaukee Metropolitan Sewerage District, the garden
was constructed in 2009 to reconnect a small river that had been interrupted by city life. The
more prominent feature of the gardens includes two massive cement cisterns that were
constructed in 2013, which hold a total of 12,360 gallons of rainwater that is slowly released into
the ground after heavy rainfall (fig. 4).22 One who sees the sign in the Spiral Garden might
“imagine” what ecological architecture can accomplish if implemented more widely.
For a brief time, the installation receiving the most foot traffic is What We Shape (fig. 5).
These highly ephemeral, organically pigmented names of endangered and invasive species,
which are written on walkways around campus, disappear with wind and rain. However, it is the
foot traffic over the names of the species that evoke the most poignant message of what we shape
and what shapes us. Endangered species, such as Ornate Box Turtle, appear in dark brown while
invasive species, including Earthworm and Japanese Honeysuckle, are inked in deep red.
The foundation for Ferrella’s three outdoor installations is his painting entitled
Endangered Wisconsin (fig. 6), displayed in the Daniel M. Soref Learning Commons at Golda
Meir Library during this exhibition. This painting is a series of seventeen small, individual oil
paintings on wood panels. The puzzle-like arrangement is coincidently reminiscent of two of the
artists’ books, Julie Chen’s Family Tree and Jody Williams’ Still Sense. The species depicted
are: Hine’s Emerald Dragonfly, Midwest Pleistocene Vertigo (snail), Northern Blue Butterfly,
Slender Madtom (catfish), Wallace’s Deepwater Mayfly, Western Ribbonsnake, Giant Carrion
Beetle, Giant Pinedrops (plant in the blueberry family), Ornate Box Turtle, Piping Plover, Phlox

16

Moth, American Marten, Blanchard’s Cricket Frog, Butterfly Mussel, Eastern Prairie Whitefringed Orchid, Fire Pink (wildflower) and the Snowy Egret.
With this painting, Ferrella’s aim is to implement art in order to educate people about the
species that are endangered by current environmental land practices. The individual paintings are
simple yet realistic, cataloging the species beautifully in order to show us what we are going to
potentially lose. What I find especially moving about this painting is that it has made me realize I
personally have no idea if or when I encounter endangered species. Could the last Phlox Moth
flitter in the light at my door?

A Common Thread Between Book Arts and Environmentalism
Johanna Drucker considers a strain of artists’ books as “democratic multiple.” Artists’
books can address any topic, can be crafted inexpensively or use the finest quality materials, and
can reach a broad audience through mass distribution, in libraries and through exhibitions.23
Drucker asserts that book arts developed into an expressive artform in the middle of the
twentieth century, largely for the sake of social change, along with the “emergence of various
avant-garde movements.”24 She elaborates, “Following the mid-century, artists began to make
books a primary or major aspect of their activity, without linking the content or form of the book
to an already established agenda.”25
The development of artists’ books coincides with the formalization of the environmental
movement and in some ways it seems the two are linked. Betty Bright points out that The Whole
Earth Catalog, a seminal journal centered on environmentalism, included references to
bookmaking and printing in its first edition in 1968 and also in a subsequent edition.26 Bright
immediately acknowledges in her book, No Longer Innocent: Book Art in America 1960-1980,

17

that scholars “still lack a generally accepted and workable definition of artists’ books.”27 This is
also the case for art that can be associated with environmentalism.28 She additionally notes,
“Book workers as a rule show affinities with the avant-garde movements of their time.”29 As the
eco-art movement is relatively new and is steeped in activism, it is no surprise that book arts
have embraced this activist driven genre. These two seemingly disparate practices evolved
concurrently to promote issues to various audiences, from grassroots movements to collectors of
fine arts.30 Unfortunately, book arts and the environment also share in common the concern of
endangerment. While some of the artists’ books in Special Collections address issues of
endangered species, monocultures and altered landscapes, the art of book making is also
threatened in some places.31
In 1992 Bright curated Completing the Circle: Artists’ Books on the Environment at the
Minnesota Center for Book Arts. Bright reports that the show was criticized by book enthusiast
Abe Lerner who took issue with sculptural book works. She empathizes, “These books are not
pretty, and they do not follow the rules of typography or binding or, for that matter, reading
itself.”32 Twenty-four years later, Bright’s curatorial exploration of artists’ books on the
environment deserves a second approach, not only because there is much work to be done in
service to the environment, but also because many artists’ books surrounding the topic have been
made since 1992. If nothing else, the books included here are actually quite “pretty.”
With the progression of book making in the twentieth century, Bright comments, “Books
were no longer viewed as repositories of finite meaning, but rather as permeable membranes
whose information could yield multiple interpretations, even as they effortlessly crossed
geographical (and political) boundaries.”33 She condoles, “The restriction of exhibition in display
cases force readers and critics to judge and articulate a book’s success based on a single page

18

opening. Reading a book involves the tactile, even emotional experience of paging through it.”34
For this and other practical reasons, the artists’ books in ECO Ephemeral are available for
viewing and handling in Special Collections throughout the duration of the exhibition.
Discussing the books by creator, in alphabetical order, serendipitously happens to arrange
the books in a sort of narrative. It is especially fitting to start off by focusing on Sarah Bryant’s
Biography (2010, fig. 7). Bryant’s book is letterpress printed from polymer plates on Zerkall
Book paper, is drum-leaf bound in hard cover and is enclosed in a clamshell box. Bryant was
influenced by her colleague Jessica Peterson to include exactly twenty colors, a situation that
Bryant adoringly begrudges.35 There is a strong emphasis on the graphic design which Bryant
accomplished using InDesign for the layout. She then transferred the digital files to polymer
plates, which are a photosensitive plastic material that hardens when exposed to light. Such
plates are typically used for relief printing but in this case they also offered Bryant a practical
way to transfer the digital files to a traditional printing process. Made on a Vandercook press,
Biography combines relief printing and pressure printing.36
Bryant worked on Biography while she was a fellow at Wells College. The project began
with visual studies of the periodic table as an offshoot of topics she addresses in her earlier
books. She wanted to make a new work that was clever but was also a somewhat “arbitrary crazy
book.”37 The title refers tangentially to Bryant herself, but more broadly to the makeup of human
physiology and ecology. Although the book is not reliable for significant scientific data, she
made a concerted effort to convey accurate information by consulting Professor Christopher
Bailey, Chair of Biological and Chemical Sciences at Wells College. As she explored the
periodic table in printmaking she determined that she needed to focus on a specific topic with
respect to chemistry “because the periodic table is so much – it is everything.”38 As the human

19

body had been a subject of interest in her previous projects, she built on this idea and considered
the elements in the human body and how humans relate to their environments. One of the
fascinating correlations that she presents in her book is that pesticides and fertilizers contain
some of the same elements. Contradicting logic, we use chemicals that kill in order to grow food.
She outlines similar relationships between medicine and weapons.39 The book includes nine
diagrams designed by Bryant:
1. You are what you are made of
2. You are part of something larger than yourself
3. You are what you stand on
[refers to the crust of the earth]
4. You are what you make
[refers to weapons, medicines, tools, etc.]
5. You are what you make (part 2)
6. You are what is similar to you [is a list of animals]
7. You are where you came from [notes the proportion of elements in sea water]
8. You are
9. You are

Julie Chen’s Family Tree (2013, fig. 8) is a hybrid livre de luxe (sculptural bookwork)
contained in a cloth covered solander box.40 The work is comprised of a block puzzle. Each
block includes four digitally printed sides and two laser-engraved sides that form six
predetermined arrangements and allow for infinite groupings. Bright equates the structure of
some artists’ books to children’s books: “The presence of nostalgia suggests an unrecoverable
past, a sense of loss that might arise with a reader’s encounter of such a format from
childhood.”41 Chen’s work demonstrates this situation perfectly in tandem with concern for the
environment. The blocks show the following texts when the six puzzles are matched and turned
congruently:
walking through my neighborhood I notice the shadows of trees branching on the
sidewalk under my feet. and in the instant that I register what I am seeing I am also not
seeing. subconsciously naming the source unaware that I have stopped looking.

20

CONNECTIONS EMERGING AFTER DORMANCY
IDENTITY REINVENTED THROUGH INTERPRETATION
EVENTS RECLAIMED RECTIFYING ASSUMPTIONS
FAMILY LINKED BEYOND BLOOD
thinking about my personal history I consider the connections linking me within a web of
abstractions. over my lifetime I have accumulated many selves, inadvertently creating an
unidentifiable person within a framework of familiarity.
PATTERNS HIDDEN BENEATH THE NARRATIVE
GENERATIONS FORGOTTEN DUE TO NEGLECT
OPPORTUNITIES LOST MASKING THE TRUTH
HISTORY REDACTED BY INDIFFERENCE
CONNECTEDNESS EXPLAINED THROUGH CONTACT
CONNECTEDNESS EXPLAINED THROUGH TIME

Eddee Daniel, based in Milwaukee, recently published Wildlife Sanctuary (2016, fig. 9)
using an online, print on demand service. This newer form of book art cannot be dismissed for its
commercial production because it has roots that spread back to early production of books that
were used to circulate messages widely at a nominal cost, including chapbooks, Fluxus
publications and zines. Even Edward Ruscha’s acclaimed books employ this method. Despite the
careful design that Ruscha dedicated to his book layouts, Drucker notes that the use of standard
printing techniques is a distinguishing feature of his books, as in Twentysix Gasoline Stations
(1963).42
Wildlife Sanctuary presents ironic imagery of a preserve at La Trobe University in
Melbourne, Australia. The seventy-four acre sanctuary is a space for education in restoration and
management of native flora and fauna. Daniel’s photography displays the odd intersection
between urban life and revitalization of natural habitats. Although it is much greater in scale, it
shares distinct similarities with Downer Woods at the UWM Kenwood Campus where a fence
effectively locks in the natural growth in order to protect it from human activity. The images

21

coincide with Daniel’s attraction “to contradictory realities in a world increasingly compromised
or redeemed by our own actions.”43
Fred Hagstrom is well represented in Special Collections, thus it was difficult to choose
just one work of his to feature in this exhibition. Paradise Lost, which addresses the atrocities of
nuclear testing on Bikini Atoll in the 1940s and 1950s, seemed like an obvious choice,
particularly in conjunction with Ferrella’s remarks about nuclear testing west of America’s
breadbasket. However, Paradise Lost can be explored in the digital exhibit Another Place.44 An
alternate work by Hagstrom that is equally appropriate in the context of ECO Ephemeral is
Forces and Fossils (2011, fig. 10). This book is screen-printed using illustrations from German
naturalist Ernst Haekel’s book Radiolaria (1862) and includes the complete text of Dylan
Thomas’s poem The Force that through the Green Fuse Drives the Flower (1939). The large and
heavy book is drum leaf bound with a screen-printed piece of slate inset on the front of the
hardcover.
The radiolarian images represent fossils of minute protozoa found throughout the ocean
floor. Thomas’s poem can be interpreted in many ways, but it can be inferred that it is about
human naiveté against Mother Nature. This poem, included below, presents uncanny parallels to
the themes explored in Bryant’s book, Biography.
The force that through the green fuse drives the flower drives my green age; that blasts
the roots of trees is my destroyer. And I am dumb to tell the crooked rose my youth is
bent by the same wintry fever. The force that drives the water through the rocks drives
my red blood; that dries the mouthing streams turns mine to wax. And I am dumb to
mouth unto my veins how at the mountain spring the same mouth sucks. The hand that
whirls the water in the pool stirs the quicksand; that ropes the blowing wind hauls my
shroud sail. And I am dumb to tell the hanging man how of my clay is made the
hangman’s lime. The lips of time leech to the fountain head; love drips and gathers, but
the fallen blood shall calm her sores. And I am dumb to tell a weather’s wind how time
has ticked a heaven round the stars. And I am dumb to tell the lover’s tomb how at my
sheet goes the same crooked worm.

22

Karen Kunc’s Air, Water, Oil (2010, fig. 11) is a pamphlet stitched book with a black
handmade-paper cover that has deckled edges. Although it is a simply constructed book it has
some carefully crafted surprises. There are two leaves that are tri-folded and the final spread is
forty-one inches wide. The pages also have an unusual waxy appearance. Kunc explains, “The
prints were treated with acrylic washes, that pooled and stiffened the papers to make them carry
the sense of liquid ‘stuff.’”45 Ovals are repeated throughout the book, reminiscent of ships or oil
tankers, and a grey haze covers the pages, simulating smoggy air. Black drips and smears recall
imagery of random oil spills. Kunc searches her memory. “I can't remember exactly what was
happening at the time I made this work, but I often address natural and man-made disasters, the
daily science stories and discoveries, the ecological and economically entwined issues that color
our everyday decisions. I am not didactic in approach, but my visual vocabulary implies and
suggests.”46 In her formal statement about the book she acknowledges the duality that often
comes between art and environmentalism: “The content mirrors the human dilemma of the use of
natural resources, as the color reduction woodcut process destroys once living matter – in the
creation of something meaningful.”47
The earliest work included in the exhibition is Denise Levertov’s Batterers (1996, fig.
12), which was truly a collaborative effort with Claire Van Vliet, Katie MacGregor, Bernie
Vinzani, Kathryn Lipke Vigesaa, Jack Sumberg, Judi Conant and Mary Richardson. Batterers is
visually commanding and conceptually stunning. A large clamshell slipcase is covered
repeatedly with the title in bold sans serif type of varying sizes, as if to pound the title into the
viewer’s psyche. Inside the slipcase is a wooden shadowbox with overlapping accordion folds
pigmented in scarlet red. Within three sections, a poem by Levertov is revealed:

23

A MAN SITS BY THE BED OF A WOMAN HE HAS BEATEN, DRESSES HER
WOUNDS, GINGERLY DABS AT BRUISES, HER BLOOD POOLS ABOUT HER,
DARKENS.
ASTONISHED, HE FINDS HE’S BEGUN TO CHERISH HER. HE IS TERRIFIED.
WHY HAD HE NEVER SEEN, BEFORE, WHAT SHE WAS? WHAT IF SHE STOPS
BREATHING?
EARTH, CAN WE NOT LOVE YOU UNLESS WE BELIEVE THE END IS NEAR?
BELIEVE IN YOUR LIFE UNLESS WE THINK YOU ARE DYING?

Claire Van Vliet wrote a letter that accompanies the book in which she mentions that
Levertov wrote the poem with the second and third verses being interchangeable. This layout
allows the reader to choose equitably. The obverse of the shadowbox could easily be overlooked,
as is so much of the scarring of the earth, however it is intended to double as the cover and as a
framed work. It is an early version of one of Lipke Vigesaa’s “Earthskins” made of pressed claypaper, which forms a muddy, rock-like landscape with deep wounds.
Batterers was created when ecofeminism was peaking in the scholarly realm during the
mid-1990s. In 1997 Karen Warren wrote in the introduction of her book Ecofeminism: Women,
Culture, Nature that “ecological feminism is the position that there are important connections
between how one treats women, people of color, and the underclass on one hand and how one
treats the nonhuman natural environment on the other.”48 Levertov approached this issue
assertively in 1996. A full twenty years later, the term “ecofeminism” is wildly radicalized by
political conservatism and it is not clear that any gains have been made in mitigating human
rights abuses, animal abuse or abuses against the environment.
As ecofeminism hasn’t penetrated mainstream thinking, environmentalists have gradually
adopted the approach of “kill ‘em with kindness.” Regula Russelle’s On Hospitality (2014, fig.
13) demonstrates this point perfectly. Within a sturdy square box Russelle includes four objects

24

in individual origami boxes. A small accordion-fold book spreads out over thirty-three inches
and three handmade paper sculptures in the form of vessels nestle like eggs. The title and
delicate contents of the box evoke a sense of responsibility upon the viewer. To hold one of the
paper vessels is like being given an egg to carry like a baby. Each vessel contains a word or a
series of words composed by Russelle, and a quote by Lao Tzu is presented as a prelude to the
text in the book:
Doors and windows are cut from walls to form a house;
but it is on the empty space within, that its use depends.
Lao Tzu
gate, hail approach with open arms bid welcome receive & usher in, cultivate, ear hear,
heart hearth, compose & form, assemble, mend, consolation, dwelling, abide,
ORCHARDS, CHOIR, LIBRARIES, tending over time, ask: what does it mean to host a
pilgrim soul?49

Jody Williams’ Still Sense (2008, fig. 14) is reminiscent of Marcel Duchamp’s Boîte-envalise (Box in a Suitcase, 1936-41). With respect to Boîte-en-valise Bright notes, “A strength of
its boxed format is that it allows access to its contents and also embodies the circularity inherent
in artistic process, rather than submitting to a book’s linear structure.”50 Williams takes this nonhierarchal structure a step further by enclosing three sets of six puzzle pieces within narrow
cavities along the edges of the case. The book is constructed from bookbinder's board covered in
Momi paper, and Sakamoto paper lines the interior. Inside the color coded shell-like pages there
are beads and three corked glass vials that are filled with specimens from the Minnesota terrain,
representing flowers, trees and grasses.
The puzzle-like cards are illustrated using intaglio and are color coded on one side to
correspond with their home in the case. Williams thoughtfully intertwines multiple concepts in
threes: “three boxes, three themes (Details, Essence, Substance), three elements (text, image,

25

specimen), three botanical types, three sets of loose cards, three colors, three dimensions.”51 The
enclosed text follows:
Details (white)
drifting in place
low down
drawn in
small senses of
isolated intensity
dismissing
before and after
enchanted by this
fragile balance
of fleeting
brilliance
Essence (blue)
reaching out
suspended beyond
a complex plain
becoming something else
almost the sky
waves of questions
consuming
illusions of profundity
only this
still sense
prevails
Substance (brown)
gathering strength
rising
singular points
of reference
divide and connect
earth and sky
imposing order
repeating patterns
retain and record
past and present
grand presences
enduring

26

All of the puzzle pieces fit together to read:
here, before, something, nowhere, never
now, that, wherever, always, nothing
soon, the other, somewhere, after, everything, everywhere

When the pieces are flipped congruently the three sets of cards show the following text:
(white)

intimate, distinct
ephemeral, elegance
precision, radiance

(brown)

survival, enduring
solid, spreading
structure, intent

(blue)

subtle, transcending
dimension, complete
whisper, mystery

Of Lasting Importance
The artists represented herein beautifully highlight a myriad of reasons to move forward
with sustainable environmental practices. Ferrella approaches environmentalism in his art
judiciously while preparing us to think carefully about how our actions upon the environment
can cause unintended consequences to our own health and livelihood. He urges consideration of
“what we shape” and “what shapes us” in order to reveal that, for the most part, we as a species
are the engineers of our existence. This is troubling in the face of climate change, drastic weather
events and epidemic diseases, but it is also reassuring to know that if we have such a significant
influence on Earth’s various systems, then we must be able to repair and reverse some of the
damage.
Ferrella’s installations and the artists’ books, taken into consideration with UWM
sustainability initiatives, offer an opportunity to “imagine” infrastructure that can transform the

27

way we interact with the environment, for the better. They signal that a holistic approach, which
implements the arts and sciences, is key to addressing pressing global concerns, such as
protecting our fresh water sources. If we are passive to infrastructure, architecture and art that
does not move us towards a more ecologically conscious way of life within our constructs of
Manifest Destiny then we will find everything on our planet, including plants, animals, entire
ecosystems and even human life, to be ephemeral. As we move forward we must accept that we
are inherently connected to the health of Earth and we must work on this puzzle collaboratively
in order to deliver the delights of a healthy and ecologically diverse planet to future generations.

28

FIGURES

Figure 1. Thomas Ferrella, 1 World, Madison, 2016

29

Figure 2. Thomas Ferrella, What Shapes Us, UW-Milwaukee, 2016

Figure 3. Thomas Ferrella, Imagine from the Drift series, 2014-2016

30

Figure 4. Cistern in the “Spiral Garden,” UW-Milwaukee, 2013

Figure 5. Thomas Ferrella, Selections from What We Shape, UW-Milwaukee, 2016

31

Figure 6. Thomas Ferrella, Endangered Wisconsin, 2011

32

Figure 7. Sarah Bryant, Biography, 2010

Figure 8. Julie Chen, Family Tree, 2013

33

Figure 9. Eddee Daniel, Wildlife Sanctuary, 2016

Figure 10. Fred Hagstrom, Forces and Fossils, 2011

34

Figure 11. Karen Kunc, Air, Water, Oil, 2010

Figure 12. Denise Levertov, Batterers, 1996

35

Figure 13. Regula Russelle, On Hospitality, 2014

Figure 14. Jody Williams, Still Sense, 2008

36

NOTES
1

Kate Nelson and Mark A. Mone, Wisconsin Post-Secondary Institution Application, U.S. Department of Education
Green Ribbon Schools, December 2015. 9. http://www2.ed.gov/programs/green-ribbon-schools/2016-schools/wipostsecondary-university-wisconsin-milwaukee.pdf; “In 2015, UW-Milwaukee students invested in a five year
student membership plan for the City of Milwaukee’s Bublr Bikeshare program and in 2013 UWM was recognized
as a Bike Friendly Campus by the League of American Bicyclists.” Nelson and Mone, “Green Ribbon School
Application,” 9.
2
Nelson and Mone, “Green Ribbon Schools Application,” 10-11.
3
Ibid., 8, 9.
4
Ibid., 12-13.
5
Ibid., 9, 13.
6
Ibid., 9.
7
Ibid., 10.
8
Ibid., 13.
9
Hiroko Shimizu, “Future Compass, Ikeda Water – Flowable to Amplify,” in Eco-art, John K. Grande et al.
(Helsinki: Pori Art Museum, 2011), 76.
10
Andrew Brown, Art & Ecology Now, (New York: Thames & Hudson, 2014), 11; Linda Weintraub, To Life!: Eco
Art in Pursuit of a Sustainable Planet (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2012), 19-20.
11
Weintraub, To Life!, 7.
12
Ibid., xiv.
13
Ibid., 6.
14
Ferrella’s comments and biographical information were conveyed directly through multiple meetings and e-mails
exchanged in 2015 and 2016. Most of his biographical information was relayed during a conversation on April 30th,
2016.
15
Not all of Ferrella’s art is environmentally based. He is currently engaged in a series on race called 1 World. One
of his longest running series is the Wisconsin Roadside Memorials project in which he has been photo-documenting
roadside memorials for the past fifteen years. http://www.wisconsinroadsidememorials.com.
16
There are many artists who loosely fit this stereotype. Eugene Von Bruenchenhein is one example.
17
Pablo Picasso is widely credited with saying, “It took me four years to paint like Raphael, but a lifetime to paint
like a child.”
18
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service, Plant Fact Sheet, Sandbar
Willow, February 5, 2002, accessed June 22, 2016, https://plants.usda.gov/factsheet/pdf/fs_saex.pdf.
19
Nelson and Mone, “Green Ribbon Schools Application,” 9.
20
Brown, Art & Ecology Now, 12.
21
James Wasley, “UWM as a Zero-Discharge Zone: Built Work 2006-2013,” 2013, 32.
22
Ibid., 44.
23
Johanna Drucker, The Century of Artists' Books, (New York: Granary Books, 1995), 69.
24
Ibid., 1.
25
Ibid., 71.
26
Betty Bright, No Longer Innocent: Book Art in America 1960-1980, (New York: Granary Books, 2005), 97.
27
Ibid., xiii.
28
The term “eco-art” is particularly contested. Definitions contradicting Weintraub’s usage have been suggested by
Christoph Brunner, Roberto Nigro and Gerald Raunig who reflect on Félix Guattari, The Three Ecologies,
translation by Ian Pinder and Paul Sutton, (London: Continuum, 2008) 35-36. Christoph Brunner, Roberto Nigro
and Gerald Raunig, “Post-Media Activism, Social Ecology and Eco-Art.” Third Text, January, Vol. 27, Issue 1
(2013): 10, http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/09528822.2013.752200.
29
Bright, No Longer Innocent, xiii.
30
Ibid., 6-7.
31
As an example, in 2015 my alma mater, Mills College, proposed plans to close its respected Book Arts program.
Sarah Burke, “An Identity Crisis at Mills College,” Eastbay Express, November 4, 2015, accessed May 29, 2016,
http://www.eastbayexpress.com/oakland/an-identity-crisis-at-mills-college/Content?oid=4563237. Further, artists’
books are underrepresented in museum exhibitions.

37

32

Bright, No Longer Innocent, 1-2.
Ibid., 193.
34
Ibid., 7.
35
Sarah Bryant, “The Evolution of an Artist’s Book by Sarah Bryant,” The Susan Garretson Swartzburg Lecture
Spring 2011 lecture at Wells College, 2011, accessed June 1, 2016,
http://video.syr.edu/Video.aspx?vid=TlzP3UMBD0O45MptqQ5DuA.
36
A deluxe version in an edition of ten copies includes all of the prints that were made simultaneously with the
book.
37
Bryant, “The Evolution of an Artist’s Book by Sarah Bryant.”
38
Ibid.
39
Ibid.
40
Kathryn Markel, “Hey, Wanna Buy an Artists’ Book?” “The State of the Book Arts,” Craft International
(October-November-December 1984): 27, cited in Bright, No Longer Innocent, 178.
41
Bright, No Longer Innocent, 94.
42
Drucker, The Century of Artists’ Books, 77.
43
Eddee Daniel, Artist Statement, received via e-mail from artist on June 4, 2016.
44
http://liblamp.uwm.edu/omeka/SPC2/exhibits/show/anotherplace.
45
Email response from Karen Kunc, June 13, 2016.
46
Ibid.
47
Karen Kunc, Artist’s Statement for Air, Water, Oil, received via e-mail from artist on June 13, 2016.
48
Karen Warren and Nisvan Erkal, Ecofeminism: Women, Culture, Nature, (Indiana University Press, 1997), 3.
49
Complete text in On Hospitality.
50
Bright, No Longer Innocent, 42.
51
Jody Williams, Artist Statement on Still Sense, received via e-mail from artist on June 2, 2016.
33

38

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Bright, Betty. Completing the Circle: Artists' Books on the Environment. Minneapolis:
Minnesota Center for Book Arts. 1992.
______. No Longer Innocent: Book Art in America: 1960-1980. New York: Granary Books:
Distributed to the Trade by D.A.P./Distributed Art Publishers, 2005.
Brown, Andrew. Art & Ecology Now. New York: Thames & Hudson, 2014.
Brunner, Christoph, Roberto Nigro, and Gerald Raunig. "Post- Media Activism, Social Ecology
and Eco-Art." Third Text 27, no. 1 (2013): 10-16.
Bryant, Sarah. “The Evolution of an Artist’s Book by Sarah Bryant,” The Susan Garretson
Swartzburg Lecture Spring 2011 lecture at Wells College, 1 May 2011. Accessed June 1,
2016. http://video.syr.edu/Video.aspx?vid=TlzP3UMBD0O45MptqQ5DuA.
Drucker, Johanna. The Century of Artists' Books. New York: Granary Books, 1995.
Hagstrom, Fred. Forces and Fossils. Edited by Dylan Thomas, Ernst Haeckel and Strong Silent
Type Press. St. Paul, MN: Strong Silent Type Press, 2011.
Levertov, Denise. Batterers. Edited by Claire Van Vliet, Kathryn Lipke Vigesaa and Janus Press.
West Burke, Vermont: Janus Press, 1996.
Markel, Kathryn. “Hey, Wanna Buy an Artists’ Book?” “The State of the Book Arts.” Craft
International (October-November-December 1984): 27.
Nelson, Kate and Mark A. Mone. “Wisconsin Post-Secondary Institution Application.” U.S.
Department of Education Green Ribbon Schools. (December 2015). Accessed May 17,
2016. http://www2.ed.gov/programs/green-ribbon-schools/2016-schools/wi-postsecondary-universitywisconsin-milwaukee.pdf.
Shimizu, Hiroko. “Future Compass, Ikeda Water – Flowable to Amplify,” in Eco-art, John K.
Grande et al. Helsinki: Pori Art Museum, 2011.
United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service. “Plant Fact
Sheet, Sandbar Willow.” February 5, 2002. Accessed June 22, 2016.
https://plants.usda.gov/factsheet/pdf/fs_saex.pdf.
Warren, Karen, and Nisvan Erkal. Ecofeminism: Women, culture, nature. Indiana University
Press, 1997.
Wasley, James. “UWM as a Zero-Discharge Zone: Built Work 2006-2013.” 2013.
https://www4.uwm.edu/sarup/people/faculty/wasley.cfm.
Weintraub, Linda. To Life!: Eco Art in Pursuit of a Sustainable Planet. Berkeley: University of
California Press, 2012.

39

