A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY OF EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP IN ACADEMIC
HEALTH SCIENCES LIBRARIES IN THE UNITED STATES
by
Ricky Lester Fought

A Dissertation
Submitted in Partial Fulfillment of the
Requirements for the Degree of
Doctor of Education

Major: Higher and Adult Education

The University of Memphis
December 2016








ProQuest Number: 10587565





All rights reserved




INFORMATION TO ALL USERS
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.












ProQuest 10587565
Published by ProQuest LLC (2017 ). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.



All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code
Microform Edition © ProQuest LLC.




ProQuest LLC.
789 East Eisenhower Parkway
P.O. Box 1346
Ann Arbor, MI 48106 - 1346

Copyright © 2016 Ricky L. Fought
All rights reserved

ii

Dedication
For my dad, Robert Lee Fought, who believed in education and more importantly,
always believed in me. Thank you for your hard work, selfless dedication, and endless
sacrifice to your family. You are always in my thoughts, and I miss you every day.

iii

Acknowledgements
This dissertation would never have been conceived, let alone finished, if not for
the tireless efforts and mentorship of Dr. Mitsunori Misawa. I am very grateful to have
had the opportunity to get know Dr. Misawa and have him as an instructor for several
courses. It was during these courses and the time spent designing my research proposal
for this dissertation that I really began to believe that I could do it. I owe him a
tremendous debt. He has been very patient and kind, and the best doctoral program
advisor and committee chair I could have imagined. I also am indebted to the work and
advice of the other members of my doctoral committee: Dr. Bill Akey, Dr. Charisse
Gulosino, Dr. Adam Walker, and Dr. Wendy Griswold. I greatly admire their dedication
and efforts on my behalf. I benefited greatly from their wisdom and insights throughout
the entire dissertation process.
I would like to acknowledge everyone at UTHSC who have supported and
encouraged me throughout my pursuit of this doctorate. I was often overwhelmed at the
generosity and kindness demonstrated to me as I struggled through it all. You all were a
source of strength for me to lean on.
My brother and sisters, nieces and nephews, aunts and uncles, cousins, and, of
course, my mom could always be counted on for support and encouragement. I know I do
not express it often enough, but I do not know what I would do without you all. My
children, Ian, Rowan, and Evelyn, were also a source of strength and inspiration. I
appreciate your understanding and sacrifice during this time and I hope now to make
some of it up to you. I love you all so much.

iv

Last, but certainly not least, to my wife Terri, who has endured more than any
person should. Thank you for believing in me and sticking with me through this all.
There were many times when I had lost faith in myself and my ability to finish this, but
you never did. You were always there to take care of me and the kids without any
complaints. Thank you for being the best wife I could ever hope to have.

v

Abstract
Fought, Ricky Lester. Ed.D. The University of Memphis. December 2016. A
Phenomenological Study of Effective Leadership in Academic Health Sciences Libraries
in the United States. Major Professor: Dr. Mitsunori Misawa, Ph.D.
Academic health sciences libraries are experiencing a challenging period of transition and
competition. They are still transitioning from a print to electronic environment while
facing competition from the Internet and other information providers. Higher education is
going through a period of shrinking state appropriations while facing greater
accountability and calls for more affordability. These challenging times, however, are
also bringing opportunities to libraries to contribute more to their campuses and partner
with other departments on new programs and projects. To realize these opportunities and
make it through the challenges ahead, academic health sciences libraries will need good
leadership. The perceived effectiveness of the library director and of the library is closely
associated, and adequate funding for the library is primarily determined by the
administration’s confidence in the library leadership. The purpose of this study, therefore,
was to better understand how academic health sciences library directors experience
leadership and how their experience related to their understanding of effective leadership.
The research questions that guided this study were:
1. How do academic health sciences library directors understand their leadership and
experiences as library leaders?
2. What was their career journey that led them into library leadership?
3. How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as leaders?
Data were collected using phenomenological semi-structured interviews and nonparticipant observations. A thematic analysis was conducted to determine the essence of
the leadership experiences of the directors and how these experiences informed their
vi

understanding of effective leadership. Three themes emerged from the data analysis: 1)
Understand Leadership; 2) Path to Leadership; and 3) Measuring Success. These themes
addressed the full range of leadership that academic health sciences library directors
experienced from their early development as leaders to their reflections on their success.
The implications of this study include recommendations for leadership development for
emerging library leaders, including how to recognize emerging leaders, as well as the
development of a tool to better measure a library director’s effectiveness. Developing
new leaders and improving leadership effectiveness in academic health sciences libraries
would assist in proving the value of the library to their campuses and ensure a promising
future.
Keywords: leadership, academic health sciences libraries, phenomenology,
phenomenological interviews, nonparticipant observation

vii

Table of Contents
Chapter

Page

1

Introduction
Background of the Study
Statement of the Problem
Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
Significance of the Study
Definition of Terms
Study Overview

1
2
10
12
13
16
17

2

Review of the Literature
Overview of Leadership Theory
Leadership Effectiveness in Higher Education
Leadership Effectiveness in Academic Libraries
Leadership Development in Academic Libraries
Chapter Summary

18
19
41
48
57
65

3

Methodology
Research Design
Epistemology
Theoretical Framework
Research Methodology: Phenomenology
Research Context
Participants
Data Collection
Data Analysis
Trustworthiness
Chapter Summary

66
67
68
70
74
76
76
79
84
86
91

4

Findings
Biographical Information of Study Participants
Emerged Themes
Theme 1: Understanding Leadership
Category: What it Takes
Category: Building a Team
Category: Advocacy and Credibility
Category: Awareness of Your Environment
Category: Create a Vision
Theme 2: Path to Leadership
Category: Breadth of Experience
Category: Focused Preparation
Category: Mentoring
Category: Recognizing/Developing Leadership
Potential
viii

93
95
97
98
100
103
108
112
114
116
117
120
126
127

5

Theme 3: Measuring Success
Category: Meeting Goals/Accomplishments
Category: Honest Feedback
Category: Formal Assessment
Chapter Summary

134
135
137
140
143

Discussions, Implications, and Conclusions
Summary of the Study
Overview of the Problem
Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
Methodology
Findings
Discussion
Discussion of Research Question One
Structural Frame
Human Resources Frame
Political Frame
Symbolic Frame
Discussion of Research Question Two
Discussion of Research Question Three
Implications
Leadership Development in Academic Health
Sciences Libraries
Effective Leadership in Academic Health Sciences
Libraries
Research Implications
Limitations
Recommendations for Future Research
Conclusions

144
144
145
147
148
149
150
152
154
155
157
158
160
165
170
171
173
176
177
177
178

References

181

Appendices
Appendix A: IRB Approval Emails
Appendix B: Consent Form
Appendix C: Interview Guide
Appendix D: Non-Participant Observation Guide

202
205
208
211

ix

Chapter 1
Introduction
There are many definitions of leadership and it is a word that can have different
meanings for different people since no consensus on its meaning has ever been reached
(Northouse, 2013, Stogdill, 1974, Yukl, 1989). In his study on the history of leadership in
the twentieth century, Rost (1991) found over 200 different definitions for leadership. He
traced how leadership was first defined early in the century in terms of control and
centralization of power (Rost, 1991). Later the focus turned to leader traits, then leader
behaviors, and then it was viewed more in terms of groups as organizational behavior
became the favored approach to understanding leadership (Rost, 1991). Definitions of
leadership continued to explore the leader-follower relationship, and the term influence,
the most often used word to define leadership, was examined from every perspective
(Northouse, 2013). Finally, Rost (1991) found that definitions were coming back full
circle to leader traits by the end of the century. Leadership will likely never be commonly
defined as it will continue to have different meanings for different people and depend on
circumstances (Northouse, 2013).
Leadership, despite the many ways it can be defined, does have components that
are central to its understanding (Northouse, 2013). First, leadership is a process in the
sense that there is a transactional event that occurs between the leader and the follower.
The leader affects and is affected by the follower (Northouse, 2013). Second, leadership
involves influence, or how the leader affects followers. Leadership cannot exist without
influence (Northouse, 2013). Third, leadership happens in groups. There must be other
people involved for leadership to occur. Finally, leadership involves common goals.

1

Leaders and followers are trying to accomplish something together. They have a mutual
purpose and must work together to achieve their selected goals (Northouse, 2013).
Therefore, leadership could be defined as a process in which a person influences a group
of persons to achieve a common goal (Northouse, 2013).
Effective leadership can be considered the successful application of influence
towards goal completion (Chemers, 1993). Rosser, Johnsrud, and Heck (2003) described
effective leaders as, “able to obtain the cooperation of other people and to harness the
resources provided by that cooperation to attain organizational goals” (p. 5). The link
between these two descriptions of effective leadership is that the common goals were
successfully completed. Leadership cannot be considered effective if the agreed upon
goals of the group are not obtained (Rosser et al., 2003). Also, though extensive research
has been conducted on leadership behaviors (Blake & Mouton 1964; Bowers & Seashore
1966; McGregor, 1960, 2006), there has been a lack of clear results about effective
leadership behaviors in organizations (Yukl, 2012). Yukl (2012) asserts that to accurately
assess leadership effectiveness one must clearly define the criteria against which it will
be judged, including objective measures of organizational performance, and include the
perspective of multiple stakeholders.
There has been little agreement on what constitutes effective leadership in higher
education (Del Favero, 2005; Rosser et al., 2003). In fact, Fincher (1996) contended that
leadership effectiveness in higher education was mostly based on perceptions and what
leaders were perceived to have accomplished. Effective leadership in academic libraries
is even less understood with the research being scattered, and few connections existing
between studies not written by the same authors (Fagan, 2012).

2

This chapter will begin with a background for the study. This will be followed
with a statement of the problem. Next, the purpose of the study and its research questions
are presented and followed with a discussion of the significance of the study. Important
terms used in the study are defined. Finally, an overview of the study is provided.
Background of the Study
Early leadership theories began with an examination of why some people became
leaders and what individual differences set them apart from others (Judge, Piccolo, &
Kosalka, 2009). Trait leadership theories emerged first and dominated early research in
leadership until Stogdill (1948), whose study questioned whether personality traits were
adequate in predicting leadership effectiveness. Kirkpatrick and Locke (1991) provide a
good summary of research studies addressing trait-based leadership theory. They argued
that while possession of certain traits does not by itself guarantee leadership success,
there was evidence that effective leaders are different from other people (Kirkpatrick &
Locke, 1991). They suggested that effective leaders possessed certain core traits that
significantly contributed to their emergence and success as leaders.
Leadership research then focused on leader behaviors and how they influence
effectiveness. Fleishman and Harris (1962) investigated the relationship between leader
behavior of industrial supervisors and the behavior of their team members. The research
was conducted in three phases and measured the supervisors’ consideration and structure
behaviors, as defined by the authors (Fleishman & Harris, 1962). They found patterns in
leader behaviors that confirmed their contribution towards effective leadership.
Supervisors who demonstrated greater consideration for their team members had a much

3

lower percentage of grievances filed and turnover rate than supervisors who exhibited a
greater number of structure behaviors (Fleishman & Harris, 1962).
De Cremer and van Knippenberg (2004) used a scenario experiment, a laboratory
experiment, and a cross-sectional survey to examine how self-sacrificial leadership
predicts leadership effectiveness as a function of a leader’s display of self-confidence.
These two behaviors are representative of the kinds of behaviors advanced as effective in
transformational leadership theories (Bass, 1998; Burns, 1979), which seek to change and
transform people and can elevate both leaders and followers to higher levels of
motivation and morality (Northouse, 2013). De Cremer and van Knippenberg (2004)
found a strong interaction between self-sacrifice and self-confidence, and the
combination of the two behaviors resulted in a consistent perception of leadership
effectiveness across all three studies.
Other scholars examined leadership effectiveness from a situational or contextual
perspective. House (1971) developed his path-goal theory of leadership from the more
general motivational theory called expectancy theory. His theory suggests that effective
leaders seek to increase the number of opportunities for their followers to achieve work
goals and personal satisfaction. Effective leaders also clarify the path for successful
attainment of these goals. The theory is concerned primarily with the relationship
between leaders and their employees. Path-goal theory has four major categories of
leadership behavior: directive behaviors, supportive behaviors, achievement-oriented
behaviors, and participative behaviors. A leader must take into consideration situational
factors, including employee characteristics and environmental factors, before deciding on
specific actions. Leaders then choose appropriate behaviors from one or more of the

4

major categories that will assist individual employees as they navigate the path towards
their goals (House, 1971).
Fiedler (1967) developed the contingency theory of leadership through his work
on leadership effectiveness. He determined that leaders need to understand the details of
their situation, and adapt their behavior accordingly, to improve the favorableness of their
situation and therefore, their effectiveness (Fiedler, 1967, 1972). Fiedler’s (1967)
contingency theory stated there were two types of leaders, relationship-oriented leaders
and task-oriented leaders, and either leader could be successful depending on their
situation. Contingency theory identified three contextual variables that inform leaders as
to the favorability of their situation: effective leader-member relations, task structure, and
the leader’s position power. The most favorable situation is created when there is a
combination of good leader-member relations, highly structured tasks, and strong leader
position power, whereas poor situation favorableness is found when there are poor
leader-member relations, unstructured tasks, and weak position power (Fiedler, 1967).
Bolman and Deal’s (1991) four organizational frames theory offers a different
perspective from which to assess organizational behavior. They consolidated the major
schools of organizational theory into a comprehensive framework encompassing four
coherent perspectives for viewing organizational behavior: structural, human resource,
political, and symbolic. Every leader has a dominant frame from which they operate most
frequently, however, Bolman and Deal (1991) argue that to improve organizational
effectiveness leaders need to assess their situation and reframe so that they are matching
the correct frame to the context of the situation. Later, Bolman and Deal (2013) refined
the theory further and address more fully a multi-frame approach to leadership that

5

encourages combining the frames. Bolman and Gallos (2011) take the four-frame theory
and apply it specifically to the academic context, which they believe is unique and offers
special challenges to leaders.
Effective leadership in higher education. Leadership effectiveness in higher
education is, not surprisingly, complex to evaluate. “Higher education’s distinctive
combination of goals, tasks, employees, governance structures, values, technologies, and
history makes it not quite like anything else” (Bolman & Gallos, 2011, p. 4). Rosser et al.
(2003) sought to present “a systematic approach for evaluating the leadership
effectiveness of deans and directors from individual and institutional perspectives” (p. 1).
They noted in their study that academic deans are most often judged effective or
ineffective via informal assessments. They developed a model that takes into account the
relevant dimensions of leadership and the multilevel nature of higher education
institutions. The model of Rosser et al. (2003) consisted of seven domains of leadership
responsibility that represent central evaluation criteria regarding the responsibilities and
skills of the dean’s role. These domains consisted of vision and goal setting, management
of the unit, interpersonal relationships, communication skills, quality of the unit’s
education, support for institutional diversity, and research, professional, and community
endeavors
Wepner, D’Onofrio, and Wilhite (2008) developed a 24-themed, four-dimensional
model in their study of decision-making among deans of colleges of education. They
found that these deans initially framed their problems in intellectual terms, and then use
this domain as their foundation for integrating the emotional, social, and moral domains.
They concluded that the effectiveness of these deans depended on the ability to read the

6

context of their situation, and generate solutions that supported both their colleagues and
the institutional culture.
Smart (2003) found a strong relationship between the level of organizational
complexity and the complexity of behaviors of senior administrators with regard to
perceptions of organizational effectiveness. He noted that effective performance of
colleges and universities is directly related to the development of healthy campus
cultures, which in turn depend heavily on the behaviors of their senior administrators and
other campus leaders. Smart further identified six core leadership competencies that
campus leaders must possess to successfully diagnose, change, and lead campus cultures.
Effective leadership in academic libraries. Few studies of effective leadership
or leadership development have been conducted specifically on academic library
directors (Fagan, 2012). Hernon and Rossiter (2006) examined which emotional
intelligence traits library directors considered most important, and which traits applied to
transformational and transactional leadership styles (Bass, 1998; Burns, 1979). They
determined that the traits perceived as most valuable by library directors were being able
to build a shared vision and rally others around it, and the ability to function in a political
environment. They suggested further research might use case studies to examine library
leaders, determine which emotional intelligence traits they have, and how they use them
effectively.
Kreitz (2009) also studied emotional intelligence, surveying university library
directors and their senior management teams working in Association of Research
Libraries member libraries in the Western United States. The study explored the ideal
emotional intelligence traits of both university library directors and the members of their

7

senior management teams. Kreitz concluded that the traits important for library directors
are different from those of members of the senior management teams, particularly when it
came to creating and communicating a vision, and motivating people to support that
vision. This reflected the different roles and responsibilities that the library directors and
their senior management teams held in their organizations.
In a study reminiscent of trait-based leadership theories, Young, Hernon, and
Powell (2006) performed a Delphi study to explore the perceptions of Generation X
(Gen-X) librarians on the attributes they believe essential for academic library leaders.
The Gen-X participants identified the top 10 most desired attributes in an academic
library leader from a list provided by the authors, but were also allowed to add their own
traits. Young et al. (2006) discovered most of the attributes identified in the top ten are
related to communication and interpersonal skills, and concludes that Gen-X librarians
might prefer participative and/or supportive leadership styles.
Examining academic library leadership in the digital age, Le (2015) surveyed
individuals in senior library leadership positions in academic libraries throughout the
United States. The research goals were to identify the top five major challenges facing
academic library leadership, the top five most important leadership skills required for
effective academic library leadership, and the top five best ways to develop these
academic library leadership skills. Le determined that the most important leadership skills
for effective library leadership included vision, integrity, management skills,
collaboration skills, and communication skills.
While research on effective leadership and leadership development is extensive,
the research on leadership in higher education and academic libraries is much more

8

limited. Leadership in higher education is complex and unique, and this has made
research on effective leadership in this context difficult (Bolman & Gallos, 2011).
Leadership in academic libraries has also been understudied and narrowly focused. Most
studies have been limited to examining desirable leader traits in the context of academic
libraries.
Challenges facing academic libraries. Academic libraries are under increasing
pressure to document and articulate their value and the contribution they make to the
institutional mission and goals (Oakleaf, 2010). Higher education in general is under
greater scrutiny, and government interest in the effectiveness and accountability of higher
education continues to increase (Altbach, Gumport, & Berdahl, 2011; Lederman, 2010).
Oakleaf (2010) was commissioned by the Association of College and Research Libraries
to develop a report that would support libraries in demonstrating their value in clear,
measurable ways. She reviewed the current state of the research on community college,
college, and university library value and suggested focus areas for future research and
emphasized articulation of library value to external audiences (Oakleaf, 2010).
Jakubs (2008) wrote about leading libraries into the digital future as they make
the transition from print to electronic collections. The Internet and digital collections
have changed how students and faculty use information and have presented enormous
challenges to libraries. Jakubs argues that with libraries facing new competition and
challenges in providing information services, a change in philosophy, organizational
model, and even recruitment are needed to reposition the academic libraries to meet these
challenges and reposition libraries for the future.

9

Hernon (2010) discussed the challenges facing academic libraries as they
transition away from book collections. There is disagreement between higher education
administrators and librarians, and even among librarians, as to what libraries will become
(Hernon, 2010). Some see the library merging with other campus units to create a new
student-focused center for the campus while others see the library becoming more
decentralized and consisting more of special collections and study areas (Hernon, 2010).
Whatever the future, Hernon argued that effective leadership would be key, more so since
current library leadership was quickly approaching a retirement age (65+ years old). At
the time of his writing, Hernon found that 47 of the 93 Association of Research Libraries
(ARL) directors were born in or before 1950 and only one was born after 1960 (no
birthdate could be found for 27 directors).
Statement of the Problem
Academic libraries are facing a significant period of transition. As libraries move
from print resources to digital collections they no longer need large physical spaces to
shelve and manage their print collections. The result has been libraries losing space to
other departments on their campuses (Freiburger, 2010; Persily & Butter, 2010). Libraries
also must now compete with the Internet and other information providers after holding a
virtual monopoly on the provision of scholarly information (Cunningham, 2010; Fought,
2014; Pritchard, 2008; Weiner, 2003). In addition, demographic projections published by
the Bureau of Labor Statistics suggest many academic library leaders will retire soon. In
a 1999 survey of library directors in academic health sciences libraries it was indicated
that 65% of the directors anticipated retiring by 2010 (Martin et al., 2003). There is a

10

looming vacuum of leadership facing the profession unless new library leaders emerge
(Hernon, 2010; Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2002).
Academic libraries are facing these challenges at a time when higher education is
undergoing difficult financial problems. State appropriations to public universities and
colleges have dwindled over the past 20 years and tuition has increased sharply as a result
(Archibald & Feldman, 2011). Federal and state governments have also increased
demands for accountability in higher education and greater affordability for students
(Altbach et al., 2011). Academic libraries, therefore, must demonstrate good stewardship
over their budgets, show a solid return on investment, and clearly explain their
contribution to the overall mission and goals of the institution (Oakleaf, 2010). Academic
libraries cannot rely on their administrations’ past belief in their importance any longer
but instead must demonstrate their value to their institutions (Sarjeant-Jenkins, 2012;
Spalding & Wang, 2006).
Academic health sciences libraries, though similar to other academic libraries,
have some important differences for which their library directors must account (Fought &
Misawa, 2016). First, academic health sciences libraries have a clinical responsibility of
working with health professionals. These libraries support not only teaching and research,
but also patient care and community health. It is vitally important that these students,
faculty, residents, and other health professionals have the best information possible, when
they need it, to treat the patients under their care. Second, because of the clinical
responsibilities and the type of research that occurs at academic health science centers,
there are tremendous amounts of money involved at these institutions. Academic health

11

sciences libraries play an important role in supporting these clinical and research
endeavors.
These challenges require effective leadership and leadership development to
secure the long-term future of academic health sciences libraries and enable them to
continue the critical role they perform at their institutions (Giesecke, 2010; Lynch et al.,
2007; Miller, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010). Effective leadership is important towards influencing
staff to willingly exert themselves and cooperate towards collective library goals, which
in turn is key for the library to be effective (De Cremer & van Knippenberg, 2004). The
perceived effectiveness of the library director and of the library are closely associated,
and adequate funding for the library, a key indicator of administrative support, is
primarily determined by the administration’s confidence in the library leadership
(Weiner, 2003).
There are a number of leadership theories that can be used to explain and define
leadership effectiveness in higher education institutions and other organizations, such as
House and Mitchell’s (1974) path-goal theory of leadership, Dansereau, Graen, and
Haga’s (1975) leader-member exchange theory, and Bolman and Gallos (2011), who
applied the four-frame theory developed by Bolman and Deal (2013) specifically to
academic leadership. To date, few studies have been conducted regarding effective
leadership in academic libraries (Fagan, 2012). No studies to date have examined
leadership effectiveness or leadership emergence in academic health sciences libraries. A
study examining how academic health sciences library directors understand leadership
and how they define and measure effective leadership would provide a better
understanding of leadership in this context. With this understanding, directors in

12

academic health sciences libraries could increase their effectiveness and also improve
their ability to identify and develop emerging library leaders.
Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
The purpose of this qualitative phenomenological study was to better understand
how academic health sciences library directors experience leadership and how their
experience related to their understanding of effective leadership. The study used the four
organizational frames (structural, human resources, political, and symbolic) developed by
Bolman and Deal (2013) and Rosser et al.’s (2003) model of seven domains of leadership
responsibility as the theoretical framework. The research questions that guided this study
were:
1) How do academic health sciences library directors understand their leadership
and experiences as library leaders?
2) What was their career journey that led them into library leadership?
3) How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as leaders?
Significance of the Study
Most leadership studies assume a causal relationship between leadership and the
performance of the organization (Fagan, 2012). As noted earlier, the perceived
effectiveness of the library director and the library are closely connected and whether
university administrations commit adequate resources to their libraries is determined by
their confidence in library leadership (Weiner, 2003). Therefore, this study’s contribution
to a better understanding of how academic health sciences library directors comprehend
their leadership and how they determine their effectiveness as leaders is important to
improving library leadership, and ultimately the organizational effectiveness of the

13

library. This could mean greater resources for the library, more opportunities for the
library to form strategic partnerships with other units on campus with whom they share
goals, and less space loss as libraries continue making the transition from print to
electronic and their information services catch up to this new library model.
More effective leadership will ensure that academic health sciences libraries have
the necessary resources to fulfill their mission on campus, which in turn helps their
institutions reach their goals. In academic health science centers, this means educating
and training doctors, nurses, dentists, pharmacists, and other health professionals to
improve healthcare in our society. It also means directly supporting clinicians in the
treatment of patients and supporting researchers as they seek to improve human health. It
is critical for these clinicians, faculty, researchers, and students to have the best
biomedical and healthcare information available to them, when they need it, as possible.
Papi, Ghazavi, and Moradi (2015), for example, found in their study on physician
awareness of electronic information resources that despite the importance to physicians,
there was a profound lack of knowledge regarding these information resources.
In addition, many recent studies demonstrate how academic libraries contribute to
improvements in student retention, student success, and graduation rates (Bell, 2008;
Mezick, 2007; Oakleaf, 2010; Tenopir & Volentine, 2012; Vance, Kirk, & Gardner,
2012). Luther (2008) discussed a case study done at the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign to test a return on investment (ROI) model for libraries. The model sought to
measure the library’s contribution by determining how many research dollars the
university received for every dollar invested in the library. The model included grants
where library resources were used and surveyed the grant-receiving faculty about how

14

important the library resources were to receiving their grant. Using the ROI model with
UIUC date, it was determined that a return of $4.38 in grant income was received for
every dollar spent in the library in 2006 (Luther, 2008).
Mezick (2007) conducted statistical analysis on data collected by the Association
of Research Libraries (ARL) and the Association of College and Research Libraries
(ACRL), as well as fall-to-fall retention rates from the Integrated Postsecondary
Education Data System (IPEDS) of the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES)
to determine if any relationship existed between libraries and student retention. She found
significant relationships between student retention and total library expenditures, total
library materials costs, and serial costs, with the most significant relationship being
between student persistence and the number of professional library staff (Mezick, 2007).
This study would improve library leadership and enable directors to be more
effective, which in turn would enable them to make their libraries more effective.
Effective library leadership can lead to a more productive library that is able to contribute
more to the institutional mission and the success of its students and faculty. This study
would also assist in identifying emerging library leaders and enable them to understand
what they need to know and what skills they need to develop to become an effective
library director. This is becoming a more critical issue as many current library directors
begin to retire and the profession seeks a new generation of leaders to emerge and meet
the challenges facing libraries today (Hernon, 2010; Lipscomb, Martin, & Peay, 2009).
The study is also significant because of the lack of research on the effectiveness
of library directors (Fagan, 2012). According to Weiner (2003), “a comprehensive body
of cohesive, evidence-based research is needed” to remedy the, “dearth of published

15

studies or dissertations that relate leadership to effectiveness of library directors, their
organizations, or outcomes” (p. 14). This study hopes to add to the body of research
being done on leadership effectiveness in academic libraries and help library directors
improve the effectiveness of their leadership.
Definition of Terms
Academic Health Sciences Library. Libraries that support the patient care,
research, education, and community service missions of academic health science centers
and medical colleges (Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries, 2014).
Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries (AAHSL). The libraries
serving the accredited U.S. and Canadian medical schools belonging to or affiliated with
the Association of American Medical Colleges (Association of Academic Health
Sciences Libraries, 2014).
Effective Leadership. The successful application of influence to obtain the
cooperation of other people towards achievement of a common goal (Chemers, 1993;
Rosser et al., 2003).
Leadership. A process in which a person influences a group of persons to achieve
a common goal (Northouse, 2013).
Leadership Development. The expanding of a person’s capacity to engage
effectively in leadership roles and processes (Kumar, Adhish, & Deoki, 2014).
Leadership Emergence. The process during which a person is recognized by
their superiors and/or peers as being a leader or having leadership potential (Judge et al.,
2009; Zaccaro, Kemp, & Bader, 2004).

16

Library Director. The leader of the library who oversees all library personnel
and operations and sets the direction and vision for the library (Association of Academic
Health Sciences Libraries, 2014).
Study Overview
Chapter 1 presented an introduction to a study of effective leadership in academic
health sciences libraries. The background of the study provided an overview of leadership
theory, and specifically examined effective leadership in higher education and academic
libraries, while also presenting the challenges facing academic libraries. The statement of
the problem and purpose of the study sections explained specifically the need for this
study and what it hopes to accomplish. Namely, a better understanding of how academic
health sciences library directors experience leadership and how their experience relates to
their understanding of effective leadership. The chapter concluded with a section on the
potential significance of the study, as well as a definition of terms. Chapter 2 will provide
a comprehensive review of the literature on leadership scholarship, with an emphasis on
scholarship on leadership in higher education and academic libraries. Chapter 3 outlines
the qualitative methodology and methods used in the study. Chapters 4 and 5 present the
findings of the research as well as discussions, implications, and conclusions of those
findings.

17

Chapter 2
Review of the Literature
Academic libraries are facing challenges with the transition from print resources
to digital collection, increased competition from the Internet and other information
providers, and the incipient leadership vacuum due to many current library leaders plans
for retirement (Cunningham, 2010; Fought, 2014; Hernon, 2010; Hernon et al., 2002;
Martin et al., 2003; Pritchard, 2008; Weiner, 2003). Compounding these challenges are
the difficult financial challenges facing all of higher education and state and federal
governments increased demands for accountability in higher education and greater
affordability for students (Altbach et al., 2011; Archibald & Feldman, 2011).
These challenges require effective leadership to secure the long-term future of
academic libraries and enable them to continue the critical role they perform at their
institutions (Giesecke, 2010; Lynch et al., 2007; Miller, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010). Effective
leadership is important towards influencing staff to willingly exert themselves and
cooperate towards collective library goals, which in turn are key for the library to be
effective (De Cremer & van Knippenberg, 2004). The perceived effectiveness of the
library director and of the library are closely associated, and adequate funding for the
library, a key indicator of administrative support, is primarily determined by the
administration’s confidence in the library leadership (Weiner, 2003).
The following is a critical review of the literature on leadership, which will
establish the context for this study. The literature of this review is organized into three
main areas. The first will be a general overview of leadership theory organized by the
major theoretical areas of leadership study and presented in a somewhat chronological

18

basis. The overview is not meant to be exhaustive and more detail is given on leadership
theories significant to higher education and academic libraries. Next, studies on
leadership effectiveness in the context of higher education are reviewed and discussed.
These studies are organized around the major leadership theories from the previous
section. Then, studies on leadership effectiveness in the context of academic libraries are
reviewed and discussed, and again, are organized around the major leadership theories
from the first section. Finally, studies on leadership development in academic libraries
will be examined. The chapter will conclude with a summary of the literature review.
Overview of Leadership Theory
A review of the literature reveals numerous theories that attempt to define and
explain leadership and leadership effectiveness. Effective leadership can be defined as the
successful application of influence towards the completion of common goals (Chemers,
1993). Leadership cannot be considered effective if the agreed upon goals of the group
are not obtained (Rosser et al., 2003). The following provides a general overview of
leadership theory, with an emphasis on leadership effectiveness. The leadership theories
are presented in a roughly chronological order.
•

Trait theory examined what traits or characteristics were most important to
leaders. There have been many trait leadership theories developed over the years
as study of leadership traits have fallen in and out of favor with scholars (Zaccaro
et al., 2004). Lately, the theory on emotional intelligence and other new
leadership theories using traits have ushered in something of a renaissance for
trait theory (Judge et al., 2009; Palmer, Walls, Burgess, & Stough, 2001; Zaccaro
et al., 2004). Trait theories, particularly in regard to emotional intelligence, have

19

been particularly important to leadership studies in academic libraries in recent
years (Hernon & Rossiter, 2006; Kreitz, 2009).
•

Behavioral theories, which include motivational theories, followed after trait
theories as scholars continued to seek a better explanation for leadership
effectiveness. These theories examined leader and follower behaviors to
determine what made a leader effective with the intent of being able to train
individuals to be leaders (Maslanka, 2004). There have been a few studies on
library leadership using behavioral theory, which is relevant to this study since
they address questions of leader motivation (Dowell, 1998; Hernon, Powell, &
Young, 2001; Hernon et al., 2002).

•

Situational/contingency theories also developed in response to trait theories
(Stogdill, 1948). These theories moved away from the leader and examined the
situation or context in leadership. Situational and contingency theories assume
that different situations call for different kinds of leadership to be successful
(Northouse, 2013). A few studies on leadership in academic libraries have used
situational or contingency theories (Mehra & Braquet, 2014; Parker, 2014). One
study in particular is relevant to this study as it also used Bolman and Deal’s
(2013) as its theoretical framework (Garson & Wallace, 2014).

•

Authentic leadership theories are the most recent school of leadership theories and
focused on values and core principles of leaders. Authentic leadership is a
genuine, or authentic, form of leadership where a leader remains true to his or her
personal values and convictions. Authentic leadership can be described as a
combination of leadership behaviors, which draw upon positive ethics and

20

psychological resources, and positive leader and follower development (Gardner,
2013). Most importantly, authentic leadership theory has served as a basis for
other positive forms of leadership theory, such as transformational/transactional
leadership theory, leader-member exchange theory, and servant leadership theory,
(Gardner, 2013). A small number of studies have been done on libraries using
authentic leadership theories, predominantly transformational/transactional
leadership theory (Albritton, 1998; Germano, 2014; Martin, 2015). They do,
however, represent some of the most recent library scholarship on leadership and
as such are significant to this study.
Trait theory. Early leadership theories began with an examination of why some
people became leaders and what individual differences set them apart from others (Judge
et al., 2009). Carlyle’s “Great Man” theory, which argued that the history of the world
was the biography of great men (and women), is the most well-known of these early
theories (Carlyle, 1830, 1997). These trait theories dominated early research in leadership
until Stogdill (1948), whose study questioned whether personality traits were adequate in
predicting leadership effectiveness. He put forth the idea of social context in leadership
and that persons who were leaders in one situation may not be a leader in other situations.
Other scholars agreed that trait leadership theories were inadequate for explaining
leadership emergence and effectiveness (Conger & Kanungo, 1998; House & Aditya,
1997).
More recently, trait leadership theory has experienced some resurgence and three
new trait leadership theories have emerged that argue traits do matter in the prediction of
leader effectiveness. This was due in part to more sophisticated statistical analysis and

21

meta-analytic techniques, which have allowed researchers to correct findings from older
trait leadership studies and determine that correlations do exist between certain traits and
the prediction of leader emergence and effectiveness (Zaccaro et al., 2004).
The Trait Leadership theory developed by Zaccaro et al. (2004) presents a
multistage model of leader attributes that begins with cognitive, personality, and motives
as distal predictors of leader emergence and also serves as precursors of social appraisal
skills, problem-solving skills, expertise, and tacit knowledge, which they considered
proximal attributes to leader performance. Zaccaro et al.’s model, unlike earlier trait
leadership theories, also accounts for the leader’s operating environment and its influence
in shaping the leadership processes and behaviors required for success. The leader’s
operating environment becomes more relevant for those attributes that are more proximal
to leader performance (Zaccaro, 2007). Zaccaro et al.’s (2004) model is also unique
among trait theories for its inclusion of social or emotional intelligence skills, which they
termed social appraisal skills and considered them to be important leadership attributes
(Northouse, 2013). This model considers the complexity of leadership and uses multiple
leadership traits in combination, as well as the situational context, to reflect and explain
this reality (Zaccaro, 2007).
Judge et al. (2009) developed the Leader Trait Emergence Effectiveness model to
better explain the effect of leader traits on leader emergence and effectiveness. The model
combines behavioral genetics and evolutionary psychology theories and demonstrates
each as a source of personality. The model distinguishes between subjective leadership
effectiveness (e.g., follower ratings of leaders, follower affective reactions to leaders) and
objective leadership effectiveness (e.g., group performance, group survival) in response

22

to past criticisms of leader trait theories. The model was also made purposely broad to
keep it flexible and make it more useful.
Judge et al. (2009) argued that two evolutionary processes affect leader traits and
the degree to which they explain leader emergence and effectiveness. First is natural
selection, whereby traits come into existence because they have been useful in solving
adaptive problems. Second is sexual selection, which favors animals with characteristics
that aid in reproduction. The combination of these two evolutionary processes results in a
set of traits that distinguish leaders from other people. The leader traits affect leader
emergence and this was confirmed in the meta-analysis performed by Judge, Bono, Ilies,
and Gerhardt (2002). Judge et al. (2009) reason that these traits result in leader
emergence because of the motives the traits elicit. An interesting note that the authors
could not fully depict in the model was trait paradoxes, or what they referred to as the
bright and dark side of all the traits. The model links leader emergence to two aspects of
leadership effectiveness: subject effectiveness and objective effectiveness, and these are
moderated by contextual factors. In a similar fashion to Zaccaro et al.’s (2004) model,
they strengthen their trait-based leadership theory by accounting for situational or
contextual factors that influence leader traits, particularly with regard to effectiveness
(Judge et al., 2009).
Judge et al.’s (2009) Leader Trait Emergence Effectiveness model is a significant
advancement to the Trait Leadership model presented by Zaccaro et al. (2004). This
model better explains how leader traits developed and how they motivate leaders to
emerge. The model accounts for situational or contextual factors, which was a weakness
in earlier trait-based leadership theories. Though the authors do discuss the positive and

23

negative aspects of leader traits and their effect on leader effectiveness at length, further
research is warranted to fully explore this area of leadership traits.
Finally, Derue, Nahrgang, Wellman, and Humphrey (2011) introduced the latest
trait leadership theory with their Integrated Model of Leader Traits, Behaviors, and
Effectiveness. This model builds on the trait leadership models introduced by Zaccaro et
al. (2004) and Judge et al. (2009), as they believe theoretical integration will improve our
understanding of leadership effectiveness. However, unlike Zaccaro et al (2004) and
Judge et al. (2009), who incorporated situational or contextual factors into their models,
Derue et al. (2011) chose to integrate behavioral leadership theory into their model. They
combined trait and behavioral leadership theory with regard to leader effectiveness, and it
is their theory that though traits and behaviors have independent effects on effectiveness,
behaviors can also be key mediators in the relationship between leader traits and
effectiveness.
Derue et al. (2011) examined the validity of leader traits (gender, intelligence, and
personality) and behaviors (transformational-transactional, initiating structure, and
consideration) across four leadership effectiveness criteria (leader effectiveness, group
performance, follower job satisfaction, and satisfaction with leader) using meta-analysis.
Using traits and behaviors combined they were able to explain a minimum of 31% of the
variance in leadership effectiveness criteria (Derue et al., 2011). The results of their
research provide support for an integrated trait-behavioral model of leadership
effectiveness and the model was able to successfully predict leadership effectiveness for
some traits and behaviors. Overall, leader behaviors were found to have a greater impact
on leadership effectiveness than leader traits (Derue et al., 2011).

24

The Integrated Model of Leader Traits, Behaviors, and Effectiveness is an
important advancement with trait-based leadership theories. As with the prior two trait
leadership theories, it recognizes that leader traits alone are not enough to predict and
understand leader effectiveness. Leader behaviors are introduced and combined with
leader traits for a stronger predictor of leader effectiveness.
Trait-based leadership theories may have fallen in and out of favor through the
years, but they continue to be important to understanding leadership (Judge et al., 2009).
While they do not explain everything related to leadership these theories are among the
most useful when examining leadership emergence and predictors of leadership
effectiveness (Judge et al., 2009; Zaccaro et al., 2004). Recent trait leadership theories
that combine with other types of leadership theories are interesting developments that
have the potential to explain more about leadership and leadership effectiveness (Derue et
al., 2011). The prevalence of studies using trait-based leadership theories to understand
leadership in higher education and academic libraries make these theories significant to
this study.
Emotional intelligence. It is worth special mention the concept of emotional
intelligence and its impact on the assessment of leadership traits. Emotional intelligence
can be defined as, “the ability to perceive and express emotions, to use emotions to
facilitate thinking, to understand and reason with emotions, and to effectively manage
emotions within oneself and in relationship with others” (Northouse, 2013, p. 27).
Emotional intelligence is a popular and successful measure for identifying effective
leaders and as a tool for developing effective leadership skills (Palmer et al., 2001).
Palmer et al. (2001) sought to substantiate the efficacy of emotional intelligence for

25

identifying and developing effective leaders with their study using a modified version of
the Trait Meta Mood Scale with 43 participants employed in various managerial roles.
Effective leaders were identified as those displaying a transformational, not transactional,
leadership style as measured by the multifactor leadership questionnaire. Emotional
intelligence correlated with several components of transformational leadership suggesting
that it may be an important component of effective leadership.
Prati, Douglas, Ferris, Ammeter, and Buckley (2003) discussed the impact
emotional intelligence has on effective leadership and team performance in organizations.
They developed a conceptual model that brought together the theory on emotional
intelligence, leadership, and team process and outcomes and formulated this model into
testable propositions. Implications for practice and proposed directions for future
research were also discussed.
Emotional intelligence theory goes far beyond the study of leadership, but it has
made a significant impact on understanding leadership effectiveness. The theory
identified traits that were previously not well understood, but were highly relevant to
those in leadership positions. As with other trait-based leadership theories, it has
advanced our understanding and ability to predict leadership effectiveness and improved
our ability to predict leadership emergence, which is significant to this study.
Behavioral theory. When trait leadership theories fell from favor in the late
1940s, it prompted scholars to go beyond leader traits and study how leaders’ behaviors
might predict effectiveness (Derue et al., 2011). Some scholars studied leader behaviors
to determine what successful leaders do and identified determinants of leadership with
the goal of training people to be leaders (Maslanka, 2004). The goal was to develop

26

training programs to change managers’ leadership behaviors and increase their
effectiveness under the assumption that leadership could be learned (Maslanka, 2004).
The following three theories are well known and representative of the behavioral
leadership theories.
McGregor’s (1960, 2006) Theory X and Y identified two contrasting assumptions
about human nature and highlighted the role of core assumptions and values in
leadership. At the time of its writing, a more controlling form of leadership was thought
to be required and that employees needed to be coerced, directed, and even threatened
with punishment to get them to exert the necessary effort to achieve organizational goals,
which McGregor (1960, 2006) labeled Theory X. It was generally assumed at the time
that individuals were lazy and unmotivated to work, and thus required an authoritative
management style to ensure results. Theory Y was the alternative, it assumed individuals
were worthy of trust and respect, could be ambitious and self-motivated, and if given the
right conditions would work well with limited supervision. McGregor was not arguing
that Theory Y should replace Theory X, but instead was contrasting the two sets of
assumptions in an attempt to better understand human motivation. He wanted to urge
leaders to reconsider their assumptions regarding employees and believed they would be
more effective if they led through influence rather than authority (McGregor & CutcherGershenfeld, 1960, 2006).
McGregor’s (1960, 2006) Theory X and Y, though still popular today, has
suffered with age mostly because the validity of this theory on the effects of individual
differences in managerial assumptions have received little examination and no measure
had been developed to test the validity of his theory until recently (Kopelman, Prottas, &

27

Davis, 2008). This new measure continues to be improved, but all data and tests thus far
suggest it is a valid and reliable instrument, which is important to determining if
McGregor’s (1960, 2006) theory is correct and subsequent implications that would hold
for managing human behavior in organizations (Kopelman, Prottas, & Falk, 2012).
Theory X and Y is a theory of contrasts that seeks to challenge leaders’ assumptions
regarding their leadership style and how they view their employees. It can be an
extremely valuable tool for self-reflection and does have a strong anecdotal record of
improving leadership effectiveness (McGregor & Cutcher-Gershenfeld, 1960, 2006).
Blake and Mouton (1964) are well known for their creation of the Managerial
Grid Model. The model has been refined and revised many times and used extensively in
organizational training and development (Northouse, 2013). The model is represented as
a grid with the x-axis being concern for production and the y-axis being concern for
people. Each axis ranges from a low score of one to a high score of nine. Blake and
Mouton (1964) then described five leadership styles derived from the model: AuthorityCompliance (9,1), Country-Club Management (1,9), Impoverished Management (1,1),
Middle-of-the-Road Management (5,5), and Team Management (9,9). The purpose of the
model is to provide a framework to analyze the assumptions that underlie managerial
styles and the behaviors stemming from these assumptions (Brolly, 1967). It is a practical
model of leadership that does not proscribe how to improve effective leadership behavior,
but instead provides a framework for assessing leadership from a broad perspective. In
other words, the theory does not tell leaders how to behave, but helps leaders better
understand their behavior (Northouse, 2013).

28

The Managerial Grid Model is useful as a tool for leaders to better understand
their leadership styles and behaviors. The model reminds leaders that their actions
towards others occur on a production or task level and also on a personal or relationship
level. Leaders can use the model to assess their behaviors and consider the impact they
have on others not only through the tasks they perform, but also through the relationships
they create (Northouse, 2013).
Bowers and Seashore (1966) analyzed the research from several leadership
studies and determined there were four factors or dimensions that consistently emerged
from these studies: support (behavior that enhanced others’ feelings of personal worth
and importance), interaction facilitation (behavior that encouraged group members to
develop close, mutually satisfying relationships), goal emphasis (behavior that stimulated
enthusiasm for meeting shared goals or achieving excellent performance), and work
facilitation (behavior that helped achieve goals such as scheduling and planning). They
tested their theory by studying 40 life insurance agencies and found the theory valid.
Bowers and Seashore (1966) tested the factors together, but it has been determined that
the four factors can be separately measured (Taylor, 1971) The Four-Factor Theory of
Leadership can be used to study and quantify a leader’s relationship to his or her staff and
also as a predictor of organizational effectiveness.
The Four-Factor Theory of Leadership helps leaders better understand their
relationships with their staffs. The theory also goes beyond individual leaders and their
effectiveness, and attempts to predict organizational effectiveness based on leaderfollower relationships (Northouse, 2013). Leaders who can model these four behaviors or

29

factors can improve their relationships with their staffs and in turn improve their
leadership effectiveness.
Behavioral theories have added much to our understanding of the behaviors that
determine leadership effectiveness. The goal of these theories differed from trait
leadership theories in that they sought to change leaders’ behaviors and improve their
effectiveness. Behavioral leadership theories were more interested in leadership
development than identifying potential new leaders. There was also more emphasis on
improving leadership effectiveness than predicting effectiveness. These theories have
been used often in studies on leadership in higher education and academic libraries and
thus are significant to this study (Dowell, 1998; Gmelch & Wolverton, 2002; Hernon et
al., 2002; Jackson, 2004).
Motivational theory. A special segment of behavioral leadership theory began at
about this same time that tried to understand both leaders and followers’ motivations,
particularly with regard to the workplace and accomplishing goals. Herzberg (1959)
stated in his Two-Factor Theory (also known as Herzberg’s Motivation-Hygiene Theory)
that certain factors in the workplace cause job satisfaction while a separate set of factors
caused dissatisfaction and that job satisfaction and dissatisfaction were independent of
each other. The factors that led to job satisfaction, which Herzberg (1959) termed
Motivators, include challenging work, recognition, responsibility, potential advancement,
and meaningful work. Factors that led to job dissatisfaction, termed Hygiene factors,
include status, job security, salary, and work condition. Hygiene factors do not increase
job satisfaction, but their absence will generate job dissatisfaction. Herzberg (2003)
strongly suggests using motivators to bring about more effective utilization of employees,

30

but cautions against motivators that simply add to the workload without bringing any
meaningful growth to the employee. Further studies have tested the validity of
Herzberg’s (1959) theory and found that the separation of job satisfaction and
dissatisfaction factors was not always true in all cases, but the theory still provides
meaningful results when determining job satisfaction and its causes (Brenner, Carmack,
& Weinstein, 1971).
Psychologist David McClelland also studied motivation and proposed a model
that attempted to explain how employees’ needs for achievement, power, and affiliation
affected these employees’ actions from a managerial perspective (McClelland, 1961). His
Need Theory, also known as Three Need Theory, explained that everyone has these three
types of motivation and that a person’s motivation comes from their life experiences and
opinions of culture (McClelland, 1961). According to McClelland’s theory, individuals
could possess several, often competing, needs that motivated their behavior when active
(Steers, Mowday, & Shapiro, 2004). Subsequent research showed that top managers had
a high need for power and low need for affiliation and individuals with a strong need for
achievement could be successful lower-level managers, but generally did not attain top
management positions (McClelland, 1977). Need Theory has been criticized as
theoretically inadequate and not empirically valid, particularly with its assumptions
regarding need for achievement (Frey, 1984). McClelland’s theory does offer a useful set
of clearly defined needs as they relate to workplace behavior, and therefore it has been
found useful in understanding individual factors relating to work motivation (Steers et al.,
2004).

31

Motivational theories went well with behavioral leadership theories as they sought
to understand the motivations behind the behaviors of leaders, as well as followers.
Understanding the motivations of leaders’ behaviors help us reach a deeper
understanding of those behaviors. The motivation of followers and the interactions
between leader and follower motivations are also important to understand and have an
impact on leader behaviors, and ultimately leader effectiveness (Herzberg, 1959;
McClelland, 1961).
Situational/contingency theory. Situational and contingency theories of
leadership also began to appear in the 1950’s as a reaction to the move away from trait
theories on leadership. Situational and contingency theories assume that different
situations call for different kinds of leadership to be successful (Northouse, 2013). The
first of these theories is Tannenbaum and Schmidt’s (1958) Leadership Continuum
Theory, which advanced an autocratic-democratic continuum model that illustrated the
degree of power and influence managers use during the decision-making process (Russ,
2013). The continuum went from autocratic or manager-centered to democratic or
employee-centered. The more autocratic managers make all the decisions themselves
whereas democratic managers permit employees to function within limits defined by the
manager and a range of leadership styles exists in-between (Tannenbaum & Schmidt,
1958). This theory falls into the situational and contextual theories of leadership because
it suggested that managers consider three forces when deciding which decision-making
approach to use: forces in managers, forces in employees, and forces in the situation
(Tannenbaum & Schmidt, 1958).

32

In later development of their theory, the authors addressed issues of
interdependency between managers, employees, and the context of their situation (e.g.,
managers growing more confident in their employees’ abilities to assume greater
decision-making responsibility) (Tannenbaum & Schmidt, 1973). LCT continues to help
explain, describe, and predict how power, authority, and freedom are negotiated and
communicated during the decision-making process in organizations (Russ, 2013). It helps
managers analyze their own behavior within a context of other leadership style
alternatives. The theory also outlines a set of predictive conditions for when it is either
appropriate or inappropriate to delegate greater responsibility to employees during
decision-making opportunities (Russ, 2013).
Fiedler developed the Contingency Theory of Leadership through his work on
leadership effectiveness (Fiedler, 1967). His argument was that different types of
leadership styles were required for different situations to achieve a strong group
performance. Fiedler’s theory stated there were two types of leaders, relationshiporiented leaders and task-oriented leaders, and either leader could be successful
depending on their situation. Contingency theory identified three contextual variables that
inform leaders as to the favorability of their situation: effective leader-member relations,
task structure, and the leader’s position power. The most favorable situation is created
when there is a combination of good leader-member relations, highly structured tasks,
and strong leader position power, whereas poor situation favorableness is found when
there are poor leader-member relations, unstructured tasks, and weak position power.
Fiedler determined that task-oriented leaders perform better in either very favorable or

33

unfavorable situations and relationship-oriented leaders perform better in situations of
moderate favorability (Fielder, 1967).
The theory has been broadly studied with both supporting and critical analyses
having been done, but overall the results have supported the model (Ayman, Chemers, &
Fiedler, 1995). In subsequent research on the theory, Fiedler has reported that group
performance can be improved when the situational favorableness is improved, such as
improving the leader’s control, influence, and motivation. Leadership training and
experience can increase a leader’s control and influence, and therefore can improve
situational favorableness (Fiedler, 1972).
Hersey and Blanchard (1969) proposed their Situational Theory of Leadership
from the premise that there is no ideal leadership style. They defined four styles of
leadership (directing, coaching, supporting, and delegating) and stated that managers
should use the style that is most appropriate for their employees’ level of ability and
degree of commitment, which can change as employees gain new abilities and their
degree of commitment changes. The appropriate leadership style is specific to a particular
task rather than a particular employee. Situational leaders need to be able to assess the
competence and confidence of their employees with regard to a specific task, be able to
use all four situational leadership styles, and be able to discuss the use of the different
styles with their employees so they understand and accept the process (Hersey &
Blanchard, 1969).
Situational Theory of Leadership has been tested extensively over the years, has
held up well, and is still widely used in training programs in leadership (Fernandez &
Vecchio, 1997). There have been critical reviews of the theory who question its

34

theoretical robustness and general utility (Graeff, 1983), however, the basic elements of
the theory are sound and have proved to be easy to understand and useful to leaders in all
types of organizations (Boak, 2013). The theory encourages employee development and
the changing styles of leadership help bring about more self-reliance and empowerment.
House (1971) introduced the Path-Goal Theory of Leadership with the assumption
that situational factors determined optimal leadership behaviors and there are no
universally effective leadership behaviors appropriate to all situations. Path-Goal Theory
states the function of leadership is to help employees achieve their goals, such as
removing obstacles and clearing the path for employees to work towards their goals, and
that a leaders’ behavior is determined by the satisfaction, motivation, and performance of
his or her employees (Evans, 1996; House, 1996). The theory is concerned primarily with
the relationship between leaders and their employees. Path-Goal Theory has four major
categories of leadership behavior: directive behaviors, supportive behaviors,
achievement-oriented behaviors, and participative behaviors. A leader must take into
consideration situational factors, including employee characteristics and environmental
factors, before deciding on specific actions. Leaders then choose appropriate behaviors
from one or more of the major categories that will assist individual employees as they
navigate the path towards their goals (House, 1971).
The Path-Goal Theory of Leadership suggests leaders consider situational factors,
both employee characteristics and environmental factors, and tailor their leadership
behavior accordingly to improve employee satisfaction, motivation, and performance.
Path-Goal Theory encourages leaders to assess their employees and situation and
consider which leadership behaviors will best enable their employees to be successful in

35

achieving their goals. The benefits include better performance and greater satisfaction
from both the leader and his or her employees.
Vroom and Yetton’s (1973) Decision-Making Model is a situational/contingency
theory that can guide a leader as to which decision-making process to use depending on
situational demands, the leader’s style, and the degree of participation needed from the
team. Seven questions were formulated on decision quality, team commitment, and
problem information and decision acceptance to determine the level of employee
involvement necessary in the decision. Once determined then an autocratic, consultative,
or group-based decision-making process is recommended. Vroom and Yetton (1973)
originally used a decision tree system, but Vroom later partnered with Jago to replace this
with a mathematical expert system as their decision-making device (Vroom & Jago,
1988). Empirical testing has found strong support for the model and it appears a valid
method for deciding the degree of employee participation in decision-making depending
on the particular situation facing the leader (Margerison & Glube, 1979; Vroom & Jago,
1978).
Kerr and Jermier (1978) go even further on situational factors with their
Substitutes-For-Leadership Theory, which states that different situational or contextual
factors can enhance, neutralize, or substitute for leadership entirely. These situational
factors can increase or reduce a leader’s ability to influence the attitudes and
effectiveness of employees and act as moderators on the relationship between leader
behavior and employee outcomes. As an example, on a work team that communicates
well and manages their task responsibilities effectively, there is little need for a formal
team leader.

36

The Substitutes-For-Leadership Theory builds on House’s (1971) Path-Goal
Theory of Leadership and helps better explain why some leader behaviors are effective in
some situations, but have no effect, or disastrous effects, in other situations with its focus
on situational factors and organizational factors that influence employee attitudes,
behaviors, and perceptions as well as leader behaviors (Podsakoff & MacKenzie, 1997).
Three categories of factors were identified: characteristics of the subordinate, of the task,
and of the organization, and they further categorized these factors between those that
impacted relationship-oriented and task-oriented leadership (Kerr & Jermier, 1978). The
theory has been met with wide acceptance and enthusiasm, but concern over validation
and empirical support still remain (Dionne, Yammarino, Howell, & Villa, 2005).
Situational and contingency leadership theories take into consideration factors
outside of leaders themselves. The theories acknowledge that not every leadership style
or behavior is appropriate for every situation and these other factors must be taken into
consideration if a leader hopes to remain effective. These theories do not help necessarily
with leadership emergence, but they can help with leadership development as they make
leaders aware of their personal limitations and the need to understand and adapt to their
situations and contingencies as they develop (Bolman & Deal, 2013; Fiedler, 1967;
Hersey & Blanchard, 1969; House, 1971). Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four organizational
frames theory makes up part of the theoretical framework for this study; therefore the
situational and contingency leadership theories are highly significant to this study.
Authentic leadership theory. In the 1970s a new school of leadership emerged
that focused on values and core principles that leaders would not compromise. Authentic
leadership is a genuine, or authentic, form of leadership in which the leader remains true

37

to his or her personal values and convictions, displays a consistency between word and
action, and therefore is able to elicit high levels of trust and performance from followers
(Gardner, 2013). Authentic leadership can be described as a combination of leadership
behaviors, which draw upon positive ethics and psychological resources, and positive
leader and follower development (Gardner, 2013). Most importantly, authentic leadership
theory has served as a basis for other positive forms of leadership theory, such as
transformational and servant leadership, and has led to the creation of more supportive
and productive work environments (Gardner, 2013).
Transformational/transactional leadership theory. A type of authentic leadership
and one of the most popular approaches since its introduction in the late 1970s,
transformational leadership seeks to change and transform people and takes into
consideration their emotions, values, ethics, standards, and long-term goals (Northouse,
2013). First introduced by Burns (1979), and later expanded upon by Bass (1998),
transformational leadership elevates both leaders and followers to higher levels of
motivation and morality and includes a form of influence that moves followers to
accomplish more than what would normally be expected of them. Transformational
leadership is able to bring about such changes in followers through idealized influence
(charisma), inspiration, intellectual stimulation, and/or individualized consideration
(Bass, 1998).
Transactional leadership, on the other hand, also introduced by Burns (1979), is
more of a power-influence theory. Transactional leadership relies more on the idea of
reciprocity or quid pro quo relationship between leaders and followers in which leaders
must understand that their power will soon disappear if they do not meet the needs of

38

their followers and followers must understand their needs will not be met if they do not
perform or provide leaders with what they need (Gilstrap, 2009). Transactional leaders do
not individualize the needs of their followers or focus on their personal development, but
exchange things of value with their followers to advance their own and their follower’s
agenda (Northouse, 2013).
Leader-member exchange theory. Dansereau et al. (1975) introduced LeaderMember Exchange Theory, though it was initially referred to as Vertical-Dyad Linkage
Model of Leadership. Also considered a part of authentic leadership theory, leadermember exchange theory is a relationship-based approach to leadership and asserts that
leaders do not develop the same type of relationship with each follower. Some members
of a leader’s team become part of the leader’s in-group, while other members form an
out-group. Subsequent research determined the quality of these leader-member
relationships was more of a continuum ranging from high to low (Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995). An explanation for why leaders develop differentiated relationships with team
members is that leaders have limited time and social resources, and therefore are only
able to develop high-quality relationships with a limited number of team members (Graen
& Uhl-Bien, 1995). Research also suggests that high-quality leader-member exchange
relationships are associated with mutually desirable outcomes due to these relationships
being characterized by mutual trust, respect, and reciprocal influence (Graen & Uhl-Bien,
1995).
Leader and member characteristics have been examined to identify and determine
the significance of certain characteristics to leader-member exchange theory. Studies on
member characteristics have found that member competence, personality traits, and

39

upward influence behavior have a significant impact on the quality of exchange.
Likewise, studies of leader characteristics suggest leader personality, leader reward
behavior, and leader expectations of followers are also significant to the quality of
exchange (Wayne, 2013). Leader-member exchange theory provides a different
framework for reflecting and examining leadership with its focus on relationships
between leaders and team members. Leader and team member relationships affect
employee commitment, performance, satisfaction, and turnover, which can directly
impact organizational effectiveness (Gerstner & Day, 1997).
Servant leadership theory. In 1977, Robert Greenleaf presented his ideas on
Servant Leadership (Greenleaf, 1977). What began as a philosophical approach to
leadership has blossomed into a leadership theory with considerable research behind it
(Dierendonck & Patterson, 2010). Servant Leadership Theory differs from other
leadership theory in that it proposes that the primary focus of leaders is to serve the needs
of their employees, customers, and community. In doing so, these servant leaders create
strong relationships both in and out of the organization and encourage employees to do
their best on the job (Dierendonck & Patterson, 2010). Servant leaders also consider
themselves primus inter pares (i.e., first among equals) and do not use power to get
things done, but persuade employees to through the trust and relationships they have built
with their service-first mentality. Servant Leadership Theory emphasizes service to
others, a holistic approach to work, promotion of a sense of community, and sharing
power with decision-making (Dierendonck & Patterson, 2010). The theory suggests that
when leaders are able to place serving the needs of their employees above everything else
then employees gain self-confidence and begin to reach their full potential. Employees

40

will reciprocate the support received from their leader to the benefit of their fellow
employees, organization, and community (Wheeler, 2012).
Authentic leadership theories all bring a sense of leaders being genuine and
having deep values and convictions. These characteristics all contribute towards the
leaders developing a strong bond of trust and respect with their followers, which in turn
raise their performance and productivity. Authentic leadership theories are relatively new
and have become quite popular in business and other leadership contexts (Gardner,
2013). Studies of these theories in practice at higher education institutions and academic
libraries are becoming more prevalent and are relevant to this study’s purpose of
understanding leadership effectiveness in academic health sciences libraries (Albritton,
1998; Germano, 2014; Martin, 2015; Muijs, Harris, Lumby, Morrison, & Sood, 2006;
Spendlove, 2007).
Leadership Effectiveness in Higher Education
Leadership effectiveness in higher education is, not surprisingly, complex to
evaluate. “Higher education’s distinctive combination of goals, tasks, employees,
governance structures, values, technologies, and history makes it not quite like anything
else” (Bolman & Gallos, 2011, p. 4). Wolverton, Gmelch, Montez, and Nies (2001)
identified a paucity of research addressing directly the daily activities and overall
effectiveness of academic deans, though subsequent research indicates the administrative
work of these deans is becoming more like the work of business executives (Jackson,
2004). The following describes how the prior leadership theories have guided studies on
leadership effectiveness in higher education.

41

Trait theory. The following three studies were grounded mostly in trait
leadership theory. Rosser et al. (2003) sought to present “a systematic approach for
evaluating the leadership effectiveness of deans and directors from individual and
institutional perspectives” (p. 1). They noted in their study that academic deans are most
often judged effective or ineffective via informal assessments. They developed a model
that takes into account the relevant dimensions of leadership and the multilevel nature of
higher education institutions. Rosser et al.’s model consists of seven domains of
leadership responsibility that represent central evaluation criteria regarding the
responsibilities and skills of the dean’s role. These domains consist of vision and goal
setting, management of the unit, interpersonal relationships, communication skills,
quality of the unit’s education, support for institutional diversity, and research,
professional, and community endeavors.
Wolverton, Ackerman, and Holt (2005) wanted to examine the preparation done
for academic department leaders, or for their succession, at the University of Nevada, Las
Vegas. They sought to identify what department chairs needed to know to be effective
leaders and then, based on the data they gathered in the multi-level needs assessment,
provide an approach on department-level leadership preparation (Wolverton et al., 2005).
After surveying 56 department chairs, they discovered that at their institution not much
was being done by means of preparation for these incoming leaders. The leaders and
potential leaders most wanted to know about what the job entailed and how they could be
successful at it, specifically budgetary issues, personnel management, and how to balance
their roles.

42

Wepner, Henk, and Lovell (2015) conducted a six-year qualitative study in which
six academic deans participated in an introspective-retrospective analysis of
characteristics and themes that emerged from five different themes that each dean wrote.
An analysis, through axial and selective coding, led to an identification of 14 key themes
and four main characteristics, which the authors identified as: vision,
interpersonal/negotiating skills, managerial skills, and confidence (Wepner et al., 2015).
As deans and other academic leaders’ roles grow more complex, the authors argue that a
more in-depth understanding of the leadership skills and characteristics is needed to be
successful in those roles (Wepner et al., 2015).
Each of these studies focused on characteristics or traits to gain understanding or
explain leadership effectiveness. The studies account for the uniqueness of leadership in
higher education while also exploring what traits or characteristics were important for
leaders to possess and/or develop as higher education leadership evolves and continues to
become more complex. Rosser et al. (2003) is particularly useful to this study as they
provide a framework for evaluating leadership effectiveness in a higher education
environment.
Behavioral theory. Smart (2003) found a strong relationship between the level of
organizational complexity and the complexity of behaviors of senior administrators with
regard to perceptions of organizational effectiveness. He noted that effective performance
of colleges and universities is directly related to the development of healthy campus
cultures, which in turn depend heavily on the behaviors of their senior administrators and
other campus leaders. Smart further identified six core leadership competencies that
campus leaders must possess to successfully diagnose, change, and lead campus cultures.

43

Jackson (2004) based his study on behavioral leadership theory and posited that
academic deans were moving more towards a business model of executive behavior. He
used comparative analysis to examine workdays of college of education deans and
workdays of business executives. Jackson found that the nature of administrative work in
higher education was moving towards that of business and there was a need to understand
these business-like tasks better. However, the author was not able to determine
conclusively what exactly makes an effective academic dean (Jackson, 2004).
Gmelch and Wolverton (2002) surveyed 1,370 academic deans in higher
education (60% response rate) to build a database of opinions, beliefs, and reported
activities. The deans were asked to indicate behaviors that characterize their leadership
and overall were found to have a balance approach to their leadership, though deans at
comprehensive universities were more likely to describe themselves as community
builders than deans at research universities (Gmelch & Wolverton, 2002). Most
interesting was that after 10 years in the position, deans tended to disengage from
direction setting behavior, which Gmelch and Wolverton identified as a key behavior for
leading effectively.
All of these studies examined, to some degree, leadership effectiveness by
investigating leader behaviors. With the trend of higher education institutions being
operated more like corporations, it is no surprise to learn that leadership behaviors in
higher education were moving more towards that of business (Altbach et al., 2011). Also
not surprising in the findings was the lack of any clear consensus on what makes an
effective leader in higher education, which corresponds with other statements and

44

research that leadership in higher education is complex and unique (Bolman & Gallos,
2011; Jackson, 2004; Smart, 2003; Wolverton et al., 2001).
Situational/contingency theory. The complex nature of administrative work in
higher education seems ideal for a situational/contingency approach to leadership (Del
Favero, 2006). Wepner et al. (2008) developed a 24-themed, four-dimensional model in
their longitudinal study of decision-making among deans of colleges of education. In a
series of interviews that asked the deans to reflect on their personal biography, strategies,
and self-reflection and values, the authors found that these deans initially framed their
problems in intellectual terms and then used this domain as their foundation for
integrating the emotional, social, and moral domains into their decision making (Wepner
et al., 2008). They concluded that the effectiveness of these deans depended on the ability
to read the context of their situation and generate solutions that supported both their
colleagues and the institutional culture.
In a similar study, Del Favero (2006) investigated what the effects of academic
discipline are on administrative work. Her primary interest was in understanding how
academic deans manage organizational complexity and how their academic discipline
affected their ability to interpret complex situations in their decision making
environments (Del Favero, 2006). She surveyed academic deans in research and doctoral
institutions nationwide to investigate the relationship between academic discipline and
cognitive complexity in their administrative behavior. Using Bolman and Deal (1998) as
her theoretical framework, Del Favero (2006) conducted a bivariate regression which
showed that discipline did effect perceptions of the deans’ leadership and was a
significant predictor.

45

Finally, Sypawka, Mallett, and McFadden (2010) investigated the leadership
styles of community college deans using Bolman and Deal’s (2008) Leadership
Orientation Instrument to discover their primary leadership frame (structural, human
resources, political, symbolic). The authors focus was on how the data could be used to
address positive management outcomes. They surveyed 340 academic deans within the
58 community college system in North Carolina and had 132 responses (39% response
rate) (Sypawka et al., 2010). The authors took the leadership styles of the academic deans
and compared them to their education levels, prior business experience, and number of
years as a dean. They found that the dominant leadership frames used by the academic
deans in the study, namely the human resource and structural frames, were consistent
with findings in other studies (Sypawka et al., 2010). The authors recommended an
emerging leadership program to mentor promising new leaders within an institution and
to use case studies to illustrate the multi-frame perspective advocated by Bolman and
Deal (2013), which has been shown through research to increase leadership effectiveness
(Sypawka et al., 2010).
The complexity of leadership in higher education and the uniqueness of each
institution would appear to make situational and contingency leadership theories ideal for
improving leadership effectiveness (Del Favero, 2006; Kezar, 2000). Sypawka et al.
(2010) demonstrated that a situational/contingency leadership theory could be even be
used as a framework for a leadership development program to improve effectiveness. In
addition, both Del Favero (2006) and (Sypawka et al., 2010) use Bolman and Deal (2013)
as their theoretical framework, which make them particularly useful for this study.

46

Authentic leadership theory. There have not been many studies of authentic
leadership theory in higher education. Both of the examples cited here are
transformational/transactional leadership theory studies and are from the United
Kingdom. Muijs et al. (2006) wanted to study the relationship between leadership and
leadership development at 10 case study organizations in higher education in the United
Kingdom. They used a mixed methods approach combining a survey of staff with focus
groups and individual interviews and found that transformational leadership was
considered the most effective leadership style for higher education (Muijs et al., 2006).
They defined transformational leadership as leadership that transforms people and
organizations and typically appeals to values and long-term goals, which is in stark
contrast to transactional leadership that is mainly defined through a relationship of
exchange, such as financial rewards from managers exchanged for greater employee
effort (Muijs et al., 2006). The authors posited that since transformational leadership
engages the heart and mind, it was not surprising that this was the preferred leadership
style in higher education where there is a strong moral purpose and commitment from the
faculty and staff employed in these institutions (Muijs et al., 2006).
In another transformational/transactional leadership study in higher education,
Spendlove (2007) attempted to define competencies for effective leadership in higher
education. His purpose was to investigate the role of higher education administrators and
the competencies (attitudes, knowledge, and behaviors) that are needed for effective
leadership in higher education (Spendlove, 2007). The author used semi-structure
interviews and an empirical scoping study to determine that leadership in higher
education is different than leadership in other contexts, which demands additional

47

competencies (Spendlove, 2007). Spendlove (2007) found that not much effort was being
made in identifying or developing leadership skills and recommended a grounded
approach to build a comprehensive new model of effective leadership in higher education
rather than borrow models from business since some competencies for leadership in
higher education were unique.
Authentic leadership theories are limited in higher education, though whether this
is due to the newness of the theories or the evolving complexity of leadership in higher
education is unclear. It would appear inevitable that authentic leadership theories will be
used more frequently to study leadership in higher education settings as they continue to
grow in popularity (Gardner, 2013). Also, as these two studies would appear to
demonstrate, authentic leadership theories would be an appropriate fit in the higher
education context and could help improve leadership development and effectiveness
(Muijs et al., 2006; Spendlove, 2007).
Leadership Effectiveness in Academic Libraries
Few studies of leadership effectiveness have been conducted specifically on
academic libraries. The studies that do exist seem to have been done in relative isolation
from one another (Fagan, 2012). The studies have also tended to be concentrated in only
a few areas of leadership effectiveness theory. The following describes how the prior
leadership theories have guided studies on leadership effectiveness in academic libraries.
No leadership studies were found that specifically addressed library directors in academic
health sciences libraries.
Trait theory. A number of trait leadership theory studies have been done on
academic libraries. Young et al. (2006) performed a Delphi study to explore the

48

perceptions of Generation X librarians on the attributes they believe essential for
academic library leaders. The Gen-X participants identified the top 10 most desired
attributes in an academic library leader from a list provided by the authors, but were also
allowed to add their own traits. Young et al. (2006) discovered most of the attributes
identified in the top 10 are related to communication and interpersonal skills and
concludes that Gen-X librarians might prefer participative and/or supportive leadership
styles.
Providing a slightly different perspective, Lynch et al. (2007) studied the attitudes
of university presidents and provosts towards their libraries through structured
interviews. There were four key questions asked of each leader, with several related
follow-up questions. Participants were also presented a list with which they could
indicate the extent of their library’s centrality within the university. The presidents agreed
on three indicators: “the library’s ability to acquire outside funding, visibility and
leadership on campus, and circulation and interlibrary loan statistics” (Lynch et al., 2007,
pp. 222-223). At least two interview questions addressed the president’s view of library
director effectiveness. Only one president was unable to provide an example where the
library or library director “participated proactively in university affairs, helped forward
the university’s agenda, or provided important information for governance and planning”
(p. 223). Lynch et al. (2007) recommended that library directors learn to operate as team
members of the provost’s council, to educate their librarians and staff about their role in
upper administration and delegate more authority to library associate deans, and make
explicit connections between the library and the university mission.

49

Lakos (2007) conducted an exploratory study on the use of data in decisionmaking in libraries, specifically library directors using evidence-based decision-making.
The study describes that university administrators are interested in benchmarks and
rankings with regard to their libraries, but do not expect detailed data. Library directors
also report that university administrators are increasingly interested in outcomes data but
do not see libraries as part of these outcomes. Regardless, library directors report an
increasing awareness of the need to use data, their own limitations in using it, and
resistance of staff toward gathering it. Furthermore, all the directors agree the quality of
decisions would be “better, more reliable, and more effective if based on actual data and
trend analysis” (Lakos, 2007, p. 443). Lakos concludes that “effective implementation of
data-driven and evidence-based decision-making requires vision, leadership, and risktaking,” which would be needed to “move from a culture of intuition-based decisionmaking to a decision-making framework based more on evidence, analytics, and results”
(p. 447).
In a study of academic library leadership in the digital age, Le (2015) surveyed
individuals in senior library leadership positions in academic libraries throughout the
United States with the research goals of identifying the top five major challenges facing
academic library leadership, the top five most important leadership skills required for
effective academic library leadership, and the top five best ways to develop these
academic library leadership skills. Le’s (2015) findings on important leadership skills for
effective library leadership included vision, integrity, management skills, collaboration
skills, and communication skills.

50

It is not surprising how many studies of library leadership use trait-based
leadership theories given how long they have been around. Each of the studies described
here examined some aspect of leadership in academic libraries in an attempt to identify
important characteristics or traits needed or that should be developed to lead effectively
(Lakos, 2007; Le, 2015; Lynch et al., 2007; Young et al., 2006). Perhaps most interesting
for this study were the efforts of Le (2015), Lynch et al. (2007), and Young et al. (2006),
all of whom attempted to identify leadership traits important to library directors from the
perspectives of individuals who were not library directors, but either reported to or
supervised the library director.
Emotional intelligence. As stated earlier, emotional intelligence has proven a
good indicator of effective leadership (Palmer et al., 2001) and has been studied in
academic libraries. Hernon and Rossiter (2006) examined which emotional intelligence
traits library directors considered most important and which traits applied to
transformational and transactional leadership styles. They determined that the traits
perceived as most valuable by library directors were being able to build a shared vision
and rally others around it and the ability to function in a political environment. They
suggested further research might use case studies to examine library leaders, determine
which emotional intelligence traits they have, and how they use them effectively.
Kreitz (2009) also studied emotional intelligence, surveying university library
directors and their senior management teams working in Association of Research
Libraries member libraries in the Western United States. The study explored the ideal
emotional intelligence traits of both university library directors and the members of their
senior management teams. Kreitz concluded that the traits important for library directors

51

are different from those of members of the senior management teams, particularly when it
came to creating and communicating a vision, and motivating people to support that
vision.
Both of these studies examined emotional intelligence with the intention of
identifying the most important emotional intelligence traits for library directors (Hernon
& Rossiter, 2006; Kreitz, 2009). Like the previous studies using trait-based leadership
theories, these studies using emotional intelligence theory are significant to this research
because they do further our understanding leadership in the academic library context.
They also address issues such as leadership emergence and leadership development,
which are relevant to this study.
Behavioral theory. Behavioral leadership theory has guided a few studies in
academic libraries. Hernon et al. (2001, 2002) conducted two studies on behavioral
aspects of leadership associated with Association of Research Libraries’ (ARL) deans.
The authors first reviewed relevant position announcements to develop an initial list of
attributes to guide their interviews conducted with ARL deans, with a total of nineteen
directors were interviewed for their study (Hernon et al., 2001). They determined that the
focus of these deans had shifted significantly from an internal to an external perspective,
which has been confirmed in subsequent research (Fought & Misawa, 2016). The authors
also found that a higher attrition rate in ARL dean positions than in the past, a growing
number of requirements for the position, more emphasis being placed on leadership
experience, and the required ability to be able to manage expectation among the academic
community (Hernon et al., 2001). In their follow up study, Hernon et al. (2002) used the

52

Delphi technique to identify which leadership attributes were most important to library
deans and directors for the present and into the future.
In a study on perceptions of leadership in academic libraries, Dowell (1998)
found that sexism exists with both men and women. Examining large academic libraries,
Dowell found that both female and male study participants tended to list their sex at
higher rates as defining leadership attributes. This sexism diminished as the focus of the
study turned to external issues such as peer and professional networks. In conclusion,
Dowell demonstrated that leadership could be perceived from many social and structural
contexts, and many times the designation of leader was outside of the administrative
structure of an organization.
Studies on leadership in academic libraries using behavioral theories are relevant
to this study due to their focus on leadership development and predicting leadership
effectiveness (Derue et al., 2011; Maslanka, 2004). Hernon et al. (2001, 2002) is
especially relevant since the pilot study for this research was able to confirm some of its
findings (Fought & Misawa, 2016). This research would suggest that more training and
leadership development is necessary to contend with the growing complexities and
requirements of leading an academic library (Hernon et al., 2001, 2002).
Situational/contingency theory. There are a small number of research studies
involving situational and contingency theory and academic libraries. Parker (2014)
discussed path-goal theory, contingency theory, and transformational theory in the
context of academic libraries and how these theories addressed leaders’ behaviors and
their influence on organizational change. The author discussed how library leaders could
use path-goal techniques to find ways to increase employee participation in decision

53

making, and contingency theory to pay more attention to their situation and adapt their
leadership style (Parker, 2014). She then drew upon some characteristics and behaviors
from these theories to propose a new theory, the credible optimist theory, which also
incorporated new developments in positive psychology (Parker, 2014).
Garson and Wallace (2014) used Bolman and Deal’s (2008) four-frame model
(structural, human resources, political, symbolic) as the theoretical framework to examine
two case studies from libraries at Harvard University. In each case, the concept of
reframing, or using multiple perspectives to manage change, was present. The authors
used the case studies to illustrate how reframing could be applied to a particular situation
or context and improve the organizational outcomes (Garson & Wallace, 2014). They
suggest case studies is an effective way to learn leadership and the examples they use
demonstrates the value of reframing, which allows leaders to assess opportunities and
challenges from more than one perspective (Garson & Wallace, 2014).
Finally, Mehra and Braquet (2014) used a case study to focus on queer leadership
in academic library circles and share some strategies for “leading from below” to further
social justice and social equity in academic libraries on behalf of disenfranchised lesbian,
gay, bisexual, and transgendered (LGBT) populations (p. 185). As the authors noted, the
particular setting and situation is important to the context and realities of the leadership
situation (Mehra & Braquet, 2014). General statements and leadership theories are not
much use without the particular details of the situation at hand and a disconnect from the
social and cultural context of the organization can result. They advocated for
participatory leadership, where the leader involves other in decision-making as much as

54

possible, as well as elements from situational and contingency theory (Mehra & Braquet,
2014).
Like higher education, situational and contingency theories seem well suited to
academic libraries perhaps due to their unique structures and complexities (Bolman &
Gallos, 2011; Gilstrap, 2009). Each of these studies address how important the situation
and context are to an academic library director and how to improve the favorability of
their situation (Garson & Wallace, 2014; Mehra & Braquet, 2014; Parker, 2014). Garson
and Wallace’s (2014) study is of particular interest, again, because of their use of Bolman
and Deal’s (2013) four organizational frames theory as its theoretical framework.
Authentic leadership theory. There are only a few research studies on authentic
leadership in academic libraries (Gilstrap, 2009). Albritton (1998) did a comparison study
of leaders and followers in medium-sized academic libraries to test the validity and
usefulness of Bass’ Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire, which is associated with
transformational/transactional leadership theory. A correlation analysis showed that for
the 146 participants in the survey, there was significance for transformational attributes
contributing to perceptions of successful leadership outcomes (Albritton, 1998).
In his study on value co-creation, Germano (2014) considered several leadership
theories as options while examining the role of library leadership in this process. He also
examined the importance of leadership in the creation and operation of programs and
services considered most important to students, librarians, and faculty. He determined
that leadership was critical for fostering organizational culture, changing mind-sets, and
value co-creation. Germano stated that a combination of transformational and servant
leadership represented the ideal form of library leadership due to the internal and external

55

leadership requirements of academic libraries and the unique role they have on their
campuses.
Halaychik (2014) discussed how an academic library used six servant leadership
themes for team effectiveness (engaging in honest self-evaluation, communicating with
clarity, fostering collaboration, supporting and resourcing, providing accountability, and
valuing and appreciating) to bring about organizational change. The results from the
effort included significant increases in library visits and uses of library services
(Halaychik, 2014). The library leaders were able to use the servant leadership themes to
revitalize the library on the campus and bring about meaningful change that impacted
faculty, staff, and students (Halaychik, 2014).
Martin (2015) conducted an exploratory study to examine the rates of
transformational, transactional, and laissez-faire leadership among academic library
directors to determine if any differences in leadership styles existed in regard to gender,
age, or experience of the director, and also by the type of academic library in which they
worked. The Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire (MLQ) developed by Bass and
Avolio (1995) was used to examine the full range of leadership styles among the 50
academic library leaders who participated in the study. Martin (2015) did not find any
statistical difference in leadership styles by gender, however, the more years of
administrative experience respondents had, the more likely they were to use transactional
leadership and a similar correlation was found with age. The author noted this as possibly
part of the problem with academic libraries’ slow adaptation to change.
Studies using authentic leadership theories seem more prevalent in academic
library literature than in literature on higher education. As stated previously, perhaps

56

leadership in higher education is too complex or different for authentic leadership
theories to be successful (Bolman & Gallos, 2011). Academic libraries, on the other
hand, are a smaller and more distinctive unit within higher education institutions and
might be better suited to authentic leadership theories. These studies do represent some of
the latest research on leadership in libraries and thus are relevant to this study.
Leadership Development in Academic Libraries
Leadership development and preparedness are important contributors to
leadership effectiveness (Weiner, 2003). There have been a number of studies that have
examined the leadership development of academic library directors as well as evaluating
what the library profession has done to promote leadership development (Bonnette, 2004;
Feldman, Level, & Liu, 2013; Fitsimmons, 2008; Kirkland, 1997; Lipscomb et al., 2009;
McCracken, 2000; O’Keeffe, 1998; Parsch & Baughman, 2010; Rooney, 2010; Skinner
& Krubbenhoeft, 2014). The majority of the research has focused on leadership
development in general, mentoring, on-the-job training and library leadership training
programs.
O’Keeffe (1998) conducted a survey that examined job preparedness of library
directors at small four-year colleges (less than 2000 students) in 12 mid-western states.
She invited 189 libraries to participate and had 158 returned surveys for an 84% response
rate. The survey measured the director’s qualifications possessed at the time he or she
first received their first director job and the skills and abilities the directors believed were
essential for survival and doing well. The directors determined their preparedness based
on education attainment, past experience, and professional activities. For example, 86%
had a subject master’s degree before becoming director and 14% had a doctorate.

57

O’Keeffe (1998) did find that 20% of the directors only had one year of experience
before becoming director and 20% were alumni of the institutions they served. She
concluded this could be due to smaller hiring pools as a result of geographic location or
desirability of position at small institution, or the hiring practices or priorities at the
institutions (O’Keeffe, 1998). O’Keeffe’s (1998) overall findings were strong, with
education and experience being valued by institutions in choosing their library directors,
but this rather high percentage of inexperienced librarians being made library directors
does present some concern.
McCracken (2000) investigated the necessity and value of a doctorate degree
among small college library directors. He found that only 20% of library directors at
Baccalaureate I institutions have them according to statistical information gathered from
the IPEDS database, U.S. Department of Education, and other data confirmed from the
directors themselves (79% response rate from directors contacted) (McCracken, 2000).
The differences between libraries led by a director with a Ph.D. and those not led by a
director with a Ph.D. were slight at best (McCracken, 2000). Although a significant
achievement, McCracken (2000) found no evidence that a doctorate improved the
reputation of the library, nor was it viewed as a replacement for administrative ability,
creativity, and experience for success as a library director.
Fitsimmons (2008) also studied the education preparedness of library
administrators. He decided to interview administrators who had direct hiring
responsibilities for the library director at their institution. The participants for the study
would be drawn from American colleges and universities, both public and private,
granting associate or higher degrees. The survey used Hernon et al.’s (2003) list of

58

desirable attributes, competencies, and credentials taken from their study of library
directors’ perspective on these issues. Fitsimmons (2008) found that library directors
rated the importance of the Master’s degree in Library Science higher than did their
administration. Library directors also rated other advanced degrees as more important
than did their administration at baccalaureate and associate’s institutions, but not doctoral
and master’s degree granting institutions, which rated them the same as library deans.
This would appear to be a shift from findings from McCracken (2000), who indicated a
great desire from administration that their library directors possess doctorate degrees.
Overall, there was much agreement between the academic administrators and the
library directors. The administrators felt more strongly about certain personal attributes,
such as integrity and the ability to work collaboratively with other campus colleagues, but
the differences were not considered that significant (Fitsimmons, 2008). The academic
administrators even added a few attributes they believed were important for a library
director, such as professional activities, being learning/student centered, having a strong
work ethic, and the ability to work effectively with all campus constituent groups
(Fitsimmons, 2008). No academic library director will have all of these qualities or
attributes, but there was enough general agreement from the academic administrators that
prospective library directors can get a sense of the general qualities and credentials
needed to get hired.
Library leadership training programs. Feldman et al. (2013), as a part of a case
study, surveyed 26 library faculty members at Colorado State University (53% response
rate) about the leadership training and development opportunities available at the library.
The authors also did a review of the literature and convened a follow-up discussion with

59

the faculty librarians after the survey data was analyzed (Feldman et al., 2013). The
Colorado State University Libraries had undergone quite a bit of change and restructuring
in recent years and many library faculty members were concerned over their roles and the
future direction of the library system. The authors recommended training opportunities
offered by local and national organizations, leadership role development, and
improvement to the organizational communications (Feldman et al., 2013). The libraries
at Colorado State University were undergoing a challenging period of transition and
determined that proactive actions towards leadership development were important to this
reorganization and transition.
Academic library professional organizations have also been proactive at creating
programs to develop the next generation of library leaders. Skinner and Krabbenhoeft,
(2014) looked at every library leadership program from 1998 to 2013 in the United
States. Before 1982, they were not able to find evidence of any library leadership training
experiences, but between 1998 and 2013 more than 200 leadership training events were
offered to more than 8,000 participants in the U.S. (Skinner & Krubbenhoeft, 2014).
Library leadership training expanded rapidly after 2000, and range from single day events
to year-long leadership fellows programs. In their examination of these library leadership
programs, Skinner and Krubbenhoeft (2014) found that the diversity of leadership
training opportunities was so wide that it was difficult to categorize or compare programs
and there was a notable lack of shared objectives or leadership competencies that guided
these programs. This also has led to difficulty in evaluation of the success or failure of
these leadership programs.

60

Lipscomb et al. (2009) studied the National Library of Medicine
(NLM)/Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries (AAHSL) Leadership
Fellows Program. This was a qualitative study that used focus groups of mentors, fellows,
and home supervisors, and a brief survey was also completed by each mentor and fellow
to supplement the qualitative data (Lipscomb et al., 2009). The authors examined
expected outcomes, program benefits, program components, mentor-fellow relationships,
cohort relationships, supervisor interaction, support system, and impact of the program
(Lipscomb et al., 2009). The main benefit for fellows was enhanced leadership skills,
credibility as candidates for library director positions, and connecting with a group of
peers who share the same career goals as benefits of the program (Lipscomb et al., 2009).
Mentors remarked that they received as much benefit from participation in the program
as they contributed to the career development of the fellows as they reflected on their
own leadership and also learned from the other mentors and fellows (Lipscomb et al.,
2009). Overall, the participants believed the program was helping develop the individual,
was making a contribution to the quality of leadership in the library profession, and was
improving succession planning and leadership development for AAHSL (Lipscomb et al.,
2009).
Academic libraries have recognized the pending vacuum in leadership positions
for some time and have tried to be proactive in preparing for it (Hernon et al., 2002;
Lipscomb et al., 2009; Martin et al., 2002; Pritchard, 2008; Weiner, 2003). Library
leadership training programs have been a major focus for several library professional
organizations (Lipscomb et al., 2009; Skinner & Krubbenhoeft, 2014). The library
profession has recognized the importance of effective leadership and developing the next

61

generation of leaders for academic libraries (Feldman et al., 2013; Lipscomb et al., 2009;
Skinner & Krubbenhoeft, 2014).
Mentoring. Academic libraries have used mentoring as an important aspect of
leadership development for library directors (Bonnette, 2004; Kirkland, 1997; Mavrinac,
2005). Mavrinac (2005) discussed the need for transformational leadership and change in
higher education and academic libraries to effectively meet the economic challenges,
demographic changes in the student populations, and rapid changes in technology.
Mavrinac (2005) argued that to successfully make these transformational changes a
learning culture needed to be created and that peer mentoring was a major component to
creating this culture. A peer mentoring program could foster leadership development
throughout the library, as well as assisting in bringing a library through periods of
transition and meeting any challenges it faces (Mavrinac, 2005).
Kirkland (1997) surveyed 50 female librarians to determine whether any
deprivation behavior or anti-mentoring was happening. At the time of her research, the
percentage of women directors was much lower than the percentage of women in the
profession (Kirkland, 1997). In a second survey, Kirkland (1997) sought career factors
that women directors found valuable to their advancement. She surveyed 135 women
library directors (received a 45% response rate) and found that mentoring was a central
factor in the career development of many women directors (Kirkland, 1997). She
concluded that every librarian needed to be mentored and encouraged to work up to her
or his full potential (Kirkland, 1997).
Bonnette (2004) researched the recruitment and mentoring of minority librarians
as a part of a 2002 ALA Diversity Research Grant. She highlighted a concern regarding a

62

lack of career development or advancement strategies for minority librarians. Bonnette
(2004) found evidence of a lack of mentoring, management training, and careerdevelopment opportunities as specific barriers to career advancement. Mentoring instills
self-confidence and the skills required to advance in libraries, it improves recruitment and
retention of librarians, and ultimately helps them advance their career (Bonnette, 2004).
This is especially important for minority librarians, who have not had these opportunities
and have often struggled to advance their careers in the profession (Bonnette, 2004).
Mentoring has been another important leadership development tool for academic
libraries (Bonnette, 2004; Kirkland, 1997; Mavrinac, 2005). As this research
demonstrates, mentoring does not only foster leadership development for library
directors, but throughout the library (Mavrinac, 2005). It has been especially important to
female and other minority librarians in their leadership development and achieving
director positions and other leadership positions in the library (Bonnette, 2004; Kirkland,
1997).
On-the-job training. Rooney (2010) examined the state of management
preparation, training, and development among middle managers in American academic
libraries and how it compares to previous decades. Two online surveys were sent to all 99
American academic libraries in the Association of Research Libraries (ARL) and a
random sample of 243 American academic libraries at other universities and colleges not
in ARL (40% response rate) (Rooney, 2010). The need for management training has
gotten better, but overall the findings were mixed with only 42% of middle managers
participating in any formal on-the-job management training prior to accepting their first
middle management position (Rooney, 2010). Interestingly, more middle managers

63

received formal on-the-job management training while serving as a department head
(Rooney, 2010). Overall, more middle managers are taking significantly more
management training after they take leadership positions since 2003 than middle
managers who took these positions before 2003 (Rooney, 2010). This would seem to
indicate the need for effective leadership and better leadership development has been
recognized somewhat by the library profession.
Parsch and Baughman (2010) used to surveys to assess the use of organization
development in Association of Research Libraries (ARL). They surveyed 123 libraries
and received a 30% response rate. They found that whether the library called it
organization development or not or whether it was a formal program or not, organization
development was being done in essentially every library (Parsch & Baughman, 2010).
This includes team building, leadership development, succession planning, and coaching
and counseling, and some of this included on-the-job training for managers and leaders.
The authors argued that more organization development is good for healthy organizations
that are more efficient and effective (Parch & Baughman, 2010).
On-the-job training is another method where library leaders can develop their
leadership skills. As the research clearly shows, most librarians that achieve leadership
positions do so without any formal management training prior to accepting the position
(Rooney, 2010). Most librarians are forced to some degree to learn on the job, though
Parsch and Baughman (2010) found that most libraries, whether intentional or not,
engaged in some organizational development, including team building and leadership
development. An important aspect of this study will be to understand the career journey

64

that led the participants to becoming library directors; therefore, these studies on library
leadership development are important background to the study.
Chapter Summary
This chapter addressed the relevant leadership theories to the study. Leadership
theories are numerous and there are many approaches to effective leadership, leadership
emergence, and leadership development. Effective leadership in higher education, and by
extension, academic libraries, has unique challenges and can be difficult to accomplish
due to the complex nature of higher education. This review of leadership literature,
particularly the focus on leadership studies in higher education and academic libraries,
hopefully provides a broad overview and solid foundation for this study on effective
leadership in academic health sciences libraries. The next chapter will outline the
qualitative methodology and methods used in the study.

65

Chapter 3
Methodology
Academic libraries are facing challenges with the transition from print resources
to digital collection, increased competition from the Internet and other information
providers, and the incipient leadership vacuum due to many current library leaders plans
for retirement (Cunningham, 2010; Fought, 2014; Hernon, 2010; Hernon et al., 2002;
Martin et al., 2002; Pritchard, 2008; Weiner, 2003). Compounding these challenges are
the difficult financial challenges facing all of higher education and state and federal
governments increased demands for accountability in higher education and greater
affordability for students (Altbach et al., 2011; Archibald & Feldman, 2011).
These challenges require effective leadership to secure the long-term future of
academic libraries and enable them to continue the critical role they perform at their
institutions (Giesecke, 2010; Lynch et al., 2007; Miller, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010). Effective
leadership is important towards influencing staff to willingly exert themselves and
cooperate towards collective library goals, which in turn are key for the library to be
effective (De Cremer & van Knippenberg, 2004). The perceived effectiveness of the
library director and of the library are closely associated, and adequate funding for the
library, a key indicator of administrative support, is primarily determined by the
administration’s confidence in the library leadership (Weiner, 2003).
The purpose of this qualitative phenomenological study was to better understand
how academic health sciences library directors experienced leadership and how their
experience related to their understanding of effective leadership. The study used the four
organizational frames (structural, human resources, political, and symbolic) developed by

66

Bolman and Deal (2013) and Rosser et al.’s (2003) model of seven domains of leadership
responsibility as the theoretical framework. The research questions that guided this study
were:
1) How do academic health sciences library directors understand their leadership
and experiences as library leaders?
2) What was their career journey that led them into library leadership?
3) How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as leaders?
This chapter will describe in detail the methodology and methods used for this
research. First, the research design for the study will be explained starting with
epistemology, theoretical framework, research methodology, participants, and finally data
collection. Second, a description of the data collection and analysis will be provided.
Third, the trustworthiness of the research methodology and methods will be discussed
and finally, the chapter will conclude with a summary.
Research Design
Research design in the social sciences is the plan set forth to answer the research
questions and fulfill the purpose of the study (Patton, 2015). The research design
transforms the research idea into a plan that can then be carried out in practice by the
researcher (Cheek, 2008). It is more than simply selecting methods and techniques for
collecting and analyzing data, but also refers to decisions about how the research is
conceptualized, how the research will be conducted, and finally the type of contribution
the research is intended to make (Cheek, 2008). Merriam and Tisdell (2016) refer to this
process as creating a map or logical plan for selecting a topic, then focusing and shaping
the topic into a research problem, and finally selecting the sample to be studied.

67

For this study, qualitative phenomenological research was implemented because
of the emphasis on analyzing and understanding the personal experiences of the academic
health sciences library directors as related to their perceptions of effective library
leadership. Qualitative phenomenological research was an appropriate research design
due to its focus on exploring and understanding the meaning individuals ascribe to a
particular phenomenon or experience (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Qualitative
phenomenological research is interested in understanding how people make sense of their
experiences, and also the essence and underlying structure of those experiences (Merriam
& Tisdell, 2016). This study intended to understand effective leadership in academic
health sciences libraries from the perspective and experiences of the directors leading
these libraries.
Epistemology. Epistemology is, “the theory of knowledge embedded in the
theoretical perspective and thereby in the methodology” (Crotty, 1998, p. 3). It is
concerned with the nature of knowledge, or how we know what we know. Epistemology
provides the philosophical grounding for deciding what kinds of knowledge are possible
and how researchers can determine whether they are adequate and legitimate (Crotty,
1998). This is why researchers need to identify, explain, and justify their epistemological
choice. Epistemology has a tremendous influence on how someone goes about his or her
research and presents the research outcomes.
There are a number of different epistemologies. Objectivism contends that
meaning and reality exist apart from the operation of any consciousness (Crotty, 1998).
Objectivism asserts the existence of a world of objective reality, independent from human
existence, which has a determinate nature that can be discovered (Patton, 2015). In other

68

words, a cloud is a cloud regardless if anyone is aware of its existence or not. When a
human being recognizes it as a cloud, he or she is simply discovering a meaning that had
been there all along. The subjectivist epistemology is found in structuralist, poststructuralist, and postmodern thought. In subjectivism, the meaning does not come from
any interplay between the subject and object but is imposed on the object by the subject
(Crotty, 1998). The object makes no contribution to the creation of meaning, but instead
human beings import meaning from elsewhere. In fact, no meaning can come from an
interaction between the subject and object at all (Crotty, 1998). Subjectivism is generally
associated with critical inquiry, feminism, and postmodern theoretical perspectives and
approaches research with the intention of detecting and uncovering beliefs and practices
that limit human freedom and justice (Glesne, 2016). The intention of such research is to
critique these historical and structural conditions of oppression and attempt to transform
them (Glesne, 2016).
For this study, constructivism was chosen as the most appropriate epistemology
(Costantino, 2008). The study sought to understand leadership in libraries from the shared
experiences of academic health sciences library directors and learn how they construct
their perceptions of effective leadership. The constructivist view of human knowledge is
that there is no objective truth, but that truth, or meaning, comes into existence as people
engage with the world they are interpreting (Costantino, 2008). In other words, people
construct meaning rather than discover it and different people will construct meaning in
different ways, even in regard to the same phenomenon (Costantino, 2008; Merriam &
Tisdell, 2016). In constructivism, individuals seek understanding of the world in which
they live and work, and develop subjective meanings of their experiences (Costantino,

69

2008). The goal of qualitative research from the constructivist epistemology relies as
much as possible on the participants’ viewpoint of the situation, which are socially
constructed through their interaction with others and through historical and cultural
norms that are always present in participants’ lives (Creswell, 2013).
Theoretical framework. In qualitative research, the theoretical framework or
perspective is, “the philosophical stance informing the methodology and thus providing a
context for the process and grounding of its logic and criteria” (Crotty, 1998, p. 3). An
epistemology, as was discussed earlier, is the source, limits, rational, and justification for
our knowledge, or put another way, our understanding of what human knowledge is
(Stone, 2008). Epistemology informs our theoretical perspective, which includes our
assumptions regarding this world and forms our method to explaining and understanding
human society and our world (Crotty, 1998).
The theoretical framework for this study came from the interpretivist perspective.
According to Glesne (2016), interpretivism is a form of social science research that holds
that the natural and social worlds cannot be directly understood but must be interpreted.
The interpretivist theoretical perspective attempts to interpret human society from a
cultural and historical viewpoint (Crotty, 1998). This fits well with the previous
discussion of the constructivism epistemology where individuals sought understanding of
the world in which they live and work, and developed subjective meanings of their
experiences (Creswell, 2013). In fact, the terms interpretivism and constructivism are
often used interchangeably (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016).
This study followed phenomenology theory, which focuses on revealing meaning
and understanding the essence of a shared experience, and works particularly well with

70

phenomena that does not lend itself to easy quantification (Käufer & Chemero, 2015;
Sokolowski, 2000). A part of the interpretivist theoretical perspective, phenomenology is
a way of studying human experience and the way things present themselves to people in
and through such experience (Sokolowski, 2000). Phenomenology searches for the
essence of a phenomenon from people’s shared experience of it, which cannot be
revealed by ordinary observation, and analyzes this phenomenon for themes and
meanings so it can be described and understood (Moustakas, 1994).
The purpose of phenomenological research is to understand the cognitive
subjective perspective of the individuals who have experienced the phenomena under
study and also understand the effect that perspective has on the lived experience (Flood,
2010; Moustakas, 1994). The lived experience in phenomenology means reflection on the
prereflective or prepredicative life experience as living through it (van Manen, 2014). It
is an appropriate methodology to use when a researcher is trying to understand the
essence of a shared experience and describe this lived phenomenon. Phenomenological
research was deemed the most suitable methodology for understanding how academic
health science library directors constructed their perceptions of leadership and how this
relates to their understanding of effective leadership due to its usefulness in
understanding subjective experience and gaining insight into an individual’s motivations
and actions (Lester, 1999; Moran, 2000).
The phenomenological research methodology is derived from the phenomenology
school of philosophy first advanced by the German philosopher Edmond Husserl (18591938). He developed phenomenology as a philosophical method of inquiry because of his
rising belief that experimental scientific research was not able to study and explain all

71

human phenomena. Beginning his career as a mathematician, he sought to create a
rigorous science that would find truth in lived experience so that we may arrive at a
deeper understanding of the nature or meaning of experiences of phenomena (Cilesiz,
2011; Earle, 2010; Mapp, 2008; Sokolowski, 2000). For Husserl, phenomenology
involved the careful examination of human experience (Smith, Flowers & Larkin, 2009).
An important aspect of Husserl’s approach is the idea that researchers are able to
narrow their focus on the phenomenon under consideration. In order to do this,
researchers must be able to put aside or focus on bracketing their own prejudices,
viewpoints, and assumptions, to get at the essence (Dowling & Cooney, 2012; van
Manen, 2014). Another phenomenological approach was developed by Martin Heidegger
(1889-1976), a former student of Husserl, which differs from Husserl in that it advocates
researchers bringing their own understanding and experiences to the research process
instead of bracketing (Mapp, 2008). Heidegger described phenomenon as “that which
becomes manifest for us,” suggesting that, “phenomena are brought into being through
our living in the world” (Vagle, 2014, p. 20). Therefore, Heidegger argued that it was
impossible for researchers to separate their own experiences, interpretations, and
presuppositions from their research (Dowling & Cooney, 2012; Leonard, 2013).
Two other persons were important to development and history of phenomenology.
Jean-Paul Sartre (1905-1980) was a French philosopher heavily influenced by Husserl.
His contributions to phenomenology derive from his writings on how human beings
actually perceive or experience nonbeing or the absence of things (Sokolowski, 2000). He
argued that human beings were always in the process of becoming themselves, and this
sense of self did not pre-exist waiting to be discovered, but was constantly in the process

72

of becoming (Smith et al., 2009). It was this focus on what will be, rather than what is,
that led him to the concept of nothingness. He theorized that things that were absent were
as important as those that were present when it came to defining who he was and how he
saw the world (Smith et al., 2009).
The second person, also from France, was Maurice Merleau-Ponty (1908-1961).
He stressed the situated and interpretative quality of our knowledge about the world. In
his works on phenomenology, he described the embodied nature of our relationship to
that world, which leads to our placing our own individual situated perspective on the
world first (Smith et al., 2009). Merleau-Ponty thus believed that while human beings
could observe and experience empathy for another person, ultimately, they could not
share entirely another’s experience because their experience belongs to their own
embodied relationship to the world (Smith et al., 2009).
In general terms, early phenomenological inquiry attempted to “get back to the
things themselves” (Smith et al., 2009, p. 1), or to understand the experience before
cultural messages have imposed meaning on the experience (Misawa, 2013).
Phenomenological methodology, “was meant to be critical of culture because it was
intended to look at how ‘a way of seeing is also a way of not seeing’” (Misawa, 2013). In
this tradition, attempts were made to interpret phenomenon without cultural meaning so
strongly coloring our perception of it. For example, how do the parents of severely
autistic children cope with raising a special needs child outside of or in spite of what
society expects these parents to experience, such as feelings of sadness, anger, and
depression? Phenomenology was initially more critical and determined to change the
worldview from the status quo. When phenomenology came to the United States it

73

became more acritical and focused on the essence of people’s shared experiences (Crotty,
1998). This is the current and more popular form of phenomenology today due to its
focus on allowing the researcher to understand the experiences of groups of people who
have taken part in a shared phenomenon (Misawa, 2013). The focus is less on the
researchers’ interpretations and more on the descriptions of the research participants’
shared experiences, while the researcher strives to maintain a fresh perspective as though
perceiving the phenomena for the first time (Moustakas, 1994).
Research methodology: Phenomenology. The methodology of a study is “the
strategy, plan of action, process or design lying behind the choice and use of particular
methods and linking the choice and use of methods to the desired outcomes” (Crotty,
1998, p. 3). The selection of methodology is guided by the choice of epistemology and
theoretical perspective. It in turn provides the rationale for the choice of methods and the
forms in which the methods are used (Crotty, 1998). As stated above, this study used
phenomenological research as its methodology and to guide its selection of research
methods.
Phenomenology guided the development of the study’s research questions due to
its focus on exploring how human beings make sense of experience. Phenomenology
searches for the meaning, structure, and essence of the lived experience of a phenomenon
for a person or group of people and stays true to the experience and context in which it
appears (Giorgi & Giorgi, 2008; Patton, 2015). Above all, phenomenology is focused on
the nature of consciousness as actually experienced, without regard for what common
sense or philosophical tradition might suggest (Moran, 2000). The study’s research
questions therefore centered on capturing how academic health sciences library directors

74

construct their understanding of leadership through an examination of their shared
experience as academic library leaders and how they defined and measured the
effectiveness of their leadership.
The primary methods for data collection in phenomenology research are by indepth, semi-structured interviews and unstructured interviews (Misawa, 2013; Seidman,
2013). Interviews allow the participant to draw a vivid picture of their experience, which
leads to an understanding of shared meanings (Mapp, 2008). It is important to consider
recording the interviews to allow for more in-depth analysis, which can be lost if the
interviewer is handwriting the notes of the interview as it happens. As to the number of
questions in the interview, it is a matter of quality over quantity and thus it is better to ask
fewer questions and probe them deeply than to ask many questions and assume more
questions will yield more data (Mapp, 2008).
As mentioned above, bracketing, or epoché, allows the experience of the
phenomenon to be explained before we allow cultural messages to impose meaning on it
(Misawa, 2013; van Manen, 2014). Aside from bracketing, there are three additional
steps in the phenomenology methodology: phenomenological reduction, horizonalization,
and imaginative variation. Phenomenological reduction is the process of continually
returning to the essence of the experience, describing it again and again, to capture the
inner structure or meaning of the experience (Merriam, 2002; Moustakas, 1994).
Horizonalization is where all your data have equal value at the beginning of your data
analysis (Moustakas, 1994). Finally, “imaginative variation is to seek possible meanings
through the utilization of imagination, varying the frames of reference, employing

75

polarities and reversals, and approaching the phenomenon from divergent perspectives,
different positions, roles, or functions” (Moustakas, 1994, p. 97).
It was my hope that the results of this study would provide a better understanding
of how academic health sciences library directors experience leadership and how they
determine their leadership effectiveness. This understanding would help new academic
health sciences library directors, and those aspiring to director positions, to better
understand and appreciate what is required in leading a health sciences library. Also, it
would give them a measure for determining their own leadership effectiveness and help
them to reflect on their personal leadership.
Research context. This study examined directors at libraries that support the
patient care, research, education, and community service missions of academic health
science centers and medical colleges. They were members of the Association of
Academic Health Sciences Libraries, which supports academic health sciences libraries
and directors through visionary leadership and expertise in health information, scholarly
communication, and knowledge management (Association of Academic Health Sciences
Libraries, 2014). Membership in the Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries
is exclusive to academic health sciences libraries and directors serving the accredited
U.S. and Canadian medical schools belonging to or affiliated with the Association of
American Medical Colleges (AAMC).
Participants. The study used purposeful sampling with criterion-based sampling
strategies to select its participants. Purposeful sampling selects information-rich cases or
participants to study, which by their nature and substance will explain and clarify the
research questions under study (Patton, 2015). Criterion-based sampling reviews and

76

studies all cases or participants that meet a predetermined criterion of importance and
eliminating any cases or participants who do not meet the predetermined criterion
(Patton, 2015). Participants for the study met the following predetermined criterion: they
were academic health sciences library directors at public RU/VH: Research universities
(very high research activity) in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher
Education. Health sciences libraries at these institutions are typically larger, have a
greater number of employees, and work with a broader and more complex range of issues
than directors at smaller institutions. A study of the leadership at these larger and more
complex health sciences libraries would yield a rich and more complete understanding of
leadership at academic health sciences libraries. Additionally, the list of participants also
met the criteria of active membership in the Association of Academic Health Sciences
Libraries.
An initial scan of universities that met these criteria identified 48 institutions. A
purposeful sampling of 15 academic health sciences library directors at these institutions
were invited to participate in the study, with 11 accepting the invitation. There is no exact
answer for how many participants is adequate as the intent of qualitative research is not
to generalize the information, but to explain the participants’ specific personal
experiences (Creswell, 2013; Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Seidman (2013), on the other
hand, recommends using two criteria to determine when a research study has enough
participants. The first criterion is sufficiency (Seidman, 2013). Are there enough
participants involved in the study so that individuals outside the sample group will be
able to connect to the experience of those who are in it? There needs to be enough
participants to reflect the wide range of individuals and contexts found in academic

77

health science centers. The other criterion is saturation of information (Seidman, 2013).
Does the researcher reach a point where he or she is hearing the same information from
the participants and no new information is being conveyed? At some point a researcher
will no longer learning anything new and at that point any further data collection is
probably of only limited value, though it is difficult to predetermine when this might
occur (Seidman, 2013). Seidman (2013), therefore, does not recommend a specific
number since every researcher and every study is different, though he does mention
practical exigencies of time, money, and other resources as also playing a role in
determining how many participants for a study. I believe that both of Seidman’s (2013)
criteria were met with regard to the number of participants in this study.
Participants were initially contacted by email to disclose the purpose of the study
and its methodology, to determine willingness to participate in the study, and also to set
up interview appointments. The interviews were conducted by telephone and lasted
approximately 1 hr each. Interviews were audio recorded for data collection purposes.
These recordings were encrypted and stored on an external hard drive that was secured in
a locked cabinet and was only accessible to myself and my advisor. Participation in this
study was on a strictly voluntary basis.
The starting point for any research project is avoidance of harm (Smith et al.,
2009). Therefore, confidentiality and anonymity of participants was maintained within
the limits allowed by law. All written documents and electronic information related to
this research remained secure, and was only accessible to myself and my advisor. An
informed consent form was provided to each participant who agreed to participate in the

78

study for him or her to sign. This form explained to participants what to expect in the
interviews and also the likely outcomes of data analysis.
Data Collection
There are many forms of data in qualitative research with new forms still
emerging (Creswell, 2013). In-depth interviews, observations, and documents are three
fundamental and widely used forms of data collection in qualitative research, though
individual qualitative methodologies determine what methods of data collection are used
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Phenomenology requires researchers to explore, describe,
interpret, and situate the means by which their participants make sense of their
experiences (Smith et al., 2009). Thus, phenomenological researchers need access to
participants’ rich and detailed personal accounts of their experience with the phenomena
under study.
Interviews. Interviews are a major source of data collection in qualitative social
science research (Patton, 2015). Interviews in social science research have a structure and
purpose, and can be defined as the process whereby the participant and researcher engage
in formal conversation focused on questions related to the research study (Merriam &
Tisdell, 2016). Different qualitative methodologies emphasize different questions and
approaches to their interviews (Patton, 2015). Phenomenological interviewing, for
example, attempts to elicit the personal description of a lived experience from the
participant in order to describe the phenomenon in as much detail as possible in livedthrough terms (Patton, 2015).
In-depth, phenomenologically-based semi-structured and unstructured interviews
are the primary method of data collection in phenomenological research wherein the

79

researcher attempts to uncover the essence of the meaning of the experience (Misawa,
2013; Seidman, 2013). This method pools together, “life-history interviewing and
focused, in-depth interviewing informed by assumptions drawn from phenomenology”
(Seidman, 2013, p. 14). Phenomenological-based interviewing, therefore, is focused on
the experiences of the participants and the meaning they make from those experiences
(Seidman, 2013).
Seidman (2013) identified four phenomenological themes that provided a
rationale for his structure and interview techniques. First, phenomenology stresses the
transitory nature of human experience. Human experiences are fleeting, therefore
researchers using a phenomenological approach try to get participants to search back for
the essence of their lived experience and the meaning they make of that experience
(Seidman, 2013). Second, phenomenological researchers are seeking to understand their
participants’ experience from their point of view, not the researchers’ point of view
(Seidman, 2013). Third, phenomenological research is focused on the lived experienced
of human beings. The lived experience is what human beings experience as it happens,
but they only have access to the experience after it happens through a reconstruction of
the experience (Van Manen, 1990). Primary access to that lived experience is through
language, which brings us back to the researcher and the basic fundamentals of
interviewing research (Seidman, 2013). Finally, a phenomenological approach to
interviewing emphasizes the importance of making meaning of experience and putting
that meaning into context (Seidman, 2013). Context is critical to understanding the
meaning of a participants’ lived experience from their point of view (Seidman, 2013).

80

With these phenomenological themes in mind, Seidman (2013) recommends a
three-interview series. Three interviews with each participant allows the research to gain
the depth and context of the experiences necessary to understand the essence of the
participants’ lived experience (Seidman, 2013). The first interview should establish the
context of the participants’ experience. The second interview lets the participants
reconstruct details of their experiences within context, while the third interview allows
participants to reflect on the meaning their experiences have for them (Seidman, 2013).
The data for this study was collected through phenomenologically-based semistructured interviews with academic health sciences library directors. After consulting
with my advisor, I decided to do two interviews with each participant, which Seidman
(2013) accepts as an alternative to his three interview structure as long as participants are
still allowed to, “reconstruct and reflect upon their experience within the context of their
lives” (p. 25). The interviews used primarily open-ended questions, structured around my
research questions, and allowed new ideas to be brought into the interview based on how
participants responded while still allowing me to cover the topics that I wished to explore
(Seidman, 2013). “The goal is to have the participant reconstruct his or her experience
within the topic under study” (Seidman, 2013, p. 14).
I first prepared open-ended interview questions based off the research questions
of the study (see Appendix C). Once participants were identified, informed about the
study and their rights, and agreed to participate, the next step was to determine what type
of interview was practical and would yield the most useful information for the study
(Creswell, 2013). Since the participants for this study were located all over the United
States, telephone interviews worked best. The interviews were audio recorded to assist in

81

data collection and improve completeness and accuracy of participants’ responses. The
interviews were semi-structured thus an interview guide was developed to help ensure the
interview covered all of the study’s research questions (see Appendix C). Interviews were
scheduled individually at agreed-upon times that were convenient to both participants and
myself. An informed consent form was provided to all participants and was signed and
returned to me before the interviews took place. Each recorded interview file was
encrypted, stored on an external hard drive, and secured in a locked cabinet where only
my advisor and I would have access. Each recorded interview was transcribed for data
analysis.
Nonparticipant observations. Observations are another major source of data in
social science research (Glesne, 2016). A researcher wanting to use observational
methods will need specific training and preparation, and be ready when in the field
(Patton, 2015). Observations in social science research are systematic, address specific
research questions, and are subject to checks and balances to produce trustworthy results
(Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Observations are different from interviews in two important
ways. Observations take place in the setting where the phenomenon is taking place rather
than a location designated for an interview or over the phone. Also, observational data
represent a firsthand account of the phenomenon rather than a secondhand account from
an interview (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). For this study, I was a nonparticipant observer at
three of my participants’ libraries and used my research purpose and questions to guide
my observations (Creswell, 2013). In nonparticipant observation the researcher is an
outsider to the participant and phenomena under study, and watches and takes field notes

82

from a distance without direct involvement with the activity or participant (Creswell,
2013).
Several of the potential participants for this study were in close proximity to me
and therefore provided the opportunity to visit and observe the academic health sciences
library directors at the libraries they lead. In these instances, I recorded field notes of my
observations (see Appendix D). The notes were detailed and recorded elements such as
physical setting, the participants, activities and interactions, conversations, and other,
subtler elements that gave my observations better and more accurate context for later data
analysis (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). The researcher needs to be able to take detailed field
notes as the phenomenon is being observed and then type the full notes in a narrative
format as soon as possible after the observation (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016).
Documents. The term document is often used to refer to a wide range of written,
visual, digital, and physical material relevant to a study (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Most
documents are created prior to the beginning of a research study and are a good source of
data for qualitative social sciences research, though they are not designed specifically to
address the research questions like interview data (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). For this
study, there were numerous documents produced by academic health sciences libraries
and professional library associations that proved useful and filled in gaps regarding the
participants’ experiences as leaders. Public records and personal documents are the most
common types of documents used in qualitative research (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). A
thorough search was conducted for documents, such as library newsletters, annual
reports, or director’s CVs that were relevant for a better understanding of the leadership
experiences of the academic health sciences library directors participating in this study.

83

Field notes are a primary recording tool for qualitative researchers and can
include descriptions of people, places, events, activities, and conversations, as well as
being a place for ideas, reflections, and notes as patterns seem to emerge (Glesne, 2016).
Field notes can be both descriptive and analytic (Glesne, 2016). Descriptive notes record
details and allow you to visualize the moment, the person, and/or setting at a later time.
(Glesne, 2016). Analytic notes are a form of data analysis that takes place throughout the
research process and can contribute to problem identification, research design, question
development, and identification of patterns and themes (Glesne, 2016). I used primarily
analytic field notes to enable me to reflect on my data and identify patterns and themes. I
wrote field notes after each interview to capture my thoughts and reflections on the
interview as a whole and particularly the experiences related to me by the participant.
Data Analysis
Data analysis in qualitative research is the process whereby the researcher makes
sense of the data collected so you can figure out what you have learned and understand
what you have experienced (Glesne, 2016; Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Data collection and
analysis is typically a simultaneous process in qualitative research, which is one of its
distinguishing features from quantitative research (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). There are a
variety of different approaches to analyzing data with the form of analysis being linked to
the researcher’s methodology, research goals, and data collection methods (Glesne,
2016). Thematic analysis was used to analyze the data for this study. It is a general
approach that prepares and organizes the data for analysis by first coding the data, then
analyzing the codes for patterns that can be organized into categories, and finally
analyzing these categories for emergent themes (Glesne, 2016; Saldaña, 2013).

84

The transcriptions were first comprehensively coded line by line. A code in
qualitative research is usually a word or short phrase that summarizes or captures the
essence of that portion of data to which it is assigned (Glesne, 2016; Saldaña, 2013). A
code therefore, “attributes interpreted meaning to each individual datum for later
purposes of pattern detection, categorization, theory building, and other analytic
processes” (Saldaña, 2013, p. 4).
Qualitative codes capture the essence and essential elements of the research story.
When clustered together, because of similarity and regularity, patterns emerge that
facilitate the development of categories, and from these categories develop broader
themes (Saldaña, 2013). A theme is usually a phrase or sentence that identifies what these
clustered data are about and/or what they mean (Saldaña, 2013). A theme attempts to
make sense of the data, give them shape, and capture the phenomenon one is trying to
understand. The objective then is to winnow down the themes to what is the essence of
the phenomenon under study (Saldaña, 2013).
The order or combination of themes for this study was dictated by the data.
Categories and themes emerged as the data was analyzed with the purpose of better
understanding how academic health sciences library directors construct their perceptions
of leadership and how this relates to effective leadership. To get to the essence of these
directors’ shared experiences as library leaders the data, once coded and analyzed into
categories and themes, was reexamined through the process of phenomenological
reduction, horizontalization, and imaginative variation (Merriam, 2002; Merriam &
Tisdell, 2016; Moustakas, 1994).

85

I was alert to repeated ideas and the number of times participants mentioned
certain terms and used them as clues to the prominence of specific ideas or to perceptions
of the essence of their shared experiences (Saldaña, 2013). In other words, there were
certain ideas or perceptions that stood out more than others and their prominence was
important to understanding the essence of this shared experience in leadership. Also, as
described above, I used member checking and a peer debriefer to validate the themes and
other findings, to guide the order or combination of the themes, and to address any
inconsistencies in the themes or other findings.
Trustworthiness
Qualitative research is based on different assumptions about reality than
quantitative research, and therefore its standards of rigor are also different from
quantitative research. To a certain extent, the trustworthiness of a qualitative study is
dependent on a thorough and rigorous research design (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Glesne
(2016) defines trustworthiness as an awareness of the quality and rigor of the study and
the criteria that can be used to assess how the research was conducted. These criteria
pertain mostly to the research methods and techniques for data collection, analysis, and
interpretation (Glesne, 2016).
Member check. This study used member checking to determine reliability and
trustworthiness of the research results. Member checking is where the researcher gives
participants the opportunity to clarify any of their answers and comment as to whether the
interview fully reflects their experience of the phenomenon (Creswell, 2013). Participants
may also be asked later to comment on the credibility and accuracy of the findings and
interpretations from the study. This is particularly important in phenomenological

86

research where the focus is on understanding the essence of the participants’ shared
experience. Transcriptions of each interview were emailed to the participants and they
were asked to review and provide feedback as to the accuracy and completeness of the
transcripts.
Peer debriefing. Peer debriefing is an external check of the research process and
provides an independent viewpoint for the researcher. The peer debriefer keeps the
researcher honest and asks hard questions about the methods and interpretations of the
study to ensure reliability and trustworthiness (Creswell, 2013). For this study, my
faculty advisor acted as peer debriefer to provide feedback and ensure reliability and
trustworthiness of the research design, findings, and interpretations. I met weekly with
my faculty advisor and, at each stage of the study, was able to discuss with him my
research design, findings, and analysis to determine if they made sense and appeared
reasonable.
Triangulation. Triangulation refers to the use of multiple data collection methods
and/or multiple data sources to substantiate the findings (Glesne, 2016; Merriam &
Tisdell, 2016). Usually associated with navigation where three measurement points
allows one to find specific place, triangulation in qualitative research can confirm
emerging findings (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). Triangulation increases credibility and
quality, and reduces the concern regarding a study’s findings (Patton, 2015). For this
study, three methods of data collection (semi-structured, phenomenologically-based
interviews, non-participant observations, and official documents) were employed to
achieve triangulation. I conducted two interviews with each participant by telephone,
which were recorded so they could be transcribed later. I was able to do non-participant

87

observations at three of my participants’ libraries. Finally, I searched for documents
online about my participants, particularly documents that pertained to their leadership or
career development.
Pilot study. A pilot study in social sciences research allows you to practice your
research methods, interview questions, and data analysis on a smaller scale before you
are ready to begin a full-scale research study (Glesne, 2016). The pilot can also let you
test interview questions, test your research methods and questions, and allow adjustments
before you begin a larger study (Glesne, 2016). My advisor and I conducted a pilot study
on effective leadership in academic health sciences libraries and published the study
results in a peer reviewed academic journal (Fought & Misawa, 2016).
We described the many challenges facing academic health sciences libraries
including the transition from print books and journals to electronic resources, competition
from the Internet and the loss of their monopoly as the primary source of information on
campus, and the economic challenges not only facing academic health sciences libraries,
but all of higher education. We believed that in such circumstances effective leadership
would be critical to the long-term future of these libraries (Giesecke, 2010; Lynch et al.,
2007; Miller, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010). A better understanding of effective library leadership
would prove very useful to meeting the challenges facing academic health sciences
libraries and demonstrating their value to their institutions’ administrations (Fagan,
2012).
The purpose of the pilot study was to better understand how academic health
sciences library directors constructed their understanding of effective leadership. The
research questions that guided the study were: 1) How do academic health sciences

88

library directors construct their perceptions of leadership? 2) How do these library
directors evaluate their leadership effectiveness? and 3) What constitutes effective
leadership in academic health sciences libraries? Using phenomenological research
methodology and methods, we interviewed eight academic health sciences library
directors. After transcribing and performing thematic analysis on the interviews of eight
academic health sciences library directors, five main themes emerged from the data:
understanding leadership, building a vision, relationships are key, advocating and
credibility, and measuring success. The findings suggested there were internal and
external leadership responsibilities for library directors, both of which were important,
however, the internal responsibilities were easier to delegate. Also, academic health
sciences library directors needed better evaluation methods for determining their
effectiveness as leaders (Fought & Misawa, 2016).
Subjectivity statement. Subjectivity or bias is present throughout the research
process. It is therefore important for researchers to systematically identify their
subjectivities, assumptions, and stereotypes throughout the course of their research
(Glesne, 2016; Peshkin, 1988). Addressing issue of subjectivity does not eliminate the
subjectivities; however, it does enable the researcher to manage them, minimize their
impact on the research process, and allows researchers to better understand themselves
(Glesne, 2016; Peshkin, 1988).
The topic of this study, namely understanding how academic health sciences
library directors construct their perceptions of leadership and how this affects their
understanding of effective leadership, is of particular interest to this researcher. I have
worked in academic libraries for almost 20 years and the last five years in an academic

89

health sciences library. I have recently become the interim library director at my library
and have been preparing myself diligently to become a library director for several years. I
have been active in several professional library organizations and have published three
peer reviewed articles over the last two years. I have also attended multiple leadership
institutes and leadership development programs. Currently I am in a year-long leadership
fellows program created and developed jointly by the National Library of Medicine
(NLM) and the Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries (AAHSL) with the
express purpose of preparing emerging leaders for the position of library director in
academic health sciences libraries.
Throughout my work history, this process of preparing myself to become a library
director in an academic health sciences library, and my recent experience as a library
director, I have thought about leadership and formed opinions as to what library directors
do and how they should lead. I have worked for what I consider to be some good library
directors and some bad library directors and have put considerable thought into what I
thought they did right and where they went wrong. As much as possible I have
considered what I would do differently if I were presented the same situation as a library
director. In other words, I have strong opinions as to how library directors should lead to
be successful and effectively manage their libraries. I will need to bracket these opinions
and thoughts as much as possible and let the participants share their experiences and
describe how they understand leadership and define effective leadership in libraries.
Another subjectivity centers on my belief that there is a great need for effective
leaders in academic health sciences libraries. The library profession has a mixed track
record as far as its ability to develop good leadership though I believe this has been

90

greatly improved with programs such as the NLM/AAHSL Leadership Fellows Program.
I think the need for better leadership has hit a watershed moment for academic libraries
and more attention and resources are being put into developing the next generation of
library leaders. As the researcher, I need to be open to hearing the participants’
experiences with their leadership development and not be critical if their path to
becoming a library director is different from the path I have chosen.
I am also a doctoral student who has focused his research on and has a high
personal interest in leadership in higher education. This work has given me a broad
perspective on leadership in academic health sciences libraries and how these libraries fit
into the overall structure of their institutions. I have also been exposed to a greater and
more concentrated focus of study than your typical academic health sciences library
director, which could affect my perceptions of their understanding of leadership in higher
education and what they consider effective leadership. Again, I will need to bracket my
thoughts and opinions regarding my participants’ understanding of leadership, their
preparation for leadership, and how they regard their libraries’ position at their
institutions. I need to take into account my likely broader perspective of leadership in
higher education and what that means to library leadership.
Chapter Summary
This chapter described the research design, methodology, and methods for data
collection and analysis for a study on how academic health sciences library directors
construct their perceptions of leadership and how this relates to their understanding of
effective leadership. This study employed a qualitative phenomenological research design
and used in-depth phenomenological interviews, as well as observations and documents,

91

for data collection. Thematic analysis was employed on the data to search for themes that
bring out the essence of the participants’ experiences as library directors. Member
checking, a peer debriefer, and triangulation were used to ensure the trustworthiness and
reliability of the study. Each theme from the research findings of the study will be
presented in the next chapter.

92

Chapter 4
Findings
While qualitative researchers are not able to determine an objective truth, the use
of multiple methods of data collection does improve the internal validity and
trustworthiness of a study (Merriam & Tisdell, 2016). For this study, semi-structured
phenomenological interviews were the primary method for data collection, but there were
opportunities for non-participant observations as well. Two interviews were conducted
with each participant with each interview lasting between 30-60 min. The interviews
were scheduled approximately a week apart as recommended for phenomenological
interviews (Seidman, 2013). The interviews followed a prepared interview guide (see
Appendix C), but allowed for follow-up questions for clarification purposes if needed.
The non-participant observations lasted about 60 min each and my observation notes
were recorded on an observation guide (see Appendix D).
A thorough search for documents relevant to better understanding the leadership
experiences and background of the academic health sciences library directors
participating in this study was also conducted. Field notes were made after each interview
to enable me to capture my initial thoughts and reflect on the interview as a whole and
identify any patterns or themes that I noticed emerging. These documents and notes
assisted in filling in the gaps and completing the picture as I attempted to understand the
leadership experiences of these academic health sciences library directors.
I selected phenomenology as my research methodology because of its focus on
revealing meaning and understanding the essence of a shared experience, and because it
works particularly well with phenomena that does not lend itself to easy quantification,

93

like leadership (Käufer & Chemero, 2015; Sokolowski, 2000). Phenomenology searches
for the essence of a phenomenon from people’s shared experience of it, which cannot be
revealed by ordinary observation, and analyzes this phenomenon for themes and
meanings so it can be described and understood (Moustakas, 1994). Therefore, I decided
phenomenology would be the most suitable methodology for understanding how
academic health science library directors experienced leadership and how this informed
their understanding of effective leadership due to its usefulness in understanding
subjective experience and gaining insight into an individual’s motivations and actions
(Lester, 1999; Moran, 2000).
The interviews, observations, and documents of the study participants yielded a
large amount of valuable data to me. As I described in Chapter 3, a thematic analysis
process was used to examine the data. The interviews, once transcribed, were coded line
by line for the purposes of pattern detection, categorization, and identification of themes
(Saldaña, 2013). Qualitative codes capture the essence and essential elements of the
research story. When clustered together, because of similarity and regularity, patterns
emerge that facilitate the development of categories, and from these categories develop
broader themes (Saldaña, 2013). A theme is usually a phrase or sentence that identifies
what these clustered data are about and/or what they mean (Saldaña, 2013). A theme
attempts to make sense of the data, give them shape, and capture the phenomenon you are
trying to understand. The objective then is to winnow down the themes to what is the
essence of the phenomenon under study (Saldaña, 2013). The themes were then examined
to determine their meaning and significance to leadership in academic health sciences
libraries.

94

This chapter provides the findings of the study. It includes a brief demographics
of the study participants; describes the coding process and the resultant categories and
themes that emerged from the data analysis; and provides selected participant quotes to
demonstrate the three themes: (1) Understanding Leadership, (2) Path to Leadership, and
(3) Measuring Success. Finally, a chapter summary is provided to recap the findings and
prepare the reader for the final chapter, which will discuss the findings as well as go over
implications and conclusions.
Biographical Information of Study Participants
As stated in Chapter 3, this study examined the leadership of directors at libraries
that support the patient care, research, education, and community service missions of
academic health science centers and medical colleges. These libraries were all active
members of the Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries, which supports
academic health sciences libraries and directors through visionary leadership and
expertise in health information, scholarly communication, and knowledge management
(Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries, 2014). Participants for the study
first had to meet the following predetermined criterion: they had to be academic health
sciences library directors at public RU/VH: Research universities (very high research
activity) in the Carnegie Classification of Institutions of Higher Education. Health
sciences libraries at these institutions are typically larger, have a greater number of
employees, and work with a broader and more complex range of issues than directors at
small institutions. I thought a study of the directors at these larger and more complex
health sciences libraries would yield a rich and more complete understanding of
leadership at academic health sciences libraries. Additionally, the list of participants had

95

to also meet the criteria of full membership in the Association of Academic Health
Sciences Libraries. A purposeful sampling of the academic health sciences libraries that
met the above criteria yielded 11 library directors who agreed to participate in the study
from a total of 15 who were asked to participate. The following Table 1 provides some
biographical information of the research participants. The information was provided
during the interviews and garnered from documents available on the Internet, such as
their library’s newsletters, curriculum vitae, and other documents that provided
information regarding their profile. I have assigned pseudonyms to protect the identities
of the participants.
Table 1
Listing of Study Participants with Relevant Biographical Information
Library
Director
Experience
(Years)

Doctorate

Graduate
Degree
(Other than
MLS)

Pseudonym

Gender

Library
Experience
(Years)

Dean

Male

10+

Less than 5

No

No

Debra

Female

35+

5+

No

No

Hannah

Female

40+

20+

No

No

Jill

Female

30+

5+

No

Yes

Karen

Female

35+

10+

No

No

Lily

Female

25+

Less than 5

No

Yes

Mary Lou

Female

25+

Less than 5

No

Yes

Olivia

Female

30+

10+

No

No

96

Table 1 (Continued)
Listing of Study Participants with Relevant Biographical Information
Library
Director
Experience
(Years)

Doctorate

Graduate
Degree
(Other than
MLS)

Pseudonym

Gender

Library
Experience
(Years)

Patricia

Female

35+

20+

No

No

Richard

Male

35+

15+

No

Yes

Terri

Female

20+

Less than 5

No

No

A signed informed consent form (see Appendix B) was obtained from each
research participant. Transcriptions of every interview were also sent to the participant
for review as part of the member check detailed in Chapter 3.
Emerged Themes
As I described in Chapter 3, thematic analysis was used to analyze the data for
this study. It is a general approach that prepares and organizes the data for analysis by
first coding the data, then analyzing the codes for patterns that can be organized into
categories, and finally analyzing these categories for emergent themes (Glesne, 2016;
Saldaña, 2013). After coding each interview line by line, categories and themes began to
emerge. Once this happened I reexamined the data using the process of
phenomenological reduction, horizontalization, and imaginative variation (Merriam,
2002; Merriam & Tisdell, 2016; Moustakas, 1994). I was able to distill the essence of the
research participants’ experiences into 12 categories and 3 themes. The three themes are:
1) Understanding Leadership, 2) Path to Leadership, and 3) Measuring Success. The
themes and thematic categories are detailed below in Table 2.
97

Table 2
Identified Themes in Participants’ Interviews
Themes
1) Understanding Leadership

Thematic Categories
a) What It Takes
b) Building a Team
c) Advocacy and Credibility
d) Awareness of Your Environment
e) Create a Vision

2) Path to Leadership

a) Breadth of Experience
b) Focused Preparation
c) Mentors
d) Recognizing and Developing Leadership
Potential

3) Measuring Success

a) Meeting Goals/Accomplishments
b) Honest Feedback
c) Formal Assessment

Theme 1: Understanding leadership. The theme, Understanding Leadership,
brings together a variety of aspects of the leadership experience expressed by the research
participants during my interviews and observations with them. The theme implies the
meaning the research participants have created for themselves with regard to their
leadership experiences and what they perceive as the essence of this meaning. There were
98

five categories that defined Theme 1: Understanding Leadership: a) What It Takes, b)
Building a Team, c) Advocacy and Credibility, d) Awareness of Your Environment, and
e) Create a Vision. The What It Takes category is based on comments and examples from
the research participants about what was required to be a library director and be effective
in leading their libraries. These range from what they perceived as necessary
characteristics to recommended behaviors they have found useful as leaders. The
Building a Team category explores the participants’ experiences in putting together their
staffs, developing teamwork and trust, and learning to function as a unit. They discussed
how vital this part of their experience was to their success as leaders. The Advocacy and
Credibility category provides comments and examples expressed by the research
participants regarding the importance of relationships outside the library, looking for
opportunities for the library, and promoting the library to the campus administration. The
participants emphasized how important credibility was to their effectiveness as advocates
for the library and what strategies they employed to foster better relationships outside the
library and promote the library’s value. The Awareness of Your Environment category
explores the importance of being aware of trends in libraries and information technology.
More so, academic health sciences library directors need to follow trends in health
information, higher education, and the current events and politics of their institutions and
states to be effective in their jobs. Finally, the Create a Vision category delves into one of
the experiences that all of the research participants considered paramount in their identity
as director and leader of their libraries. As library director, each research participant
believed their major function was to provide the future direction of the library and
communicate that vision to both their staff and other stakeholders of the library.

99

What it takes. The first part of being a library director that stood out in all the
participants’ experiences was the personal cost they had to endure as leaders and coming
to terms with that cost. Each of the participants believed this was something that came
with the job. They also indicated to some extent their belief that whether or not a person
was suited to be a director hinged to some degree on that person’s ability to cope with the
negative aspects of being a leader. Patricia, a director with over 20 years of experience
leading academic health sciences libraries, shared this about her experiences as a library
leader:
[B]eing a director isn’t always just smooth sailing, and you have to find out at
some point if you can handle the grief that comes with the job as well as the good
things. So I figured if I got through [my first big challenge], it was probably going
to be a good testing ground for anything else I was going to have to deal with.
And that actually has turned out to be true. When I think over my whole career,
I’ve had periods where it’s been very challenging, but maybe because I had more
experience or just different times, different environment, I found that I was better
able to cope with it. So, I guess getting that first crisis period out of the way early
in my career was a good thing.
She enjoys being director and is passionate about libraries, but did not hide that the job
could be quite challenging at times. Dean, a library director for less than five years,
related similar sentiments as he reflected on what he has learned thus far as a leader and
the person responsible for everyone working at this library:
You've got to be very deliberate, and you've got to make some hard choices.
You've got to manage that those hard choices may not… you can't make

100

everybody happy. That is something I've learned the hard way over the [short
time] that I've been director, is trying to keep everybody happy is impossible. It's
a good goal, but it's just simply not possible. You have to do what is the greater
good and be okay when folks may not be the happiest with the decisions that
you're making. You have to commit to them. You have to know that that's the
direction you should go in, and eventually, they'll catch on and accept it or they
won't, and both of those you have to be okay with.
Dean admits, “This is an incredibly emotional job”, but that he, “loves, loves, loves
seeing what the people on my library team are capable of accomplishing.” Again, for
those who are able to endure the cost, the job can be extremely rewarding. Terri, an
academic health sciences library director for about five years, echoed similar sentiments
as Patricia and Dean. She spoke more about the power structure inherent with the
position of director, the feeling of isolation, and the need to network and seek out peers to
help cope with that isolation:
I think there's high cost to pay personally and professionally. There's definitely-you cannot be friends with everyone in your staff, and I guess you've got to be
prepared that you will be isolated to some extent, even within your own
organization. So you need to have relationships in the institution, whether it's
counterparts or in the different schools, or within the library, it all depends. But I
think there's just-- as a leader, there's a power structure there. And people may not
like to admit it, but there's always going to be a power structure, and so you need
to decide to what extent you're comfortable being a leader, or do you have to be a

101

friend to everyone in your organization. Otherwise, I don't think you'll be able to
do the job well, or be respected for what you and your organization does.
A specific challenge several of the research participants brought up was their
comfort level with ambiguity and that leaders often worked, and made decisions, without
knowing all the details. Terri spoke of times when as director she needed to act, whether
she had all the information she would like or not:
You need to be able to act in times of clarity and also in times when it's not so
clear that you should be acting. And you need to know that by doing that you're
moving your organization forward, moving your group forward, moving a larger
entity forward, not just yourself.
Terri explained that she was responsible for making decisions and at times those
decisions needed to be made with less than perfect information. Karen, a library director
for over 10 years, reiterated this same point:
They say this about academia, but I think it applies to leadership [too]. You have
to be comfortable with ambiguity [chuckles] and be able to thrive in
ambiguous situations and find your path, find your way, which I think I've been
effective at doing.
The ability to thrive in these ambiguous situations is an important part of this equation.
Dean spoke of his comfort with the unknown, but also his willingness to take risks:
I've always been comfortable with not knowing all the answers and always been-had the curiosity to seek those answers. And I think part of being a good leader is
you have to have a curiosity, to take risks, and explore new things. [The c]uriosity
and courage to do that.

102

The level of comfort with the unknown or ambiguous coupled with a willingness to take
risks would appear to be important elements in being an effective library leader. This
does not mean that directors are, or need to be, reckless. However, from the stories
related by the research participants, there was a shared experience and common trait of
the directors being willing to take some risks. Lily, a director for less than five years,
perhaps put it best:
I am open to thinking about anything, any possibility, and then I want to weigh in
the risks. Then, as long as there's not a huge financial risk or a legal or ethical
[problem], after I figure those out, then I'm like, "Okay, let's give it a shot."
This idea being open to new ideas and willing to try them without fully understanding
their implications appeared to be a critical part of the experience of being an effective
library director. As Dean said, “I think that’s the thing, not being afraid to take those risks
and try new things.” Lily, too, reiterated that she was, “willing to try anything!”
Building a team. Before reaching the point where the research participants felt
confident in taking some risks, they talked about the necessity of having a good team in
place whom they could trust. The participants explained to me that in their experience as
directors, they were only successful when their team was successful. One director with
over 20 years of experience, Hannah, spoke about how she needed to develop her team to
be effective:
I really tried to foster the development of my staff, because you can't do it on your
own. You really have to foster people to be able to grow. I'm very proud of my
staff because many of them are leaders in the profession. It's been gratifying to
see them spread their wings and accomplish things in MLA, and to publish, and

103

so I think that helps the reputation of the library, both within the institution, and
in the profession.
Other directors brought this same point up when discussing their experiences in
leadership. They considered team building and staff development to be one of their major
responsibilities and they put much time and effort into the endeavor. Patricia, one of the
most experienced directors, said this about what she is responsible for:
Building a team, really. And there are a lot of discreet activities that go into that,
but taking a group of people, and having them become a team, and then having
them become a high-performing team is a challenge. It's something that takes
work. It's not just going to happen without guidance and without getting people
on board, and without modeling team behavior. For example, sharing the credit on
projects. I go out of my way to share the credit, and then people get the idea that
you share the credit. Inviting people in on projects and giving them substantial
roles and sharing opportunities. Important to building a team.
Lily explained in detail her approach when it came to initially building her team. She first
developed a leadership team and then with that core group of senior leaders in the library,
was able to enlist their help in coordinating communications and building the rest of her
team. As Lily described the process to me:
I felt like I needed a team in place, a leadership team, I called it, and I pulled in
different people from all areas-- somebody from technology, the head guy,
somebody from the finance piece, somebody from the reference piece, I was it for
collections, and we just made this team that every Monday morning, we sit down
and talk about either a policy we are working on or just what's the latest news, or

104

we look ahead in the week or whatever it is, we muddle through it. We bring in
guest speakers from the staff. We don't do it very often, but they know if we need
the expertise and someone else got it, let's invite them in, have them talk with us
and give us info and help us figure some things out. I realized early on that I
better not go with what I think. I better include those around me, and I think that's
so important. That's probably one of my-- I hope that's one of my best qualities
here, because we're just so much better when we involve the whole group.
Several of the participants, including Lily, mentioned the desire to hear from their team
and receive their feedback on ideas and decisions the directors were making. This seemed
a big part of the team building the directors thought was important. This goes beyond
improving communication and people working together, but the team having trust in each
other and especially in their leader. These directors knew they could not accomplish
much on their own, but with a good team that trusts each other they could accomplish
much. Terri spoke about how she focused more on her relationships with her staff since
becoming director for this very reason:
I really do try to focus more on the relationships than I have in the past. In the
past, I was just one of these people, if I can get it done, I'll get it done alone forget about bringing other people in. And you learn through those kinds of
mistakes. I've always been a collaborator, but at the same time, at the end of the
day, if the team wasn't pulling their load, I would pick it up and compensate for it
and get the work done. I really have to step back now and not let that happen. So
building relationships is really important for me right now.

105

Mary Lou, who is a relatively new library director, told me she worked hard to make her
library a more open environment where staff would feel comfortable disagreeing with
her. She believed this was an important step to developing trust and creating the type of
relationships she needed to make her team effective. As she said to me:
My staff had to feel that they could disagree with me and I would not be someone
who then penalizes them because I want to go in a particular direction and they
don't want to do that. Especially if they have very valid reasons for saying, "This
is not a good idea."
A final aspect to this idea of building an effective team that was mentioned by a few of
the participants regarded getting the right people on their teams and getting the wrong
people off their team. This was a difficult part of my discussion with some of the research
participants. None of the directors relished the idea of getting rid of anyone, however,
most had stories of problem employees, the difficulties they caused, and the actions they
were forced to take. One of the most experienced librarians and directors I interviewed,
Hannah, made these comments on the subject:
I think having the right staff is one of the most important things, and I talk to a lot
of librarians who reach out to me, and I taught some sessions at AAHSL in the
New Director Symposium on staff development, and I think there are many
directors who feel really paralyzed. They either don't want to or can't or don't feel
that they can really get rid of people that are real problems. I feel a big
responsibility to do that because if you let people stay-- and sometimes I think it
may be perceived as being hard-hearted, but I feel it's protective of the library and
protective of people who are working there to make sure that people who are not

106

productive, who are acting out, who are bullies, who are incompetent at what they
do, they need get on with their life's work somewhere else. So I think that's very
important, is to have the right people on the bus and the wrong people off the bus.
Even if it's a hassle, even if it hurts a lot - and sometimes it does - employment in
the library is not a life tenure.
Clearly, it is a part of the experience as a library director that none of these participants
looks forward to, but when the topic arose they each related experiences they had where
it became evident to them that they would need to take action. This was viewed as a
necessary part of building their teams. Terri summed up the sentiments of many of the
participants with the following comment:
[T]hat's what I try to do as a director - make sure we've got the best possible staff
for our organization, our university at the time. And to me, the staff is more
important than the collection because people can find alternative ways of getting
to the information if they really need it. But I think the staff and the librarians we
have are gold, and you want to make sure you're making the right calls and
decisions with each one of those position lines and vacancies when possible.
Maybe that's me talking as kind of still a junior director, maybe my perspective
would change in 15, 20 years, over time. I don't know, but right now I really feel
in my first five years as director it's those people that are gold, and you need to
take care of them and you make sure that you've got the right types of people in
the right roles.
A director’s ability to build a quality team was an integral part of the leadership
experience for each of research participants. Each articulated it in their own way, but they

107

understood and discussed with me how important their staffs were to their own personal
success. They put a significant amount of energy into developing their staff, building
their team, and were protective of their staff to a large extent. Building their teams was a
foundational part of their experience as library directors.
Advocacy and credibility. A major role that emerged from my interviews with the
research participants was that of primary advocate for the library. Several of the directors
remarked that they felt this one of their most important duties and they shared with me
several experiences and strategies employed to advocate on behalf of the library. These
included annual events held at the library, lunches with key stakeholders, development of
marketing plans, and regular attendance at important campus events and meetings. More
interesting were the reasons the participants believed this aspect of being a director was
so important. Jill, an experienced librarian who has been a director for over five years,
put it this way:
I advocate on behalf of the library and [its] services. I advocate and communicate
about the value of the library services to leadership, because many [in the
administration] do not know what the library roles have transitioned to more
recently. So when they think about libraries, they think about study space. They
might think about books and electronic things, and they're not sure how they get
those electronic resources or actually maybe they don't even think about whose
providing those resources or the library. And so one of the things… there's
various ways to advocate or to inform folks about that, but I take the opportunities
that I have or I make opportunities.

108

Another research participant, Olivia, who has been a library director for over 10 years,
echoed the same sentiments. She recognized, as did Jill, the transition and challenges that
academic health sciences libraries currently face and spoke about the need to help people
outside the library understand the value it brings to the campus and all library users:
I spend a lot of my time making sure people understand why the library is
important. Also, being an advocate to make sure the staff have the resources that
they need. And making sure that the stakeholders understand the role that the
library plays. So an advocate all around. Advocating for resources, the collection
budget, or… but I think one of the challenges we have right now in libraries is
with faculty, they don't need to come into the library. And so it's no longer on
their radar anymore like it used to be, and so we've got to advocate for ourselves
so that our services are understood and utilized.
When I followed up with Olivia later in the interview about her experiences as a director
and her primary responsibilities at her library she responded:
I think it goes back to being the advocate for the staff and for the kind of users
that we have, and educating people on what we do. Being at the table, making
sure I'm at the table when decisions are being made.
Other research participants brought up this imagery of “being at the table” that Olivia
mentioned and sought not only to explain their libraries and demonstrate their libraries’
value to stakeholders, but to advocate for opportunities and seek new roles for the library
at their institutions. Hannah simply stated that, “I represent the library to higher
administration. I think it's important to be out there in the university, just being there. I
don't think I turn down opportunities very often.” Of course, as several participants

109

mentioned in their interviews, a large part of being able to successfully advocate for their
libraries came down to networking and the relationships they were able to develop on
campus. Lily, who was promoted internally to library director, talked about her
experience in forging the necessary relationships on campus to effectively advocate for
her library:
[O]ne of my goals was working on the relationships and understanding our culture
better here. Boy, I really got to learn our culture. I did not have a handle on it
before because of my position and my lack of connections with people outside the
library. I knew some faculty. I had some good connections with certain people
because of my work that I did, but I did not get out and, really, I was not visible
out there on a wide scale. Now, I try to be.
As I discussed more with her about her experiences as a library director and the
responsibilities that came with her position, she remarked, “You're the one that should
know everything, that you can communicate that and advocate at the same time, and
partner, and support, and everything you do to connect the external to the library.” Terri
felt much the same way when the topic came up in our interview together:
[B]uilding relationships is really important for me right now externally. Showing
up at these venues, committee meetings, open events, is really critical. Especially
as [I am] what I consider a new director, I'm only in my first five years, and that's
really important. Even though people will always transition, there'll always be
new faces coming into an institution at the administrative level. People need to
know that you exist and you're there.

110

Perhaps the most important element mentioned by the participants towards being able to
successfully advocate for their library was their credibility. In the interviews I had with
the participants, they mentioned their honesty and personal integrity as being important
factors in establishing their reputations of being credible people, and sometimes their
ability to manage the library budget well contributed too. As Patricia stated:
I'm good with budgets, I can manage to a budget. I come in on or under budget
consistently and that gets you respect from your boss, from the financial office.
People trust you when you give an estimate of what something's going to cost.
When Lily first became a library director she understood managing the library budget
well was important and she told me about that experience:
This library had a problem with the budget in the past - we were in the red
constantly. There were some big problems, and I had to quickly… I halted all
spending until we could figure out where we were with things… I recognized the
importance of the finances and I communicated with the staff. I said, "This is one
area that we have to do right, and we're going to do right."
It was clear from the interviews with the research participants that the need to advocate
for their library was paramount to any academic health sciences library director. Not only
to advocate on behalf of the library’s continued importance and value to the mission of
the university, but to seek out new opportunities and partnerships across campus and in
the community. The library director also needed to have strong credibility to find success
in their advocacy.
Awareness of your environment. According to every research participant I
interviewed, library directors need to be aware of not only trends in libraries and

111

technology, but trends in health information, higher education, and the current events and
politics of their institutions and states. It is from this information gathering and awareness
of current trends that directors are able to understand the context of their position, and
that of their library, within their institution and from that plan for the future. It allows
them to appreciate the culture at their institutions, network and build partnerships, and
better meet the challenges of leading an academic health sciences library in today’s
world. Several of the participants described their strategies and techniques for keeping
abreast with current trends in the field and with the current events and politics of their
institutions. Lily, for example, spoke in-depth about her efforts to stay current:
I hear things, I see things, I bring it to [my] leadership team and say, "Let's be
aware of this." As a leader, I need to be connecting with [administration] when I
hear something that may be of interest to them, and either getting it to them or just
talking about it with them and see how it's being thought of in our institution. I'm
always trying to align ourselves with our institution. Paying attention to the
mission of this place and the different mission of colleges, and trying to
understand them better, and just awareness. Always trying to be aware what is
happening here at home at our health institution, what is happening at our main
campus, which is separate from us. Also, trying to be aware of what's happening
in the political landscape out there, not only in the [state], but in the nation.
Anything that I hear that could possibly affect us in some way, a lawsuit with
something, just anything, just always trying to have that awareness. Every day
when I wake up, I listen to the news, and there's a tech site I check because
technology is one of my big things. What am I hearing out there? How can that

112

affect our students? Can we use that? Whatever we're hearing about next social
media thing, can we use that for the library? I'm trying to understand our
population, talking with people any chance I get.
Other participants used different strategies, but the general intent was the same. They
were seeking to understand where the profession was heading and also trying to
anticipate needs or problems at their institutions. Debra, a library director for over five
years, relies on the Horizon Report, published by New Media Consortium, to inform her
of key trends, challenges, and developments in technology that are affecting academic
libraries (Johnson, Adams Becker, Estrada, & Freeman, 2015). Karen, on the other hand,
had her library leadership team do a monthly environmental scan at their institution to
keep everyone apprised of what is going on at their campus. While at Terri’s library, she
had her leadership team do regular SWOT (Strength, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and
Threats) analysis as part of their strategy to identify trends and keep aware of what was
happening on their campus.
The need to understand library and technology trends, while also keeping abreast
of more local happenings and politics on campus was clear after speaking to all of the
research participants. It was apparent that a significant amount of each director’s time
was spent in activities related to keeping aware of what was going on and what the trends
were after hearing their experiences. When I asked Jill about her experience and
responsibilities as a library director, her reply perhaps summarized it best:
I think it's also to pay attention to trends and bring up the question of trends in
libraries. Where do we want to go? What are others doing? How is the
educational landscape changing? How is the clinical arena changing? What are

113

researchers doing and what do they need? So keeping those trends in mind, and
then retooling some of our staff to work in those areas is another challenge.
Create a vision. A major element of the experience of all the research participants
and one they considered paramount in their identity as director and leader of their
libraries was that of building the vision and providing the future direction for the library.
In some cases, directors came into less than ideal situations and had to quickly develop a
vision and then build support for that vision. Patricia shared her experience and the
challenges she faced:
I knew, coming in, that the direction of the library had to change, and that the way
the library worked had to change. And I knew because I understood how the
medical school worked, and I took that understanding of the medical school, and
was able to apply it and adapt it in the other schools that [my library] works with.
I didn't feel that what I saw as the vision of the future where the library wanted to
go resonated with people, when I came in. I knew that it was going to be a
transformative change for the library, and that it was going to be difficult, and that
there would be resistance. I also knew that some changes had to be made very
quickly, because the library was losing the support of the schools, because it
wasn't meeting their needs.
At the same time, she understood her vision alone would not be sufficient and she would
need to reach out to others. It is better for the library if other people can be involved in
building the vision, even if it is the director who has the final say and is responsible for
making the vision a reality. As Patricia continued:

114

You don't have to have all the ideas. You don't have to have the entire vision
yourself. It'd be a very narrow one if you did but, you can bring all of that in and
everybody's ideas in. Everybody can contribute to that. But as the leader, you're
the one, and in most cases the only one, who can bring in the resources to
accomplish what needs to be done.
At the same time, Karen warned not to let resources (or the lack of resources) drive the
vision the director creates for his or her library:
That's a challenge, to not let resources dictate vision. You can still have the vision
even if you can't implement it because it finds a way to get implemented maybe in
small ways, and informs other decisions. So it's always good to have a vision.
You can't get frustrated just because there's no money.
Another challenge when building a vision is communicating that vision and being willing
to adapt the vision when it is presented to different audiences or when it meets other
external factors. Lily discussed with me her experience in this and the need to remain
flexible:
[B]eing able to vision and communicate that vision and help others with their
needs and understand it, get and receive their input to help continue to shape it,
and then oversee getting there to what that vision is. Being also mindful that just
because what you envisioned in the beginning, whatever you envision the
beginning is not necessarily where you end up. That you have the flexibility, the
adaptability to change course if needed because of external factors that might
come on the horizon or new information that-- not wandering, but purposefully
using the input to make the decisions to guide the organization forward.

115

Finally, a leader needs to create some enthusiasm for their vision. After talking about the
importance of having a vision, including others in developing the vision, and then
communicating that vision, the most frequently mention aspect of the visioning process
by the research participants was the importance of generating enthusiasm for the vision to
get people to buy into it. Jill remarked that this was not always easy, “A part that I think
is a harder part is to have a clear shared vision and let people know that that vision is a
priority and that it's exciting.” This is where leaders’ influence with their team is tested
and ultimately where their effectiveness will be decided as the vision provides the goals
and direction the team is trying to achieve.
Theme 2: Path to leadership. The career journeys that led each of my research
participants to their current positions of library directors were fascinating stories and
further completed the picture as to understanding the experience of being an academic
health sciences library director. Though each participant’s path was unique, there were
common elements that emerged as they chronicled their life story to me that are
informative as to how they understood their experiences as leaders and also how they
understood their effectiveness as leaders. The four categories that define Theme 2: Path
to Leadership are: a) Breadth of Experience, b) Focused Preparation, c) Mentors, and d)
Recognizing/Developing Leadership Potential. The Breadth of Experience category
comes from responses from participants regarding their work history prior to becoming
library director. I found that all of the participant had some combination of the following:
working at several different libraries and/or different types of libraries, or several
different jobs within the same library that exposed them to a variety of library and/or
leadership experience, or they had multiple post-graduate degrees to go with their library

116

work experience. This breadth of experience gave them a big picture understanding of
how libraries work and their position within their institutions. The Focused Preparation
category concerns the preparation each participant made specifically to prepare
themselves for their role as library director. It was interesting to learn how much and the
variety of preparation each participant made to prepare themselves for their new role.
Also, the preparation did not end once achieving the position of library director. The
Mentors category describes how important mentors were for many of the participants in
moving up through their career until ultimately achieving the position of library director.
Many of the participants also fill the role now as mentor for many of their staff and other
librarians in the field. Finally, the Recognizing/Developing Leadership Potential category
delves into how the participants knew and decided they could be library directors. Also, I
discussed with them how they recognized others with the potential for leadership in
libraries and what they did to develop that leadership potential. This theme builds on the
previous theme, Understanding Leadership, in helping understand how academic health
sciences library directors experience leadership and how this informs their understanding
of effective leadership.
Breadth of experience. From my discussions with the research participants they
communicated how the position of library director required a broad perspective and an
understanding of the big picture of how academic health sciences libraries work and how
they fit in at their institutions, now and in the future. As we talked about each of the
participants’ individual path to their position of leadership, it was remarkable how varied
the education and work experiences of the participants were. Patricia, for example,

117

worked a variety of positions, each of which provided her with valuable experience that
prepared her well to be a director:
I have worked across like all areas of the library. I was a cataloger for a year. I
worked in technical services for a year. I was an assistant director. I was head of a
small library, small two-, three-person library. I dealt in such a wide range of
health sciences from medical education to medical research to healthcare policy. I
really think that breadth of exposure in those three very different institutions I
worked at gave me a broad perspective, an ability to detect, not quite the right
word, but to suss what's really critical, what's really good practice, and what's just
local custom. And I felt really prepared when I came to [my current position] for
the challenge that I was given here.
I heard a similar story from Olivia, who cataloged for me the various positions she has
held over her career and what she thought it meant to her becoming a director:
Every job, I think, gave me a little bit more in terms of broadening my
experiences to lead up to being a director, so that by the time I became a director,
I was pretty comfortable with the various components of running a library.
It was not only lessons learned from working the different positions in the library that
was valuable. For Patricia, she was also able to learn from those to whom she reported.
At one institution, where she later became director for a time, she related the following
experience:
I reported directly to the Dean of the Medical School. As one of his direct reports,
I was part of his monthly meeting at which everything in the medical curriculum
was discussed. Everything - admissions, scholarships, financial aid, curriculum,

118

particular courses, negotiation with faculty, with other schools, relationships with
hospitals where our students and interns went, relationships with the hospital that
was no longer part of the university and had to be negotiated with. All that stuff. I
learned so much about medical education and not just the content, not just what
medical education is, but how people in medical education think, what's
important, what the values are. I went through two LCME accreditations between
assistant director and interim director and director. It just fell out that way that I
had two in that 10-year period and I learned a lot from that as well.
Another important aspect to this category that came up in the interviews was the
opportunities for growth and experience given to the participants at various stages of their
career that allowed them to develop their leadership skills and learn important lessons
regarding how academic health sciences libraries work. For example, Terri spoke about
opportunities she was given that she thought were instrumental in her personal leadership
development:
I was given an opportunity to organize a conference for the whole campus. It was
going to be a technology expo. I was given stretch assignments and conference
event planning exercises. There was another opportunity [at my library] where I
had to decommission all photocopiers and move us to a printing card system. I
also had to move us from a home-grown system to a commercial-based library
integrated system. We went from a home-grown system to Innovative Interfaces,
Inc. So, I guess, I was given a lot of implementation assignments. I had to do the
research, or was part of the team that did the research. But I just remember those
being really risky, fun, rewarding opportunities that really challenged me and kept

119

me motivated, and I appreciated the fact that those directors really were willing to
take a risk on me.
It was usually during this period that the participants said they started thinking that they
could be directors at some point in their future and initiated a more deliberate plan of
preparation to help them achieve that goal.
Focused preparation. Once the goal of becoming an academic health sciences
director was set, many of the participants began a more focused and planned approach in
preparing themselves for that position. They had been exposed to enough leadership
opportunities that they understood better where they needed to develop their skills and
gain more experience. Many of the participants took advantage of opportunities provided
by their universities and/or professional organizations to develop their leadership
abilities. Patricia spoke to me about a professional managers program offered by her
university:
I completed a professional manager's certificate that was offered by the university
human resources department, and that was very valuable. Not in the traditional
sense of learning management theory or anything like that, but these very focused,
short courses, and there were about 20 of them that you had to take over a period
of 2 years, they were very helpful to me. One class that was particularly helpful
was on how to network, and why that's important and I think those experiences
really gave me a strong foundation in leadership, and what I had to step up and
do, if I was going to be a leader.

120

Olivia too, talked about specific leadership skills she sought out to develop to provide
herself with a solid foundation before becoming director. Specifically, she mentioned
leadership classes on hiring employees, budgeting, and interpersonal relationships.
There were a number of specific leadership programs that were mentioned by
multiple participants as being particularly helpful in their development as leaders. Each
participant took something different from the programs, but all of them found the
experience valuable and an important step in their path towards becoming a library
director. For some the experience served, among other things, as a confidence booster,
like Karen, who had this to say:
One thing that helped me gain more confidence was getting the opportunity to
attend the Bryn Mawr Summer Institute for Women in Higher Education
Administration. Those kinds of opportunities I thought were really help not only
in building skills and perspective, but also providing a little bit of a jolt or booster.
Morale booster as well as a knowledge booster. I had also gone to
the Harvard/ACRL Leadership Institute for Academic Librarians. While Bryn
Mawr was three weeks and a half and residential [chuckles], ACRL was one week
and residential. But what was packed into that week was just incredible. I think
the thing that I really liked the best about it was learning about the four frames
because it helped me get even a quicker way of understanding what's going on
around me and how to interpret things. I found that very valuable.
Dean also attended the ACRL/Harvard Leadership Institute for Academic Librarians and
said this about his experience at the program:

121

I took continuing education courses that were related to building my skill set in
management and leadership. I also did the Harvard Institute for Academic
Librarians. And that week at Harvard was honestly one of the most educational
weeks I think I ever had in all of my education. It was just really, really, really
good. I would recommend it to anyone who has not gone through it that is in a
director or assistant director role in libraries.
Still other participants attended other leadership programs more designed for the specific
needs of medical librarians. As Mary Lou remarked to me, “Academic health
sciences libraries are so different than the other kinds of academic libraries.” These
libraries have unique challenges and therefore the majority of the participants attended
leadership courses and programs that took this into account. Hannah, for example, took
advantage of offerings from the Medical Library Association and combined that with
leadership training that had a more business focus:
I took a lot of MLA CE courses at the time and I also went to an Executive
Development Academy [held] at Carnegie Mellon University at their school of
business. It was under the offices of the Special Libraries Association that
contracted with the school of business at Carnegie Mellon University. That was a
very intensive week-long program that was very eye opening for me. I learned
what a leverage buyout was, which was the big talk at the time. Also, it exposed
me to a lot of business principles I think that were very helpful.
Jill related to me a similar experience where she reached out to the offerings from the
Medical Library Association once she decided to start seeking leadership positions:

122

I probably began thinking about being a leader very seriously when I became a
head of reference. And that was a time when people were scheduled to work on
the reference desk and really it was a group of people that I was leading, I think,
in a formal sense, with training and the responsibilities. I looked for different
opportunities at that point in my career, and I used MLA as a source for some
training, and they had some kind of CE course that I attended that was helpful
because I don't believe that I'd really paid attention to leading in the past. I may
have had some information on management probably here from my own
institution, but I never had attended anything with regards to the leadership at the
time. So I thought that was helpful.
Without question, the main program mentioned by the research participants regarding
their leadership development was the National Library of Medicine/Association of
Academic Health Sciences Libraries Leadership Fellows Program, a year-long intensive
leadership program designed to prepare emerging leaders for the position of library
director in academic health sciences libraries (Lipscomb et al., 2009). Several of the
research participants had been part of the program and spoke well of its contribution to
their development as leaders in academic health sciences libraries. Debra told me:
So basically doing the AAHSL Leadership Fellow Program, the one-year
leadership institute, was really good for me. It helped reframe many things I had
been doing and gave them a name and then I understood what it was I had been
doing. And going forward I felt more empowered with that knowledge, knowing
what I needed to do. And I do a lot of leadership CEs, I read a lot, I have a vast
collection of supervisory manuals. I also go to the CEs here at [my university]

123

where they offer a six-month leadership training class, supervisory training class.
[My alma mater] had a supervisory training class that lasted six weeks. So I've
been through all the training courses at [my alma mater] and [my university],
learning as much as I possibly could and applying as much as I possibly can in the
role I currently have.
Terri knew she wanted to be part of the NLM/AAHSL Leadership Fellows Program early
on, when she decided to start her journey towards becoming an academic health sciences
library director:
I always knew I wanted to go to the AAHSL Leadership [Fellows] Program
because anybody that I knew that had done really well in their career path had
been to that program. So, I discussed it early on with my director when I arrived
to [my former place of employment]. She was immediately supportive. In my
second year at [my former place of employment], I applied to be part of that
program.
One research participant, Lily, had a very detailed and thoughtful response regarding her
experience in preparing for the position of library director at an academic health sciences
library. It speaks to the level of commitment and responsibility the position demands and
the wide range of skills and knowledge necessary to do the job well:
I started talking to people, directors that I met, and I received two leadership
scholarships from AAHSL. One of them I used to attend the ARL three-day
intensive workshop on management and leadership, and really enjoyed that. There
was a lot of homework in that, and I just love learning about leadership and how
to better lead an organization, and manage it. And the other scholarship I got

124

was to do two site visits at [academic health sciences libraries]. I picked one that
was a private university and one that was public. And I did this because I had only
been at my library; I had never been anywhere else. I wanted the experience, and I
wanted to learn from leaders out there. The reason I picked the two universities I
chose was because I liked what I saw coming out of there. And meeting their
people, it just seemed like they were doing all the right things at those places.
And they both agreed to host me, a week each, almost a full week each. I did them
back to back, and I had some serious discussions with those directors in saying,
I'm looking at the next level, where will go from here. I'm thinking that director is
next, but am I ready? What other education do I need? I was looking to get an
MBA, but I had also heard about a Master’s in Public Administration. A couple of
years after that I had been looking to see what program I should get into and I
decided the MPA route, because I was going to stay in public universities. If I'm
going to be leading a public institution, I better understand better public
budgeting, ethics and public institutions and things like that. And so, I went that
route. And at the same time, well after middle of my MPA program, I was
accepted into the AAHSL Leadership [Fellows] Program, thinking I wanted to go
into directorship but thought, "This is what I need to really finalize this in my
head." And I loved every bit of that also, the fellowship. I enjoyed the work so
much. Even though it was intensive, I just ate it up and enjoyed it.
The research participants dedicated countless hours towards the singular task of
developing their leadership abilities to add to their already solid foundation of knowledge
and skills regarding libraries in general. Once they decided to take that next step in their

125

career they understood they needed additional knowledge and experience to be successful
and the selectively sought out that knowledge and experience.
Mentoring. Another important part of leadership development that several
research participants mentioned was mentors that had helped them at various stages of
their careers. Mentor relationships were described by many as being really valuable in
advancing the research participants’ careers. Not only did the mentors educate them
about the demands of leadership at academic health sciences libraries, but also served as
sounding boards for ideas and advice once the participants began moving into leadership
positions. When I asked Mary Lou about what made the biggest difference in her
development as a leader, she replied:
I think having a boss who acted as a mentor and I was very, very fortunate to have
had an excellent boss who was also a very good mentor. She would challenge me
to think differently about how I might approach a problem, and she would let me
sit in with her on certain leadership opportunities. I think having a boss and
a mentor who sees opportunities and then can match those opportunities to who
you are as person, are very important. And she had a gift to be able to do that. She
has not only done that with me, she's done it with several others. And so that
really helped to form my experiences as a library director.
Hannah and Richard both said they had many mentors and supporters who helped push
them along and taught them valuable lessons that enabled them to advance their careers
in a positive way. Richard put it this way:
[W]hen you're on the track to director, having that supportive, good boss is really
important and I did have that my whole career until I became director, more or

126

less. I had people that were championing me and just really supportive and helpful
or I don't think I'd have ever gotten anywhere. I'd still be a cataloger somewhere if
I hadn't had that kind of support.
Jill and Terri mentioned seeking out mentors who modeled the behaviors they thought
were effective and were on the career path they hoped to follow. These mentors then
were sure to have the types of knowledge, skills, and experiences they were seeking to
learn more about. In turn, these mentors could go beyond imparting advice and wisdom,
and directly help the participants advance their career. Terri mentioned, “I had great
mentors along the way and some of my mentors were always watching out for me for
next career opportunities.”
Almost every research participant mentioned a mentoring relationship they had
experienced somewhere during their path to becoming a library director. In each case
they spoke about this mentor relationship in reverent terms and expressed a desire to
mentor librarians themselves. They appreciated deeply the mentoring they received and
wanted to give that same experience back to the next generation of library leaders that
were coming next.
Recognizing/developing leadership potential. Finally, the last category for this
theme provides a deeper look at how the research participants recognized and developed
not only their own leadership potential, but how they recognize emerging leaders in the
library profession and what they do to assist in developing that leadership potential. Not
surprisingly, given the complex nature of leadership and our understanding of it, there
was a wide disparity of opinions from the research participants as to what qualities
identify someone as having leadership potential. However, many of these qualities are in

127

fact precursors to the categories described in Theme I: Understanding Leadership. For
example, both Patricia and Richard mention looking for people with an ability to see the
“big picture”, which is important towards having an awareness of your environment and
creating a vision. Here is what Patricia had to say about what she looks for in potential
library leaders:
[I] look for people who ha[ve] shown an ability to see the big picture, and who
understand what I am saying about the library's future direction. They get it. They
get where I am coming from. They may not agree with every bit of it but they at
least understand it. And they thought overall, it was the right direction to head in.
Because my philosophy was you can always learn supervision, you can always
learn management, but if your department is not aligned with the library's overall
direction, all the management skill in the world isn't going to help your
department succeed. It's not going to help the library succeed.
Richard expanded on these sentiments and emphasized how important it is to be able to
see the big picture. He thought it was critical for a director to not have too narrow a
viewpoint and understand how the library fits into the overall structure of the institution
to be successful. He explained it to me like this:
I know the big one I looked for, and that was people that could see a big picture.
People that didn't focus so narrowly on their own set of duties that they couldn't
grasp the way the whole system worked. They had to know their role in our
library system in the library here but boy, if you can't see how that fits into a
larger picture, you're sort of doomed. And I have seen people tripped up by that,
who just won't pull back and see the bigger picture. Now, how I know if they're

128

seeing the bigger picture or not, I don't know. I guess what the things they're
interested in, what kind of projects they take on, even the way they develop
relationships with other faculty within the library and within our constituent
groups, I guess. So I guess that's what I'm looking for, the way they build
relationships and the way they sort of build their worldview.
Several research participants mentioned being enthusiastic, having a good attitude, and
being able to move things forward as good signs of leadership potential, which would
seem to relate well to previous categories such as Building a Team and Advocacy and
Credibility. Karen put it this way when describing what she looked for in potential new
leaders:
First and foremost, I look for someone who gets things done, and who doesn't
seem upset by doing that, that they're enthusiastic, they move forward, they're
organized. I guess I kind of look sometimes at temperament as well as
accomplishment. Because anybody can accomplish if they work hard enough, but
is it easy for them? Do they like it? Are they comfortable with it? Are they going
to struggle? So kind of what their attitude is about in getting lots of work done. Is
it fun and exciting? Is it their duty and they just do it? Or is it something they
fight all the way because their temperament or their view of things? Perhaps they
don't feel it at heart, or they don't feel it in a deeper way, or they just don't think
it's important enough that even if they're in a little bit of pain they want keep
going [chuckles].
Lily picked up on this idea that Karen touch upon regarding enthusiasm and a willingness
to go beyond what is expected of a person in the position they are currently in. She

129

described those people with leadership potential as overachievers, who were always
trying to exceed expectations. Employees who only did the minimum and met
expectations tended to be overlooked. As Lily explained:
I look for someone who is effective, who's successful, and how do I judge that?
They consistently strive to achieve, they go above and beyond. There's the people
who are average. They do what's expected, and that's it. So, I don't look at those
people as identifying themselves for leadership positions. But the person who just
is hungry for it, who shows initiative, who shows energy, who shows enthusiasm,
any of those things, all of those things, whatever I can get, but there's a glimmer
of a light there, a possibility, I talk to them. And I ask the staff, "Where do you
see yourself?" Even those who don't show that, I still like to know, what do you
think about for your future? But the ones that show those things I mentioned, the
light, the energy, the glimmer, the initiative, hungry for things, I really hone in on
those and I try to help them reach beyond or sometimes they already are.
Dean too, made similar comments regarding initiative and high expectations. It was clear
that many of the directors wanted people who had the stamina, energy, and passion to
perform at what experience had told them was a highly demanding position that has a
tremendous impact on its institution. Dean stated what he looked for in potential leaders
this way:
I have very high expectations. Not unreasonably so, but I do have high
expectations. But what I look for in other folks in regards to leadership is
curiosity, courage, compassion, and initiative. I need to see those things in
someone. I need them to have the curiosity to ask the hard questions and the

130

courage to not know the answers and to be okay if they get it wrong at first swing.
I need them to be compassionate and realize that to a lot of people the things we
have to deal with can be very emotional. A lot of people put a lot of feeling into
the things that they work on and the things that they care about. Especially the
library world, I think we have to be compassionate about that and work within
those comfort levels of the people we're working with. It's just customer service,
you have to put yourself on other people's shoes. Folks especially need to take
initiative and not wait to be told what needs to be done, but rather give it a shot,
and do it, and make it happen.
Dean briefly mention needing to have the courage to not know the answers, which
harkens back to earlier findings regarding library director’s ability to handle the unknown
from the category What It Takes. Mary Lou also commented on this quality as being
essential to determining whether or not someone has leadership potential. Here is what
she had to say on the matter:
I think it is one way that we can discern who has leadership potential and who
doesn't, and that is, what is their level of comfort with uncertainty. And this is
more than, "I don't like change." This is the whole uncertainty's a nebulousness of
when something will be decided or how it will be decided or how it will be
implemented or what your future looks like. The sooner that we can determine
that in people who are identifying as future leaders, the less grief we might save
ourselves down the road. Someone who cannot live with uncertainty shouldn't be
in a leadership position because by definition, you're future-casting and you can
never be sure about the future.

131

Hannah described to me an example of someone who she determined did not have
leadership potential based on her reaction to an opportunity given to her by Hannah and
her team. The person exhibited virtually none of the characteristics previously described
and serves as a good example of what not to look for in potential leaders. As Hannah
described the encounter:
I can give you an example of somebody that is not a leader that's stuck in my
mind from way back when. We had a student who came to us with wonderful
credentials and she was a fancy student and an intern. We sat her down and we
said, "We have a great project for you to work on. This is a great project. And
here's what we want you to do." And she listened to our whole thing, and then she
looked at us and said, "Was there anything else I could work on?" And that was
the end of any identifying her as a leader. I don't know whatever happened to her,
but she was not going to go anywhere in our organization.
As in this example, several of the research participants would give projects to their staff
as opportunities to reveal any leadership potential and to develop their leadership
abilities. Hannah spoke of giving her staff bigger and bigger projects as they proved
themselves capable of handling the work and responsibility. She described her process to
me like this:
I give people smaller projects and see how they do, and then give them bigger
projects and watch them succeed. And I keep an eye on them and not just throw
them in the deep end, but try to coach them in how to succeed, I think. People that
can listen, benefit from the coaching. Some people, you can tell them, but they

132

just don't get it. So people who have good judgment and a good attitude, you can
teach them what they need to know in terms of skills.
Patricia also talked to me about what she did to develop leadership potential in her staff.
She emphasized the importance in believing in people, giving them opportunities to
prove themselves and opening doors for them to network and make the kind of
relationships they would need to be successful as academic health sciences library
directors. Most importantly though, she said she encouraged and supported her staff in
taking new roles to develop their leadership potential:
I work with people where they are to help them think about what their potential is
and where they could possibly go. Sometimes, when I ask people to step up into a
role, their first reaction is, "Oh, I don't have the experience to do that, I'm not
good enough to do that," or, something like that and it's convincing them that
they're really… I wouldn't be asking them if I didn't think they'd be able to do it,
that they do have the ability, and the background, and the experience.
Other participants described themselves as serving as mentors to these emerging library
leaders and gave them opportunities and encouragement to go to leadership development
programs like many of them did. Debra, for example, had a librarian last year go to the
ACRL/Harvard Leadership Institute for Academic Librarians and she routinely
encourages them to go for any other programs they are interested in. She has been able to
pay for these programs out her library’s budget when the person was not able to secure
any scholarships or awards to pay for the program. Many of the other research
participants offered the same opportunities to their staff.

133

Each research participant seemed especially excited to talk about their efforts to
help, encourage, and develop new leaders in academic health sciences libraries. In my
discussion with them about their experiences along the career path that led them to
becoming library directors, it was clear that they did not do it alone. They benefited
greatly from many mentors, leadership development programs offered by the numerous
library professional organizations, and the many opportunities they were given by
supervisors over the course of their careers. In this spirit, they were eager to do the same
for others and seemed to enjoy passing on the lessons they had learned along their
journey perhaps more than any other part of their experience as library directors.
Theme 3: Measuring success. The final theme, Measuring Success, attempts to
capture what was a difficult subject for many of the research participants to discuss. Dean
seemed to speak for many of the directors when he said, “I think that's something
that every good leader wrestles with… sometimes you just don't know.” Doing a good
job was important to everyone, but as a library director, whether that was actually the
case or not, was more difficult to assess. According to the experiences and comments
from the research participants, three categories emerged that best defined Theme 3:
Measuring Success: a) Meeting Goals/Accomplishments, b) Honest Feedback, and c)
Formal Assessment.
The Meeting Goals/Accomplishments category describes how several of the
participants use their annual goals and other major accomplishments as evidence and
benchmarks of success and their effectiveness as library directors. Attaining goals was
part of several definitions of effective leadership (Chemers, 1993; Rosser et al., 2003).
The Honest Feedback category is based on several research participants relating to me

134

personal stories where they had heard from someone on their campus speaking highly of
the library. Research participants generally took any kind of positive feedback to mean
that the library was effectively serving their stakeholders and in turn, they were being
effective in their leadership of the library. Finally, the Formal Assessment category
includes what formal measures of their effectiveness the research participants have taken
and their experience with these measures. Aside from annual evaluations, the formal
assessment measure that came up most regularly was the 360-degree evaluation tool,
which was utilized by several of my research participants.
Meeting goals/accomplishments. As noted above, the achievement of goals is
fundamental to effective leadership (Chemers, 1993; Rosser et al., 2003). Several
research participants mentioned reviewing past goals and checking on their library’s
accomplishments when evaluating their effectiveness as leaders. Hannah, for example,
meets with her management team twice a year to review their goals for the library and
check on their progress. These progress meetings and reports are significant indicators in
her self-evaluation as library director. She described to me her reflective process on
evaluating her leadership effectiveness:
I think in my mind when I look at all the departmental reports and all the things
that the library has accomplished over the year, I can look at it, I can feel that
something's going right, whether it's me or whether it's the people that
I'm empowering to do things. If the library's doing well and well respected, and
people are publishing papers, we're doing new project, we're introducing new
things. You look at the range of activities and the number of contacts, and if it's
all working and we spend our money, and we got the stuff we needed, to me, you

135

can tie up the year in a bow and, to me, if the library's a success then I must be
doing something right.
Jill told me a similar approach to determining her and her library’s effectiveness that she
has practiced for several years:
I think, look at your leadership on a regular basis throughout the year. I try to take
the time when I'm looking at the accomplishments for this six months or the next twice a year - what's been happening in the library and what are the
accomplishments.
Other directors spoke about not getting too locked into the goals since they can change
rapidly or new opportunities can present themselves. They told me that priorities could
change very quickly, either internally in the library or externally with administration.
They kept themselves flexible and tried to account for these developments when it came
time to reflect on their effectiveness as leaders and whether or not they had accomplished
their annual goals. Lily told me that when she does her performance evaluations with her
staff she makes special note whether or not she or the administration changed any of the
goals, or otherwise made some goals impossible for her staff to accomplish, so it would
not reflect negatively on them. When I discussed this topic with Patricia, she specially
noted that she focused on accomplishments and not goal achievement:
When we get the right things done, which is not necessarily the same thing as
achieving your goals, because sometimes the right thing is something that wasn't
on your radar, and you pursue that instead of pursuing a goal you started with, or
what you thought was your goal to start with. But at the end of the day, I look at
how-- for example, how are we relating to the medical school? Things that have

136

changed since I've been here, we have a permanent guest position on the medical
school curriculum committee. We helped develop the curriculum for the school.
We didn't just sit there and say "Well, here's where information could fit in." We
were part of the whole curriculum redesign.
Whether achieving goals or generally reviewing the library’s accomplishments, each
research participant to some degree looked to what their library had done as a measure of
their success as leaders. However, this was not the only measure they used to determine
their effectiveness.
Honest feedback. Even more than meeting goals and their library’s
accomplishments, the research participants I spoke to relied heavily on honest feedback
from a variety of sources to measure their effectiveness as library directors. This
feedback was either very personal or more directed to the library as a whole, but in both
cases the research participants accepted it as validation that they were doing a good job in
leading their libraries effectively. In my discussions with Patricia, she gave me examples
of both though she quick to share the credit for the accomplishments of her library:
We haven't done any formal leadership assessment since then, but I hear that,
from other people, that the faculty here has said something nice about me. "Oh,
she's such a good mentor," or "Oh, she really helped me with this," or "Wow, I
don't think I would have been prepared to go take that position if [she] hadn't
believed in me or [she] hadn't helped me or supported me or whatever." So I look
to that also as a way of saying, "Yes, I'm being effective as a leader in this
organization."
And further along in our discussion:

137

We're most intensely involved with medicine, but we also have a seat at the
curriculum committee meetings in nursing and in dentistry, and we've been on
some of their subcommittees as guest participants and things like that. So when I
see that integration going on, and when I see library faculty being co-authors on
papers with medical school and nursing school and other school faculty in
journals in their field - Academic Medicine, JAMA, Archives of Cardiology,
whatever - Blood. When I see those things going on, when people come and say,
"We're doing a grant, and we really need this person. This person has the skills
that we need for this grant to be successful and we would like to have about 5% of
their time for our project." That to me says that we're doing the right thing in the
right way, and that to me is what you look for to say your library is a success. I
certainly don't say that all due to my effectiveness as a leader. But I think if I were
an ineffective leader, that wouldn't have happened, and the other integration
wouldn't have happened, and the partnerships wouldn't have developed as they
did.
Other research participants told me similar stories. Olivia mentioned that the positive
feedback did not only go to her, but also to her supervisor, which seemed to strengthen
the impact of the feedback for her. This positive feedback eventually made it to her and
gave her a greater sense of effectiveness on her campus:
I would say that if you were talking about our stakeholders like the College of
Medicine, the College of Nursing, I think that if my staff are successful working
with their faculty and students, I think that gets reflected back to say, "The library
is doing a good job. She's got good staff," whatever it is that they think. In terms

138

of who I directly report to, they’ve heard good feedback from the stakeholders,
from the users, and also the success of the grants and publishing.
Hannah too used positive feedback to gain a sense of whether her library was moving in
the right direction and whether she was being effective as the library director. She told
me that with her experience as library director she has a good sense of whether she is
being effective or not:
[I can] feel things are going well with the library. Librarians, are they
participating in projects with faculty? Are people turning to the library? Are
people getting what they need? [I] can kind of feel whether that is happening or
not. So that's when I feel pretty good about things, and if things are going well,
then it must mean that I'm leading it well, or at least getting out the way and
letting other people do what they need to be doing.
One participant, Terri, did warn about becoming insulated from negative feedback since
many staff members are reluctant to criticize their boss directly to his or her face. Honest
feedback from outside the library could be difficult to obtain as well, and a director needs
to lead anyway and find other ways to measure their effectiveness:
I think there's a risk of being overly confident. Nobody is going to come to the
director and criticize him to your face, so a lot of these [are] done behind closed
doors. So how do you get an honest or a real pulse on what's going on, and
how people feel about your leadership. I guess to some extent people voice their
concerns either through resignations or departures, and I've certainly had mine,
my share. That process informs me that some people definitely aren't happy at the
same time. People aren't happy with the leadership. I think there are times when

139

they do need to leave. I'm not saying that… well I'm coming across as very
aggressive and maybe callous about it, but I do think it's… I've worked in many
organizations where people are not happy with the director, or at least that's who
they blame it on. So they really need to move on. Others would agree. At this
level you're not going to get a lot of compliments or feedback like you did at other
levels of the organization where there is more of that, "Oh congratulations,” or,
"Great job." I just think at this level, it's expected that you're tough enough to
handle it whether it's good or bad, and there's less good delivered. You're just
expected to perform and run a very capable organization, and lead.
Honest feedback, most of which was positive in my discussion with participants, adds
another piece to measuring leadership effectiveness of academic health sciences library
directors. This feedback appeared mostly anecdotal and did not include enough negative
feedback to bring it balance, however, from the experiences related by the research
participants it was clearly valued and the most widespread means of measuring their
effectiveness. This would suggest the need for an acceptable formal measurement of
library director effectiveness to be used.
Formal assessment. There is no formal assessment tool specifically designed to
measure the leadership effectiveness of academic health sciences library directors.
However, a number of the directors spoke to me about their experience with 360-degree
evaluations and attested to the value of this evaluation tool. A few other participants told
me they were planning to do a 360-degree evaluation soon or were at least looking into
the idea. In a 360-degree evaluation a director is evaluated not only by his or her
supervisors, but also by the staff he or she supervises as well as peers within the

140

organizations. It can be an intimidating evaluation to go through as several of my
research participants attested. Here is what Jill had to say about her experience with the
360-degree evaluation:
I asked to have an assessment, a 360-degree assessment, of my work as director.
And I did good feedback there, from that evaluation. I wasn't thrilled about doing
it, but actually, I was pleasantly surprised. People are realistic and I think they
realize that individual's going to reading that. I think they were positive too, as
well as good at suggesting areas for improvement.
Patricia also did a 360-degree evaluation once at her institution. She thought it was a
positive experience overall and felt there were some tangible benefits from going through
the process. She did point out that expectations were high for individuals at the level of
library director and that needed to be accounted for in the evaluation. As she described
her experience to me:
We did a 360 evaluation one time across the library. And I would say that is
probably the most strictly formal time that we've done that. And I would say my
ratings were except-- the setup was everybody-- if you're doing your job, it's a
three. You only got higher than a three, if you were doing better than what you
kind of expect. And when you get to a certain level, the expectations are so high,
it's kind of hard to exceed them. You could go out and walk on water and the
dean would say, "Well, I didn't expect anything less of you." So mine were
between three and four, and I thought that was pretty good, and looked at what
I was seen as most successful at and least successful at.

141

Terri’s experience did not seem as positive though she thought it was a valuable
experience that yielded some good feedback for her to consider. She described her
experience with the 360-degree evaluation this way:
I had one time a 360 evaluation where feedback was given, and I was amazed at
the kind of nitpickiness that people were going after, but well, it's to some extent
constructive, other times it didn't quite makes sense. It's not going to be in your
favor, so you have to develop a very tough skin, and recognize, even if the
evaluation comments are harsh, or they're not 100% necessarily true, you're going
to have to tough it out, and take it and understand this is part of the job. This is
how it works.
Dean had not done a 360-degree evaluation, but had some trepidations for exactly the
reasons that Terri pointed out in her experience with the tool. At this point, he indicated
to me that he did not think it would benefit him or his library and so he was not planning
to move forward with it. His comments to me on the 360-degree evaluations were:
I admire those places that do a 360 feedback, and the reason I do is because that
requires the individuals who are both giving and receiving that feedback to have a
lot of confidence. You've really got to be secure in your role and willing to take,
you know-- honestly willing to take it if you're not getting it right, because that
kind of feedback is… people aren't going to hold back and you've got a really
have some thick skin to get through that. And it is hard and I admire folks who
have done that and grown from it a lot. Our environment here, we have not done
that kind of feedback to date. It is something that I aspire for us to get to be able
to do. I don't think we're there yet. I think if I even so much as mention the idea, it

142

would be met with a lot of adversity, and a lot of uncertainty, and frankly, a lot of
fear.
The 360-degree evaluation is not the only tool for determining effectiveness for academic
health sciences library directors, but it was the tool of choice among the research
participants I spoke with. The 360-degree evaluation does provide honest feedback,
which from the previous category we know was valued so highly, in a formal and
consistent way. No other formal measure of leadership effectiveness was mentioned other
than annual reviews from two of the participants.
Chapter Summary
This chapter described the leadership experiences of eleven academic health
sciences library directors to the reader and how these directors understood these
experiences, particularly with regard to their effectiveness as leaders. The three major
themes were: (1) Understanding Leadership; (2) Path to Leadership; and (3) Measuring
Success. The essence of the research participants’ experiences in their journey to
becoming library directors and since becoming leaders at their libraries were contained
within these themes and were described and selected participant interview excerpts were
used for illustrative purposes. The following chapter is a summary and discussion of the
study, along with implications and conclusions.

143

Chapter 5
Discussions, Implications, and Conclusions
This research study used phenomenological research methodology to examine the
leadership experiences of a selected group of academic health sciences library directors.
The study focused on understanding how these directors experienced leadership and how
their experience informed their understanding of effective leadership. It also focused on
examining their leadership development experiences and how those experiences led them
to the positions of directors at academic health sciences libraries at major research
universities. This chapter begins with a summary of the study, an overview of the
problem being investigated, and a restatement of the purpose of the study and its research
questions. Afterwards there will be sections discussing the findings of the study as they
relate to the research questions and also implications and conclusions.
Summary of the Study
The phenomenological study involved 11 research participants, who were all
interviewed and three were observed in their academic health sciences libraries. The
participants included nine female library directors and two male directors, and all worked
at public universities with a very high research activity. Each participant was interviewed
using phenomenologically-based semi-structured interviews done over the telephone.
Two interviews were conducted for each research participant to gain the depth and
context of the participants’ experiences necessary to understand their essence (Seidman,
2013). Nonparticipant observation was managed at three of the research participants’
libraries that were close by and visits were able to be arranged.

144

The two phenomenologically-based semi-structured interviews centered around
questions that were designed to produce responses related to the participants’ experiences
as library directors, their experiences with leadership development, and how they related
these experiences to their understanding of effective leadership. An Interview Guide
(Appendix C) aided in conducting the interviews. The nonparticipant observations noted
interaction between the library directors and their staff, students, administration, and
other library stakeholders. A Nonparticipant Observation Guide (Appendix D) was used
to record information from the observation sessions. After having transcribed and coded
all of the interviews sessions, a thematic analysis was administered on the data. Three
major themes then emerged: 1) Understanding Leadership; 2) Path to Leadership; and 3)
Measuring Success.
Overview of the problem. As noted in Chapter 1, academic libraries are facing a
significant period of transition. These libraries are moving from print resources to digital
collections and no longer need large physical spaces to shelve and manage their print
collections. The result has been libraries losing space to other departments on their
campuses (Freiburger, 2010; Persily & Butter, 2010). Libraries also face competition
from the Internet and other information providers after holding a virtual monopoly on the
provision of scholarly information for centuries (Cunningham, 2010; Fought, 2014;
Pritchard, 2008; Weiner, 2003). In addition, demographic projections published by the
Bureau of Labor Statistics suggest many academic library leaders will retire soon. In a
1999 survey of library directors in academic health sciences libraries it was indicated that
65% of the directors anticipated retiring by 2010 (Martin et al., 2003). There is a looming

145

vacuum of leadership facing the profession unless new library leaders emerge (Hernon,
2010; Hernon et al., 2002).
Academic libraries face these challenges at a time when higher education is
undergoing difficult financial problems. State appropriations to public universities and
colleges have dwindled over the past 20 years and tuition has increased sharply as a result
(Archibald & Feldman, 2011). Federal and state governments have also increased
demands for accountability in higher education and greater affordability for students
(Altbach, Gumport, & Berdahl, 2011). Academic libraries, therefore, must demonstrate
good stewardship over their budgets, show a solid return on investment, and clearly
explain their contribution to the overall mission and goals of the institution (Oakleaf,
2010). Academic libraries cannot rely on their administrations’ past belief in their
importance any longer but instead must demonstrate their value to their institutions
(Sarjeant-Jenkins, 2012; Spalding & Wang, 2006).
Academic health sciences libraries, though similar to other academic libraries,
have some important differences for which their library directors must account (Fought &
Misawa, 2016). First, academic health sciences libraries have a clinical responsibility of
working with health professionals. These libraries support not only teaching and research,
but also patient care and community health. It is vitally important that these students,
faculty, residents, and other health professionals have the best information possible, when
they need it, to treat the patients under their care. Second, because of the clinical
responsibilities and the type of research that occurs at academic health science centers,
there are tremendous amounts of money involved at these institutions. Academic health

146

sciences libraries play an important role in supporting these clinical and research
endeavors.
These challenges require effective leadership and leadership development to
secure the long-term future of academic health sciences libraries and enable them to
continue the critical role they perform at their institutions (Giesecke, 2010; Lynch et al.,
2007; Miller, 2012; Oakleaf, 2010). Effective leadership is important towards influencing
staff to willingly exert themselves and cooperate towards collective library goals, which
in turn are key for the library to be effective (De Cremer & van Knippenberg, 2004). The
perceived effectiveness of the library director and of the library are closely associated,
and adequate funding for the library, a key indicator of administrative support, is
primarily determined by the administration’s confidence in the library leadership
(Weiner, 2003). To date, few studies have been conducted regarding effective leadership
in academic libraries (Fagan, 2012). No studies have examined leadership effectiveness
or leadership emergence in academic health sciences libraries. A study examining how
academic health sciences library directors understand leadership and how they define and
measure effective leadership would provide a better understanding of leadership in this
context. With this understanding, directors in academic health sciences libraries could
increase their effectiveness and also improve their ability to identify and develop
emerging library leaders.
Purpose of the study and research questions. The purpose of this qualitative
phenomenological study was to better understand how academic health sciences library
directors experience leadership and how their experience related to their understanding of
effective leadership. The study used the four organizational frames (structural, human

147

resources, political, and symbolic) developed by Bolman and Deal (2013) and Rosser et
al.’s (2003) model of seven domains of leadership responsibility as the theoretical
framework. The research questions that guided this study were:
1) How do academic health sciences library directors understand their leadership
and experiences as library leaders?
2) What was their career journey that led them into library leadership?
3) How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as leaders?
Methodology. Phenomenological research methodology was used to investigate
the research questions. Phenomenology searches for the meaning, structure, and essence
of the lived experience of a phenomenon for a person or group of people and stays true to
the experience and context in which it appears (Giorgi & Giorgi, 2008; Patton, 2015).
Above all, phenomenology is focused on the nature of consciousness as actually
experienced, without regard for what common sense or philosophical tradition might
suggest (Moran, 2000). The study’s research questions centered on capturing the essence
of academic health sciences library directors’ leadership through an examination of their
shared experience as academic library leaders and how they define and measure the
effectiveness of their leadership.
Phenomenology requires researchers to explore, describe, interpret, and situate the
means by which their participants make sense of their experiences (Smith et al., 2009).
Thus, phenomenological researchers need access to participants’ rich and detailed
personal accounts of their experience with the phenomena under study. The three primary
data collection methods for this study were interviews, nonparticipant observations, and
documents. The interviews were phenomenologically-based semi-structured and the

148

interview questions allowed each participant to describe her or his leadership experiences
in rich detail. An Interview Guide (Appendix C) was used as a guide in each of two
interviews that were conducted. My intent was to get to the essence of each participants’
experience with leadership as a library director in an academic health sciences library
including their development as leaders that guided them to their current positions. The
interview process followed the guidelines presented by Seidman (2013) on conducting
phenomenological interviews. The nonparticipant observations were limited due to the
geographical location of the research participants. I was able to observe three of the
participants at their health sciences libraries. The observations lasted from approximately
an hour and I was able to observe their interactions with library staff, students,
administration, and other library stakeholders. A Nonparticipant Observation Guide
(Appendix D) was used to record my notes from the field and other information from the
observation sessions.
The data in this study were analyzed using thematic analysis, which is a general
that prepares and organizes the data for analysis by first coding the data, then analyzing
the codes for patterns that can be organized into categories, and finally analyzing these
categories for emergent themes (Glesne, 2016; Saldaña, 2013). Transcriptions of all
interviews and observations were coded line by line, which facilitated the development of
categories, and from these categories developed the broader themes (Saldaña, 2013). The
objective then was to winnow down the themes to what was the essence of the
phenomenon under study (Saldaña, 2013).
Findings. Once the thematic analysis was complete, I had distilled all of the
individual codes into 12 categories and 3 themes. The three major themes from the data

149

were: 1) Understanding Leadership; 2) Path to Leadership; and 3) Measuring Success.
The phenomenological research methodology combined with the thematic analysis
approach to analyzing the data was effective in getting to the essence of the research
participants’ shared experience as library directors in academic health sciences libraries.
The emergent themes capture this essence and are insightful in understanding this
experience and how it relates to their effectiveness as leaders. A more detailed discussion
of the findings as it relates directly to the research questions continues below.
Discussion
The following sections address the study’s findings as they relate to the three
research questions. As part of the discussion of each research question, the theoretical
framework for the study, the four organizational frames (structural, human resources,
political, and symbolic) developed by Bolman and Deal (2013) and Rosser et al.’s (2003)
model of seven domains of leadership responsibility, will be used to guide the discussion.
The experiences of each research participant that is germane to each of the research
questions are cited and discussed. Where applicable, existing research is cited to lend
weight to the study’s findings.
Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four organizational frames theory was selected to
guide the discussion of the first research question because of the question’s emphasis on
understanding the leadership experience of the library directors. The four frames theory is
a comprehensive and practical approach to understanding leadership in organizations, and
seems particularly versatile in adapting to the complicated leadership environment of
higher education (Bolman & Gallos, 2011). The theory should demonstrate the degree to

150

which I was successful in capturing the essence of the research participants’ leadership
experiences.
The seven domains of leadership responsibility model created by Rosser et al.
(2003) was chosen as the framework for the discussion of the last research question,
which explored how the research participants measured their effectiveness as library
leaders. As I discovered when conducting the pilot study for this research, no formal tool
for measuring leadership effectiveness exists for academic health sciences library
directors (Fought & Misawa, 2016). Rosser et al. (2003), in their article, were attempting
to create such a tool for academic deans, who have many similar responsibilities and
work in a similar setting as academic library directors (Fagan, 2012). The seven domains
of leadership responsibility model works quite well as a general framework to discuss
how to measure the leadership effectiveness of academic health sciences library directors.
Together, the Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four organizational frames theory and
the seven domains of leadership responsibility model by Rosser et al. (2003) provided me
with an excellent framework to both understand the leadership experiences of the
research participants, but also consider how to evaluate the effectiveness of their
leadership. As the findings revealed, while the research participants could articulate what
leaders needed to know and do, several of them seemed to struggle when the question
came to how they measured their effectiveness as leaders. The four organizational frames
theory helps better understand leadership in organizations and coupled with the seven
domains of leadership responsibility model should provide some guidance on how to
measure the effectiveness of this leadership.

151

Discussion of Research Question 1. The first research question in the study
focused on understanding the leadership experiences of academic health sciences library
directors. The actual question was: How do academic health sciences library directors
understand their leadership and experiences as library leaders? The intent of the research
question was to capture the essence of the participants’ leadership experiences as library
directors at academic health sciences library directors and determine what could be
learned from these shared experiences. To aid in understanding and explaining these
leadership experiences, I used Bolman and Deal’s (1991) four organizational frames
theory as part of my theoretical framework.
Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four organizational frames offer different perspectives
from which to assess organizational behavior. They consolidated the major schools of
organizational theory into a comprehensive framework encompassing four coherent
perspectives for viewing organizational behavior: structural, human resource, political,
and symbolic. The structural frame, drawn from sociology, economics, and management
science, focuses on organizational structure including planning, goals, structure,
technology, specialized roles, coordination, formal relationships, and metrics. Rules,
policies, procedures, systems, and hierarchies are used to coordinate diverse activities
into a unified effort. This frame provides insight into how leaders can better organize and
structure their organizations. The human resource frame, rooted in psychology, focuses
on the people in organizations. It views organizations as an extended family with
individuals that all have needs, feelings, prejudices, skills, and limitations. This frame
provides insight into how leaders need to tailor organizations to individuals to maximize
their productivity and job satisfaction. The political frame, grounded in political science,

152

focuses on the political dynamics in organizations. It takes into account limited resources
and competition for these resources and sees conflict in organizations as inevitable.
Bargaining, negotiation, building coalitions, and compromise are important skills for
handling the internal and external politics of organizations. The symbolic frame, drawing
on social and cultural anthropology, focuses on meaning and culture in organizations. It
leaves the assumptions of rationality found in the other frames and views organizations as
cultures, strengthened by rituals, ceremonies, stories, heroes, and myths rather than by
rules, policies, and managerial authority. This frame provides insights into how leaders
can shape culture (Bolman & Deal, 2013).
These four perspectives provide a mechanism for understanding and explaining
organizational behavior in the face of their many challenges. The four organizational
frame model presents a comprehensive practical approach to understanding the
situational contexts that influence the library directors’ decisions and how they perceive
their leadership styles (Bolman & Deal, 2013). Every leader uses each frame to some
extent, though most leaders typically have one or two frames that are the dominant
frames from which they work from (Bolman & Deal, 2013). Many scholars have used
Bolman and Deal’s four organizational frames as the theoretical framework for their own
research (Bowen, 2004; Del Favero, 2005; Fleming-May & Douglass, 2014; Heimovics,
Herman, & Jurkiewicz, 1995; Kezar, Eckel, Contreras-McGavin, & Quaye, 2008;
Swiercz, 2003; Thompson, 2005). Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four frame theory will
provide the framework for understanding how academic health sciences library directors
construct their perceptions of their leadership as well as understanding their emergence
and development as library leaders.

153

Structural frame. When I interviewed the research participants it was clear they
believed it was important to get their organizational structures right. The majority of the
participants mentioned their structure outright and the need to constantly evaluate their
structure to make sure it was meeting the needs of the library. Patricia mentioned, “We
reorganize constantly because as the nature of our work changes, our organizational
structure needs to change. And so from the number of units we have, to who the leaders
are, all across the board things change.” According to Bolman and Deal (2013), “the
structural perspective argues for putting people in the right roles and relationships” (p.
46). Several research participants echoed Patricia’s sentiments regarding the need to
reorganize as needs and circumstances changed. Hannah talked with me about how
having the right staff in the right positions was one of the most important parts of her job.
Richard said, “[As library director], you don't do a lot of everyday operations. If you're
having to sit on the reference desk, if you're having to do book selections, there is
something wrong… your structure is not working.”
This is all consistent with Bolman and Deal’s (2013) assumptions regarding the
structural frame which include that, “structures must be designed to fit an organization’s
current circumstances,” (p. 46) and that leaders need to coordinate the efforts of their
team in order to achieve established goals and objectives. Every research participant
mentioned either setting goals for the library or determining if goals were met as being a
primary function of their role as library director. Terri told me, “I have individual
meetings and management team meetings on a weekly basis to help with communicating
and making sure that to the extent possible we're working towards the same goals.” I
thought this expressed the experiences of many of the research participants who each in

154

their own way had developed a structure that organized and coordinated the efforts of the
library staff towards meeting goals and objectives set forth by them or by their
administration. They formed committees, had regular meetings, and established policy in
an effort to increase efficiency and enhance performance. These activities are all
consistent with Bolman and Deal’s (2013) description of the structural frame and how it
needs to work for organizations to be effective.
Human resources frame. The human resources frame is about the relationship
between people and organizations (Bolman & Deal, 2013). The frame is built on the
assumption that people and organizations need each other. “Organizations need ideas,
energy, and talent; people need careers, salaries, and opportunities” (Bolman & Deal,
2013, p. 121). It is the job of the leader of any organization to ensure that this relationship
between person and organization remains beneficial for both. To this end, library
directors need make sure each employee is a good fit and that they are developing
employees to keep their skill sets updated to meet the needs of the library and the
university. Beyond that though the human resources frame means investing in people,
giving them opportunities, and providing them with the necessary information and
support to do their jobs.
In my interviews and observations with my research participants, this frame stood
out perhaps more than any other. Each director spoke highly of their staff and took pride
in their work assembling and developing their team. They spoke of empowering and
providing opportunities to their staffs to accomplish the work they needed to on campus.
Terri, for example, spoke about connecting her staff to people on campus in order to
accomplish the mission and goals of the library, “[Y]ou want to empower your librarians,

155

and that's the way to do it, by getting them connected to the right people at the right place
and time that aligns with what you'd like to happen in the organization.”
The idea of sharing information and providing support is also important to human
resources frame and the ideas of investing in people for the good of the organization.
Several directors spoke about the need for good communication with staff and the
importance of transparency. This story from Mary Lou nicely illustrates the point:
I strive very much for transparency. So someone can come and ask me about the
details of the library budget from the library staff and I will tell them the details of
the library budget unless I'm not allowed to tell them.
Jill told me that when she is transparent and straightforward with her staff, they respond
better to her because have a greater understanding of what the library is trying to achieve.
Supporting and developing staff was expressed by each research participant as something
they do and believe is valuable to their libraries based on their experience. It was
considered a necessary and good investment and was discussed with enthusiasm. Lily
told me about her experience with staff development and I could hear the commitment in
her voice to the effort:
I give support to the staff and try to mentor people and guide them. I do meet with
the younger librarians, and I mean younger in terms of their years in the
profession. The two more seasoned librarians, I meet with them, one monthly, one
irregularly, and I meet with the two younger ones every other week, until [my
new associate director] gets into place and then I can turn them over to that
person. But, in mentoring them, I really enjoy that, and I'm trying to develop our
next leadership, because I think we have an obligation to do that.

156

These directors understood the value of their people and were willing to invest
their time, budget, and energy into their development. The benefits to the organization
were clear from my observations and review of annual reports and other documents,
which indicated highly productive libraries and staffs. Patricia said something to me that I
believe was indicative of how many of the research participants felt about their role as
leaders. “[My role as a leader has] become much more holistic for me, and much more a
role of empowering, encouraging, and enabling other people to achieve great things than
actually thinking about what I myself am going to do.” This to me embodies the human
resources frame in full.
Political frame. The political frame, according to Bolman and Deal (2013), has
many negative connotations associated with it and does often concern issues of power
and conflict. Political processes in organizations are inevitable, but that does not mean
they cannot be handled ethically with skill (Bolman & Deal, 2013). The political frame
assumes that organizations are made up of coalitions of different individuals and interest
groups who have, “enduring differences in values, beliefs, information, interests, and
perceptions of reality” (Bolman & Deal, 2013, p. 194). Most important organizational
decisions involve the allocation of scarce resources, and because of this, along with the
enduring differences among the coalitions, conflict arises and makes power an important
asset in settling these conflicts. Leaders must bargain and negotiate among competing
stakeholders for access to these scarce resources (Bolman & Deal, 2013). Therefore, “one
of the most important tasks of unit managers or union representatives is to be a
persuasive advocate for their group on a political field with many players representing
competing interests” (Bolman & Deal, 2013, p. 206).

157

One of the categories that emerged under Theme 1: Understanding Leadership
was Advocating and Credibility. As I described in the findings in that category, the
research participants I spoke to were well aware of the politics involved with the position.
Every participant spoke to me of their experiences with networking and building
relationships across their campuses, aligning the goals and services of the library to the
mission of the university, and staying informed as to what was happening on campus
while also looking for opportunities for their libraries. When I asked Lily how she knew
when she was being an effective leader, “One of the big things that comes to my mind is
when I advocate for what we need from the administration, and they give it to
me [laughter].” For academic health sciences libraries, it is not only a matter of
advocating for scarce resources, but also to communicate to administration and the rest of
campus the continued value libraries bring to their institutions. Olivia told me that part of
being a library director was, “[B]eing an advocate to make sure the staff has the
resources that they need, that the stakeholders understand the role that the library plays,
and advocating for ourselves so that our services are understood and utilized.” After
speaking to all of the research participants on this issue, it was clear that this was a major
role for the director at every academic health sciences library, and anyone who sought to
be effective in this role needed understand this and develop these political skills.
Symbolic frame. The symbolic frame is focused primarily on meaning and culture
in organizations (Bolman & Deal, 2013). Bolman and Deal (2013) described part of the
frame’s assumptions as it not mattering what actually happens or what is accomplished so
much as the meaning that people attribute to a particular activity. Also, it is particularly
true that when people face uncertainty or ambiguity, they will often create symbols to

158

resolve confusion and find direction. Finally, culture bonds an organization, unites
people, and helps them accomplish their goals (Bolman & Deal, 2013). A major part of
the culture of any organization is the values it holds and the vision it has for the future
(Bolman & Deal, 2013). Also at the heart of the symbolic frame is typically a leader
communicating who you are as an organization (telling your story), fostering
collaboration, transmitting values, and leading people into the future (Bolman & Deal,
2013).
Again, one of the categories that emerged under Theme 1: Understanding
Leadership was Create a Vision, which I think speaks well to this frame. Every research
participant discussed their experience with creating a vision for their libraries, often with
input from their staff. They considered providing the future direction of the library as a
primary function of their role as library director. At the same time, they knew having a
vision was not enough and told me of their experiences in fostering support for the vision,
building their teams, and in some cases working to change the cultures of their libraries in
order to carry out their vision. Lily understood this when she was able to visit two
academic health sciences libraries as part of a leadership grant she received before
becoming a library director. This was her observation:
I realized something from both of those directors that I had never thought of
before was that the culture of a library was reflected… their leadership reflected
that. They set the tone and what I was seeing, all the success with their library,
was because they had [en]visioned it, created it, put people in place, and let people
go, and said, "Go, you've got my support," and it was like the leadership reflected
the culture and what I was seeing.

159

When I spoke to Jill about what contributed to her being an effective leader, she too
mentioned the type of culture she was trying to create at her library. From her description
it is clear what the values are at her library:
I think that idea of being a good organization where there's a culture where we
support transparency, communication, leadership on everybody's part… all help
contribute to me being an effective leader, because it can't just be me on my own
doing this work, it needs to be many people. And I'm happy to say that in my
organization, more people have encouraged others to do that, and take the
opportunities that they might not have considered in the past.
Several other research participants spoke of events and awards they do annually, which
again adds to the sense of culture, further uniting the staff, and making collaboration
more effective (Bolman & Deal, 2013). The participants’ experiences with leadership in
libraries certainly introduced them at least to some degree to the symbolic frame and its
usefulness in understanding organizational culture as well as symbols and ceremonies to
foster collaboration and move forward with a vision for the future.
Discussion of Research Question 2. The second research question focused on the
career journey and experiences that led the research participants to their position as
library directors. The actual research question was: What was their career journey that led
them into library leadership? The intent of the question was to further my understanding
of their leadership experiences by examining how they developed and prepared
themselves for leadership. Leadership development and preparedness have been found to
be important contributors to leadership effectiveness (Weiner, 2003).

160

The literature review in Chapter 2 notes that the majority of leadership research
studies on academic libraries concentrated mostly on trait leadership theories, behavioral
theories, situational/contingency theories, and authentic leadership theories. The largest
number of leadership studies on academic libraries have used trait theories and seem
most interested in developing a list of the most desirable traits for library directors. This
might possibly be due to the looming leadership void that is fast approaching academic
libraries and the need to identify potential new library leaders. At any rate, these studies
and those on leadership development in academic libraries seem most germane to guiding
this discussion on the leadership development experiences of the research participants
and how they contributed to their overall understanding of leadership.
The second theme, Path to Leadership, went into great detail regarding the
participants’ experiences in preparation of becoming library directors. The categories in
that theme were: Breadth of Experience, Focused Preparation, Mentors, and
Recognizing/Developing Leadership Potential. Not only did the participants talk about
their experiences with developing their own leadership potential, but I also discussed
with them what they qualities they looked for in other potential leaders and what they did
to help develop these people.
All of the directors I spoke to mentioned their prior library experience, specific
leadership training programs, and/or mentor relationships as being critical to their
preparedness as library directors. The participants also mentioned being active in several
professional library organizations. This would seem to confirm the findings of O’Keeffe
(1998) whose survey results determined that directors prepared themselves for the
position through education attainment, prior experience, and professional activities. None

161

of the research participants had a doctorate degree, however, this would again seem to
confirm other study findings that university administrations do not require doctorates for
the position (Fitsimmons, 2008). Fitsimmons (2008) did find that administrators desired
library directors who were professionally active and had the ability to work
collaboratively, both of which were clearly demonstrated by the participants in my
study’s findings.
At least seven research participants directly spoke to me about mentoring
relationships they had throughout their careers that were beneficial to them. Kirkland
(1997) and Bonnette (2014) completed studies on the benefits of mentors to women and
minorities, respectively, in attaining leadership positions in academic libraries, while
Mavrinac (2005) made a case for peer mentoring to foster leadership development. In any
case, it would appear that mentoring is valuable to leadership development and has
produced positive results with the research participants. I believe the eager willingness
expressed by several of the research participants to now want to serve as mentors for
potential new library leaders illustrates the value of these relationships.
It was clear from the category, Focused Preparation, that many of the research
participants had been involved with the National Library of Medicine/Association of
Academic Health Sciences Libraries Leadership Fellows Program. As mentioned before,
this is a one-year program designed to prepare emerging leaders for the position of library
director in academic health sciences libraries (Lipscomb et al., 2009). Debra mentioned
her experience with the program as being one of the most useful activities she did to
prepare herself for becoming a library director. Terri and Lily both discussed with me
how important they knew going through the program was for their career and that it was

162

really a capstone experience that brought many academic health sciences library
leadership concepts together for them. Lipscomb et al. (2009) did a review of the
program by interviewing past fellow graduates. They found from their study that the
program enhanced leadership skills, provided fellows a network of peers, and gave them
credibility as candidates for library director positions. My discussions with the research
participants who took part in the program confirmed these findings.
When asking the research participants about their most important leadership
qualities and what qualities they looked for in potential leaders I received a wide range of
answers, but there were also many common responses. Each participant recognized the
need for good communication and collaborative skills and the ability to create a vision for
the library. For example, Terri told m0e of her efforts to improve her communication
skills, “[Y]ou're constantly working on your communication skills, what you relay, how
you relay it, where do you want to put effort into communication versus not in order to be
a successful leader and drive a successful organization.” The ability to work
collaboratively was almost assumed at the director-level and most participants spoke
about it as a normal part of their day. In fact, Jill said it was her leadership style and how
she approached projects, she told me, “I like a collaborative approach to things, and I've
learned that that's really good when there's big stakes involved.” As mentioned before,
Create a Vision was a category that emerged under the theme, Understanding Leadership,
as it was clearly a major part of the essence of the participants’ experience with being
library directors. I thought Lily stated it well for the whole group when she said this
about her role in creating a vision for her library, “[B]eing able to vision and
communicate that vision and help others with their needs and understand it, get and

163

receive their input to help continue to shape it, and then oversee getting there to what that
vision is.”
Other popular responses from participants regarding their best leadership qualities
and what they looked for in potential leaders were enthusiasm, positive attitude, integrity,
ability to handle uncertainty, and initiative. It is hardly surprising to discover that many
of these were consistent with characteristics listed in several of the trait leadership studies
on academic libraries. Le (2015), for example, in his survey on library leadership, found
that the five most important leadership skills required for effective academic library
leadership were vision, integrity, management skills, collaboration skills, and
communication skills. Hernon and Rossiter (2006) and Kreitz (2009), both studying
emotional intelligence traits in library directors, determined that building and
communicating a shared vision, motivating their staff, and functioning in a political
environment were the most important traits.
The leadership traits or characteristics exhibited by the research participants and
those they mentioned looking for in potential leaders are well supported in the library
literature on leadership and in leadership literature in general. Of equal interest was how
the research participants prepared themselves once they decided they had the qualities to
be library directors. As the literature in Chapter 2 shows, these directors used a
combination of prior library experience, focused preparation through education and
training programs, and mentors. One area not previously discussed, but included in the
review of the literature is on-the-job training that many of the participants had, based on
documents I was able to obtain. None of the participants talked to me about it much other
than to mention their experience in passing. Several of the participants were interim

164

directors before becoming permanent library directors, which could be considered as onthe-job training for the position. Debra mentioned acting as director for a significant
period of time and how that helped prepare her for the permanent position, but no one
else spoke in any detail of their experience as an interim director. It would appear to be
from the literature to be an excellent path to learn some parts of the job that no other type
of training can prepare you for (Rooney, 2010).
Discussion of Research Question 3. The third research question addressed how
academic health sciences library directors measure their effectiveness as leaders. The
actual research question was: How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness
as leaders? The intent of the question was to reach past the participants’ leadership
experiences as library directors and explore their understanding of their effectiveness as
leaders.
Rosser et al. (2003) developed “a systematic approach for evaluating the
leadership effectiveness of deans and directors from individual and institutional
perspectives” (p. 1). They used social exchange theory as their framework for explaining
the effectiveness of deans and found that the personality of deans and those they
interacted with made a difference in the expectations held for deans (Bray, 2010). Rosser
et al.’s (2003) model consists of seven domains of leadership responsibility that represent
central evaluation criteria regarding the responsibilities and skills of the dean’s role.
These domains included (1) vision and goal setting, (2) management of the unit, (3)
interpersonal relationships, (4) communication skills, (5) quality of the unit’s education,
(6) support for institutional diversity, and (7) research, professional, and community
endeavors.

165

The study also took into account the relevant dimensions of leadership and the
multilevel nature of higher education institutions. They found that deans and directors
should be aware of the ability to be effective in their interpersonal relationships, ensure
individual and group support, strategize a clear direction for the unit, pull and
conceptualize ideas together, demonstrate fairness and good judgment, and effectively
perform their various functions, tasks, and responsibilities in a manner that will reflect
their institution’s goals and mission. Rosser et al. (2003) also recommended that
academic institutions invest in formally training their leaders and in conducting fair and
accurate assessments to ensure their effectiveness.
Bray (2010) used Rosser et al.’s (2003) seven domains model to study normative
patterns across the field of higher education, in particular, to study college administrators
and how they performed their roles and were expected to behave. Rosser et al.’s (2003)
work on formal and informal assessment of deans helped guide Bray (2010) to examine
unwritten rules and informal norms to understand the normative expectations of deans
and provide a better sense of what is expected and required for success in higher
education administration. Hoffman (2012), in her dissertation, sought to determine the
preparation methods experienced by academic library deans and which methods they
perceived as most valuable. She used a questionnaire instrument to measure academic
library deans’ perceived value of different preparatory methods and then tested for
perceived effectiveness using Rosser et al.’s (2003) theoretical constructs of academic
leadership. Hoffman (2012) also used Rosser et al.’s (2003) theoretical constructs of
effective academic leadership as the basis for her study. Del Favero (2005) was heavily
influenced by Rosser et al. (2003) and takes up their call for a, “better understanding of

166

how individuals and groups of individuals construct their perceptions of leadership” (p.
70). She examined the construction of leadership by discipline group and discussed the
presence of discipline differences in administrative behaviors. Rosser et al.’s (2003)
seven domains of leadership responsibility model will provide the framework for
understanding how academic health sciences library directors recognize and measure
their effectiveness as leaders.
Rosser et al. (2003) identified seven domains of leadership responsibility and
designed an instrument to capture people’s perceptions of deans’ effectiveness in those
areas. I am hoping to use these domains as a framework to guide my discussion on the
research participants’ responses to questions about their effectiveness. It seems clear from
the discussions so far that I was able to capture the essence of the research participants’
leadership experiences as directors at academic health sciences libraries since every
domain of leadership responsibility germane to library directors has been addressed. I
have discussed thoroughly the experiences of the research participants, and the
importance they place, on vision and goal setting, management of their unit, interpersonal
relationships, and communication skills. Without question, these are at the heart of being
an effective director of a health sciences library. Many of these were categories that
emerged in the findings of the study, such as Create a Vision, Advocacy and Credibility,
and Building a Team.
The participants understood, for example, that vision and goal setting were critical
their effectiveness as leaders. They dedicated a significant amount of time, energy, and
resources to these efforts. Lily spoke with me about what the visioning process meant to
her effectiveness as a leader:

167

How do I know I'm effective? When I communicate the vision, and that's after I
should have taken into consideration when building the vision, the input from the
stakeholders. Whether it's the faculty and staff working here, or the faculty I meet
on the sidewalk, or meetings I go to that we're supporting and the researchers, and
the students I get to talk with, and putting that together and create that vision. And
then if I'm able to effectively communicate it to our stakeholders, and they get
behind us on it. The staff understand it, and they're able to work in a way that
helps to build that and put it in the direction that we need to go.
Not only does she address the importance of creating a vision, but other elements from
Rosser et al.’s seven domains of leadership responsibility also are present, including the
emphasis on communication and interpersonal relationships. These sentiments were
common from many of the directors that I interviewed and observed. In the discussion on
the second research question, Terri spoke about how she was always working on
improving her communication skills. Jill told me that after having gone through a 360degree evaluation, she learned that she needed to improve her communication skills. She
brought in a consultant to help her work out a communications plan for the library and
was excited about how much communications had improved. Interpersonal relationships
are, of course, at the heart of being able to build a team and being able to successfully
advocate for their libraries. Every participant spoke about the need to have good
interpersonal relationships to be effective in their positions.
Rosser et al. (2003) describe management of the unit as delegating work
effectively, allocating resources fairly and with good judgment, being able to handle
administrative tasks, problem solving, and managing staff and change well. Again, many

168

of these have emerged in the findings as the participants spoke about their need to handle
their budgets well to maintain credibility with administration. Richard talked to me about
the administrative duties inherent to the director position, such as following
administrative policies, managing the budget, delegating, and day-to-day operations of
the library. A large part of this, from the perspective of the research participants, was
managing their staff well. Lily mentioned that she always pointed to the staff whenever
her boss visited the library to praise them for something they accomplished. She would
tell her boss that she could not accomplish anything without having a good team backing
her up. I believe that is what Rosser et al. (2003) was trying to convey with their
management of the unit domain and its influence on the perception of effective
leadership.
The final three domains in Rosser et al.’s (2003) seven domains of leadership
responsibility are quality of education in the unit, support for institutional diversity, and
research, professional, and community endeavors. I should again point out these
leadership responsibility domains were designed for academic deans and were not
specifically designed to evaluate academic health sciences library directors, though they
work well as a general framework. These three domains would seem to fit the least for
the research participants, however, the library’s collections and services do make a
significant contribution to the quality of the education of the university. Also, support for
diversity is typically an institutional goal and from my conversations with participants,
their libraries were always in support of institutional goals. Every participant shared the
goal of increasing institutional diversity and believed it was a contributing factor in the
perception of their effectiveness as a leader. Finally, as I discussed earlier, being active in

169

library professional organizations as well as research and publishing were viewed by the
participants as important preparation for leadership roles in libraries. As directors this
professional participation was expected to continue. In their role as advocates for the
library, it was also important for them to be engaged with the campus community and to
be present at events. To this extent these three domains were also germane to exploring
how these directors understood their effectiveness as leaders.
As a final thought on this discussion, Rosser et al. (2003) developed their seven
domains of leadership responsibility in part because there they had found no tool to
evaluate the effectiveness of academic deans that was not a self-evaluation or an
evaluation only from the dean’s supervisor, which they believed could be biased. Their
tool allowed for input from both above and below the dean to give a more complete
picture as to the dean’s leadership effectiveness. This sounds very similar to the 360degree evaluations that several of the research participants mentioned doing or were
looking at doing. The 360-degree evaluations do provide a more complete picture as to a
director’s effectiveness and might be the best tool to determine what may be a difficult
position to evaluate.
Implications
The implications from the findings of this research study have a number of
applications to academic health sciences library directors, medical librarians, academic
health science center administrators, academic libraries and librarians, and higher
education in general. The following sections include recommendations for leadership
development in academic health sciences libraries; and the creation of a tool for
measuring effective leadership of academic health sciences library directors. The

170

experiences the study participants shared with me provided insight into the
recommendations for potential leadership development programs and activities for
potential leaders in academic health sciences libraries and even current academic health
sciences library directors. Also, the study participants’ experiences with evaluating their
leadership effectiveness also provided insight into recommendations for the creation of a
tool designed specifically for measuring the leadership effectiveness of academic health
sciences library directors.
Leadership development in academic health sciences libraries. The National
Library of Medicine and the Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries have
already partnered for a successful leadership program (Lipscomb et al., 2009). The
Medical Library Association has their own Rising Stars program along with several
continuing education courses offered on leadership. I do not think that the findings from
this research study suggest a new leadership development program is needed. I do,
however, think this study could be used to perhaps evaluate or enhance these programs to
ensure they are addressing every issue they need to be covering and doing so in an
effective manner.
These leadership programs could examine the findings of this study and compare
them with their curriculum to determine how well what their programs are covering
matches the actual experiences of my research participants. The leadership programs
could look each of the five categories under the theme, Understanding Leadership and
assess whether their program addresses the category and to what extent. I believe this
theme could serve as a general framework for a workshop on understanding leadership in
academic health sciences libraries, which would be useful not only to librarians aspiring

171

to become library directors, but also current library directors who might be looking to
keep up their skills.
The findings from this research study could also address the subject of leadership
emergence to some extent, which is not tackled in these programs. Any person who
wishes to participate in these leadership development programs must initiate the
application and compete for their spot in the program. The leadership crisis facing
academic health sciences libraries may need to go farther than that and actively recruit
potential leaders whom they can develop to assume these roles. This gets to the heart of
leadership emergence, which this study could assist with in developing criteria for
discovering potential leaders in the library field. In my analysis of the research
participants’ career journeys, I was able to detect patterns and the participants themselves
were able to provide characteristics and traits they looked for in potential leaders. It could
be possible to identify librarians on a similar path, earlier in their careers, and begin
training and developing their leadership potential at a much faster pace. This is critically
important to the library profession, which is facing a real leadership crisis due to the
number of retirements and pending retirements of many of its long-time directors. We
need to be able to identify and train the next generation of library leaders to help libraries
through this transformational and challenging period we are now experiencing.
The professional organizations could establish a more formal mentor relationship
for these potential leaders to have someone to model themselves after and go to for career
advice. It was clear from the findings of this study how important mentor relationships
were to many of the research participants in the careers and development as leaders. It
appeared that most of these mentor relationships were informal and were established

172

through where the research participant was employed. This might be an opportunity for
the professional organizations to establish a mentor program with the intent of developing
future leaders for the profession.
Academic health sciences libraries might also need to look at their organizational
structures to create more leadership positions and provide opportunities for potential
leaders to gain some on-the-job training with leading a team. Many of the research
participants spoke about the importance of getting their structure right to be effective, but
this speaks more to human resources and directors giving their staff the opportunities
they need to grow and develop. This point was emphatically made many times by the
research participants and bears repeating again here. If the profession wants to develop
new leaders, then directors must give their staff the opportunities to learn these leadership
skills and gain the experiences necessary to make it to the next level. One way to do this
is to create more leadership positions for people to get these experiences and learn these
skills.
The findings from this study provided a complete picture of the path to becoming
an academic health sciences library director, understanding the experiences of having the
position, and what it means to do the job effectively. This would be valuable to any
library leadership development program, whether to help further develop their curriculum
or to assess the effectiveness of their current curriculum. Either way, I believe this study
would have a significant positive impact on the development and growth of new
leadership in academic health sciences libraries.
Effective leadership in academic health sciences libraries. The findings of the
research study suggest academic health sciences library directors would benefit from a

173

more formal measure of their effectiveness as leaders. The participants were somewhat
divided on how they defined effective leadership and did not have an agreed-upon
measure for determining their effectiveness as leaders, though several mentioned and
used 360-degree evaluations. In my discussion of research question three, it seemed that
Rosser et al.’s (2003) seven domains of leadership responsibility, which was designed to
measure the leadership effectiveness of academic deans, adapted nicely to directors in
academic health sciences libraries.
Rosser et al. (2003) noted that academic deanships were leadership roles that were
much more political and social than hierarchical and technical, which would also seem to
describe library directors. They also make the argument that leadership effectiveness in
higher education is mostly a matter of perception, thus their recommendation to use their
tool with both senior administrators and faculty and staff to gain a more well-rounded
perception of the dean’s leadership effectiveness (Rosser et al., 2003). As I stated earlier,
the perceived effectiveness of the library director and of the library are closely associated,
and adequate funding for the library, a key indicator of administrative support, is
primarily determined by the administration’s confidence in the library leadership
(Weiner, 2003). This would seem to indicate that the seven domains of leadership
responsibility model from Rosser et al. (2003) would be an excellent framework for the
development of formal evaluation tool to measure the leadership effectiveness of
academic health sciences library directors.
It would seem that with some slight modifications to Rosser et al.’s (2003) seven
domains evaluation survey (it included a total of 58 Likert-type items) to tailor it better to
academic health sciences library directors, a 360-degree evaluation tool for measuring

174

leadership effectiveness could be created. The value of modifying Rosser et al.’s (2003)
seven domains evaluation survey is that the validity of the tool has already been
established and it would not require many changes due to the similarities in duties and
positions between academic deans and academic health sciences library directors. This
could prove a more useful evaluation tool than the generic 360-degree evaluation being
used by some library directors at the moment. This new tool would address the specific
leadership areas and concerns that are relevant to library directors in academic health
science centers and their unique challenges.
A successful tool for measuring the leadership effectiveness of academic health
sciences library directors would be beneficial in several ways. First, it could assist library
directors determine areas of strength and weakness so that they could work to improve on
their leadership effectiveness. Second, assuming the director was an effective leader, the
evaluation tool would add to his or her credibility with administration and the campus. It
is one thing to be perceived as effective, but something else entirely when you can
demonstrate your effectiveness with a credible evaluation tool. Third, such a tool would
give opportunity to library staff, peers, and campus administration to speak about the
leadership of the director and have their voices and concerns heard. It would be a health
check on the library leadership and bring greater accountability to everyone involved.
Lastly, I believe an evaluation tool like the one describe above would help the confidence
of the library director. The director would know, rather than be forced to guess, whether
he or she was doing a good job. This would allow the director to lead with more
confidence and know he or she was on the right path.

175

Research implications. The purpose of this research study was to better
understand how academic health sciences library directors experienced leadership and
how their experience related to their understanding of effective leadership. It is important
for academic health sciences libraries and medical librarians to improve library
leadership and the organizational effectiveness of the library. Academic health sciences
libraries are facing uncertain times with many challenges and transitions ahead, and
effective leadership will be needed to maintain their prominent educational role on
campus. As several other studies have shown, an effective library contributes
significantly to improvements in student retention, student success, graduation rates, and
even grant funding (Bell, 2008; Luther, 2008; Mezick, 2007; Oakleaf, 2010; Tenopir &
Volentine, 2012; Vance et al. 2012).
Therefore, it is important for the academic health sciences library profession to
recognize those with leadership potential and help them develop this potential, whether it
be through the various library professional organizations, or through their individual
institutions. This must become a high level priority for the profession and a serious
commitment of resources and effort will need to be put in place to assist in the effort.
Academic health sciences libraries may need to more actively recruit individuals with
leadership potential and create more opportunities for them to develop the type of skills
and gain the experience necessary to lead their libraries through the challenging times
ahead.
This research also has implications to higher education in general. I used the
seven domains of leadership responsibility model from Rosser et al. (2003) as a
discussion framework on evaluating leadership effectiveness because library directors are

176

very similar to the academic deans for whom they designed their evaluation tool. The
reverse, however, is also true and academic deans are very similar to library directors,
therefore the findings of this study could have some benefit to academic deans who wish
to better understand their leadership and their leadership development. As with academic
health sciences libraries, higher education could use more effective leadership throughout
and this study may contribute to understanding effective leadership and how to develop
it.
Limitations
Limitations of this study imply possible directions for future research on
leadership development and effectiveness in academic health sciences libraries. The data
collection, including two phenomenologically-based semi-structured interviews,
nonparticipant observations, and other relevant documents, and completing the
transcription and analysis of the data, was completed in about three months. The second
interview with each participant was conducted about a week after the first interview. The
observations were done as I was able to arrange time to visit the participant’s library and
find time on my schedule to travel. The 3-month period for data collection and analysis
was adequate, but it would have been better if I could have scheduled visits to all of the
participants’ libraries. Also, the interviews typically lasted between 30-60 min and there
would have been benefits to extending these interviews to 60-90 min, if the participants’
schedules would have allowed for it.
Recommendations for Future Research
The research involved directors of academic health sciences libraries at public
universities, highly involved with research, from all over the United States. There were

177

11 participants, 9 that were female and 2 were male. A phenomenological research
methodology was used in the study. Future research could expand on this study to
examine academic library directors in general or perhaps use a multi-site case study
methodology to do a more in-depth examination of leadership effectiveness at a selected
number of academic health sciences libraries. Also, future studies could include private
universities, which have a somewhat different set of challenges than public universities. It
could prove beneficial to gain the perspective of the library directors at the private
institutions on leadership effectiveness.
When discussing with research participants their career journeys that led them to
becoming library directors, there were many interesting details that emerged regarding
leadership development and the qualities and/or traits that were needed to be successful
as a leader. This remains an area in library literature that is under researched. According
to Weiner (2003), “a comprehensive body of cohesive, evidence-based research is
needed” to remedy the, “dearth of published studies or dissertations that relate leadership
to effectiveness of library directors, their organizations, or outcomes” (p. 14). Studies of
leadership development and emergence are particularly important due to the many library
directors beginning to retire from their positions (Hernon, 2010; Martin et al., 2003).
Conclusions
This qualitative phenomenological study used Bolman and Deal’s (2013) four
organizational frames model and Rosser et al.’s (2003) seven domains of leadership
responsibility to better understand how academic health sciences library directors
experienced their leadership and how their experience related to their understanding of
effective leadership. The use of phenomenological research methodology helped capture

178

the essence of the participants’ experiences with library leadership, and kept the focus on
their shared experiences as academic health sciences library directors and the meaning
they made of those experiences (Giorgi & Giorgi, 2008; Moustakas, 1994).
This research study attempted to do a comprehensive examination of the
participants’ experiences with library leadership by asking them to describe when they
knew they wanted to, and thought they could be library directors, and what they did to
prepare themselves for leadership. This was a particularly informative part of the study
and I believe directly impacts a library director’s effectiveness as a leader. The research
participants clearly expressed their belief that more leadership development and greater
understanding of leadership theories and principles were beneficial to their effectiveness
as leaders. Even after attaining the position of library director, the participants told me
they continued to read, attend seminars, and take leadership classes to continue
developing their leadership skills. Karen put it this way, “I tend to try to go to a
leadership development thing every few years. It's kind of like a booster shot to learn
about what is new and get reinvigorated.”
I stated my subjectivities in Chapter 1 of this research study. I am an interim
director at a health sciences library who has shared many of the same experiences and
challenges as many of the research participants. As difficult as it was, I put aside or
bracketed my own experiences and thoughts on effective leadership in academic health
sciences libraries and focused on the descriptions of the participants’ experiences rather
than my interpretation of these experiences (Moustakas, 1994). In so doing, I learned
more about my own narrow views of what effective leadership is and what the path to

179

leadership needs to be. I was surprised at how many different leadership styles and paths
to leadership could still ultimately lead to an effective library.
The challenges facing academic health sciences libraries today are not
insignificant and seem to be growing as many long-term library directors are starting to
retire, which is leaving a leadership void in the profession. The role these libraries have at
their institutions is still an important one, though this message can get lost without a
strong voice reminding the administration and the faculty exactly what the library does
for the campus. This is the role of the library director and academic health sciences
libraries need more effective directors to assume this role. They need to be advocates for
the library, capable of building a team, and able to create a vision that will lead their
libraries forward into the future. This future starts with understanding effective leadership
in academic health sciences libraries and how to recognize and develop potential leaders
to take on these challenges.

180

References
Adair, J. E. (1973). Action-centred leadership. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Adair, J. E. (2009). Functional leadership. NHRD Network Journal, 2(2), 2-7.
Albritton, R. L. (1998). A new paradigm of leader effectiveness for academic libraries. In
T. F. Mech & G. B. McCabe (Eds.), Leadership and academic libraries (pp. 6682). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Altbach, P. G., Gumport, P. J., & Berdahl, R. O. (2011). American higher education in
the twenty-first century: Social, political, and economic challenges (3rd ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press.
Archibald, R. B., & Feldman, D. H. (2011). Why does college cost so much? New York,
NY: Oxford University Press.
Association of Academic Health Sciences Libraries. (2014). About AAHSL. Retrieved
from http://www.aahsl.org/
Ayman, R., Chemers, M. M., & Fiedler, F. (1995). The contingency model of leadership
effectiveness: Its levels of analysis. Leadership Quarterly, 6(2), 147-167.
doi:10.1016/1048-9843(95)90032-2
Bass, B. M. (1998). Transformational leadership: Industrial, military, and educational
impact. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Bass, B. M., & Avolio, B. J. (1995). Multifactor leadership questionnaire for research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Bell, S. (2008). Keeping them enrolled: How academic libraries contribute to student
retention. Library Issues, 29(1), 1-4.

181

Blake, R. R., & Mouton, J. S. (1964). The managerial grid: Key orientations for
achieving production through people. Houston, TX: Gulf Pub. Co.
Boak, G. (2013) Situational theory of leadership. In E. H. Kessler (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
management theory (pp. 704-707). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Bolden, R., Gosling, J., Marturano, A., & Dennison, P. (2003). A review of leadership
theory and competency frameworks. Retrieved from http://www2.fcsh.unl.pt/
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (1991). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and
leadership. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bolman, L. G., & Deal, T. E. (2013). Reframing organizations: Artistry, choice, and
leadership (5th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bolman, L. G., & Gallos, J. V. (2011). Reframing academic leadership. San Francisco,
CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bonnette, A. E. (2004). Mentoring minority librarians up the career ladder. Library
Administration and Management, 18(3), 134-140.
Bowen, E. (2004). A leadership reality check involving county extension leaders and
their stakeholders. Journal of Higher Education Outreach and Engagement,
10(1), 79-90.
Bowers, D. G., & Seashore, S. E. (1966). Predicting organizational effectiveness with a
four-factor theory of leadership. Administrative Science Quarterly, 11(2), 238263.
Bray, N. J. (2010). The deanship and its faculty interpreters: Do mertonian norms of
science translate into norms for administration? Journal of Higher Education,
81(3), 284-316.

182

Brenner, V. C., Carmack, C. W., & Weinstein, M. G. (1971). An empirical test of the
motivation-hygiene theory. Journal of Accounting Research, 9(2), 359-366.
Brolly, M. (1967). The managerial grid. Occupational Psychology, 41(4), 231-237.
Burns, J. M. (1979). Leadership. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Carlyle, T. (1830, 1997). On heroes, hero-worship, and the heroic in history. Retrieved
from http://www.gutenberg.org
Cheek, J. (2008). Research design. In L. M. Given (Ed.), The SAGE encyclopedia of
qualitative research methods (pp. 761-763). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Chemers, M. M. (1993). An integrative theory of leadership. In M. M. Chemers & R.
Ayman (Eds.), Leadership theory and research: Perspectives and directions (pp.
293–319). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Cilesiz, S. (2011). A phenomenological approach to experiences with technology:
Current state, promise, and future directions for research. Educational Technology
Research & Development, 59(4), 487-510. doi:10.1007/s11423-010-9173-2
Costantino, T. E. (2008). Constructivism. In L. M. Given (Ed.), The SAGE encyclopedia
of qualitative research methods (pp. 116-119). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Creswell, J. W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (3rd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.
Creswell, J. W. (2014). Research design: Qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods
approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.

183

Crotty, M. (1998). The foundations of social research: Meaning and perspective in the
research process. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Cunningham, K. (2010). The hidden costs of keeping current: Technology and libraries.
Journal of Library Administration, 50(3), 217-235.
doi:10.1080/01930821003634955
Dansereau, F., Graen, G., & Haga, W. J. (1975). A vertical dyad linkage approach to
leadership within formal organizations. Organizational Behavior and Human
Performance, 13(1), 46-78. doi:10.1016/0030-5073(75)90005-7
De Cremer, D., & van Knippenberg, D. (2004). Leader self-sacrifice and leadership
effectiveness: The moderating role of leader self-confidence. Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 95(2), 140-155.
doi:10.1016/j.obhdp.2004.04.002
Del Favero, M. (2005). The social dimension of academic discipline as a discriminator of
academic deans’ administrative behaviors. The Review of Higher Education,
29(1), 69-96.
Del Favero, M. (2006). An examination of the relationship between academic discipline
and cognitive complexity in academic deans' administrative behavior. Research in
Higher Education, 47(3), 281-315. doi:10.1007/s11162-005-9389-x
Derue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and
behavior theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic of their relative
validity. Personnel Psychology, 64, 7-52.
Dierendonck, D. v., & Patterson, K. (2010). Servant leadership: Developments in theory
and research. New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan.

184

Dionne, S. D., Yammarino, F. J., Howell, J. P., & Villa, J. (2005). Substitutes for
leadership, or not. Leadership Quarterly, 16(1), 169-193.
doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2004.09.012
Dowell, D. R. (1998). Leadership. In T. F. Mech & G. B. McCabe (Eds.), Leadership and
Academic Libraries (pp. 159-170). Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Dowling, M., & Cooney, A. (2012). Research approaches related to phenomenology:
Negotiating a complex landscape. Nurse Researcher, 20(2), 21-27.
Earle, V. (2010). Phenomenology as research method or substantive metaphysics? An
overview of phenomenology's uses in nursing. Nursing Philosophy, 11(4), 286296. doi:10.1111/j.1466-769X.2010.00458.x
Evans, M. G. (1996). R.J. House's "A path-goal theory of leader effectiveness".
Leadership Quarterly, 7(3), 305-309.
Fagan, J. C. (2012). The effectiveness of academic library deans and directors. Library
Leadership & Management, 26(1), 1-19.
Feldmann, L. M., Level, A. V., & Liu, S. (2013). Leadership training and development:
An academic library's findings. Library Management, 34(1/2), 96-104.
doi:10.1108/01435121311298306
Fernandez, C. F., & Vecchio, R. P. (1997). Situational leadership theory revisited: A
test of an across-jobs perspective. Leadership Quarterly, 8(1), 67-84.
Fiedler, F. E. (1967). A theory of leadership effectiveness. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.),
Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 1). New York, NY: Academic
Press.
Fiedler, F. E. (1972). The effects of leadership training and experience: A

185

contingency model interpretation. Administrative Science Quarterly, 17(4), 453470.
Fincher, C. (1996). Theory and research in administrative leadership. In J. C. Smart
(Ed.), Higher education: Handbook of theory and research (Vol. 11, pp. 307–
336). New York, NY: Agathon Press.
Fitsimmons, G. (2008). Academic library directors in the eyes of hiring
administrators: A comparison of the attributes, qualifications, and competencies
desired by chief academic officers with those recommended by academic library
directors. Advances in Library Administration and Organization, 26, 265-315.
Fleming-May, R. A., & Douglass, K. (2014). Framing librarianship in the academy: An
analysis using Bolman and Deal's model of organizations. College & Research
Libraries, 75(3), 389-415.
Flood, A. (2010). Understanding phenomenology. Nurse Researcher, 17(2), 7-15.
Fought, R. L. (2014). Breaking inertia: Increasing access to journals during a period of
declining budgets: A case study. Journal of the Medical Library Association,
102(3), 192-196. doi:10.3163/1536-5050.102.3.009
Fought, R. L., Gahn, P., & Mills, Y. (2014). Promoting the library through the collection
development policy: A case study. Journal of Electronic Resources in Medical
Libraries, 11(4), 169-178. doi:10.1080/15424065.2014.969031
Fought, R. L., & Misawa, M. (2016). Effective leadership in academic health sciences
libraries: A qualitative phenomenological study. Journal of Library
Administration, 56(8), 1-16. doi:10.1080/01930826.2015.1130548
Freiburger, G. (2010). A "white elephant" in the library: A case study on loss of space

186

from the Arizona Health Sciences Library at the University of Arizona. Journal of
the Medical Library Association, 98(1), 29-31. doi:10.3163/1536-5050.98.1.011
Frey, R. S. (1984). Need for achievement, entrepreneurship, and economic growth: A
critique of the McClelland thesis. The Social Science Journal, 21(2), 125-134.
Gardner, W. L. (2013) Authentic leadership. In E. H. Kessler (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
management theory (pp. 53-56). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.
Garson, D. S., & Wallace, D. (2014) Leadership capabilities in the midst of transition at
the Harvard library. In B. L. Eden & J. C. Fagan (Eds.), Leadership in academic
libraries today: Connecting theory to practice (pp. 41-76). Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Gayton, J. T. (2008). Academic libraries: "Social" or "communal?" The nature and future
of academic libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 34(1), 60-66.
Germano, M. (2014). Leadership and value co-creation in academic libraries. In B. L.
Eden & J. C. Fagan (Eds.), Leadership in academic libraries today: Connecting
theory to practice (pp. 111-122). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Gerstner, C. R., & Day, D. V. (1997). Meta-analytic review of leader–member exchange
theory: Correlates and construct issues. Journal of Applied Psychology, 82(6),
827-844. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.82.6.827
Giesecke, J. (2010). Finding the right metaphor: Restructuring, realigning, and
repackaging today's research libraries. Journal of Library Administration, 51(1),
54-65. doi:10.1080/01930826.2011.531641

187

Gilstrap, D. L. (2009). A complex systems framework for research on leadership and
organizational dynamics in academic libraries. portal: Libraries & the Academy,
9(1), 57-77.
Giorgi, A., & Giorgi, B. (2008). Phenomenology. In J. A. Smith (Ed.), Qualitative
psychology: A practical guide to research methods (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA:
SAGE Publications.
Glesne, C. (2011). Becoming qualitative researchers: An introduction (4th ed.). Boston,
MA: Pearson.
Glesne, C. (2016). Becoming qualitative researchers: An introduction (5th ed.). Boston,
MA: Pearson.
Gmelch, W. H., & Wolverton, M. (2002, April 1). An investigation of dean leadership.
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research
Association, New Orleans, LA.
Graeff, C. L. (1983). The situational leadership theory: A critical view. Academy of
Management Review, 8(2), 285-291. doi:10.5465/AMR.1983.4284738
Graen, G. B., & Uhl-Bien, M. (1995). Relationship-based approach to leadership:
Development of leader-member exchange (LMX) theory of leadership over 25
years: Applying a multi-level multi-domain perspective. Leadership Quarterly,
6(2), 219-247.
Greenleaf, R. K. (1977). Servant leadership: A journey into the nature of legitimate
power and greatness. New York, NY: Paulist Press.
Halaychik, C. S. (2014). Rapid organizational change through servant leadership. Library
Leadership & Management, 28(3), 1-18.

188

Heidorn, P. B. (2011). The emerging role of libraries in data curation and e-science.
Journal of Library Administration, 51(7-8), 662-672.
doi:10.1080/01930826.2011.601269
Heimovics, R. D., Herman, R. D., & Jurkiewicz, C. L. (1995). The political dimension of
effective nonprofit executive leadership. Nonprofit Management and Leadership,
5(3), 233-248. doi: 10.1002/nml.4130050303
Hernon, P. (Ed.). (2010). Shaping the future: Advancing the understanding of leadership.
Santa Barbara, CA: Libraries Unlimited.
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2001). University library directors in the
Association of Research Libraries: The next generation, part one. College &
Research Libraries, 62(2), 116-145.
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2002). University library directors in the
Association of Research Libraries: The next generation, part two. College &
Research Libraries, 63(1), 73-90.
Hernon, P., & Schwartz, C. (2006). Leadership: A unique focus. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 32(1), 1-2.
Hersey, P., & Blanchard, K. H. (1969). Management of organizational behavior:
Utilizing human resources. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Herzberg, F. (1959). The motivation to work (2nd ed.). New York, NY: Wiley.
Herzberg, F. (2003). One more time: How do you motivate employees? Harvard
Business Review, 81(1), 87-96.
Hoffman, S. (2012). The preparation of academic library administrators. (Ph.D. Higher
Education), University of North Texas.

189

House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 16(3), 321-339.
House, R. J. (1996). Path-goal theory of leadership: Lessons, legacy, and a reformulated
theory. Leadership Quarterly, 7(3), 323-352.
House, R. J., & Mitchell, T. R. (1974). Path-goal theory of leadership. Journal of
Contemporary Business, 3(4), 81-97.
Hutton, E. L. (2013). Perception of organizational openness to performing Kouzes &
Posner's Five Practices of Exemplary Leadership (Doctoral dissertation).
Retrieved from ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global. (3542570)
Jackson, J. F. L. (2004). Toward a business model of executive behavior: An exploration
of the workdays of four college of education deans at large research universities.
The Review of Higher Education, 27(3), 409-427. doi:10.1353/rhe.2004.0002
Jakubs, D. (2008). Out of the gray times: Leading libraries into the digital future. Journal
of Library Administration, 48(2), 235-248. doi:10.1080/01930820802231518
Jankowska, M. A., & Marcum, J. W. (2010). Sustainability challenge for academic
libraries: Planning for the future. College & Research Libraries, 71(2), 160-170.
Johnson, L., Adams Becker, S., Estrada, V. & Freeman, A. (2015). NMC Horizon Report:
2015 library edition. Austin, TX: The New Media Consortium.
Judge, T. A., Bono, J. E., Ilies, R., & Gerhardt, M. W. (2002). Personality and leadership:
A qualitative and quantitative review. Journal of Applied Psychology, 87(4), 765780. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.87.4.765

190

Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Kosalka, T. (2009). The bright and dark sides of leader
traits: A review and theoretical extension of the leader trait paradigm. Leadership
Quarterly, 20(6), 855-875. doi:10.1016/j.leaqua.2009.09.004
Käufer, S., & Chemero, A. (2015). Phenomenology: An introduction. Malden, MA:
Polity Press.
Kerr, S., & Jermier, J. M. (1978). Substitutes for leadership: Their meaning and
measurement. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 22(3), 375403. doi:10.1016/0030-5073(78)90023-5
Kezar, A. (2000). Pluralistic leadership: Incorporating diverse voices. The Journal of
Higher Education, 71(6), 722-743. doi:10.2307/2649160
Kezar, A., Eckel, P., Contreras-McGavin, M., & Quaye, S. (2008). Creating a web of
support: An important leadership strategy for advancing campus diversity. Higher
Education, 55(1), 69-92. doi: 10.1007/s10734-007-9068-2
Kirkland, J. J. (1997). The missing women library directors: Deprivation versus
mentoring. College & Research Libraries, 58(4), 375-383.
Kopelman, R. E., Prottas, D. J., & Davis, A. L. (2008). Douglas McGregor's Theory X
and Y: Toward a construct-valid measure. Journal of Managerial Issues, 20(2),
255-271. doi:10.2307/40604607
Kopelman, R. E., Prottas, D. J., & Falk, D. W. (2012). Further development of a measure
of Theory X and Y managerial assumptions. Journal of Managerial Issues, 24(4),
450-470.
Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (1987). The leadership challenge: How to get
extraordinary things done in organizations. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.

191

Kouzes, J. M., & Posner, B. Z. (2013). Leadership practices. In E. H. Kessler (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of management theory (pp. 460-462). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Kreitz, P. A. (2009). Leadership and emotional intelligence: A study of university
library directors and their senior management teams. College & Research
Libraries, 70(6), 531-554.
Kumar, S., Adhish, V. S., & Deoki, N. (2014). Making sense of theories of leadership
for capacity building. Indian Journal of Community Medicine, 39(2), 82-86.
doi:10.4103/0970-0218.132721
Le, B. P. (2015). Academic library leadership in the digital age. Library Management,
36(4/5), 300-314. doi:10.1108/LM-07-2014-0083
Lederman, D. (2010). No letup from Washington. Inside Higher Education
Retrieved from http://www.insidehighered.com/news/2010/04/13/hlc
Leonard, S. P. (2013). Phenomenology of speech in a cold place: The Polar Eskimo
language as "lived experience". International Journal of Language Studies, 7(1),
151-174.
Lester, S. (1999). An introduction to phenomenological research. Stan Lester
Developments. Taunton. Retrieved from http://www.sld.demon.co.uk/resmethy.pdf
Lin, C. P. (2001). Changes in stated job requirements of director positions of
academic libraries in the U.S. Journal of Information, Communication, and
Library Science, 8(1), 9-25.

192

Lipscomb, C. E., Martin, E. R., & Peay, W. J. (2009). Building the next generation of
leaders: The NLM/AAHSL Leadership Fellows Program. Journal of Library
Administration, 49(8), 847-867. doi:10.1080/01930820903396970
Luther, J. (2008). University investment in the library: What's the return?: A case study
at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. Retrieved from San Diego,
CA: http://www.ila.org/advocacy/pdf/University_investment.pdf
Lynch, B. P., Murray-Rust, C., Parker, S. E., Turner, D., Walker, D. P., Wilkinson, F. C.,
& Zimmerman, J. (2007). Attitudes of presidents and provosts on the university
library. College & Research Libraries, 68(3), 213-228.
Mapp, T. (2008). Understanding phenomenology: The lived experience. British Journal
of Midwifery, 16(5), 308-311.
Margerison, C., & Glube, R. (1979). Leadership decision-making: An empirical test of
the Vroom and Yetton model. Journal of Management Studies, 16(1), 45-55.
Martin, E. R., Brown, H-A., Epstein, B. A., Lipscomb, C. E., Riley, R. A., & Shipman,
J. P. (2003). The Leadership Reconsidered Symposium: Report. Journal of
the Medical Library Association, 91(2), 251–257.
Martin, J. (2015). Transformational and transactional leadership: An exploration of
gender, experience, and institution type. portal: Libraries and the Academy,
15(2), 331-351.
Maslanka, A. M. (2004), Evolution of leadership theories (Master’s Thesis). Retrieved
from ABI/INFORM Global. (Publication No. AAT 1424602)
Mavrinac, M. A. (2005). Transformational leadership: Peer mentoring as a valuesbased learning process. portal: Libraries and the Academy, 5(3), 391-405.

193

McClelland, D. C. (1961). The achieving society. Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand.
McCracken, P. H. (2000). The presence of the doctorate among small college library
directors. College & Research Libraries, 61(5), 400-408.
McGregor, D., & Cutcher-Gershenfeld, J. (1960, 2006). The human side of enterprise
(Annotated ed.). New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Mehra, B., & Braquet, D. (2014). Marriage between participatory leadership and action
research to advocate benefits equality for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and
transgendered people. In B. L. Eden & J. C. Fagan (Eds.), Leadership in academic
libraries today: Connecting theory to practice (pp. 185-212). Lanham, MD:
Rowman & Littlefield.
Merriam, S. B. (2002). Qualitative research in practice: Examples for discussion and
analysis. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Merriam, S. B., & Tisdell, E. J. (2016). Qualitative research: A guide to design and
implementation (4th ed.). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Mezick, E. M. (2007). Return on investment: Libraries and student retention. The Journal
of Academic Librarianship, 33(5), 561-566. doi:10.1016/j.acalib.2007.05.002
Miller, R. (2012). Damn the recession, full speed ahead. Journal of Library
Administration, 52(1), 3-17. doi:10.1080/01930826.2012.629963
Misawa, M. (2013). Week 7: Unit 7 description phenomenological research. Personal
Collection of M. Misawa, University of Memphis, Memphis, TN.
Moran, D. (2000). Introduction to Phenomenology. New York, NY: Routledge.
Moustakas, C. E. (1994). Phenomenological research methods. Thousand Oaks, CA:
SAGE Publications.

194

Muijs, D., Harris, A., Lumby, J., Morrison, M., & Sood, K. (2006). Leadership and
leadership development in highly effective further education providers. Is there a
relationship? Journal of Further and Higher Education, 30(1), 87-106.
doi:10.1080/03098770500432096
Northouse, P. G. (2013). Leadership: Theory and practice. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Oakleaf, M. (2010). The value of academic libraries: A comprehensive research review
and report. Chicago, IL: Association of College and Research Libraries.
Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/ala/mgrps/divs/acrl/issues/value/val_report.pdf
O’Keeffe, J. (1998). Small college library directors: Getting in the door and surviving
on the job. College & Research Libraries, 59(2), 139-152.
Palmer, B., Walls, M., Burgess, Z., & Stough, C. (2001). Emotional intelligence and
effective leadership. Leadership & Organization Development Journal, 22(1), 510. doi:10.1108/01437730110380174
Papi, A., Ghazavi, R., & Moradi, S. (2015). Determining the level of awareness of the
physicians in using the variety of electronic information resources and the
effecting factors. Journal of Education and Health Promotion, 4, 49-54.
doi:10.4103/2277-9531.162316
Parker, S. E. (2014). Positive leadership in libraries: The rise of the credible optimist. In
B. L. Eden & J. C. Fagan (Eds.), Leadership in academic libraries today:
Connecting theory to practice (pp. 15-40). Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Patton, M. Q. (2015). Qualitative research & evaluation methods: Integrating theory and
practice (4th ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.

195

Persily, G. L., & Butter, K. A. (2010). Reinvisioning and redesigning "a library for the
fifteenth through twenty-first centuries": A case study on loss of space from the
Library and Center for Knowledge Management, University of California, San
Francisco. Journal of the Medical Library Association, 98(1), 44-48.
doi:10.3163/1536-5050.98.1.015
Peshkin, A. (1988). In search of subjectivity: One's own. Educational Researcher, 17(7),
17-21. doi:10.2307/1174381
Podsakoff, P. M., & MacKenzie, S. B. (1997). Kerr and Jermier's substitutes for
leadership model: Background, empirical assessment, and suggestions for future
research. Leadership Quarterly, 8(2), 117-125.
Prati, L. M., Douglas, C., Ferris, G. R., Ammeter, A. P., & Buckley, M. R. (2003).
Emotional intelligence, leadership effectiveness, and team outcomes. The
International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 11(1), 21-40.
Pritchard, S. M. (2008). Deconstructing the library: Reconceptualizing collections, spaces
and services. Journal of Library Administration, 48(2), 219-233.
doi:10.1080/01930820802231492
Rosser, V. J., Johnsrud, L. K., & Heck, R. H. (2003). Academic deans and directors:
Assessing their effectiveness from individual and institutional perspectives. The
Journal of Higher Education, 74(1), 1-25. doi:10.1353/jhe.2003.0007
Rost, J. C. (1991). Leadership for the twenty-first century. New York, NY: Praeger.
Russ, T. L. (2013) Leadership continuum theory. In E. H. Kessler (Ed.), Encyclopedia of
management theory (pp. 433-435). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.

196

Saldaña, J. (2013). The coding manual for qualitative researchers (2nd ed.). Los Angeles,
CA: SAGE Publications.
Sarjeant-Jenkins, R. (2012). Why market? Library Leadership & Management, 26(1), 18.
Seidman, I. (2013). Interviewing as qualitative research: A guide for researchers in
education and the social sciences (4th ed.). New York, NY: Teachers College
Press.
Simpson, S. (2012). The styles, models & philosophy of leadership. Ventus Publishing
ApS. Retrieved from http://a1l.co.za/Knowledgeshop/images/ebookphil.pdf
Skinner, K., & Krabbenhoeft, N. (2014). Training the 21st century library leader: A
review of library leadership training, 1998-2013. Atlanta, GA: Educopia Institute.
Smart, J. C. (2003). Organizational Effectiveness of 2-Year Colleges: The Centrality of
Cultural and Leadership Complexity. Research in Higher Education, 44(6), 673703.
Smith, J. A., Flowers, P., & Larkin, M. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological
analysis: Theory, method and research. Los Angeles, CA: SAGE Publications.
Sokolowski, R. (2000). Introduction to phenomenology. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press.
Spalding, H. H., & Wang, J. (2006). The challenges and opportunities of marketing
academic libraries in the USA. Library Management, 27(6/7), 494-504.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435120610702477

197

Spendlove, M. (2007). Competencies for effective leadership in higher education. The
International Journal of Educational Management, 21(5), 407-417.
doi:10.1108/09513540710760183
Steers, R. M., Mowday, R. T., & Shapiro, D. L. (2004). Introduction to special topic
forum: The future of work motivation theory. The Academy of Management
Review, 29(3), 379-387. doi:10.2307/20159049
Stoffle, C. J., & Cuillier, C. (2010). Student-centered service and support: A case study of
the University of Arizona Libraries' Information Commons. Journal of Library
Administration, 50(2), 117-134. doi:10.1080/01930820903455065
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the
literature. Journal of Psychology, 25, 35-71.
Stogdill, R. M. (1974). Handbook of leadership: A survey of theory and research. New
York, NY: Free Press.
Stone, L. (2008). Epistemology. In L. M. Given (Ed.), The SAGE encyclopedia of
qualitative research methods (pp. 264-268). Los Angeles, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Swiercz, P. M. (2003). Rational, human, political, and symbolic text in Harvard Business
School cases: A study of structure and content. Journal of Management
Education, 27(4), 407-430. doi: 10.1177/1052562903252511
Sypawka, W., Mallett, W., & McFadden, C. (2010). Leadership styles of community
college academic deans. The Community College Enterprise, 16(1), 63-73.
Tannenbaum, R., & Schmidt, W. H. (1958). How to choose a leadership pattern. Harvard
Business Review, 36(2), 95-101.

198

Tannenbaum, R., & Schmidt, W. H. (1973). How to choose a leadership pattern. Harvard
Business Review, 51(3), 162-180.
Taylor, J. C. (1971). An empirical examination of A Four-Factor Theory of Leadership
using smallest space analysis. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance,
6, 249-266.
Tenopir, C., & Volentine, R. (2012). Scholarly reading habits: Demonstrating library
value. LINK, (May), 8-9.
Thompson, M. D. (2005). Organizational climate perception and job element satisfaction:
A multi-frame application in a higher education setting. E-Journal of
Organizational Learning and Leadership, 4(Fall/Winter).
Vagle, M. D. (2014). Crafting phenomenological research. Walnut Creek, CA: Left
Coast Press.
van Manen, M. (2014). Phenomenology of practice: Meaning-giving methods in
phenomenological research and writing. Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Vance, J. M., Kirk, R., & Gardner, J. G. (2012). Measuring the impact of library
instruction on freshman success and persistence: A quantitative analysis.
Communications in Information Literacy, 6(1), 49-58.
Vroom, V. H., & Jago, A. G. (1978). On the validity of the Vroom-Yetton model.
Journal of Applied Psychology, 63(2), 151-162. doi:10.1037/0021-9010.63.2.151
Vroom, V. H., & Jago, A. G. (1988). The new leadership: Managing participation in
organizations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Vroom, V. H., & Yetton, P. W. (1973). Leadership and decision-making. Pittsburgh, PA:
University of Pittsburgh Press.

199

Wayne, S. J. (2013). Leader-member exchange theory. In E. H. Kessler (Ed.),
Encyclopedia of management theory (pp. 429-433). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications.
Weiner, S. G. (2003). Leadership of academic libraries: A literature review. Education
Libraries, 26(2), 5-18.
Wepner, S. B., Henk, W., & Lovell, S. (2015). Developing deans as effective leaders for
today's changing educational landscape. Journal of Higher Education
Management, 30(1), 51-64.
Wepner, S. B., Onofrio, A., & Wilhite, S. C. (2008). The leadership dimensions of
education deans. Journal of Teacher Education, 59(2), 153-169.
Wheeler, D. W. (2012). Servant leadership for higher education: Principles and
practices. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Wolverton, M., Ackerman, R., & Holt, S. (2005). Preparing for leadership: What
academic department chairs need to know. Journal of Higher Education Policy &
Management, 27(2), 227-238. doi:10.1080/13600800500120126
Wolverton, M., Gmelch, W. H., Montez, J., & Nies, C. T. (2001). The changing nature of
the academic deanship (ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report, 28 n.1). San
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Young, A. P., Hernon, P., & Powell, R. R. (2006). Attributes of Academic Library
Leadership: An Exploratory Study of Some Gen-Xers. Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 32(5), 489-502.
Yukl, G. A. (1989). Leadership in organizations. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall.

200

Yukl, G. A. (2012). Effective leadership behavior: What we know and what questions
need more attention. Academy of Management Perspectives, 26(4), 66-85.
doi:10.5465/amp.2012.0088
Zaccaro, S. J. (2007). Trait-based perspectives of leadership. American Psychologist,
62(1), 6-16. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.62.1.6
Zaccaro, S. J., Kemp, C., & Bader, P. (2004). Leader traits and attributes. In J. Antonakis
(Ed.), The nature of leadership (pp. 101-124). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE
Publications.

201

Appendix A
IRB Approval Email
Hello,
The University of Memphis Institutional Review Board, FWA00006815, has reviewed
and approved your submission in accordance with all applicable statuses and regulations
as well as ethical principles.
PI NAME: Ricky fought
CO-PI:
PROJECT TITLE: Effective leadership in academic health sciences libraries: A
qualitative phenomenological study
FACULTY ADVISOR NAME (if applicable): Mitsunori Misawa
IRB ID: #3678
APPROVAL DATE: 4/10/2015
EXPIRATION DATE: 4/10/2016
LEVEL OF REVIEW: Expedited
Please Note: Modifications do not extend the expiration of the original approval

Approval of this project is given with the following obligations:
1. If this IRB approval has an expiration date, an approved renewal must be in
effect to continue the project prior to that date. If approval is not obtained, the
human consent form(s) and recruiting material(s) are no longer valid and any
research activities involving human subjects must stop.
2. When the project is finished or terminated, a completion form must be completed
and sent to the board.
3. No change may be made in the approved protocol without prior board approval,
whether the approved protocol was reviewed at the Exempt, Exedited or Full Board
level.
4. Exempt approval is considered to have no expiration date and no further review
is necessary unless the protocol needs modification.
Approval of this project is given with the following special obligations:
Thank you,
James P. Whelan, Ph.D.
Institutional Review Board Chair

202

The University of Memphis.
Note: Review outcomes will be communicated to the email address on file. This email should be
considered an official communication from the UM IRB. Consent Forms are no longer being stamped
as well. Please contact the IRB at IRB@memphis.edu if a letter on IRB letterhead is required.

Hello,
The University of Memphis Institutional Review Board, FWA00006815, has reviewed
and approved your submission in accordance with all applicable statuses and regulations
as well as ethical principles.
PI NAME: Ricky Fought
CO-PI:
PROJECT TITLE: Effective leadership in academic health sciences libraries: A
qualitative phenomenological study
FACULTY ADVISOR NAME (if applicable): Mitsunori Misawa
IRB ID: #3678
APPROVAL DATE: 4/8/2016
EXPIRATION DATE: 4/8/2017
LEVEL OF REVIEW: Expedited
Please Note: Modifications do not extend the expiration of the original approval

Approval of this project is given with the following obligations:
1. If this IRB approval has an expiration date, an approved renewal must be in
effect to continue the project prior to that date. If approval is not obtained, the
human consent form(s) and recruiting material(s) are no longer valid and any
research activities involving human subjects must stop.
2. When the project is finished or terminated, a completion form must be completed
and sent to the board.
3. No change may be made in the approved protocol without prior board approval,
whether the approved protocol was reviewed at the Exempt, Exedited or Full Board
level.
4. Exempt approval is considered to have no expiration date and no further review
is necessary unless the protocol needs modification.
Approval of this project is given with the following special obligations:
Thank you,
203

James P. Whelan, Ph.D.
Institutional Review Board Chair
The University of Memphis.
Note: Review outcomes will be communicated to the email address on file. This email should be
considered an official communication from the UM IRB.

204

Institutional Review Board
315 Administration Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152-3370
Office: 901.678.2705
Fax: 901.678.2199

Appendix B
Consent to Participate in a Research Study
TITLE OF STUDY: A PHENOMENOLOGICAL STUDY OF EFFECTIVE LEADERSHIP IN
ACADEMIC HEALTH SCIENCES LIBRARIES IN THE UNITED STATES
WHY ARE YOU BEING INVITED TO TAKE PART IN THIS RESEARCH?
You are being invited to take part in a research study about effective leadership in academic
health sciences libraries. You are being invited to take part in this research study because you
meet the study’s pre-determined criteria. If you volunteer to take part in this study, you will be one
of about 15 people to do so.

WHO IS DOING THE STUDY?
The person in charge of this study is Rick L. Fought of University of Memphis Department of
Leadership. He is being guided in this research by Dr. Mitsunori Misawa. There may be other
people on the research team assisting at different times during the study.

WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THIS STUDY?
By doing this study, we hope to better understand how academic health sciences library directors
construct their perceptions of leadership and how that relates to their understanding of effective
leadership.

ARE THERE REASONS WHY YOU SHOULD NOT TAKE PART IN THIS STUDY?
You could be excluded from this study if you are an interim director or have been in the library
director position for less than six months.

WHERE IS THE STUDY GOING TO TAKE PLACE AND HOW LONG WILL IT LAST?
The research procedures will be conducted via phone or videoconferencing. There will be two
interviews. Each interview will take approximately 1 hour. The total amount of time you will be
asked to volunteer for this study is about 2 hours.

WHAT WILL YOU BE ASKED TO DO?
As a participant in this study, you will be interviewed and asked questions about your experiences
as a leader, how you define leadership, and qualities you look for in a leader. You will also be
asked about how you evaluate your effectiveness as a leader and what constitutes effective
leadership in academic health sciences libraries.

205

Institutional Review Board
315 Administration Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152-3370
Office: 901.678.2705
Fax: 901.678.2199
WHAT ARE THE POSSIBLE RISKS AND DISCOMFORTS?
To the best of our knowledge, the things you will be doing have no more risk of harm than you
would experience in everyday life. The research does not include any procedures that could
cause possible physical harm.
WILL YOU BENEFIT FROM TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
There is no guarantee that you will get any benefit from taking part in this study. However, you
may develop a deeper understanding of your leadership style and how to be more effective as a
leader if you choose to participate. Your willingness to take part may also, in the future, help
society as a whole better understand this research topic.
DO YOU HAVE TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY?
If you decide to take part in the study, it should be because you really want to volunteer. You will
not lose any benefits or rights you would normally have if you choose not to volunteer. You can
stop at any time during the study and still keep the benefits and rights you had before
volunteering.

IF YOU DON’T WANT TO TAKE PART IN THE STUDY, ARE THERE OTHER CHOICES?
If you do not want to be in the study, there are no other choices except not to take part in the
study.

WHAT WILL IT COST YOU TO PARTICIPATE?
There are no costs associated with taking part in the study.

WILL YOU RECEIVE ANY REWARDS FOR TAKING PART IN THIS STUDY?
You will not receive any rewards or payment for taking part in the study.

WHO WILL SEE THE INFORMATION THAT YOU GIVE?
We will make every effort to keep private all research records that identify you to the extent
allowed by law. However, there are some circumstances in which we may have to show your
information to other people. For example, we may be required to show information which
identifies you to people who need to be sure we have done the research correctly; these would
be people from such organizations as the University of Memphis
Your information will be combined with information from other people taking part in the study.
When we write about the study to share it with other researchers, we will write about the
combined information we have gathered. You will not be personally identified in these written

206

Institutional Review Board
315 Administration Bldg.
Memphis, TN 38152-3370
Office: 901.678.2705
Fax: 901.678.2199
materials. We may publish the results of this study; however, we will keep your name and other
identifying information private.
We will make every effort to prevent anyone who is not on the research team from knowing that
you gave us information, or what that information is. A recording of the interview will be encrypted
and kept on an external hard drive.
CAN YOUR TAKING PART IN THE STUDY END EARLY?
If you decide to take part in the study you still have the right to decide at any time that you no
longer want to continue. You will not be treated differently if you decide to stop taking part in the
study.
The individuals conducting the study may need to withdraw you from the study. This may occur if
you are not able to follow the directions they give you, if they find that you being in the study is
more risk than benefit to you.
WHAT IF YOU HAVE QUESTIONS, SUGGESTIONS, CONCERNS, OR COMPLAINTS?
Before you decide whether to accept this invitation to take part in the study, please ask any
questions that might come to mind now. Later, if you have questions, suggestions, concerns, or
complaints about the study, you can contact the investigator, Rick L. Fought (email:
rlfought@memphis.edu; phone: (901) 687-0118) or Dr. Mitsunori Misawa (email:
mmisawa@memphis.edu; phone: (901) 678-4060). If you have any questions about your rights
as a volunteer in this research, contact the Institutional Review Board staff at the University of
Memphis at 901-678-2705. We will give you a signed copy of this consent form to take with you.

What happens to my privacy if I am interviewed?
Your privacy will be protected at all times. Your real name will not be identified on any documents
or other transcripts, and will be replaced by a pseudonym (false name) assigned by the
participant or the researchers.
_________________________________________
Signature of person agreeing to take part in the study

____________
Date

_________________________________________
Printed name of person agreeing to take part in the study
Rick L. Fought
_________________________________________
Name of [authorized] person obtaining informed consent

207

5/10/2016
____________
Date

APPENDIX C
Interview Guide
Purpose Statement: The purpose of this qualitative phenomenological study is to better
understand how academic health sciences library directors construct their perceptions of
leadership and how that relates to their understanding of effective leadership and
leadership development.
Interview #1
Thank you for agreeing to participate in this study. I greatly appreciate your time. I am
going to start off with some background questions. Please do not hesitate to interrupt me
if you have a question or do not understand something. I will be audio recording this
interview and transcribing it later. I will encrypt and store the file on an external hard
drive that will be kept in a locked cabinet.
Warm-up questions
Interview Question 1: How did you get started in libraries?
Interview Question 2: How long have you worked in academic health sciences
libraries? Have you ever worked in any other type of library?
Interview Question 3: How many different libraries have you worked?
Research Question 1: How do academic health sciences library directors understand
their leadership and experiences as library leaders?
I want to get to the essence of your experience as a library leader. I want to
understand how you understand leadership and what effective leadership means to you. If
you can give me specific examples to my questions that would be helpful.
Interview Question 1: Tell me how would you define leadership.
Interview Question 1-a: Tell me about your experiences as a library director at an
academic health sciences library.
Interview Question 1-b: What do you consider your most important qualities as a leader?
Interview Question 1-c: What does being a leader in an academic health sciences library
mean to you?
Interview Question 1-d: As a library leader, what do you do? What are you responsible
for?

Interview Question 2: How would you describe your leadership style?

208

Interview Question 2-a: What do you focus on most as a library leader? Explain/give
examples.

Interview Question 3: What do you consider your most important role as a leader?
Interview Question 3-a: How would you describe the essence of your experience as a
library director?

Interview Question 4: Tell me what you find most challenging in leading an
academic health sciences library. Can you give me any examples?
Interview Question 4-a: How do you personally approach challenges as a leader?
Interview Question 4-b: Tell me about a time when you successfully met a leadership
challenge.
Interview Question 4-c: Tell me about a time when you did not successfully meet a
leadership challenge.

This completes our interview. Thank you again for your willingness to participate. Do
you have any questions or comments you would like to make at this time?
Interview #2
Once again, thank you for agreeing to participate in this study. I greatly appreciate your
time. I hope with our last interview we were able to build some rapport and my questions
made you reflect on your leadership experiences some more. Please do not hesitate to
interrupt me if you have a question or do not understand something. I will be audio
recording this interview and transcribing it later. I will encrypt and store the file on an
external hard drive that will be kept in a locked cabinet.
Research Question 2: What was their career journey that led them into library
leadership?
Interview Question 1: Tell me how your career journey led you to your current
position.
Interview Question 1-a: When did you know you wanted to be a library director?
Interview Question 1-b: Tell me about some experiences that were particularly useful to
your development as a leader in libraries.

Interview Question 2: How did you prepare yourself to be a library director?
Interview Question 2-a: Tell me about any leadership development activities you have
done (e.g., leadership training programs, mentorships, and/or additional education).
Interview Question 2-b: Have you ever recognized an up-and-coming leader in academic
health sciences libraries? What did you do to encourage them or help them develop as
leaders?

209

Research Question 3: How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as
leaders?
Interview Question 1: How do you know when you are leading your library
effectively?
Interview Question 1-a: How do you measure your success as a leader?

Interview Question 2: How do you evaluate your effectiveness as a leader?
Interview Question 2-a: What do you do to formally assess your effectiveness?
Interview Question 2-b: Are your personal research and/or campus activities recognized
by administration and/or contribute to the perception of your effectiveness as library
director?
Interview Question 2-c: When the library is able to support institutional diversity and/or
contribute to the quality of the education at your institution, is that recognized and does it
contribute to the perception of your effectiveness as library director?

Interview Question 3: What has contributed the most towards you being an
effective leader in academic health sciences libraries?
Interview Question 3-a: What has hindered you the most from being an effective leader?

This completes our interview. Thank you again for your willingness to participate. Do
you have any questions or comments you would like to make at this time?

210

Appendix D:
Non-Participant Observation Guide
Unique Observation Number:
Date:
Time (IN & OUT):
Location(s):
The purpose of this non-participant observation is to help understand the experiences of
academic health sciences library directors.
Research Questions:
RQ 1: How do academic health sciences library directors understand their leadership and
experiences as library leaders?
RQ 2: What was their career journey that led them into library leadership?
RQ 3: How do these library directors evaluate their effectiveness as leaders?
Leadership in Academic Health Sciences Libraries Observation Guide

#

+

-

Neutral

Interactions with
Library Staff

Interactions with
Students

Interactions
with
Administration
and Faculty

Breaks

Physical Affect

Verbal Utterances

211

Descriptions of what
they do- Activities,
Conversations,
Interactions

Reflections of
the observer

