A PARALLEL STUDY OF ACADEMIC LIBRARY ADMINISTRATORS
LEADERSHIP BEHAVIORS

A Dissertation
Presented to
The Faculty of the College of Graduate Studies
Lamar University

In Partial Fulfillment
of the Requirements for the Degree
Doctor of Education in Educational Leadership
by
Theresa Storey Hefner-Babb
May 2016

Pro Q ue st Num b e r: 10150156

All rig hts re se rve d
INFO RMATIO N TO ALL USERS
The q ua lity o f this re p ro d uc tio n is d e p e nd e nt up o n the q ua lity o f the c o p y sub m itte d .
In the unlike ly e ve nt tha t the a utho r d id no t se nd a c o m p le te m a nusc rip t
a nd the re a re m issing p a g e s, the se will b e no te d . Also , if m a te ria l ha d to b e re m o ve d ,
a no te will ind ic a te the d e le tio n.

Pro Q ue st 10150156
Pub lishe d b y Pro Q ue st LLC (2016). Co p yrig ht o f the Disse rta tio n is he ld b y the Autho r.
All rig hts re se rve d .
This wo rk is p ro te c te d a g a inst una utho rize d c o p ying und e r Title 17, Unite d Sta te s Co d e
Mic ro fo rm Ed itio n © Pro Q ue st LLC.
Pro Q ue st LLC.
789 Ea st Eise nho we r Pa rkwa y
P.O . Bo x 1346
Ann Arb o r, MI 48106 - 1346

A PARALLEL STUDY OF ACADEMIC LIBRARY ADMINISTRATORS
LEADERSHIP BEHAVIORS

THERESA STOREY HEFNER-BABB

Approved:
______________________________
Jennifer Butcher
Dissertation Chair
______________________________
Ken Young
Committee Member
______________________________
Sandra Harris
Committee Member
______________________________
Julie Todaro
Committee Member

_________________________________________
Jason R. Mixon
Director, Doctoral Program
_________________________________________
William Holmes
Interim Chair, Department of Educational Leadership
_________________________________________
Robert J. Spina
Dean, College of Education and Human Development
_________________________________________
William S. Harn
Dean, College of Graduate Studies

© 2016 by Theresa Storey Hefner-Babb
No part of this work may be reproduced without permission except as indicated by the
           taken from this work
must be properly credited in any written or published materials.

ABSTRACT
A PARALLEL STUDY OF ACADEMIC LIBRARY ADMINISTRATORS
LEADERSHIP BEHAVIORS
by
Theresa Storey Hefner-Babb

The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. A combination of survey and interviews
provided information about leadership behaviors desired by librarians and currently in
practice by administrators. The results of Spearman correlations on the subscales of
Consideration and Initiation of Structure found weak correlations between the ideal
behaviors desired by librarians and the real behaviors indicated by administrators.
Findings of the qualitative interviews confirmed leadership behaviors mentioned in prior
library studies that could be considered for leadership competencies in the library
profession. Recommended actions include revising library school curriculums to include
leadership courses, professional development for future library leaders via professional
organizations and the development of leadership competencies for the profession.
Keywords: leadership, academic libraries, competencies

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I would like to express my appreciation to Dr. Sandra Harris and Dr. Julie Todaro,
members of my doctoral committee for their insights and suggestions throughout this
study. I especially acknowledge the role of Dr. Ken Young who helped me develop my
purpose for this study and was an invaluable resource while I conducted and interpreted
my survey data. Finally, to my committee chair, Dr. Jennifer Butcher who encouraged
my interest in pursuing this study. Her invaluable comments and encouragement made
this journey successful.
I owe a tremendous debt of gratitude to the library administrators and librarians
who participated in this study. Without their participation this study would have been
impossible. To my colleagues at the Mary & John Gray Library thank you for the support
and encouragement while I pursued this degree.
To my parents thank you for encouraging me to pursue my dreams and for being
there when I needed to take a break and talk. Dad thank you for providing such a great
leadership example for me to emulate. My love and appreciation to my brothers, Joe and
Laurence, and my sister Kathy for their emotional support.
Finally, loving thanks to my husband Ralph for his support while I pursued my
degree. To my sons, John and Matthew thank you for your patience and to answer the
often asked question, yes I am finally done with my homework.

iii

Table of Contents
List of Figures

xi

List of Tables

xii

Chapter

Page

I

1

II

Introduction to the Study
Background of the Problem

2

Statement of the Problem

3

Theoretical Framework

3

The Purpose of the Study and Research Questions

5

Rationale and Significance of the Research

5

Assumptions

7

Limitations

7

Delimitations

8

Definitions

9

Summary and Organization of the Study

10

Review of Related Literature

11

Foundations of Leadership Behavior Theory

11

Leadership Theory

12

Ohio State Leadership Studies

13

Consideration and Initiating Structure

13

Validity of the LBDQ

14

Leadership in Academic Libraries

16

Leadership

16

Institutional Leadership

17

Transition to Leadership

17

Leadership Gap

18

Transformational Leadership

18

Millennial Generation

19

iv

Management

19

Successful Leadership Practices

20

Communication

20

Vision

21

Innovation and Change

22

Personal Connection

23

Professional Development

23

Leadership Institutes

24

Mentoring

27

Library based Programs

28

Leadership Competencies

29

American Library Association Efforts

30

International Perspectives

32

Summary
III

33

Methodology

34

Purpose Statement and Research Questions

34

Research Design

35

Quantitative Sample

36

Qualitative Participants

41

Instrumentation

43

Quantitative

43

Qualitative

45

Data Collection Procedures

46

Quantitative

46

Qualitative

47

Data Analysis

48

Quantitative

48

Qualitative

48

v

IV

V

VI

VII

VIII

IX

X

Epoche

49

Summary

49

Analysis of Data

51

Data Preparation

51

Findings for Research Questions One and Two

52

Summary

53

Pieces of the Puzzle

54

Input Behaviors

56

Group Structure and Operations Control

58

Influence Group Achievement

60

 



e a Leader

64

Input Behaviors

66

Group Structure and Operations Control

67

Influence Group Achievement

68

The Goal is Consensus, Not Compromise

72

Input Behaviors

75

Group Structure and Operations Control

78

Influence Group Achievement

80

Share Credit for Successes, Shoulder Blame for Failures

88

Input Behaviors

92

Group Structure and Operations Control

96

Influence Group Achievement

99

It Comes Down to Communication

105

Input Behaviors

108

Group Structure and Operations Control

109

Influence Group Achievement

111

Leadership by Strategic Plan

115

Input Behaviors

116

vi

XI

XII

XIII

XIV

XV

Group Structure and Operations Control

117

Influence Group Achievement

117

Walking the Talk

119

Input Behaviors

121

Group Structure and Operations Control

124

Influence Group Achievement

127

    

  rary

134

Input Behaviors

136

Group Structure and Operations Control

140

Influence Group Achievement

142

      

147

Input Behaviors

149

Group Structure and Operations Control

153

Influence Group Achievement

160

I Work First in Higher Education and Happen to Work in a Library

168

Input Behaviors

170

Group Structure and Operations Control

173

Influence Group Achievement

177

Narrative Analysis

184

Research Question Three: Input Behaviors

184

Formal Evaluation Processes

185

Rewards Systems

185

Communication Practices

187

Meetings

188

Planning

190

Research Question Four: Group Structure and Operations Control 191
Traditional Structure

191

Assessment

192

vii

Meetings

193

Research Question Five: Influence Group Achievement

XVI

194

Assessment practices

194

Observation

196

Communication

196

Leadership by Example

197

Removal of Barriers

198

Acceptance of Change

200

Summary and Organization of the Study

201

Summary, Conclusions, Implications, and Recommendations
Summary of the Study

203
203

Overview of the Problem

203

Purpose Statement and Research Questions

204

Review of the Study Design

205

Population and Data Collection

205

Data Analysis

206

Summary of Major Findings

207

Research Question One

207

Research Question Two

207

Research Question Three

208

Research Question Four

209

Research Question Five

209

Merged Results

210

Conclusions

210

Consideration

212

Initiation of Structure

212

Input Behaviors

213

Vision

214

viii

Group Structure and Operations Control

214

Influence Group Achievement

215

Implications for Practice

216

Leadership Competencies

217

Demonstrating Leadership

217

Planning

217

Risk Taking

217

Delegation

218

Interpersonal Skills

218

Communication Skills

218

Flexibility

219

Vision

219

Political Understanding

219

Problem Solving

220

Advocacy Skills

220

Immersion Programs

220

Recommendations for Future Research

221

Concluding Remarks

222

References

223

Appendices

242

Appendix A

Approval of Request to Conduct Research Using Human Subjects 243

Appendix B

NIH Certificate

244

Appendix C

Participation Email Invitation-Quantitative

245

Appendix D

Qualitative Invitation Letter

246

Appendix E

Qualitative Consent

247

Appendix F

Quantitative Consent

249

Appendix G

         
ix

251

Appendix H

Demographic Questions to Accompany Leadership Behavior

255

Description Questionnaire XII Ideal (Modified) and Real (Modified)
Appendix I

Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description

257

Questionnaire XII Ideal (Modified)
Appendix J

Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description

260

Questionnaire XII Real (Modified)
Appendix K

Phase Two: Guided Protocol Qualitative Interview Questions

Biographical Note

263
265

x

List of Figures
Figure

Page

Figure 1.

M  

 

Figure 2.

 

Figure 3.

John 

 

74

Figure 4.

D  

 

92

Figure 5.

Kathy 

Figure 6.

Luke 

Organization

116

Figure 7.

Cara 

 

121

Figure 8.

Jacob 

Figure 9.

Kait  

Figure 10.

Anne 

 

 

 
 
 

56
65

107

136
149
170

xi

List of Tables
Table

Page

Table 1.

Demographic Data for Library Administrators

37

Table 2.

Demographic Data for Librarians

38

Table 3.

Administrator Participation by Years of Experience

39

Table 4.

Librarian Participation by Years of Experience

40

Table 5.

Participation by Degree Granting Size and Type

41

xii

Hefner-Babb 1
Chapter I
Introduction to the Study
Academic libraries are on the verge of losing their experienced leaders to the
graying of the profession with prospects of replacements from a generation of librarians
with no leadership background (Edge & Green, 2011; Rooney, 2010). Jordan (2012)
demonstrated the need for leadership preparation for any librarian who assumes an
administrative role in an academic library so it is important to examine leadership
behaviors of academic library leaders. According to Hicks and Given (2013), the library
profession does not have a designated set of desired leadership competencies for
professional librarians that can help organizations identify the best candidate for the
position. National organizations, such as the American Library Association (ALA),
examined their professional codes to make sure that leadership was addressed.
Consequently, the leadership problem prompted then American Library Association
President Leslie Burger to convene a task force in 2006 to create a set of core
competencies related to librarianship.
The ALA Presidential Task Force on Library Education compiled a list of core
competences based upon input from various constituencies within ALA and received
approval for the proposal from the ALA Executive Board in 2008 and the ALA Council
in 2009 (Hicks & Given, 2013). The final statement entitled,

       

Librarianship (2009) indicated tha         

     !  !  " #$ 
Library Association, 2009, p. 5). Despite the selection of transformational leadership and
the establishment of the core competences, the profession still lacks a set of leadership

Hefner-Babb 2
competences (al Ansari & al Khadher, 2011; Ammons-Stevens, Cole, Jenkins-Gibbs,
Riehle, & Weare, 2009; Jantii & Greenhalgh, 2012). Jordan (2012) emphasized the need
for leadership preparation for any librarian who assumes an administrative role in an
academic library.
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. This chapter includes the following sections:
background of the problem, problem statement, the theoretical framework used for this
study, purpose for the study with research questions and significance and rationale of the
study. Included in this chapter are the assumptions, limitations, and delimitations of the
study. The chapter concludes with a definition of terms and a summary of the
organization of the study.
Background of the Problem
The library profession is experiencing a transition in library leadership due to
retirements and the decline in professional librarians qualified or willing to undertake
administrative positions (Brundy, 2014; Edge & Green, 2011; Rooney, 2010). Data from
the Occupational Outlook Handbook 2014-2015 indicates a 7% change in the number of
librarians between 2012 (148,400) and 2022 (159,400) in the United States; projected
annual job openings due to growth and net replacement is estimated at 4,440 (United
States Department of Labor, 2012). A more recent study by the AFL-CIO (2015) in 2013
indicated that 42% of librarians were over age 55. Hernon, Powell, and Young (2001)

Hefner-Babb 3
anticipated that the turnover in Association of Research Libraries directorships would
continue given that many directors are in their late 50s.
The subject of leadership as it relates to librarianship is difficult to define (Herold,
2014). Upon concluding their study, Hicks and Given (2013) determined that leadership
meant a call for librarians who could motivate people and guide the profession forward
into an uncertain future. Gilstrap (2009) defined leadership as it relates to organizational
development in the academic library setting by providing a summary of the leadership
theories used in librarianship. According to Mackenzie and Smith (2009), librarians in the
profession have yet to agree on a definition and type of leadership system that works
within the organizational structure.
Statement of the Problem
The specific problem is that some academic library leaders are career librarians
either hired or promoted into administrative level positions and they are not meeting the
expectations of the librarians who work with them (Cawthorne, 2010; Dewey, 2012).
There are numerous studies on the need for leadership competencies for librarians
however the profession has not determined specific competencies (al Ansari & al
Khadher, 2011; Ammons-Stevens, et al., 2009; Jantii & Greenhalgh, 2012). Librarians
transitioning into leadership roles in academic libraries such as assistant directors,
associate directors, or library directors need a specific set of leadership skills (Ameen,
2006; Dewey, 2014; Rooney, 2010).
Theoretical Framework
This study used two related leadership behavior theories rooted in research
conducted at Ohio State University under the Ohio State Leadership Studies program.

Hefner-Babb 4
The first is the Ohio State Two Factor Theory which evolved from research by Halpin,
Coons, and Stogdill during the late 1950s. The framing questions for this research
included 1) What does an individual do while he operates as a leader? 2) How does he go
about what he does? (Hemphill & Coons, 1957, p. 6). Research conducted at Ohio State
sought to define leadership as behaviors versus traits. A series of studies determined the
original nine dimensions that formed the basis of the Leadership Behavior Descriptions
Questionnaire (LBDQ). Succeeding studies of military commanders and educational
administrators by Halpin (1957a) indicated that the two most important dimensions were
Consideration and Initiating Structure, and the theory became known as the Ohio State
Two Factor Theory.
Stogdill proposed the Theory of Role Differentiation and Group Achievement in
1962 based upon the foundation of Consideration and Initiating Structure found in the
Ohio State Two Factor Theory. Stogdill reasoned that the two dimensions indicated that
   

  

     
    
    




          
 

    

 

   

   



 

   

      (Stogdill, 1959). Further, it allowed researchers
   

 





  

  

   

         ! This theory is appropriate for this study because it

applies to educational administration and focuses on how a leader initiates structure in the
 "   

   working relationships with subordinates (Fleishman, 1995;

Halpin, 1955; Judge, Piccolo, & Ilies, 2004; Lunenburg & Ornstein, 2011).

Hefner-Babb 5
The Purpose of the Study and Research Questions
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. The overarching question of the study was:
What is the relationship between the real leadership behaviors of Texas academic library
administrators and the ideal leadership expectations of the librarians they supervise? The
following quantitative questions guided the study:
1. What is the relationship between library administrators actual consideration
leadership behaviors and ideal consideration leadership behaviors preferred by
academic librarians in Texas?
2. What is the relationship between library administrators actual initiating
structure leadership behaviors and real initiating structure leadership
behaviors preferred by academic librarians in Texas?
The following qualitative questions guided the study:
3. Describe what and how input behaviors are practiced by the library
administrator in their current position.
4. What group structure and operations control are practiced by the library
administrator?
5. How does the library administrator influence group achievement?
Rationale and Significance of the Research
Librarians transitioning into leadership roles learn that they have gaps in their
professional education (Dewey, 2014; Hicks & Given, 2013; Arns & Price, 2007). Jantii

Hefner-Babb 6
and Greenhalgh (2012) found that the reason librarians did not seek upper leadership
positions was due to an inability to close the leadership knowledge gap. Jange (2012)
determined that internally promoted administrators may or may not have the skill set
required for the transition to leading an organization.
Librarians in the profession have yet to agree on a definition and type of
leadership system that works within the organizational structure of a library (Mackenzie
& Smith, 2009). Young, Hernon, and Powell (2006) reported on a generation gap
developing in the library profession between Baby Boomers, Generation X and the
Millennials that is accompanied by generational differences in leadership. Long and
Sheehan (2015) noted the increased number of older librarians and the challenge of
  

 

        

   Library

directors and administrators are retiring in greater numbers and it is difficult to find
leaders capable of leading the organizations into the 21st century (Mackenzie & Smith,
2009). The library profession is currently experiencing a transition among its leadership
with the retirements of the Baby Boomer generation and the migration of millennial
librarians into leadership roles (Murray, 2011). Thus, the impending shortage of library
leaders brings leadership programs to the attention of librarians seeking continuing
education on how to lead in a library setting (Romaniuk & Haycock, 2011).
The significance of this study was to determine a group of ideal leadership
behaviors required by academic library administrators thus creating a set of leadership
competencies that could become part of library education and professional development.
There is an international demand for leadership competences for the profession to aid
current and upcoming library leaders (Al Ansari & Al Khadher, 2011; DeBoer, Bothma

Hefner-Babb 7
& Olwagen, 2012; Düren, 2012; Hicks & Given, 2013; Jordan, 2012). Research shows
that preparation programs for librarians do not teach leadership concepts and that it is not
always gained through work experience (Ameen, 2006; Edge & Green, 2011; HarrisKeith, 2015a; Harris-Keith, 2015b).
Assumptions
Creswell and Miller (2000) defined assumptions as views that shape a
 

   . This study was conducted based on the

following assumptions. The first assumption of this study was that the researcher was
able to locate and interview 10 librarians who matched the requirements of the study. The
second assumption was that the questions were answered truthfully by each of the
respondents. The third assumption was that the researcher did not allow bias to interfere
with the research. The use of open ended questions assumed that the questions being
asked were appropriate for the purpose of the study.
Limitations
 

  

    

          

& Glatthorn, 2013, p. 209). The following limitations impacted the outcome of this study:
1. Due to low participation rates among administrators and librarians the findings for
this study could not be applied to the population.
2. The lack of available demographic data describing the academic librarian
population of Texas prevented comparison between the sample and the
population.
3. Self-reported data by the librarians and administrators in the surveys and the
interviews could not be verified as fact by the researcher.

Hefner-Babb 8
4. Access to people to participate in the study was limited to those who chose to
respond to the surveys using convenience sampling.
Delimitations
Joyner et al. (2013) defined de   
   



     

             



 

   

study included:
1. Library administrators invited to participate had to hold MLS degrees or
equivalent and had to have at least one academic year of experience working in an
administrative role at their current library.
2. The librarian needed to be working in some administrative function that directly
supervises librarians, which traditionally means a head of public services or
technical services, an assistant or associate dean or director, and library dean or
director. In academic research libraries this would include coordinators who
oversee librarians and staff.
3. Additionally, the library administrator needed to be in a Texas academic library at
a four-year degree granting institution because the duties of an academic library
administrator differ from those of a public, school or special librarian. Four-year
degree granting institutions include universities that grant bachelors, masters, and
doctoral degrees.
4. Only Texas academic library administrators and librarians were included in the
study.
5. Only administrators and librarians at four-year degree granting institutions could
participate in the study.

Hefner-Babb 9
6. Only librarians who work for administrators could respond to the survey; nondegreed professional staff were not included.
7. Only administrators with five years of experience or more participated in the
interviews.
8. Library administrators whose tenure was less than one academic year were not
included because their inexperience could impact the evaluations of the librarians
who work for them.
9. Academic libraries at two-year degree granting institutions were not studied
because the number of degreed professional staff in the individual libraries is
smaller than in academic libraries at four-year degree granting institutions.
10. Non degreed professional staff were not included in the study because the focus
of the study was the relationship between the administrator and the degreed
librarians.
11. Library administrators without direct supervision of librarians were excluded
from the study because the study examined leadership behaviors and these
positions did not include leadership.
Definitions
Academic library  A library that serves a four-year university, two-year junior
college or a community college. The library may or may not be a member of the
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) (Nelson, 2014).
Four-year degree granting institution  a college or university that grants


         , Hardesty & Hug, 2014)

Hefner-Babb 10
Library administrator-A professional librarian with a minimum of an MLS who is
either an assistant or associate dean or director or the director of dean of library
services (Nelson, 2014).
Summary and Organization of the Study
This study was divided into six chapters. Chapter I included the introduction to
the study, background and problem statement, theoretical framework, purpose of the
study with research questions, rationale or significance of the study, assumptions,
limitations, delimitations, and the definitions used in this study. Chapter II presents the
literature review related to leadership behaviors of academic library administrators.
Chapter III describes the methodology used by the researcher. Chapter IV contains the
analysis of data by the researcher followed by the narratives in Chapters V through
Chapter XIV. Chapter XV summarizes the narrative findings. Chapter XVI provides the
summary of the research, conclusions, implications for practice, and recommendations
for further research.

Hefner-Babb 11
Chapter II
Review of Related Literature
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. This contains the following components:
foundations of leadership behavior theory, leadership in academic libraries, leadership
competences in librarianship and leadership development and mentoring in academic
libraries.
Foundations of Leadership Behavior Theory
Stogdill (1975) discussed two major predecessors to leadership behavior theory:
the situational school and the personalist school. The first school dates back to the turn of
the twentieth century and theories proposed by Cooley, Mumford, and Bogardus. Cooley
(1902) defined a leader as someone of substantial individualism and understanding.
Mumford (1906-07) (as cited by Bass, 1990), observed that leaders are those who rise
above the group in a situation and are able to take control. Bogardus (1920) discussed the
social psychology of leadership including the qualities of leadership and the types of
   



     

  



    

  

    



d traits, and experience all contribute to

leadership. Theorists in the 1920s founded the personalist school which focused on the
leader and the group who deferred to the leader in all respects. Munson (1921) defined a
leader as one who can glean cooperation from a group while remaining devoid of

Hefner-Babb 12
disagreements. Munson also believed the leader should be the creative and morale
building force for the group.
Leadership Theory
Bass (1990) defined leadership as members of a group who react to a situation
based upon the circumstances and their opinions. Shartle (1957) argued that a specific
leadership theory did not exist in 1945 and that was the impetus for the study of
leadership by a group of scholars at Ohio State University. Research on leadership
conducted prior to World War II focused on traits of leaders however researchers, such as
Charles Bird, William O. Jenkins, and Ralph Stogdill, determined that the trait approach
was ineffective when choosing leaders.
The topic of leader behavior is difficult to condense and categorize (Yukl, 2012).
Smith and Krueger (1933) determined that leadership was a combination of the interrelationships of the members the mutual goal of the group. Charles Bird (1940) found
limited experimental research on leadership which he used to compile a list of 79
leadership traits with limited duplication amongst the studies. Jenkins (1947) concluded
that the literature of the period had not determined leadership behaviors or a definition of
leadership. DeRue, Nahrgang, Wellman, and Humphrey (2011) recommended modifying
existing measures to provide better descriptions of leader behaviors. Yukl (2012)
determined that leader behavior research focused on the way the behaviors were used but
not on the conditions surrounding the leadership behaviors and effects.
According to Bass and Bass (2009), one of the seminal works in leadership
behavior research is the study of personal factors conducted by Ralph M. Stogdill and
published in 1948. Stogdill (1948) determined that an analysis of leadership needs to

Hefner-Babb 13
include studying both the leaders and the situations in which they lead. Leadership is not
limited to one person but is instead the interaction of the group and its members. Stogdill
(1967) proposed the need for a theory that encompassed organizational, behavioral, and
mathematic models and argued specifically that behavioral theories are based upon
satisfaction and productivity of the organization.
Ohio State Leadership Studies
According to Shartle (1957), the Ohio State Leadership Studies originated in 1945
for the purpose of testing hypotheses related to situational leadership behaviors. Halpin
(1955) examined the leadership behaviors and ideology of educational administrators and
aircraft commanders while focusing on Initiating Structure and Consideration dimensions
of leadership behavior. The purpose of the study was to determine if the leadership
ideology and style of the two leaders differed significantly. Halpin used the Leader
Behavior Description Questionnaire (LBDQ) and determined Initiating Structure and
Consideration as the two primary leader behaviors (Halpin, 1957a; Halpin & Winer,
1952; Hemphill & Coons, 1950).

  

   

            



 

them. Initiating

structure was defined as achieving the goals of the group (Halpin, 1957a, p. 1; Halpin,
1957b, p. 53).
Consideration and Initiating Structure. Leadership studies conducted by
Halpin (1957b) 
  

 

 

   

     

 

         



(Taylor, Crook & Dropkin, 1961, p. 12). It

is also argued that the two dimensions can help determine whether a leader is effective or
ineffective (Taylor, Crook & Dropkin, 1961, p. 12). Yukl (1971) sought to develop a

Hefner-Babb 14
theory to determine how leader behavior and other variables impact productivity and
satisfaction of subordinates and found additional research was necessary to determine the
impact of leader effectiveness on groups. Kerr, Schriesheim, Murphy and Stogdill (1974)
suggested that the Ohio State research is not to be labeled historical, but rather as
continuing research. Schriesheim, Kinicki and Schriesheim (1979) then conducted a
series of five studies to determine how leniency impacted how subordinates reported
Consideration and Initiation of Structure and determined that leniency impacted all
leadership measurement scales. Jago (1982) determined that leadership research divided
into universal and contingent theoretical areas and also into focal leadership constructs of
either traits or behaviors.
Validity of the LBDQ. Stogdill (1969) sought to provide proof of validity for the
LBDQ instrument using two hypotheses: 1: Two different actors playing the same role
will not be described as significantly different on the subscale for that role. 2. The same
actor playing two different roles will be described as significantly different on the
  



 

        



 

Consideration, Structure, Representation, Production, Freedom, and Influence. The
results of the experiment supported both hypoth

    





subscales of the Leader Behavior Description Questionnaire measure what they are
       

House (1971) explained the effect of leader behavior on subordinates using the
path-goal theory of motivation. Three studies were conducted and findings validated the
results of the previous research and the Path Goal Theory (Stogdill, 1969; Halpin, 1955).
House (1971) used the Path Goal Theory to determine that leadership behaviors exhibited

Hefner-Babb 15
by the leader will impact the reactions of the followers. If the leader exhibits
consideration, then the follower will learn about the rewards available. Likewise, the
  

 







    

 

  

 

Schriesheim and Stogdill (1975) compared the three versions of the Ohio State
Leadership Scales and determined that version XII of the LBDQ proved to be the best
  

   

       

 

  

 

study and its lack of production related questions. Schriesheim and Stogdill (1975)
examined definitions of initiating structure and its relationship to leadership and
determined that the items in the three scales: SBDQ, LBDQ, and LBDQ XII differed in
each instrument. Research into the three instruments showed that the LBDQ XII has a
strong correlation between the initiating structure and consideration but the original
LBDQ and the SBDQ version are weakened because they measure autocratic, punitive,
and production oriented items not found in the revised version. Some examples of these
items include questions that have personalized reactions to subordinates, punitive actions
that push subordinates for work, and use of words like insist, arbitrary, and resistance that
increase bias (Schriesheim & Stogdill, 1975).
Schriesheim (1979) found that there was a relationship between both individual
oriented and group oriented lea  

  

  

 





individual and group outcome measures. More recently, Judge, et al. (2004) showed that
the two areas are still relevant and that the original LBDQ and LBDQ XII have the
highest validity in Consideration and Initiating Structure among the instruments used in
leadership studies.

Hefner-Babb 16
Leadership in Academic Libraries
The position of library director requires a background in both management and
leadership (Arnold, Nickel & Williams, 2008; Brundy, 2014; Farrell, 2013b; Hayati &
Barahmand, 2012; Hernon, 2011; Jange, 2012). An academic library director requires
being a leader of the library organization and serving in leadership roles at the
institutional level (Dewey, 2014; Hernon, 2011). Leadership and management skills are
needed once a librarian reaches a position of department head, whether interim or
permanent, and those skills are not part of the library school curriculum (Farrell, 2013b;
Hayati & Barahmand, 2012). However, Ameen (2006) argued that library school
programs do not include leadership skills as part of the management courses.
Building on existing supervisory skills, a manager gains more responsibilities by
overseeing an aspect of the budget, project management, long term and short term
planning, and meting organizational goals (Farrell, 2013b). Harris-Keith (2015a)
determined that work in prior departments does not prepare librarians for the leadership
requirements of a library director. Leadership experience comes from membership in
professional organizations, mentoring and continuing education and other skill building
activities (Arns & Price, 2007; Dulin, 2008; Farrell, 2013b). Konya and Gurel (2014)
found that library leaders need varied skills to meet the changes that face libraries and
library users.
Leadership. Davis & Macauley (2011) concluded that true leadership inspires
and influences others. Hernon and Schwartz (2011) noted how leadership divides into
 

  

     

     

that vision

(p. 259). Cawthorne (2010) explored the experiences of middle managers in academic

Hefner-Babb 17
libraries with shared leadership and determined that academic libraries need a new
approach to leadership that includes personnel at all levels. Carpenter (2012) interviewed
library directors who identified risk taking, ability to accept failure and the importance of
establishing partnerships as key attributes of being an entrepreneurial leader. Farrell
recommended that leaders should take responsibility for decisions and seek the opinions
of others when making decisions and ultimately realize they are accountable (2013b).
Konya and Gurel (2014) suggested that leading an organization is successful when the
leader can get others to support the goals of the organization.
Institutional leadership. The nature of the academic library director position
requires leading the library organization and serving in leadership roles at the institutional
level (Arns & Price, 2007; Dewey, 2012; Dewey, 2014; Hernon, 2011; Jange, 2012). In a
study conducted by Hernon (2011) every library director indicated that leadership was






    

  

         

position. Gwyer (2010) found that libraries need a new type of leader that encourages
 

    



 



  



     

Transition to leadership. Dewey (2012) recommended developing a plan
      







   

     







Dewey suggested that librarians who are transitioning into administrative roles should
consult the literature to learn about the experiences of others. External hire library
directors should focus on learning about the new organization and then establish their
credibility; no decisions should be made about changes until a few months have passed
(Brundy, 2014; Dewey, 2012). Internal hire library directors face the challenge of
separating their new position from the old and learning to view the campus from the

Hefner-Babb 18
perspective of an administrator. Interim directors face a difficult task of leading an
organization without the ability to make changes (Dewey, 2012).
Leadership gap. Management skills are key for the new librarians entering the
profession and many who are in middle management positions are not inclined to move
into upper administrative positions (Arnold, et al., 2008; Edge & Green, 2011; Goulding,
Walton, & Stephens, 2012). As the Baby Boomer generation of librarians prepares for
retirement, there is a gap of experienced library leadership to fill the vacant positions
(Arnold, et al., 2008; Arns & Price, 2007). The future workforce comes from a more
diverse background in library education and a different form of librarianship than prior
generations (Edge & Green, 2011). Van der Walt and du Plessis (2010) indicated that
library leaders needed to plan for a large number of staff retirements and should
implement management and leadership training for staff moving into the administrative
positions. A new librarian must prove ability to lead during the transition period (Dewey,
2012).
Transformational leadership. The American Library Association selected
transformational leadership as a component of the Core Competences of Librarianship
approved in 2009 (Hicks & Given, 2013). Düren (2012) stated that transformational
    

  

         

     

goals of the leader  



 

     

ransformational leadership transcends the personal


    

  

! 

cited by Hicks &

Given, 2013). The focus of transformational leadership for librarians is on change and
how to work with the implications of change in libraries (Hernon & Schwartz, 2008;
Phillips, 2014). Transformation is a part of leadership based upon the following definition

Hefner-Babb 19
 
  



-driven action that brings about change or transformation based on

         -Low, 2013; Day &

Antonakis, p. 5, 2012).
Millennial generation. The emergent leader in libraries today is the millennial
librarian, a person born after 1980 and a product of the digital age (Murray, 2011). They
are supervised by librarians who meet the characteristics of baby boomers or Generation
X thus creating a cross-generational workforce (Murray, 2011). Graybill (2014) explored
the leadership perceptions of millennial librarians. Findings indicated that
communication, vision, and personal connection are key to the millennial generation.
Murray (2011) stated that knowledge of millennial leadership behaviors will help ease
tensions between the new leader and the established librarians and staff. Research about
the millennial generation has indicated differing leadership styles incorporating
collaboration, multitasking, tendency to experiment and other generalizations. Murray
pointed out another issue that arises between the generations is the use of immediate
    

          s case to seek validation

of their decisions. Graybill (2014) found that millennials indicated interest in leadership
roles in their library but they believed barriers prevented them from leadership roles in
professional organizations.
Management. Managerial skills also contribute to successful library leadership
(Hayati & Barahmand, 2012; Jange, 2012; Mugyaboso & Matovelo, 2000; Unaeze,
2003). Academic library leaders require management skills as they relate to people, tasks,
and critical thinking (Hayati & Barahmand, 2012; Jange, 2012; Mugyaboso & Matovelo,
2000; Unaeze, 2003). Ameen (2006) found that management skills are often confused

Hefner-Babb 20
with leadership skills for example: policy making, planning, and organizing skills.

       

a need for library school programs to focus more on

teaching leadership skills to prepare the future librarians in the profession. Mackenzie
and Smith (2009) found that the library profession cannot agree on what is required for
leadership versus management positions. Library school graduates need to be proactive in

                 
that goal (p. 140).
Successful Leadership Practices
Communication, vision, and personal connection are key to the millennial
generation (Brundy, 2014; Graybill, 2014). Library leadership required strong skills in
morale building, openness to change and ideas, ability to communicate and achieve
results and professionalism (Jange, 2012). An effective leader must be able to
successfully use the talents of the library organization to keep up with the rate of change
in the profession (Davis & Macauley, 2011; Heifetz, Grashow, & Linsky, 2009). Rogers
(2009) recommended that library leaders encourage their librarians and staff to contribute
to their organization with ideas and to draw upon their support to become better leaders
and thus they will help others become leaders.
Communication. Effective leaders have communication skills that contribute to
their success (Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2013b; Jange, 2012). Farrell (2013b) noted that
librarians improve their communication skills during the middle management phase of
their career when they supervise staff and also function as part of the library
administrative team. In t  

          

needs while passing information down from the administration to their departmental

Hefner-Babb 21
employees. Furthermore, leaders also need to be able to communicate their message
clearly and serve as a diplomat between the various interests. Cawthorne (2010) found
that while library managers believed they had responsibility for the decisions made in
their departments they also felt that upper level administration did not communicate the
information they needed to perform their jobs better. Leaders also need to advocate for
their organization and prove its value among the other draws of academic institutional
resources (Düren, 2012; Gwyer, 2010; Reyes, 2006).
Vision. Library leaders need to develop a long term vision for their library
(Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2013a; Farrell, 2015; Gwyer, 2010; Jange, 2012; Saunders, 2015).

  

             

   

leads to consistency (Carpenter, 2012; Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2013b). Leaders should use
framing to provide clarity and to maintain focus (Macauley & Davis, 2011). Gwyer
(2010) found that libraries need a new type of leader that encourages vision, collaboration

 

      academic libraries. Problems that directors

faced included managing a balance between tradition and change within the library
setting as it applied to technology and budgets (Carpenter, 2012). Farrell (2013b) argued
that a library leader should be able to motivate people and educate those outside the

                         
broader outlook beyond their department to include the library and even the community.
Strategic plans are still focused on the traditional aspects of libraries and that
library leadership is not defining a vision of the future of the library (Carpenter, 2012;
Saunders, 2015). Further, Jantz (2012) argued that leaders are able to prevent
organizational drift when they establish a strategy. Thus it is recommended that library

Hefner-Babb 22
leaders should use their strategic plans to increase library visibility on campus. However,
middle managers have disagreed about whether their opinions mattered in the library
strategic planning process.
Innovation and change. Jantz (2012) suggested that leadership in innovation and
change is an area that lacks a process for administrators to follow. Further Jantz (2012)
argued that the leader who heads an organization and their team impact organizational
innovation. Yi (2013) found that female directors were less likely to use multiple
approaches to evaluating change and directors who held more varied positions during
their careers were likely to use dual approaches. Leaders must be prepared to address
resistance to change in the traditional areas of the library where transformation is needed
(Carpenter, 2012; Düren, 2012; Jantz, 2012; Miller, 2012). Library leaders need to be
able to communicate a vision that advocates change as required; it cannot be optional
(Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2015; Hayati & Barahmand, 2012; Jantz, 2012; Miller, 2012).
In relation to change the library and its staff must be flexible and willing to
change at a faster rate than in prior generations (Jantz, 2012; Michalak, 2012; Miller,
2012). Jantz (2012) concluded that academic library leaders will be forced to address
innovation both as a force of change and as a cause of conflict. Dewey (2014) stressed
that institutional leadership is the focus of the library dean or director in a university
setting. The role of library leader encompasses participation on university committees
and serving on administration councils as a representative and advocate of the library. As
the library leader, the director oversees the strategic planning process and the
organizational transitions that may occur as the university grows and moves forward into
the 21st century. Constant change facing libraries called for leadership that is aware of the

Hefner-Babb 23
need for change with greater focus on library users and their needs (Siriprasoetsin,
Tuamsuk & Vongprasert, 2011).
Personal connection. Leadership is not guaranteed by a set combination of
factors but rather it comes from conversations and relationship building with people in
the library organization (Brundy, 2014; Davis & Macauley, 2011; Düren, 2012; Farrell,
2015). Goulding, et al. (2012) found that the ability to form solid working relationship
with others in the community, whether in the university setting or the public library, was
a necessary leadership skill. Mallon (2014) reported that some new librarians experience
a lack of support from their supervisors that impacts their interest in the profession.
Experienced library leaders explained that library leaders need to establish relationships
in the library and in the institution to bring about change via a group effort (Düren, 2012;
Farrell, 2015; Jange, 2012; Ryan & Currie, 2014). Leadership is not guaranteed by a set
combination of factors but rather it comes from conversations and relationship building
with people in the library organization (Davis & Macauley, 2011). New library directors
who are transitioning into a new library position need to build relationships with their
new colleagues (Brundy, 2014; Harris, 2011).
Professional Development
Mackenzie and Smith (2009) indicated a lack of agreement about leadership and
management preparation within the profession. Librarians are transitioning into
leadership roles and finding out that they have gaps in their professional education (Hicks
& Given, 2013). Mackenzie and Smith examined library school curriculums and found
that leadership is included in just over half of the required management courses and even
fewer of the electives. Farrell (2013b) recalled a deficiency of two key leadership skills

Hefner-Babb 24
needed as a department head: ability to motivate employees and establishing a vision for
the library. Thus, the profession needs to encourage professional and personal
development for all who are potential leaders in a library organization (David &
Macauley, 2012). Professionals should take the initiative to pursue educational
opportunities to improve their skills and share what they learn (Ameen, 2006; Konya &
Gurel, 2014).
Leadership training is needed in the profession because library leaders need to be
able to connect with their users, address change, and exhibit confidence in their
leadership skills (Jange, 2012; Konya & Gurel, 2014; Romaniuk & Haycock, 2011).
Researchers recommend that library leaders have formal leadership training and
continuing professional leadership development to address the changing profession and
the ever changing leadership roles (Farrell, 2013b; Harris-Keith, 2015a; Harris-Keith,
2015b; Hayati & Barahmand, 2012; Konya & Gurel, 2014). Library leaders need to
optimize their staff during times of tight budgets and consult literature outside of the
profession for ways to manage their departments (Harris, 2011). Brundy (2014)
recommended that librarians who want to be directors should attend leadership institutes
and be mentored by other leaders. Crawley-Low (2013) found that employees who
     



               

able to develop new skill                 
    
Leadership institutes. The role of leadership institutes in the library profession is
to identify and educate emerging leaders in the library profession so they can undertake
greater leadership roles (Arnold, et al., 2008; German, Owen, Parchuck, & Sandore,

Hefner-Babb 25
2009; Sheehy, 2004). Facilitators and mentors at the leadership institutes are recognized
leaders in the profession including library deans and directors, coordinators and state
librarians. Institutes are also seen as a way to prepare the next generation of leaders for
the library profession (Romaniuk & Haycock, 2011; Arnold, et al., 2008). Herold (2014)
recommended that potential attendees of the leadership institutes examine the outcomes
of the program for beneficial content. Among these outcomes are establishing roots to
create change, ability to apply content learned at the workshop in the library, confidence
to undertake leadership positions after completing the program. Sheehy (2004) reported
that the Synergy program in Illinois included sessions on leadership assessment,
formulating a vision and how to implement a shared vision. The Synergy program
transformed the librarians into library leaders prepared to fill leadership gaps at their
institutions
The reasons for creating leadership programs included diverse job options for
library school graduates and being able to recruit librarians into leadership positions
vacated by retiring librarians (Kaufman, 2002). Goulding, et al. (2012) reported that a
series of studies of UK librarians determined an absence of leadership in the profession
causing concern about the next generation of library leaders. Romaniuk and Haycock
(2011) indicated that the initial purpose of leadership development programs focused on
teaching organizational effectiveness. Programs address the unique characteristics of the
profession including the predominance of females and introverted personality types
(Kyrillidou & Bland, 2009; Romaniuk & Haycock, 2011; Scherdin & Beaubien, 1995).
Skills taught at leadership institutes include (Arnold, et al., 2008; Fieldhouse, 2004;
German, et al., 2009; Winston & Neely, 2001):

Hefner-Babb 26
Advocacy
Collaboration
Communication
Curiosity
Diversity issues
Global perspective
Innovation management
Motivation
Organizational transformation
Passion
Persistence
Professional priorities
Socialization
Strategic vision
Values.
Attendees also reported that the leadership institute offered a clearer
understanding of the role of the library and library administrator within the larger
organization i.e., university, state, or school district. Fallon, Maxwell, McCaffrey, and
McMahon (2011) found that attendance at a leadership institute helped them to identify
current leadership roles, potential roles, diversity, and that there is no single leadership
style that applies to everyone. Leadership programs like the program sponsored by the
Association of Research Libraries (ARL) support the profession in the areas of
succession planning for academic institutions by providing eager, emerging leaders to fill

Hefner-Babb 27
vacant positions (German, et al., 2009). Participants in the ARL program are well
grounded in management skills and exhibit leadership qualities and learn leadership via
an immersion setting (Webster & Young, 2009). The length of commitment to leadership
programs vary for example the Synergy program in Illinois requires a year-long
     

   

      



  

school library media specialist certification (Sheehy, 2004).
Arnold, et al. (2008) found that many participants selected for leadership
institutes are recommended by administrators who see leadership potential in the librarian
while others are required to attend. Participants selected for the ARL Research Library
Leadership Fellows and other similar programs bring leadership characteristics with them
that are untapped such as confidence and knowledge of their own abilities (Neely, 2009).
Herold (2014) suggested that provosts who choose to send a librarian to leadership
conferences receive a library leader in return who can contribute to the campus
community.
Mentoring. Leadership institutes often serve as a route to mentoring relationships
or mentoring programs (Arnold, et al., 2008). Lorenzetti and Powelson (2015) studied
mentoring programs for academic librarians and found that numerous programs exist and
they have varied levels of success. The mentoring process aids librarians in the process of
adjusting to academia and the pursuit of professional development (Lee, 2009; Lorenzetti
& Powelson, 2015). Mentoring programs in libraries can result in better supervision and
improved ability to navigate the profession (Hicks, Buckingham, & Law, 2010; Mallon,
2014; Munde, 2010). Lee (2009) reported that mentoring allows individuals to pass
knowledge gained through experience on the job on to new inexperienced professionals.

Hefner-Babb 28
Mentoring new professionals is an investment in the future and they mentee is likely to
serve as a mentor in the future. Lacy and Copeland (2013) suggested that library school
graduates benefitted from mentoring programs providing exposure to academic
librarianship. Mentors supported the program because the students learned current
practices and the mentors had opportunity for self-examination. Mentoring programs
benefit new librarians by providing counsel for concerns and increased confidence
(Phillips, 2014).
Library based programs. Camille and Westbrook (2013) reported that the
incentive to establishing an in house library leadership program was the newly hired
librarians needed to maintain professional development, participate in library
organizations and contribute to the literature. Results of the program included increased
communication and an improved organizational culture among the librarians and staff.
Mierke (2014) described the internal leadership program established at the University of
Saskatchewan resulting in employees interested in pursuing leadership roles in the
workplace. Feldmann, Level & Liu (2013) discussed the leadership program established
at Colorado State University based upon librarian desire to pursue leadership training and
experience. Librarians cited a decline in leadership positions in the library, organizational
structure, and workload as reasons for not pursuing leadership development
opportunities. Subsequently, the libraries addressed the issue by reorganizing,
establishing task forces, and committees and resulted in renewed interest in leadership by
the librarians.

Hefner-Babb 29
Leadership Competencies
Library leaders are defined as successful when they exhibit certain characteristics
or skills that are also classified as competencies (Ammons-Stephens, et al., 2009; Düren,
2012; Jordan, 2012). The topic of leadership competencies for academic librarians is
addressed in the literature (Düren, 2012; Hernon & Rossiter, 2007; Hernon, Powell, &
Young, 2003; Hernon, Powell, & Young, 2002; Hernon, et al., 2001; Winston &
Williams, 2003). According to Ammons-Stephens, et al. (2009), the collection of
    



         

    

         

 



     ay

to determine if they can be an effective leader; the profession does not have a list of
leadership competencies for aspiring leaders to reference (Düren, 2012; Jordan, 2012).
According to Jordan (2012), even the definition of competency varies but it typically


       

           !   "

Liebst, 2005; Giesecke & McNeil, 1999; Jordan, 2012, p. 37). According to Jordan
(2012) after conducting a Delphi study the following items made up the final set of
competencies:
#

Enthusiasm: optimism, positive emotional connection.

#

Demonstrating leadership: being perceived as a leader; taking charge of situations
effectively.

#

Delegation: handing off of both responsibilities and sufficient authority to
accomplish necessary tasks.

#

Accountability: taking responsibility for results $ positive and negative.

#

Planning: setting goals and developing strategies to achieve those goals.

Hefner-Babb 30
Integrity: following professional code, being honest, being a role model for how
to behave; honesty.
Risk Taking: not taking the easy way; taking a chance of failure; bold or
courageous action.
Credibility: building trust in others; doing what you say you will do; being
consistent in speech and actions.
Management: finding money, facilities to accomplish goals
Creativity: seeing different ways to accomplish goals; bringing forward new ideas
Customer service: both internal and external; remembering that patrons are the
Focus of the library
Interpersonal skills: effectively working together with others of different levels or
different position (staff and public); good social skills; building rapport
Communication skills: speaking, writing, listening; understanding your message
and conveying it to others
Flexibility: changing course when necessary, changing plans to be successful
Vision: looking at the future and see where the library can go; articulating
directions.
Political understanding: governing relations, Board relations, working with City
departments, understanding organizational structure.
Maturity: calm and in control, emotional intelligence, thinking of others first.
Problem solving: assess a situation and see what needs to be done.
Advocacy skills: being visible in the community and library, active in community
organizations, building relationship with decision makers (p.42).

Hefner-Babb 31
Jordan recommended a set of competencies based upon research would help librarians
determine the skills needed to be a successful leader.
American Library Association efforts. American Library Association (ALA) is
examining their professional codes to determine a set of leadership competencies
(Ammons-Stephens, et al., 2009; Hicks & Given, 2013). Hicks and Given (2013) noted
that the association was tasked with creating a set of core competencies that would fill the
gap between library school curriculums and the skill set needed librarian positions. The
resulting draft list of competencies for approval by ALA in 2009 did not include
leadership and principled transformational leadership was added by a floor motion and
approved. Hicks and Given determined that the addition of transformational leadership to
the competencies was a due to the uncertainty among members of the profession and the
need for future leaders. The final document included eight core content areas
accompanied with a list of competencies for each; leadership is found under the section
for management and administration (See Appendix D).
The Library Leadership and Management Association of ALA compiled a
competency model for library leadership based upon prior research and the results of
small group meetings and interviews with library leaders (Dole, Hurych & Liebst, 2005;
Promis, 2008; Shannon, 2002; Winston & Dunkley, 2002). Ammons-Stephens, et al.
(2009) reported that the findings of the LLAMA study resulted in the Core Leadership
Competency Model:
Cognitive Ability includes problem solving, decision making, and
reflective thinking inclu    



   

Hefner-Babb 32
thinking, critical ad analytical thinking, database manipulation, and
synthesis and decision making.
Vision includes the ability to think globally, think creativity [sic] and
foster innovation, as well as the ability to be forward-thinking.
Interpersonal effectiveness describing leaders who can create a positive
atmosphere centered on respect, responsibility, and motivation. Includes
culturally competence, accountability, team building, development,
inspirational or motivational, and communication skills.
Managerial effectiveness which includes the ability to manage change,
manage resources, plan for the future, collaborate with others, and have
the ability to be flexible (p. 68-70).
The authors argued that    


        

 

             

International perspectives. The issue of core competencies is one of
international interest (Al Ansari & Al Khadher, 2011; de Boer, Bothma & Olwagen,
2012; Düren, 2012; Grgic & Zivkovic, 2012; Jantti & Greenhalgh, 2012; Tanloet &
Tuamsuk, 2011). Düren (2012) argued that during times of change library leaders need to
employ a variety of special competences to meet the needs of the profession. DeBoer,
Bothma and Olwagen (2012) investigated the need to develop leadership competencies in
South Africa by examining the thinking processes of library leaders and connecting them
to leadership preferences. The results indicated a need to develop the thinking skills
associated with the position occupied by the leader so that the leader does not limit their
views to existing knowledge. Jantti and Greenhalgh (2012) determined that library

Hefner-Babb 33
leaders need to commit to leadership development and put those leadership behaviors into
practice in the workplace. Partridge, Menzies, Lee and Munro (2010) examined the lists
     



                

and focus on interpersonal skills versus technology.
Al Ansari and Al Khadher (2011) studied the competencies needed in Kuwait
libraries for successful leadership. Initially they sought to define a competency model and
determined two model types: work related decisions that gain results and the knowledge
brought to the position from experience (Klemp, 2008). Results of the study narrowed 20
competencies into six categories including: managerial skills, cognitive skills, social
skills, motivational, personal, and occupational (Al Ansari & Al Khadher, 2011). The
skills selected in this study are recommended for use in library education, professional
development, and training in Kuwait. A similar study conducted in Thailand found three
attributes for inclusion as competences: leadership capacity, achievement motivation and
adaptability (Tanloet & Tuamsuk, 2011). Results of a study by Grgic and Zivkovic


               

      

the focus of librarians in Croatia (p. 255).
Summary
The researcher reviewed the literature in Chapter II. Chapter III describes the
methodology used by the researcher. Chapter IV contains the analysis of data by the
researcher followed by the narratives in Chapters V through Chapter XIV. Chapter XV
summarizes the narrative findings. Chapter XVI provides the summary of the research,
conclusions, implications for practice, and recommendations for further research.

Hefner-Babb 34
Chapter III
Methodology
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. The methodology for this study is organized
into the following sections. The chapter includes the purpose statement and the research
questions guiding the study. An overview of the research design is in the third section.
The fourth section includes information about the sample population and setting.
Following this section, the instrumentation for the study is detailed. Then the data
collection procedures are documented. Next, follows the details of how the data were
analyzed. The final section concludes with a summary.
Purpose Statement and Research Questions
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Individual
Behavior and Group Achievement. The overarching question of the study is: What is the
relationship between the real leadership behaviors of Texas academic library
administrators and the ideal leadership expectations of the librarians they supervise? The
following quantitative questions guided the study:
1. What is the relationship between library administrators actual consideration
leadership behaviors and ideal consideration leadership behaviors preferred by
academic librarians in Texas?

Hefner-Babb 35
2. What is the relationship between library administrators actual initiating
structure leadership behaviors and real initiating structure leadership
behaviors preferred by academic librarians in Texas?
The following qualitative questions guided the study:
3. Describe the input behaviors: performance, interaction, and expectation, are
practiced by the library administrator in their current position.
4. What is the group structure and operations control practiced by the library
administrator?
5. How does the library administrator influence group achievement?
Research Design
This convergent parallel mixed methods study examined Texas academic library
administrator real and ideal leadership behaviors. According to Creswell and Clark
(2011), a convergent parallel mixed methods design is a type of design in which
qualitative and quantitative data are collected at the same time, analyzed separately, and
then merged. Creswell (2012) stated that this mixed method design allows for one
research design, qualitative or quantitat    


   

 

  

     

    



 

 

 

   

quantitative analysis supports the qualitative research using the process of integration
through connecting. According to Fetters, Curry, and Creswell (2013), 

    

quantitative findings may influence the focus and kinds of qualitative data that are being
     !"

Using the population that participated in the quantitative survey

provides a sampling frame for selecting participants for the qualitative interviews.

Hefner-Babb 36
The first part of the study consisted of quantitative research through survey
design. Creswell (2012) defined a survey as a process when the participant chooses
answers to questions       

        ).

The survey instrument was the most effective way to collect data from librarians across
the state of Texas. Using a cross sectional survey allows the researcher to learn about
   current attitudes or practices within a short time frame (Creswell, 2013). The

revised instruments incorporated nominal levels of measurement for demographic data
           

  

   



  

respondents while maintaining confidentiality, numbers represented the libraries.
The second part of the study used a qualitative phenomenological narrative
analysis. According to Creswell (2012), the purpose of this type of study is to explore a
central phenomenon shared by a group of individuals such as library administrators in
academic library settings. The use of narrative inquiry methods provides the option for
the participants to tell their unique story and experience with the phenomenon (Creswell,
2013). The researcher examined trends in the results of the separate dimensions of the
survey and sought information about leadership behaviors of the library administrators to
learn more about the views of the participants (Creswell, 2013). Using a mixed methods
design incorporating quantitative and qualitative data provided a more thorough
examination of the research problem.
Quantitative sample. For this study, the population of library administrators
(N=61) and their librarians (N=242) from Texas academic libraries, defined as
  

 

   

-granting postsecondary ins    ,

2014, p. 1), was contacted about participating. A convenience sample of library

Hefner-Babb 37
administrators (n=18) and librarians (n=52) from 18 different four-year degree-granting
universities in Texas responded to the request. Table 1 provides descriptive data for the
administrator participants and Table 2 outlines descriptive information for librarians who
participated in the study.

Table 1
Demographic Data for Library Administrators
Demographic
Current Library Position
Library Dean or Director
Associate or Assistant Dean or Director
Participation by Age Group
41 to 50
51 to 60
61 to 70
71 and older
Participation by Gender
Male
Female
Participation by Ethnicity
Caucasian
Highest Degree Earned
Doctorate
Masters
Degree in Library Science or Equivalent
Yes
No



n (%)
17 (94)
1 (6)
3 (16)
3 (16)
11 (61)
1 (5)
7 (38)
11 (62)
18 (100)
2 (11)
16 (89)
17 (95)
1 (5)

Hefner-Babb 38
Table 2
Demographic Data for Librarians
Demographic
Current Library Position
Associate or Assistant Dean or Director (reporting to
Director)
Coordinator or Department Head
Librarian
Participation by Age Group
30 and under
31 to 40
41 to 50
51 to 60
61 to 70
Participation by Gender
Male
Female
Participation by Ethnicity
White
African American
Hispanic
Asian
Other
Highest Degree Earned
Doctorate
Masters
Degree in Library Science or Equivalent
Yes
No



n (%)
4 (7)
18 (35)
30 (58)
7 (13)
13 (25)
10 (19)
9 (17)
13 (17)
14 (27)
38 (73)
43 (82)
4 (7)
3 (5)
1 (1)
1 (10
4 (8)
48 (92)
52 (100)
0

Table 3 indicates years worked in current library, years in administration, and library type
for the administrators and Table 4 presents the same information for participating
librarians. Table 5 indicates the type of degree granting institution and the type of
university.

Hefner-Babb 39
Table 3
Administrator Participation by Years of Experience
Number of years by type
Professional Years in Libraries
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more
Administration Years in Libraries
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more
Years in Current Library Position
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more

n (%)
2 (11)
3 (16)
3 (16)
1 (5)
1 (5)
2 (10)
6 (33)
1 (5)
6 (33)
3 (16)
0
3 (16)
5 (28)

3 (16)
7 (38)
5 (28)
3 (16)

Hefner-Babb 40
Table 4
Librarian Participation by Years of Experience
Number of years by type
Professional years in Libraries
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more
Administration Years in Libraries
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more
Years in Current Library Position
0 to 5
6 to 10
11 to 15
16 to 20
21 to 25
26 to 30
31 or more

n (%)
22 (42)
7 (13)
9 (17)
9 (17)
3 (5)
0
2 (4)
37 (71)
9 (17)
3 (5)
2 (4)
1 (3)
0
0
40 (77)
6 (11)
4 (7)
1 (3)
1 (3)
0
0

Hefner-Babb 41
Table 5
Participation by Degree Granting Size and Type
Library Size & Type

n (%)

Doctoral Degree Granting University
Administrator
Librarian
Degree Granting University
Administrator
Librarian
Degree Granting University
Administrator
Librarian
Public University
Administrator
Librarian
Private University
Administrator
Librarian

12 (66)
41 (78)



5 (27)
11 (21)

  

1 (5)

11 (61)
38 (73)
7 (39)
14 (27)

Qualitative participants. For the second phase of the research, the researcher
chose to use a combined convenience and purposeful sample of Texas academic library
administrators who are at 4-year degree granting institutions. A purposeful selection of
10 library administrators with at least five years of experience in library administration at
academic libraries was conducted. Selected individuals were interviewed for the
qualitative aspect of the study. Participants came from the libraries where both the
administrator and the librarians participated in the surveys. The benchmark of five years
was selected based upon a recent study that reported 40% of respondents (119 of 289)



had been in their library director position at master s level colleges and universities less
than four years (Harris-Keith, 2015b, p. 249). The number of directors with 5 or more

Hefner-Babb 42
years totaled 59% while those with 10 or more years of experience totaled 34% (HarrisKeith, 2015b, p. 249).
Each librarian invited to participate worked in an administrative role in their
current library serving under a variety of job titles ranging from dean or director to
associate dean or director. The titles varied based upon the size of the institution of higher
education served by the library. Tier one libraries as determined by Carnegie
classification are nationally competitive research universities, have deans, associate
deans, and coordinators who are in leadership roles supervising librarians and staff
(Bennett, 2010). Smaller academic libraries at private schools may only have a dean or
director in the administrative roles. The emphasis was on librarians in leadership
positions and the leadership behaviors they exhibited while performing their jobs.
Each library administrator who participated in this study worked in the library of
a four-year degree granting institution in Texas. Six administrators work in libraries at
public universities in Texas and four are at private u   
 

   

  

    


    

doctoral work in continuing and adult education; three participants have doctorates in
higher education. Eight of the administrators are active in the American Library
Association and the Texas Library Association with three who participated in the Texas
Accelerated Library Leaders program as librarians; two administrators served as mentors,
ALA Snowbirds, or other recognized professional leadership programs. The
administrators have served in their current positions range from eight years to twenty and
all but two of the administrators are in the 61 to 70 age group.

Hefner-Babb 43
Instrumentation
This convergent parallel mixed method study incorporated two types of
instrumentation. For the quantitative data, a survey was utilized to collect demographic
information about the sample, and the primary data for analysis. For the qualitative data,
a semi-structured interview protocol was developed. In this section, each of the
instruments will be discussed in depth.
Quantitative. The surveys used in this study included demographic questions
(see Appendix H) and questions from the Consideration and Initiation of Structure
subscales (see Appendices I and J). The first survey instrument is derived from the
LBDQ-XII-R-Ideal (Fisher College of Business, The Ohio State University, 1962a).
Questions for the second survey instrument are from the LBDQ XII-R-Self (Fisher
College of Business, The Ohio State University, 1962b).
Two dimensions of Leadership behavior are: Consideration (e.g., behaviors such
as mutual trust, respect, and warmth in relationship) and Initiation of Structure (e.g.,
delineates relationships between self and followers, establishes well-defined patterns of
organization, and ways of getting a job completed) (Halpin, 1955), were measured using
the Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire-XII Revised (LBDQ-XII-R). The
LBDQ    



         to provide

                
supervise (Ideal)     self- described leadership behaviors (Self) (Stogdill,
1963). It consists of 20 items (10 items measuring Consideration leadership behaviors
and 10 items measuring Initiation of Structure leadership behaviors) on a five-point

Hefner-Babb 44
Likert-scale (Always, Often, Occasionally, Seldom, and Never). Three items in each
subscale are reverse scored.

  



       are summed to provide a total

consideration and initiation of structure score that ranges from 10 to 50 for each of the
library administrators.  

          

         consideration and initiation of
structure for each administrator.    a minimum of four respondents
per leader is desirable, and additional respondents beyond ten do not increase
significantly the stability of the index scores. Six or seven respondents per leader would

    (Halpin, 1957a, p. 2; as cited in Stogdill, 1963, p.11).
Reliability was determined by a modified Kuder-Richardson formula in which

          

      

the subscale score including the item. This procedure indicated a conservative estimate of
subscale relia (Stogdill, 1963, p. 8). The reliability coefficients from different
samples for Consideration ranged between .38 (senators) and .87 (highway patrolman),
and an average coefficient of .76. For the Initiation of Structure subscale, reliability
coefficients from different samples ranged between .64 (senators) and .80 (college
presidents), and an average coefficient of .75.
Taylor, Crook, and Dropkin (1961) indicated the stability of the consideration and
initiation of structure in a variety of situations and satisfied    

      !" Likewise, Stogdill (1969) conducted a
study using filmed scenarios depicting the various behaviors described in the subscale
items. The films were then shown to observers who used the LBDQ to describe the

Hefner-Babb 45
 



 

   

compared the scores and used the means and

analysis of variance to compare the roles. The results showed no difference between the
scores of two different performances of the same role, thus Stogdill argued that his




 

 

 

 

  

    

measur  
Schriesheim and Kerr (1974) examined the four versions of the LBDQ for
evidence of validity, reliability, and scaling. After examining each instrument, the authors
determined that





    

!" #  $%%  

& 

to

experimental validation with successful results, and it does not confound frequency of


   

  '(

Judge, Piccolo, and Iles (2004) conducted a meta-

analysis of all leadership studies focused on the Consideration and Initiation of Structure
domains of the LBDQ
*

 

  %





    

 +  

 )



   

 

 





p. 37). After examining all

available leadership studies the authors found that Consideration and Initiation of
Structure are still relevant in leadership.
Qualitative. For the qualitative portion of this study, participants were asked 14
open-ended questions (Appendix K). Since the participants resided in various cities in
Texas, the interviews took place via telephone or in person. Administrators were invited
to participate directly via email by the researcher after they completed the LBDQ-XII-RSelf. The interviews were conducted in a 45 to 60 minute time period. Confidentiality of
participants was protected by using numbers to represent the librarians and their library.
Upon completion of the interviews, the data collected were electronically analyzed and
stored on a password protected computer.

Hefner-Babb 46
Data Collection Procedures
After receiving the approval of the Lamar University Institutional Review Board
(Appendix A), the data collection for the study began. This section provides details of the
data collection process in the order of its implementation for this convergent parallel
mixed methods study.
Quantitative. This phase of the study used electronic versions of the Leader
Behavior Description Questionnaire Form XII (Stogdill, 1963), created on
S 

   ), which consisted of two different forms; one for

the administrators and one for the librarians. Written permission to use the LBDQ was
not required (Ohio State University, 2014). A list of Texas academic libraries was
provided by the Texas Higher       lists of
Independent Universities and Public Universities, which contained internet links to each
university home page. Contact information for academic library administrators and
librarians was collected from academic library websites linked to the university home
pages. Contact information was then compiled into a master contact list. Invitation emails were sent to all library administrators and librarians for whom email addresses
were found, providing them an overview of the study, instructions on how to participate,
and an estimated time range it would take them to participate (see Appendix C).
Electronic links to the LBDQ-XII-R-Self, which measured the admini
behavior from their personal perspective, were sent to library administrators and the
LBDQ-XII-R-Ideal, which measured what the librarians expected of their administrator,
were sent to their librarians. The survey remained open for five weeks, and follow-up
emails were sent in weeks 2 and 5. The response rates for administrators were 24% and

Hefner-Babb 47
21% for the librarians. Once the survey closed, the data was downloaded from

 

as an Excel file, which was then imported into Statistical Package for

the Social Sciences (SPSS, ver. 22, n.d.) for analysis. The survey data files were saved on
a password protected computer to protect the privacy of the participants.
Qualitative. The use of narrative inquiry methods provides the option for the
participants to tell their unique story and experience with the phenomenon (Creswell, p.
71). The questions for the guided protocol (Appendix K) included background questions

     

             

Achievement. Each participant received the same set of questions from the researcher and
had the option to review their comments prior to inclusion in the study. The interviews
explored individual behavior and group achievement beliefs of current Texas academic
library administrators.
According to Creswell (2013) the process of interviewing is a detailed data
collection process that is part of the larger research. The data collection methods for this
study included in depth interviews conducted in person, via telephone and when
necessary, email. Interviews were conducted using the same set of questions for each
candidate and when possible the interview was conducted in person. Research questions
were open-ended and focused on the phenomenon of leadership. Interviews with each
librarian were recorded and transcribed and sent back to the individual for follow-up to
make sure that the transcription was correct. Participants also were provided with IRB
consent forms as part of the interview process. After the participants submitted the
surveys, data were collected and analyzed electronically on a password protected
computer.

Hefner-Babb 48
Data Analysis
The data for both phases of the study were analyzed in two separate steps. The
first phase focused on the quantitative analysis and the qualitative data was analyzed in
the second phase. Interpretation of the results followed analysis of the data.
Quantitative. Descriptive statistics were calculated for the demographic variables
and used to provide a quantitative description of the respondents to the survey. A Pearson
Product-Moment correlation was conducted to test the relationships between
Administrators and their librarians regarding the two domains of leadership behaviors.
Prior to analysis, all data was evaluated to assure that test assumptions were met. When
  

 

  

 Rho, a non-parametric alternative to the

Pearson, was used. Prior to analysis, the librarian scores for the Consideration and
Initiation of Structure subscales were combined by averaging librarian scores for each
library, to provide a single score on each subscale. Administrator scores for the
Consideration and Initiation of Structure subscales were also combined providing a single
score for each subscale for each library for which an administrator responded. The
subscale scores were then averaged to arrive at a single average score for consideration
and another for initiation of structure.
Qualitative. The data collected from the interviews were classified and
interpreted. Interview content was coded into categories of information based upon
keywords that were frequently mentioned by the candidates. The coded information was
combined into themes and interpreted for a larger meaning. Creswell (2013) recommends
that the researcher use at least two of the eight procedures to validate their study. The
data collected were corroborated via triangulation using curriculum vitas and resumes,

Hefner-Babb 49
biographical information on library websites, print resources and theories that suggest
that the information is valid. Peer review was used to keep the researcher honest and
served as a sounding board for ideas. The researcher clarified personal bias and examined
how their position might impact the study. Members who participated in the study were
invited to participate in member checking where they read the results of the study and
submitted their views on the outcomes to the researcher to vali   
findings.
Epoche
As an experienced librarian, I have observed and participated in the phenomenon
of trying to undertake leadership roles without leadership training. Librarians are elected
to leadership positions within their professional organizations, libraries, and institutions
and often struggle with the responsibilities. As a new librarian fresh from library school, I
accepted a position that included tenure and promotion. My coursework in library school
included management and library administration, but I had little knowledge of how to
supervise or be a leader. My supervisor suggested that I apply for the Texas Accelerated
Library Leaders program through the Texas Library Association, and I was accepted. The
institute focused on organizational skills, stepping outside of your comfort zone, and
communication. As part of the program, I had to set a professional goal that would be
accomplished within two years and a personal goal as a member of the Texas Library
Association.
Summary
In Chapter III, the researcher presented the methodology. Chapter IV contains the
analysis of data by the researcher followed by the narratives in Chapters V through

Hefner-Babb 50
Chapter XIV. Chapter XV summarizes the narrative findings. Chapter XVI provides the
summary of the research, conclusions, implications for practice, and recommendations
for further research.

Hefner-Babb 51
Chapter IV
Analysis of Data
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. This study was guided by the following
quantitative research questions:
1. What is the relationship between library administrators actual consideration
leadership behaviors and ideal consideration leadership behaviors preferred by
academic librarians in Texas?
2. What is the relationship between library administrators actual initiating
structure leadership behaviors and real initiating structure leadership
behaviors preferred by academic librarians in Texas?
This chapter contains information about the assessment and modification of raw
data before analysis, the analysis process and the results. The results are also interpreted.
The chapter is organized by research questions guiding this study.
Data Preparation
Before analysis, the data were evaluated for missing values and the violations of
assumptions related to correlation analysis. Six administrator responses and three
librarian responses were removed due to skipped questions or no librarian responses to
correlate to the administrator. No violations of assumptions were detected in regard to
linearity or extreme outliers, but the variables were not normally distributed. As such, it

Hefner-Babb 52

         rho would be the most appropriate test to use
(Salkind, 2011).
Prior to conducting the analysis, the scores for librarians were totaled for the two
subscales and averaged. The scores for the administrators were totaled and administrators
without corresponding librarian responses were removed.
Findings for Research Questions One and Two
Research question one examined the relationship between library administrators
actual consideration behaviors and librarians ideal consideration leadership behaviors by
academic librarians in Texas. A Spearman correlation was computed to test the
relationship between the actual consideration leadership behaviors of library
administrators (n=18, M=41.05, SD=3.33) and the ideal behaviors preferred by academic
librarians (n=18, M=39.74, SD=3.40). Analysis revealed that there was a weak, positive
correlation that was not statistically significant between the administrators real behaviors
and the ideal behaviors sought by the librarians, rs(18)=.277, p=.265. This suggests there

                  
      
                
actual and ideal initiation of structure behaviors preferred by academic librarians in
Texas. A Spearman correlation was computed to assess the relationship between the
actual initiation of structure leadership behaviors of library administrators (n=18,
M=38.94, SD=4.19) and the ideal behaviors sought by academic librarians (n=18,
M=39.52, SD=4.23). Analysis revealed that there was not a statistically significant
relationship, and that the

         

Hefner-Babb 53
initiation of structure behaviors and the ideal behaviors desired by the academic librarians
was considered extremely weak, rs(18)=.152, p=.546. This suggests there is minimal
relationship between a       structure behaviors and their
  

  

      

       

             
the two groups, there was not much difference between the actual and preferred.
Likewise, the means for Initiating Structure were lower than the means for
Consideration, which means that the Consideration behaviors were preferred by
librarians over Initiating Structure behaviors.
Summary
In Chapter IV, the researcher presented quantitative analysis of findings. The
results of the research found a statistically, weak, positive correlation between the real
consideration leadership behaviors and the ideal behaviors desired by librarians. The
correlations showed there was not a correlation between the actual and ideal initiation of
structure behaviors. Qualitative narrative findings are presented in Chapters V through
XIV. A narrative summary of the findings is in Chapter XV. Study, conclusions and
implications for practice, and recommendations for further study are discussed in Chapter
XVI.

Hefner-Babb 54
Chapter V
Pieces of the Puzzle
Matthew is currently in his 41st year as a professional librarian at a doctoral
degree granting public university in Texas. When I asked what positions he held at his
current library he answered:
I came as a tenure track faculty member. My title was catalog librarian, or
                

department. Then we had a library director who wanted to set up a sort of midmanagement level layer in the library, so there were coordinator positions created.
                

from my other nomenclature, but just a different kind of mid-management role.
           

  

    

Library Services.
I asked Matthew what education he completed prior to his current position. He
stated he has a baccalaureate               
 

 

   !          

  "           #  $    



masters and a second m %   # him what leadership positions in he held in
professional organizations and Matthew responded:
At the national level, nothing that I can recall. At the state level, I know I was an
         & '

 (ble with the Texas Library

Association [TLA]. I was chair of a committee for TLA about a hundred years
      )   t         

Hefner-Babb 55
two out of the last three years ... We have a group called TCAL, which is the

 



             -year

schools, the four- 

   -       

          -president/president-     t
win either time, but I felt somewhat gratified that they thought enough of me to
nominate me at least.
My next question focused on leadership positions in the library and by extension
the university campus. Matthew responded describing how he became library director:

              

    

guess I was doing well enough that the current leadership on the campus at that
time thought that, go ahead and make me a permanent Director of Library
Services, so twice as an interim and then currently as permanent.

                  
                       
     een a member of the Faculty Senate on two different
  !
My next question asked Matthew to describe the structure of his library
organization and what positions directly reported to him. He replied:
If I had to describe the organizational 

          

traditional top down (see Figure # 1"  

       

                 #    
pretty much top down. The positions that report directly to me outside of the
people in my own office suite, which is my executive assistant and business

Hefner-Babb 56
manager, but all of the coordinators in the library: the coordinator of acquisitions,
the coordinator of cataloging, the coordinator of systems, coordinator of reference
services, the coordinator of instruction and assessment, the coordinator of access
  



   

  

     

sort of resurrected our university archivist position, and that position reports
directly to me as well.

Director of Library Services

Business Manager

University
Archivist

Coordinator of
Access Services

Coordinator of
Reference
Services

Executive Assistant
Coordinator of
Instruction &
Assessment

Reference Librarian/
Electronic
Resources

Coordinator of
Collection
Development

Coordinator of
Systems

Coordinator of
Cataloging

Acquisitions
Librarian

Reference
Librarian/Distance
Education
Reference
Librarian/Instruction
al Design

Figure 1. M

 

rganization.

Input Behaviors
My first question asked Matthew how he assessed and rewarded performance of
the librarians he supervised. He divided his response into two types: formal and informal.

Hefner-Babb 57
The formal is the annual process of the annual faculty evaluation, which is the

  

               ere is merit

      

        

   

been approved by our faculty.
Matthew then discussed the informal:

   

  

achievement. I try and   

  

      
 

     

 

                

 !    

          

        




   

   

         

          

      

recognized, so I try and do that as much as possible. I think those are the main
ways.
My next question to Matthew asked what modes of interaction that he uses daily
to communicate with librarians. His immediate response was:

"  

          

       

heavily on email, try and reach people by phone, try hard not to call their cell
phones, but sometimes I resort to that and text is sort of a last resort; sort of in
non-   

           

   #             
has gone awa  

 



   

than almost anything else.

  

      

     

  

              

Hefner-Babb 58
The final question in this group inquired how Matthew informs librarians about
his expectations. Matthew responded:
I think collectively in meetings and individually in meetings. I try and meet with
people that report to me periodically at least throughout the academic year. We
meet as a faculty and we meet as a management group, which is the faculty and
   

 

            

        



 

 

   

   

 

     

primarily with meetings.
Group Structure and Operations Control
This first question visits the topic of organizational structure and how it relates to
operations control. Matthew responded to this question at length stating:
 

 

    

         

 

  

academic libraries do. We have classified and even some exempt staff. Then we
have faculty librarians, who are professional librarians with ALA accredited


!"$ 



 

  

           !"#

      !"% 

  





   

that time. Tenure these days across the country, I think, is a 50/50 kind of
proposition. A lot of libraries even have both where they have a dual track you
can choose, but we have a tenure track and tenured situation. Then we have a lot
of student assistants and the work study, and we rely on them so heavily because
     

 &

 



       

the permanent people, to keep the building open as much as we do, we rely on
students a lot.



Hefner-Babb 59
I next asked Matthew how operations control is used in the library organization.
He responded again in detail:


    

         

  

   

in our particular organization. That is due, I think, I mentioned the word top
down, but not very top heavy. I think if we had at least one associate director, I
think we could do more to control the day to day operations as far as making sure
that projects that start well, that stumble at some point; sort of limp to the finish


 

  

  

  

      



  

  

that. I think if I had some help that would be better; a better situation. I really do
  

   

Matthew added:
Of course, we have all kinds of employees. Some are go-getters and self-starters.
   




 

  

    

  

 

     






   

   






 



 

control on what happens because it just seems like things come together at
deadlines and usually past deadlines, and just sort of are thrown together in haste.
   



 

now with personnel. I 
  



     

 

 



     


 
 

     

 
 

     
    

   





two over the years. To not have one is, I think, a true handicap for us. Particularly
in this area of control of operations, I think.
My final question in this group focused on how Matthew relayed his expectations
to the library. He remarked:

Hefner-Babb 60
  



    

 

  

 

 



meeting. I need to probably have more of those. Certainly, we have faculty


              

people, which is a combination of faculty and staff supervisors. In order to trust
   
 

        



   

  
  





       

  





ars

      

  

  
 

I sat on

    

 

    

work very well, so you really need to talk to the whole library. I think we need to


 

            



      



messages.
Influence Group Achievement
The final group of questions for Matthew centered on the topic of group
achievement. I asked him how he analyzed the productivity in his library organization.
Matthew responded that this primarily happens in the spring semester when annual
reports are compiled. He continued:
I receive departmental annual reports and start putting the pieces together. I think
 



  

    

    

     

spr  
  

 



 





!   

        


    "  

   



 



 !! 







   

    

   

 

those last few pieces, which are invariably under a chair or sofa or something.
       
 

  



     
    



   

 




   


 

Hefner-Babb 61

    

       

     

how much is done in an organization like ours. When you see it all pulled
together, it makes an impact, I think.
The next question I asked Matthew related to assessing morale in his library
organization. He remarked on how difficult it is to evaluate morale saying:
We h

                   

professional librarians. We have eleven, I think, and maybe a total staff of thirty-

 

        

        

where the morale problems are. A lot of our people wear their heart on their

                      
because it really is the case of just one really, truly unhappy, negative person who
is vocal and negative; that kind of person can really poison an organization. I

     

 

  

         

                  

   

            t sure how to combat that except trying
to get the correct story on the record at some point.
Morale is a difficult issue to address. Sometimes it can be done just one on
one. Sometimes you have to bring a supervisor in with the employee in my office.
The

              

esources. I think honestly

                        
even if they go to another job. They tend to be unhappy people and they just may
not be resolved anywhere. Some morale issues are not resolvable, I think. I think

             

       

 

Hefner-Babb 62
   



             

so easy in a larger one.
My final question examined integration of the library organization. Matthew
responded after thinking about the question
Getting people to work outside of the departmental lines starts with the
supervisors, who in many cases can be very territorial people and very
antagonistic if their employees attempt to do that. Trying to get the supervisors on
the page first is, I think, the hardest part. I think most people that work in our
library are eager to do anything that will help the library, but I think sometimes
we get bogged down, at least in our particular library, by one or two people who
  

               

get around that.
I think the best ways are to get people working on, obviously, committees.
                   
       

         

Welcome. I think we just finished a Gulf Coast R     
bound journal                 
people from various departments doing that. I think working on special projects,
         

     

  

not such a work thing, we can get rid of the department lines. Things like we have
an annual wassail at Christmas time. We have a Christmas luncheon, gift
exchange. We have a spring luncheon; spring salad luncheon. I think those kind
of special events and special projects and committees are the best ways to go

Hefner-Babb 63
   




             

     

      

  
   

  



    

 

      hink.

Hefner-Babb 64
Chapter VI
 



e a Leader

Lucie is currently in her 9th year at a private academic university library. When I
asked her what positions she held prior to being director she responded:
I started as the cataloging librarian and after a couple of years and became the
technical services coordinator. Within that same year that I became technical
services coordinator, unfortunately, our director that I was hired under passed
away suddenly and I became interim director and then director. Those are the
          !     " # 

the weekends, so cover the gamut of the activities that take place.
I then asked Lucie to describe her educational background. She stated she had a Masters
in Library Science (MLS) however:
I  $!

 #   % "    " $  &  ' $#

()*  +,-. ' " $ !"/&  %    "  

things since then. When I came back into this, this was the first time I had used
that degree in a number of years.
I then asked what leadership positions she held in professional organizations and
)" "$$0 1    #       
 &2 $ $$! 0  $$!

at-

-only situation. I have run for a couple of member-

&    ! 0 !   '  "3 4 / !

library and by extension university committee service she stated:
$ $&  #  /& !   '  # "$$unity.

Really, the only leadership position right now has been that of director of the

Hefner-Babb 65
 

 











 

currently on the 



     

   

  



   

 

 

    



  

 

 

  





 

positions or anything.
When asked to describe her library organization she told me she reports to the associate
provost and provost who divide library duties. She then detailed the internal organization
saying:
Then reporting to directly to me, see Figure 2, I have an assistant director who is
the head of our reference area. Then I have an interlibrary loan supervisor who
reports directly to me. The technical services coordinator reports directly to me.
Then I have a distance education librarian who works with our off-campus sites
and online education. She reports directly to me.

Director of
Library
Secretary
Assistant
Director
Reference
Services

Director
of
Distance
Learning
Library
Services

Interlibrary
Loan
Supervisor

Figure 2.   library organization.

Special
Collections

Serials

Technical Services
Librarian
Systems
Cataloging
Librarian

Hefner-Babb 66
Input Behaviors
I then asked Lucie how she assesses and rewards performance of the librarians
who work with her. She said she meets with the librarians annually:
We discuss annual goals, what they expect. We review what they consider their
highlights from the previous year, what they thought they could have done better,
what they were proud of, what they consider their best achievement for the year.
  





  

       

          

     

other kind of reward system in place at this point.
  

 





    -a-year

meeting. Now,

we do, for the university, have to turn in annual goals. They do have to have those
   



         s

for the university

report, but we do highlight one area each year and try to include that annual goal
in our report to the university.
I asked Lucie what modes of communication she preferred to use with her
librarians. Initially she indicated a personal preference for face-to-face conversations
describing her pattern saying:
     

     

   

 

harder right now because I am short staffed. I do a lot of face-to-face
conversation. Then I do use 



 

   

trying to figure out something new or working on an issue at that particular point,
but most of the conversations are face-to-face. Either I go to their office or they
come to mine.

Hefner-Babb 67
When asked how she lets librarians know her expectations as their leader Lucie
referred to her practices in the annual meetings. She remarked:
In those face-to-face conversations, we do discuss expectations in that annual
review meeting each year, which I usually generally try to do in August before the
 



 

            

year. I do have staff meetings. In those staff meetings, we may go over some
     

            t

                
   



 

they



   

Group Structure and Operations Control
As a follow up to my initial question about the library organization I asked for
elaboration on the group organization. Lucie commented providing more detail about
select duties in each position saying:
        

             

charge when I have to be away. Since he also supervises the reference area, there
is an additional full-time librarian under him and one part-time librarian under
him. There is somewhat structure. Our coordinator of technical services oversees
the periodicals and other cataloging. Acquisitions is under her area although direct
purchasing is done out of my office. All of the purchase orders come through me.
                 

We are trying to work within the structure that the university has set up, but then
also allow for some autonomy within the areas themselves.

Hefner-Babb 68
When I asked Lucie to discuss her implementation of operations control she
focused on collaboration and team work. She also explained how she led the library soon
after assuming t  

 

I believe in collaboration. I try to work with my librarians to come up with plans
and ideas and input from everyone trying to see how can we improve the services
  

   

             spect of

collaboration, working together as a team rather than myself as just the individual.
                          
to be the director. I was looking at ways in which I would appreciate hearing from
others who might have done this a little longer than I had done this.
I then asked how she relayed her expectations to the library organization as a
whole. Lucie replied stressing what she saw as the purpose of the library:
I think that goes back to that question C under your first question. Through the
staff meetings, through the meetings with annual goals, and then also as I share
above me with the associate provost and with the provost, sharing with them what
we, as a team, have come to understand our purpose to be here for the university
and for the students.
Influence Group Achievement
When I inquired how Lucie evaluated productivity in her organization she
described a dependence on statistics. She explained:
           

t are our statistics, looking to see not only

gate counts, but then what kind of response and feedback are we getting from
students, from faculty? What are the areas in which we can improve? What areas

Hefner-Babb 69
are we already showing improvement from the past? What other changes that

                 
                   
been some anecdotal comments.
When discussing assessing productivity Lucie reflected on library contributions to
recent changes to student evaluations. She described them as follows:
One of the things that I pushed for that, this year, did take place was to add. They
revised our student course evaluation courses form this year. It was nice to be able

         

    

      

every student and every course to give us some feedback on their research and
whether it has been productive and what are some areas we could improve on. We

                   
             
They were revising the whole evaluation form. I just said one of the things
that we have looked at and that w 

        



       re-affirmation as well, to be able to say I needed some
more raw data. I needed some more statistics to be able to show that we are
performing and providing a service for the students. Since they were revising the
whole form, it just seemed like a good time to insert some things having to do
with information literacy and to see what kind of research students were having to
do in some of their classes and if the resources we had were meeting those needs.

Hefner-Babb 70
When asked how Lucie gauged morale in her library organization she indicated
how hard it is to do. She then elaborated on how she assessed morale among her library
staff saying:

   

 

   -to-face conversations. I really have to

depend on that, the feedback that I am getting from the faculty, from the
librarians, realizing that sometimes they may not always be as honest in face-to-

                 
                  
who are talking about quitting or retiring or walking away. I feel like they seem to
be fairly content right now. It really has been the face-to-face conversations and
staff meetings. We do a devotional in the staff meetings. Generally, people seem
to be fairly upbeat and positive.
My final question to Lucie focused on how she integrated her library as a group.
She replied indicating a dependence on a variety of meetings:
We do that again, through those staff meetings, appointing smaller groups to work

                  
of individuals and their weaknesses and trying to pair people up based on that
information. 

              

to be working well at this point.

                 
the most part, it seems to be working well. They do integrate well together. We do
have a lot of variety of resources, and then to see that also carry over into their

              

Hefner-Babb 71
step further than just what we provide for the students, but to actually work within
  

    

 



Hefner-Babb 72
Chapter VII
The Goal is Consensus, Not Compromise
John has been the director at his library since 1996. He began the discussion by
stating the following:
I came as library director and then about 10 years after I came, they changed it
from library director to executive director of library services. My standard joke

   

      

       

you a new title and more responsibility.
First, I asked John to discuss his educational background as related to his current
position. He responded in detail:
I was in the process of finishing my Ph.D.; I finished it about 3 years after I
moved out here. I had 3 courses left to take and then the proposal and the
dissertation so I was not even ABD yet when I accepted the position out here. I

                 
     

              

                  
Development Program th  

         

-week

workshop for aspiring executives in libraries that my... I used to work at the
University in North Texas. They sent me to that and then I also attended several
Association of Research Libraries workshops as well. Then, just a lot of
conference proceedings and other similar-type things before I accepted the
position out here.

Hefner-Babb 73
When I asked John what leadership positions he held in professional
organizations he indicated active participation at the state level. He responded saying his
leadership experience was:
Primarily with the Texas Library Association. I have held numerous division and
 

 





  

       

, president



whatever it is, Colleges and Universities Library Division (CULD). Then, also,
the Reference  

  

   

 

 



  ve

   

been a member of Texas Library Association (TLA) since 1982. I think I had my




 



           

about 2 or 3 pages i     

 

   

   


 



  !

I also was a member of the Texas Council of State University Librarians,




 "!   # "

  !  

 

 





  

that organization as well and held other positions in there. I served as an
accreditor or peer reviewer for the Commission on Colleges of the Southern
!



 

   " 

 $ 

      



%&&' 

$  

(



'&  '' 

    




ional

organizations. There used to be an Association of Higher Education or something
to that effect, the Alliance of Higher Education in the Dallas and Fort Worth Area,
     

  

 

   )     



  

active.
In response to questions regarding his library organization John indicated a
traditional structure. He described it as follows:

Hefner-Babb 74
  



 

 





 

(see Figure 3)



 

comfortable with that. I have basically 3 primary areas to the library. One is called
    

    



    

 :

access services,

circulation, and related activities. Next area is research support or research
services which is the traditional reference, (ILL) inter-library loan, and
information literacy. Then we have our technical services unit which is cataloging
and serials as well as acquisitions. The fourth major area is the West Texas
Collection which is our special collections area in and the University Archive.
Then there is a library business manager, and community engagement coordinator
position which reports directly to me as well.

Executive Director of
Library Services

Executive Assistant

Head of Technical
Services

Electronic Serials
Librarian

Asst Director for
Research and
Information Services

Gov Info / Reference
Librarian

Acquisitions Librarian

Figure 3. 



library organization.

Asst Director for
Access Services

Multimedia Support
Services Librarian

Circulation Supervisor

Head of Special
Collections and
Programs

University Archivist

Hefner-Babb 75
Input Behaviors
My first question to John focused on the various input behaviors he used as a
library administrator. I focused on how he evaluated and rewarded performance of the
librarians who worked for him and he replied:
We have a standardized performance review system here on the campus which is,
I think, pretty similar in a lot of different institutions where we look at the
requirements of their particular position and how well they perform particularly in
5 key areas. That will vary from person to person depending on what their
assignments are and what they have chosen to emphasize as well. We do not have
  









 

direct reports are supervisors with the

  

 


  



  


 

another component to have to look at is, how well do they perform as
supervisors? Not only as their supervisor but I also have to assess how well
 

   





I also require all of my direct reports to do unit as well as personal goals


  



    

   



   



in their typical job description. They can gain credit for that whether that be
professional activities or something here on campus  



   

special projects they might be working on. All of that goes into a formal review
document that we use here on campus.
I then asked John what his formal process for rewarding performance entailed.
John replied indicating it was not based on merit but rather on an alternative system:

Hefner-Babb 76
Unfortunately, there is not true merit money available. I really truly wish there

                    
have to have a satisfactory performance review in order to qualify for that. I
would much rather have a pot of money allotted to the library which then I could

           

        

            hing.
I usually try to reward with help with special projects, giving them time to
work on special projects. If they express wanting to go to a particular conference

           

        

willing to work with existing budget resources to support those kinds of activities.

        

          

up and grooming people to take my position at some point or if they want to
explore opportunitie  

        

         

     

             

            !         
        

  eep them interested and give them new

opportunities and peak their interest to gain new skills.
Also, I try to force them to stretch themselves sometimes here on campus.

                  
" l, I got #   $    

    

When asked how he communicates with the librarians who report to him John

  %   

   & '    (

Hefner-Babb 77
Email, telephone calls, face-to-

  

 

  

    

still a strong proponent of just simply management by walking around, making
     
    

over 

            

    

        

         

       !    

 



  

 



  

 

 

     

 
 

like that.
   

   

    

visual. Not everybody 
  

   

  

"    

  

 -

# 

 

          !     

    $ 

        



In my final question for this section we discussed how John relays his
expectations to the librarians. He responded:
I think part of that is to have strong goals and objectives planning system for the
year. Each year, we map out the goals and objectives for the library and then they
go out and map their unit goals and objectives. This year, I reversed the process
     

   

        

           

  

  





 

  



Also, in that performance review process, I have monthly meetings, one-on-ones
with my direct reports then we have monthly meetings with the prof admin group
and then I have a monthly meeting with the support staff, separate from their
supervisors.

Hefner-Babb 78
   

  

   

nication with the staff at all levels. Also, I



          

        
   


  

   



informed directly rather

                 

              
     

   

          

     

  

    

    

              

Group Structure and Operations Control
When I asked John to describe his library organization structure he
    
    

   

   ll

  

!     " 

    # $ 
&





be a search box for the

    

   " 

 

 %

        

  





      

movement about flat lining and direct reporting and all that kind of stuff. I still
like the idea of the more structured organization but with that said, in our library,
   



 

 '       

(     

members which are the 2 people over in the West Texas Collections. Their
)      
   





   
 

      



    

 )  

       

  * !  

           

       

      

*

  !    re

  

  

    

exempt employee.

     +     
  

 

 

going to write up a

Hefner-Babb 79
Libguide for that particular area or they might be called upon their expertise to
            



     

 

                
regardless of what your positi   
   
   

 

    

   

     

  

    

an organizational structure but i   

  


 

     
 




 

    

     

picks people from all the different areas and then also support staff to accomplish
     

  

          on paper

very hierarchical, very structured, but because of the size of the staff, those
boundaries blur very quickly.
     !"# #      
  

$%  &%  

                 !  

all day long is informati        not allowed to do anything
else;

 



 

When asked how he implements operations control John indicated his personal
practice was to avoid micromanagement. He said:
If I give somebody an assignment, I pretty much want to get out of their way. If
  

  

     



    

 

 



   







           ' 

unit level, I might give guidance, I might g        
head to figure out a way to get that task finished or new programs started.

 

Hefner-Babb 80
My operational control goes back to those monthly meetings, the one-onones with direct reports as well as the group meetings. Most importantly is that
  
  


      

       

            

          

   

    

     

 on

              

                !      
do micromanagement.
I then asked John how he relays his expectations to the library and he s   " f I
   

         #

  $ %

  &

When you talk about all those formal and informal meetings, particularly the
formal meetings, the monthly meetings, the review process, the written
documentation of the goa  

           

our webpage. The last 3 years, I think, the goals and objectives as far as the
              


          

  

  

 

      

document.
Influence Group Achievement
When asked how he assesses group productivity John referred to using goals and
objectives but also looking at other factors that influence group achievement. He said:
I think it just goes back to, are we fulfilling our goals and objectives and if not,
       '  

        



  (                  



Hefner-Babb 81
make that proposal, but until IT actually adopts it, is that a reflection on poor
performance on my staff member or is that they finish their part of the task, it was
  





     

        



document for the library. How well did we fulfill and meet all of those objectives


  



     

    

   

library, just not me. Each unit has to evaluate their individual goals and objectives
which fee 

       

  



         

     

    

      

survey with the students and then the next year, we run it with faculty. Also, at the
same time, we keep documentation of all the external review organizations,
professional organizations. If the College for Education is up for accreditation by
NCATE or an equivalent organization, we look at the criteria, we submit our
documentation, and they get the feedback from the professional organizational




    

 

      

         

    

 

    


ll,



and

meeting their needs, or if there is a problem, then that tells us what we need to


    



  



       

user satisfaction and external review agencies are very, very helpful.
When I asked how John determines morale within his organization he offered not
only an answer but some situational examples. He reflected:

Hefner-Babb 82
    


  



       



 



   

ious

   

what the morale is.

The more I isolate myself in the office, the less I have a good feel for that until
  



 

 

    
   

     

!





   " 

 

 

 





  
 







if you

 

 

free to use this definition. Management is a series of meetings interrupted by
meetings. Some are formal, some are informal, some are called, some are not
    # 





   

           

office for the next 3 hours and end up having HR come over.
  

$

 !

    

  %

there are always little surprises that will be bumped up. One of the most valuable




  

   





  $  &'   (  )

years and I was in charge of gen ref, the general reference unit, ILL was one of
the units and someone else reported to me. I had a staff member, not a
professional staff member but a support staff, the person was outstanding, good
reviews, high productivity, and then all of a sudden, it absolutely went in the tank.
*



 

 !  

 +,   +$  

It got to the point where I was going to do disciplinary action and possible
  





 

   &  
 



   

    

   

  

 

  +    !

   & 

   +  

then it all made sense. I thought something like that

    

 

     



Hefner-Babb 83
reason why behavior changes. The more you cannot tolerate so much as be aware
of the external factors, for better, for worse, we all bring our personal lives to

               
                  
them is no longer the jovial person they used to be.
You also have to watch out for people like me that are getting towards

                   
2 years before I came but was still here about 5 years after I came. Finally, I
convinced that person to actually leave but it was a long 5-year process to get that

                
                
University of Maryland, one of the speakers came in and given the time frame and
some of the people did not like what he said but there was one phrase, only

      

    !   "#     

golf. Golf you can go out to a practice range and perfect your swing. You can hit

         #        
except by doing it. By doing it, you always affect someone. You may affect

              



To me, that was very profound. The other thing that I often tell library
school students when I would give a guest lecture or when I taught in a library
school at North Texas, is it sounds so easy on paper to manage, hire, fire,
discipline an employee, but whe  

        

            $       

Hefner-Babb 84

 
 

         

      

        This person should not be

                    
they only lasted 6 months.

          

          

career for the rest of their lives. I also had to do it for the good of the organization

         !

       

you can only reward one. My staff gets tired of some of my phrases but I always

        
 

 

time you make a decision. You make

    

       

decision that everybody likes.
At Association of College and Research Libraries (ACRL), the workshops
there always emphasize the idea of consensus, not compromise, but consensus
because in compromise, everybody gives something up but in consensus, you find
a path that everybody can support equally. Consensus takes time and participatory
management requires a time commitment by everybody. Everybody wants to have
a say, but when they find out that it takes time and its time on their part, they

                    
you can work around to a solution that everybody supports and is not necessarily

       
another side.

          

Hefner-Babb 85

                  
                  
until we can find that consensus position.
When asked how he integrates his library organization John commented on how
his background in military history influences his practices. He said it starts with:
Setting a good example. Part of my training as a historian was military history.
One of the areas I often read about was the wars in the Middle East. The Israeli

                   
            
                     
                  -in on performance
standards. I have to be setting the standard for excellent service. I have to be
setting the standard for good supervision. I should be the one setting the standard
for the example of what it is to be a good leader in the organization if I want my
staff members to be good leaders.
If we truly value our users, then I should be setting a very good example at
the reference desk. I should be setting a high standard of quality when I push, I

                     
library instruction and now information literacy.
Again, if I want people to be professionally active and giving back to the

                 
              !      "
         #         !    

Hefner-Babb 86
  

 

             

               



  

immediate action or I may know circumstances, there are other disciplinary issues






 

  



      

           

 

Y





 

   

           



  

 



 



   

    

       

 



  

  

   

that will affect their perception of you as the leader.
When I asked if he had further comments regarding previous questions he
reflected on his experience teaching in library school. He said:
I always enjoyed talking about the management topics with the library school
 

tol 

  

     

      

   

   





    



 

 







      

    !  " 

           



   

    

temporarily assigned to a branch library and a public library, and all of a sudden, I
 

   

 

   

management class, but what do you mean I have to have a budget to you in 2
weeks or 2 days?
#  

  

 

               

              

    

 



       

   



Hefner-Babb 87
organization because what you learn in library scho     

 

generic but when you get into an organization, you have to relearn their
management, you have to relearn their budgeting methods, you have to relearn
their personnel issues regulations. When you go from Texas to another state, there
may be whole different set of bureaucracies and rules and regulations that you
              earn the rules and regulations and getting
                    
bee      
Department.

       

      

Hefner-Babb 88
Chapter VIII
Share Credit for Successes; Shoulder Blame for Failures
Deb is a career librarian with over 20 years at the same library in a variety of
roles. When asked about her positions to date she replied:
I have been working here since 1995, so 20 years and a few months, and the
positions that I held ... I came really as a government documents librarian, and
then within a few years moved to head that department, and then from there I
moved to an assistant dean position for the information technology services that
included digital library, the systems, and network, et cetera, and a user interfaces
group. After a few years with that, then I moved into the associate dean role that
has responsibilities across the library.
I then asked Deb for information related to her educational background. Deb
replied in detail:
  



    

library science, and then



    



      

 

 

   

years in addition to just all the professional networking and training, et cetera, that
you normally do through professional associations. The leadership I did at TALL
Texans, I also did the Snowbird Institute, which was ongoing for a few years in
the mid-

    

 



  

 

     

  

   

     

    d

be invited like with Texas Accelerated Library Leaders (TALL) Texans.

Hefner-Babb 89
When I asked Deb to discuss her leadership in professional organizations she
offered an extensive listing of state and national roles. She summarized the last 20 years
saying:
  





    

 



   

earlier on in this

20-year cycle, plus I worked in another library for a few years as well and got
  

 





  



  



 

was a member of ALA Council for a few years. Just a variety of kinds of
assignments and heading task forces to get work done, those kinds of things. Then


 

  

          

  

offer as many opportunities. From there I began to work with the Library of
Congress, in their NDIIPP program, National Digital Information Infrastructure
and Preservation Program, and that evolved into the NDSA, the National Digital
Stewardship Alliance where I co-chaired the content work group.
There about four or five work groups that did all the work of that alliance
and so I co-chaired that. I also became very active in the International Internet

 

   

 

 



   

     

        



four more

members outside the US than inside of the US where I was elected to the steering
committee, and then was elected chair of the steering committee, and have served
in that role there, as also vice-chair a couple of times, and lead some opportunity,
    

now.



  

        

  

Hefner-Babb 90
  





 

     



-Agency

Coordinating Council in Texas. I was the faculty representative from a state
university on that committee for 12 years. We did reports to the legislature
recommending how to deal with records management issues, in particular as we
move more into the digital word, and how to preserve records that are not in any
format, but digital.
That was a good experience, getting to know records managers from
           



   

 

   

the Premise Group that developed the preservation metadata standards, and a
variety of other things.
When asked to discuss her leadership roles in the library Deb focused on her
current position and then reflected on her prior roles in the library. She began saying:


 

 

        

   

   

      

the library. I report to the dean of librari   






  

 

   

    

picture of the library than in my previous positions that were related to
information technology. Then, earlier than that, government information.
With government information it was as we watched government
information move more to digital. I became really interested in capturing the
websites of agencies that were going out of business. That got me involved in the
world of technology, and in the world of digitization because we were wanting to
get things available online, and government information; which then prepared me
for the next job, information technology services in the library.

Hefner-Babb 91
When the current dean came, he asked if I would serve as the associate
dean.

  

 

        ading a lot of

different kinds of efforts. Major building changes, major shifts of collections, a lot
of different kinds of things like that in addition to just strategic planning. I have a
lot of responsibility with our budgets. I do pretty much all of the purchase
approvals over a certain amount of money. Just a wide range of activities and
responsibilities.
In response to my 

          organizational structure Deb

responded with information on the divisions first. She recalled:
Yes. That would be the four divisions, which are public services, digital libraries,
special libraries, and collection management. And offices, facilities, and systems.
Then the administrative offices, and external relations offices. All of the heads of
those groups report directly to me at this point (See Figure 4).

Hefner-Babb 92
Dean of
Libraries

Associate Dean
Of libraries

Figure 4.

External
Relations Office

Facilities &
Systems Office

Finance &
Administration
Office

Research
Support Office

Collection
Management
Division

Public Services
Division

Digital Libraries
Division

Special Libraries
Division

 library organization.

Input Behaviors
My first question to Deb related to assessing and rewarding performance of
librarians who reported to her. She replied in detail describing the strategic planning and
assessment structure in her organization stating:
We have a structure in place that enables this process. We work with our strategic
plan that has overarching goals, and targets our objectives within that. Each of the

                    
going to do to contribute to us, achieving whatever is in the objective. The
objectives are measurable, et cetera. We work, very much, with SMART goals.

  u     Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Realistic,
Time-bound). We ask each of them to do an operational plan for their division or

Hefner-Babb 93
  

 

   



   

  



goals for the library. Then, within that, they also have their personal performance


agreement

     

     



 

 



operational plan for their divisions or offices.
 

         

 basic performance

area, which out in the rest of the university would be called teaching. We call it
our primary duties, basically. We are also expected to include scholarship and
service, like all the rest of the faculty. They write this up at the beginning of the
year. I review and sign off on it. At the end of the year, they annotate that
 


 

      

     

   
   

    
 

 



 

evaluation.
I score them based on a range of scores that we have. Which is basically, a
three is an effective score. You did your job. Four, is highly effective. Five is
   



         



expectations are to receive each of those scores. A two is deficient. There are
      

 

  

   

staying on track with what we say our vision is, and what our goals are for the
library within the university mission and goals.
   

     

    

measure that success. Then, you can have your celebrations ... or not. We have an
evaluation document that actually defines that whole process. Yes, it impacts their
                        

Hefner-Babb 94
of living raises, you only get merit as faculty. So yes, the scores then guide the
awarding of the merit pool. And we use three year averages. Someone may be
having a                   
     -            
       

 

            

gravely ill, or something like that.
I then asked Deb which modes of interaction she used daily to communicate with
librarians. Deb responded at length:
I have, really, an open office door. If people need something immediately, they
  

          py to talk with them. We also

communicate a lot through email. I also try to be aware of their achievements, and
           

        

            feedback things that I
think they need.
I also, sometimes offer constructive criticism when appropriate. They are
all generally pretty good at accepting that and trying to change behaviors as
needed. For the most part, they are super talented and devoted group of people
                   
do regular meetings with most of 

         

that. One on one, there are a couple that like that. I have more personal one on one
meetings with them. I try to sort of follow what their needs are as individuals,
related to one on one kinds of meetings.

Hefner-Babb 95

     

         

leadership team that I mentioned. We do meet a couple times of month. Usually,

                   
agenda, or the dean is out of town, so it gets cancelled. Those kinds of things. We
generally meet, minimum, of twice a month... just to update everybody on things,
and discuss things that need to be discussed, or decision making processes. Just
how we have equity across the library related to evaluation and scoring, and all
those kinds of things.
I then asked how Deb lets her direct reports know her expectations as their leader.
She referred back to the strategic planning document and the evaluations used for
librarians and staff saying:
I think that our expectations are pretty clear in our strategic plan. The goals and
targets that we develop. We always run into this for the librarians. Our staff, we
have I think some sixty librarians, and maybe eighty or eighty so, about that many

                       

s

heads are staff. For them, they have a little bit different kind of a planning
document. But the communication happens in that planning process of what
expectations are. Librarians, occasionally, will hear this from people on the

                        
faculty member at a university is not a forty hour a week job.

     
                    
We have to make that statement now and then, th

a week, otherwise we have to pay them an overtime pay. People who are in

Hefner-Babb 96
 




 

 



       

   

 

   





       

  

  

             
    
 

 

  

     

   

  

 

We also have a process where we have a group called the library
assembly. People can submit questions through library assembly to us that we
respond to in writing. There are several avenues like that for people to ask
questions, and for us to communicate out to people about information they need to
know.
     
   


        



             

   
     

              



  

and be transparent when we can be. Of course, when you start talking personnel
issues then you have to be much more circumspect.
Group Structure and Operations Control
I first asked Deb to elaborate on the group structure of her organization. She
discussed the positions outside of the divisions that reported to her:
We do have a few positions that floats a little outside of our divisions and offices.
We have a director for assessment that floats a bit outside. Reports directly to me,
but we want to keep that emphasis as being across the library. We have a person
in a library publishing position that reports directly to the dean. That position is
more working with special corrections, and our university press, and others
related to publishing. We do have a few of those outliers. The university press

Hefner-Babb 97
actually reports to the dean of libraries as well. We have a few of those positions
  



  

 



 

 



I then asked Deb to discuss the practices she used in organizational control as a
leader. In her response she stressed the need for communication within the organization
saying:
 







 

  





 

  

      

   

  

  

   

rt of the buck stops

here person related to approving purchases, dealing with our purchasing cards. I


  

 

     

 

 

  

   

how we spend it. We meet the requirements of our vice president for our financial
fiscal affairs, and state law related to how we handle money, how we spend
money, that sort of thing. I do a review of all of the reviews of librarians, and


   

  

 







    

supervisor, and our personnel affairs committee that come in on those scholarship
and service areas. There is that oversight of the evaluation process. The oversight,
first of all, of the development of strategic plan, and how we implement the
setting the objectives that we need to set to reach our goals outlined in our
strategic plan.
When I asked Deb how she relayed her expectations to the library and she again
stressed the various communication avenues within her organization. She remarked:
Well, I think I discussed that somewhat earlier, in we have several avenues of
communicating, just with everyone in the library. The coffees are, I think, a good
way of doing that. Having some time for people to ask questions is an important

Hefner-Babb 98
factor. But also allowing them to submit them in writing anonymously through
the library assembly, I think is a good thing.
We also have an internal newsletter that we tend to add things to from the
administrative offices. A lot of it is communication across the divisions and
offices about

       

     

         

              

     

      

are a couple of things that  

    

        

In her comments Deb mentioned the 

   . I asked her to elaborate on

the purpose of the coffees and the topics discussed during these sessions and she said:

  

              

   



  !          

usually have some kind of program planned. We do a variety of kinds of things at
those coffees. For example, our divisions and our offices take turns reporting
about their activities over the past year, or if they feel like, or accomplishments.

"      

   #           

on. We tend to get too siloed otherwise, I think.
We sometimes have external speakers, like someone talking about
diversity issues, that sort of thing. We always leave some time for
announcements, discussion, for questions, that sort of thing as well.

Hefner-Babb 99
Influence Group Achievement
My first question to Deb in this section focused on how she assessed productivity
in her organization. Her response detailed the various assessment activities within her
library:
Again, this evaluation process and those annotated performance agreements.

   
            
                 
                
and offices and what        

                     
             
We also do a lot of assessment activities trying to understand better how
we serve students and faculty. We have a graduate student and an undergraduate

                
The assessment pieces are also such things as the students come in and log
in to computers. They may log in to our regular desk top computers, but they may
also check out lap tops from us that they use. Which is super popular. They may

                  
find out how students, how many t            
through the IRB process for this of course, and not release any personal
information.
We can also, through our central offices, begin to say, these are the groups
of people who are in the library weekly. These are the groups that came in

Hefner-Babb 100
monthly, et cetera a    

         

 

 

we started a couple years ago, collecting that data, and beginning to analyze that
       

    

      to show how

they achieve and accomplish their goals as students, as measured by their success
in their classes over their career here.
     

     

        

of the students coming in for instruction clas   

       

measure who has had some library instruction, and see if we get in to work with
some of their faculty members to see if it impacted papers, those kinds of things.
We have some groups of classes, like beginning English class. They bring
     

  

 

    

         

at those. Then, we have individual librarians doing assessment around some more
specific kinds of areas that they work in. One of our librarians, that actually, her
husband, she followed her husband to Austin, and got a job at Texas digital
library. She published a paper related to our scholarly work repository. Which is
our institutional repository, and an analysis of the use of that content and how the
faculty feel about contributing to it, et cetera. We have those individual research
projects going on as well. Our director of research and assessment actually helps
all of those people to design surveys, to design assessment tools, et cetera to make
sure       

  

We encourage this by the way. We encourage this behavior. We would
really like to have as much data driven decision making as possible.

Hefner-Babb 101
For further clarification I asked Deb to return to the topic of card swiping. She
detailed the process and purpose saying:
Yes. They come in, and they swipe their I. D. cards; their student I. D. cards. This
      





     

  





 





   



   

      

attendance taking. 



     



 



     

   



   

   

 

  

to do any kind of ... In fact,

     



  



 



      

ing, they just swipe their



  





protected. Everyone who does this has to go through the required training for
human subjects.
If you can get collaboration from your people who control all the data
about students, they can supply you... You can submit your card swipe data and
they can supply you back with anonymized data. I think that you can get some
 

fo 

 

 

  

  

         

    

        



 

collaboration from our central folks. They do require that human subject, you
have to protect all this data. You need people to understand their responsibility if
  

way collecting this data.

I asked Deb how she evaluates morale in her organization. She initially replied,
!      "#  



$

We inevitably have one person who complains that the morale in her group is not
good. Yet, it see



    

  

         

Hefner-Babb 102
  

          

           





      
   

case thirty years ago. That is true now. Because we are information professionals,
and accessed information is just in constant flux. You have to be always prepared
to change the way you do things. To provide better services to students who are
much more tech savvy, but may not have a clue about critical thinking skills, and
selecting authoritative sources.
Before, in libraries, we selected authoritative sources for them to use.
                 
kinds of things that may or may not ... so critical thinking skills are just absolutely
vital in the information world now.
I think that constant change is unsettling to a lot of people. We try to do
                   
ends up controlling what the size of the merit pool. We love to give as much merit
                                   
made it. It is no    
     



  

        

          

people when they do a good job. Sometimes some of our supervisors need some
help with remembering to do that maybe.
      !  " #     
$               

  

piece of paper I had with me during this key note speech was the little conference

Hefner-Babb 103
program, so I wrot   



           

desk ever since. Two of his, two of the leadership strengths that she talked about
was, he always shared credit for successes. And shouldered blame for
 

 

         

  

credit for successes makes a huge difference in morale.
I then asked Deb how she integrates her organization and gets people to work
together. She described the success they have in this area stating:


    

 

!

       



harder in other areas. For example, our digital libraries division and our special
libraries division, there is strong coordination, collaboration there. Much of what
we digitize are unique, special collections. They really work together getting the
   




  

             

                    

strong relationship.
Our facilities and systems group in our digital libraries, super close
working relationship that has allowed us to be ... t



    

digital library field is because those two groups work together so well. As I go out
talking to others around the country and the world, that is the biggest barrier that I
hear about, is the lack of collaboration between those two groups. I think the
   

                  

sometimes harder to pull those together.
"
 

         

        

       

 

         

Hefner-Babb 104
why. I think people find it hard, sometimes, to have two different bosses. We
  





      

  



 

collection management division to help with metadata for the digital library, so
  

 

to avoid t 

 

  

    

     

            

 

in libraries.
At the end of the interview Deb made a summary observation about leadership in
library organizations. Her comments focused on the need for two-way communication.
I guess, in my opinion, the chief thing as a leader that you need to do is that
  

    

 

      

 

get people on board around ideas, they will never have the same level of interest
and passion. T                 



with the quality and interest if you can sell them on the idea. That
communication around a new idea, a new approach, something we want to do that
      ... or even 
    
   


     
 

     

 

     
      

       

 




  

  

 

       t, it makes a real difference.

Hefner-Babb 105
Chapter IX
It Comes Down to Communication
I first asked Kathy how long she worked at h     
   



 he

   -93, so it was five years. I was a Reference Interlibrary

Loan Librarian. This time around as library director or  
      

  

#   $  



  

 % 



   





 !"

    &



 

that she prepared for her current job by com  # #     
 

 ' ( 

+ !" 

 



 )   

 

 

      

 #* 

   ,

I was in the second class ever of TALL Texans [Texas Accelerated Library
Leaders]. I also attended- -     .   
 

  /#0.  &

 1( *

 

 */*  

   

!   

similar to TALL Texans except it was 2-1/2 days in a basement room, and it
   

 as TALL Texans. It was a leadership management thing,

and that was years ago.
I then asked Kathy to discuss her leadership experience in professional
organizations. She replied in detail saying:
 



2 ( 

   
31/4 /



      (/*! e chaired Reference

  4    3 ! * 

 



Leadership Development Committee three years, which is only supposed to be a
two-year appointment, but within that, I chaired subcommittees, where either I
chaired where we did the selection of the candidates for TLA for TALL Texans,

Hefner-Babb 106
or I chaired the group where we picked the mentors, that kind of thing. The
Leadership Development Committee, I spent a great deal of time on for the Texas
Library Association. I chaired, trying to think what else I chaired. Leadership
Development was a biggie for me because it went on for a long time, and then, of
     

  

  

    

Texshare Board for the Texas State Library and Archives Commission. Then, I
  

     



        

and Management Association] Committee of Measurements, Assessments and
         

  

      

that.
I then asked Kathy to discuss her leadership roles in the library and by extension
the university. She indicated that her roles are outside the library:
!    

    

library, of    

     !     

  or executive- "       

title change from director to executive director, but that is pretty much in the
library, and within the university, I have served on university strategic planning
committees and the assessment, The University Assessment Committee, and the
Institutional Effectiveness Committee and various and other committees at the
university level.
My final question in this section concerned the library organization that Kathy
leads. She detailed recent changes within her organization (see Figure 5) saying:
!              

    

years. At one point, all librarians reported directly to me, but we have grown and

Hefner-Babb 107
everything, so I have a library management team, which includes the head of
public service, the head of electronic resources and collections, our head of library
systems, and the head of university archives and special collections, and then two
administrative support positions report to me. One is, well, my administrative
     

 



 

  



administrative services officer, and that position actually makes sure that all kinds
   

    

    

 the required guidelines,

policies and laws and stuff.

Executive Director of
Library Services

Head of Public
Services

Assistant

Administrative
Services Officer

Head of Electronic
Resources and
Collection
Management

Head of Library
Systems

Figure 5.   library organization.

Head of University
Archives & Special
Collections

Hefner-Babb 108
Input Behaviors
My first question to Kathy in this section concerned how she assessed and
rewarded performance of librarians who report to her. In her response she detailed the
formal evaluation process and how it is tied to the assessment plan.
Okay, well, first of all, the actual main part of the evaluation, annual evaluation
thing, a good part of that is our mutually-established goals. Okay, so we look at
what we like I said in our mutually established goals, we also have a university
   
   

ired to have an assessment plan ... so that ties in to that

        

  

     

 and what those

           



As far as reward, well, of course, I do work for the state, so monetary
reward is very hard to do other than if there is an opportunity for merit and things
like tha                 
            

   

  


provosts ... and each one has been different in how they allow you the leeway in
the awarding. You only get a certain pot, like 2%, but some of them are very - the
               

   

    

expectations, then everybody got the same percentage of raise. It really - and
          ts what you can really do.

I then asked Kathy what modes of communication she used most with her
librarians. She replied indicating a variety of formats including chat:
Face-to-face, phone, email, and actually a lot of chat. We use Link or Skype or
whateve  

          

 

     

Hefner-Babb 109
really easy just to pop up, and we do a quick chat, and then - or call, or a variety
of things.
My final question in this section asked Kathy how she let her librarians know her
expectations. She responded that she holds a variety of meetings including:
biweekly, well, every two weeks I have the management team meetings. ... and
    

         

break, but, we have some of -    



  







 

  



meetings, where we take about an hour, hour and a half, and we do some kind of
either, we do some informative, but we also do team-building exercises, and then






-on-one meetings a lot of times in discussion, particularly with my

management team.
Group Structure and Operations Control
I asked Kathy to elaborate on the group structure of the library organization. She
summarized the different departments she oversees:
Okay. Well, within public service - 

    

  

  

of division of public services, kind of technical services, but we do have quite a
number of committees or groups that work together across lines. We have an
outreach committee that like University Archives and Special Collections is


  

areas and a



 

  

   

   

     

start in January, a once a month meeting with 
    



  

 

 

 



 





across

  

    



Hefner-Babb 110
When asked to discuss operations control over her organization Kathy asked for
clarification of the definition of operations control. After confirming the meaning of the
term she replied:
Okay, because I was going to say, I work - not only do we work for the state, but
we also work for the ABC system, and so there are a lot of operations that are
controlled by entities beyond the library. I will say that I just said that we have a
   



  

 

 

  

  

 

We do, like I said, we do have cross groups that work together across their
departments, but before having everybody report directly to me was just
impossible, okay, so that management team does do, handle, a lot of that day-to   

 

        

             

 

   

 

   

 



    

basis.
I then inquired how she relayed her expectations to the library as a whole. Kathy
repeated common practices she indicated in her prior answers:
Well, lots of meetings, lots of emails, face-to-face, going back to where are we on
our goals, and what is our assessment practices telling us because I will tell you a
    





  

  

    

    

      

    

 

 

 



actually telling us? We just did a major renovation, redesign of one of our floors
and created a learning commons like I know a lot have done, and then just from
     

    



-





  

 



        

       

 



e do a lot of

Hefner-Babb 111
looking at data and discussing it, and saying what does this mean and how do we
interpret this and stuff, so.
Influence Group Achievement
My first question in this section sought information related to how Kathy
evaluated productivity in her organization. She indicated reliance on assessments
conducted by her library:
Well, a lot of that again is looking at the assessments, whether they meet their
  







 

    



  

the participation level has been of the students and stuff, what kind of comments
they get back on a lot of the displays and stuff they do, that feedback. As far as
instruction, we look at- I look at the numbers, and I look at the feedback and see if
 









ceeding in what we said we were going to do, with some









 

    

    

- 

 



  

   

  

     

 



I then asked Kathy how she analyzed morale in her organization. She said it is
based on observation:
 

 

 





 

     

  

 



 

   







Okay? How

   

    

t. Just, lot of it has to do with observation of the

communication across lines. Making sure communication- It comes down to
   

 

       

    

started having these monthly development things, and a lot of that is to help open








   



 

 



  

Hefner-Babb 112
tell you that nothing aggravates me more than to have someone say, well so and
   

     

          
         
       



    

   

I think you

      

        

         

influx, but if you learn to just learn from it, and not take it to-  



 

the world or whatever, then you allow for room to learn and grow.
My final question to Kathy related to how she integrates her organization. She
replied that it is a challenge:
  
 

    
   

  






 

       

            

         

          

-5 or


they decided they wanted, instead of just the classified staff that we have at the
real late hours, they wanted some librarians to fill in, and I came up here and
worked 7 to 10 Sunday night just to help. We serve coffee when our coffee bars
not open, and make sure cleaning is getting done and stuff like that, so I guess
some of that is by example. Some of it is by a lot of time, and actually trying to
break down silos. There are a lot of things that say, for example, public service,
 

 

 !

    







     

 

also can be a University and Archives issue or it can be a Collections issue, so we
        


     

     

              

implemented at least an orientation checklist with the new professionals so that

Hefner-Babb 113
      







      









important to remind people of certain parameters that you have and let them know
           

        

working with someone are you keeping it professional? Are you keeping it polite,
and is it productive?
Then, we went to the - some of my management team we participated in
the Harwood Institute that the state library did, and we borrowed from them,
meeting rules. Allow

     

   

     

big challenge. I do think, and this is just part of human nature, that we tend to take
 

 



     



   

    

are my comments.
I think one of the biggest challenges, I will say this though, is trying to
think in terms of things from different perspectives, a  
 

     

    



 

     







- As I

said, I just did the two day or day and a half Resource Sharing Summit, and it
amazed me when we were talking about things the state library did. We were
broken into groups, and they there were people who thought in terms of the user
perspective, and there were people who only thought in terms of their own library
  

                

  

the best at collecting data, but we tend to get into a rut about trying to stop and
look at the data from different angles.
An example: we are doing patron-driven acquisition, and so we can look
and see what the cost was, and we can see, oh well, we paid more for this book

Hefner-Babb 114
because of short-term loans and everything, and it might look bad at first. What
do you mean you paid one and a half times more for the book? Okay, but I had
my resources person give me that data, and I said, "But wait a minute, can we go
back and look at the short-  







   



figure out what would it have cost us to purchase that and it only got used once, if
we purchased it, so what cost avoidance did we have?
Because otherwise you just look at, oh my gosh, look, we spent one and a


  

deal, b


   

    

  



  

   

   







 

  







 

  



      

you have to stop and think: What else could this data tell me? I think sometimes
we get- 
   

    

     

           

  

 











go through my head, right now, is thinking about things differently from a
different perspective is challenging for all of us.









Hefner-Babb 115
Chapter X
Leadership by Strategic Plan
Luke has been at his library for 24 years. He told me that he worked as:
periodicals librarian, and assistant director for the library, and [currently] associate dean
for library services. When asked about his educational background Luke stated that he
 



    

         



    

clarified that he had an MLS and that his doctorate had a higher education focus.
I asked Luke to discuss his leadership roles in professional organizations. He
hesitated briefly and said:
 

        

   -table at the state level,

state organization level. Served as chairperson for the district level of the state
library org      

     

   -table at

the national level.
 

  

   ! leadership roles in the library and the

university and he   
co


  

         
      

       "
 "          

  

I asked Luke to describe his library organization structure and he stated,
#  "

       y acquisitions, our library technical

services, and our library audio-visual, and then also our library electronic resources and
 "     (see Figure 6)

Hefner-Babb 116

Dean of Library Services

Associate Dean for
Digital Initiatives, Special
Collections & Archives

Associate Dean of
Library Services

Public Services Librarian
and Learning Commons
Coordinator

Learning Studio
Supervisor

Circulation and Outreach
Coordinator

Interlibrary Loan
Coordinator

Library Acquisitions &
Peridodicals Coordinator

General Collection &
Government Documents
Cataloger

Project Archivist and
Curator

Original Cataloger &
Authrority Control
Librarian

Collection Services &
Theological Librarian

Archival Media
Conversion Specialist

E-Collections & Web
Services Librarian

Digital Initiatives
Librarian

Figure 6.

 

rganization.

Input Behaviors
My first question asked how Luke assessed and rewarded librarian performance

       
  

               

                    

   I asked Luke about what modes of interaction he uses on a daily basis to
                        
indicate that email was probably used the most.
My final question in this section asked Luke how he relayed his expectations to

              

  

  

... I meet with them at least, try to meet with them quarterly to talk about updates on our

  

 

Hefner-Babb 117
Group Structure and Operations Control
My first question in this area asked Luke to describe his group structure and he
 









     

supporting, just primarily point of need support. 
 

  

    

strategic planning and our goals that we do
  

 

     
   



    

d

   
 

            




     

him to discuss operations
  





how he relayed his

 

  

them at least

! 

   



Influence Group Achievement
       

    

    



our annual statistics tracking that we do, and also through our goals and accomplishments
of our strategic plan goals
 !   

    


analyzed morale and Luke replied:

   !   



 



the individual meetings that we have with our staff and with our ... that I do with
   " 
   

  

      

 !      

I asked if they had informal soci  



   

 !   

 

       #

well we do some of that as well. We do have a morning coffee time that several of us
      "    !    
 

   



My final question inquired what Luke did to try and integrate his organization. He
referred back to library goals and planning saying:

Hefner-Babb 118
Again we come around pretty much our goals and planning that we do, and we try
to integrate multiple departments in those goals. Then new initiatives that come
up at the university level, we try to integrate those as well. That involves multiple
people normally.

Hefner-Babb 119
Chapter XI
Walking the Talk
I asked Cara how long she worked at her current library and she responded
   

               

was then a director of central university libraries. After my first contract renewal, they
       

   

After Cara described her job position I asked her to describe any preparatory
education for her current job. Initially she asked for clarification saying:
   


             

    

     an MPA, Masters in Public

!        

"         #  

European Literature, but I did not do anything specific just for this job.
Then I asked Cara to describe her leadership roles in professional organizations.
She indicated that I should refer to her vitae said:
Many. You can always go back onto our website and my vitae is there for
    



         



because I have to admit, I forgot to bring over a copy of my vitae. A lot of this is,
 $      





        

things.
Anyway, for starters, I was president of the Eastern New York ACRL
chapter in upstate New York, vice president and past pres "
      ""!

! 

 

  

  !"!     

member for many years of the Texas Women in Higher Education. For several

Hefner-Babb 120
   

             

Dallas to promote ethical diversity and create a just and abundant community.
       

    

  

board member and chaired the Strategic Planning Group for some years in
International Federation of Library Associations and Institutions (IFLA). I
represented the ALA on the University and Research Libraries committee for four
    

         n president

!"#   $  % &  '   en on the boards
and still am on some of Portal: Libraries and the Academy, College and Research
Libraries, LLAMA Magazine    



        

was just when I was thinking about it, the high spots. At this point in your career,
 %  %  %       
When asked to discuss her library leadership roles Cara commented, (As dean,
        )     *
I then asked Cara to elaborate on the organizational structure of her library (see
Figure 7): She referred me to her library website and told me where to find the detailed
chart:
This is also on our website, so again, you can go and look on that. All charts are
under the staff resources link. Basically, in terms of direct reports, I have my
executive assistant. I have the head of the Friends of the ABC Libraries. I have
three assistant deans; one of them for collections and Director of the D Library,
another assistant dean for Technology Services and the third assistant dean for
Hum +  % ,    

  

     

Hefner-Babb 121
have the Director of the F Library and Director of the HA Library. I think that that
is it.

Dean and
Dean and Director
Director

Director of F Library and Head
of Research Services
Head of Access
Services
User Experience librarian

Outreach Coordinator

Humanities Research Librarian
General Research and Social Science Research
Librarian
Research Librarian
Social Sciences Research Librarian
Science and Engineering Librarian
Head of Special Library Initiatives

Figure 7.

 

rganization.

Input Behaviors
My first question in this section inquired how Cara assessed and rewarded
performance of the librarians she supervised. Cara replied:
It is, in fact, already governed by the processes that the university has in place.
We have an annual performance evaluation process that we go through with forms

Hefner-Babb 122
that are filled out by each supervisor and manager. Everything comes to me at the
top and I review everything before it goes over to HR. We also have a merit raise
   

 

      

  

all the

supervisors to define who gets additional merit.
Then I asked Cara what modes of interaction she used to communicate with her
librarians. She told me that she has two management groups and proceeded to explain
both of them:
One I meet with weekly called the Management Team, which is, in fact, the three
assistant deans, my financial officer, and the two other directors of the libraries. I
also then have an expanded group called the Leadership Team which meets once
a month and includes my development directors, the director of the friends of the
libraries, my director of assessments and my director of the N Center for Digital
 



    

Then I communicate, of course, when I need to by a listserv that we have
when there are important things to note. I will send those out to the staff. I also


      

           

          ll give the staff updates and open it up for
questions. Anyone can announce anything and so on. I also have a total open door
policy. If anyone feels they need to meet with me, they can make an appointment
with my assistant. I also do a lot of walkabout management, visit people. If
 

    

   at out of baby cashmere.

When I asked how she lets her librarians know her expectations Cara quickly
responded in detail. She discussed her leadership style saying:

Hefner-Babb 123
First off, I do have a very high standard but my staff know that because of the
way we all work together. We also have a very well-defined strategic planning
  

           -fledged

                
          engaged in and so we made the decision not to go
                        
things about how we interact both with our public and with each other.
           I am not hands-off. I
hope not to micro-manage, but I am extremely engaged. I read everything that
comes across my desk. What can I say? Again, I think modeling the behavior that
you want to see is the way to go and making clear your expectations. I put in a lot
                   
                  
etcetera. Being a very engaged dean, I think in modeling that behavior is one of
the most important ways to set your expectation.
I want to mention because I really forgot, when you were talking about
how do you assess my reward performance, one other way that we do this is we
have a series of awards that we hand out at the end of the year for all the librarians
and library staff, we have a variety.
             
     !            
  " !     # $  !     
added a Team Award because so many of the things we accomplish, are

Hefner-Babb 124



                 

  

      

measu        



       

  







Group Structure and Operations Control
My first question in this section asked for a description of the group structure.
Cara reminded me to look at the website and then discussed the various organizational
structures she tried:
Again, yes, this is on our website. Since one of my areas of expertise is very much
organizational culture, organizational modeling and so on, I focus a lot on how
      

   

   



ull variety of

models that both accommodates the personalities, how the work is done, some of
the trends, but also to look at how best to understand and work with things that
are changing because libraries are changing so much.
  

     from team run divisions through what my staff

called my surfboard organization. That was a way to represent the matrix way that
      



    

 



  

 

people actually like boxes. They like to know who they report to and what they



  
  

 

    

  

 



  





        

 

doing things.
At the same time, the university right now is going through a huge
reorganization and re-     
 



  

 

 

    

  !"#     $  

 



Hefner-Babb 125






        



  

    

   



shaking up our organization.
    
    
  



 

  

 





      



     

        
  







  
  

which



My final question to Cara asked how she practiced organizational control in her
library. She mentioned the various groups that meet within the library:
I already described the meetings. We have two small group meetings that work on
policy and day-to-day decisions. I have a variety of other groups. For our




 



 

      

     !      

         

               

       

         

decisions will always be recommendations.
The same with search committees. We will have search committees led by
librarians. Of course, I participate in the interview process. They will make a
recommendation to me and ultimately the decision is mine.
That is to say with performance review, all those things go through me.
" 

  

           



##$ 

everything that goes by. This is changing too. I had the delegatory processes in
      

  

   %&            

are changing. They just brought in a new financial system and I assume it just

Hefner-Babb 126
started. Now I have all these beep-beeps. You have a new report. Beep-beep. You
    

  

             

 

need to be monitoring that level of detail. The same when our people travel
professionally. I don            

   

them to know that I saw they downloaded a video or they ate chicken cacciatore
  

                 

         ight now with that.
When asked how she relays her expectations to the library Cara referred back to
her response to the prior question. This time she spoke about instituting a promotion
process for her librarians:
I think we talked about that a little bit earlier; basically, modeling the behavior
that I want our librarians to develop. Of course, when I first came here, we
actually had no promotion process for librarians. You were just what you were
hired at. We are not faculty, but I managed to create a promotional process. You
can go up through four. We have four categories of librarians through the ranks. I
managed to get some money from the provost to add into this.
My librarians were not used to going out and publishing or having to do a
lot organizationally. If they were interested in professional development, they


        

          

they could be promoted just by having been there for ten years. Looking at their
vitas, it was clear. They had showed no evidence of professional development. It
took a while for them to get that, that in actual fact, they have to follow the

Hefner-Babb 127
criteria, they have to be involved and so on. Of course, we do have a Peer Review

        one way that we have clarified those
expectations.
Influence Group Achievement
My first question in this area asked how Cara analyzed the productivity of her
library. She referred to the benchmarks in the various departments in her response:
Clearly, we ha     

     

                 
to manage and to assess productivity areas. We used to collect statistics and
reference questions and all thos

        

those as a measure of productivity. If my faculty feel that my librarians are doing

                   
We do a lot more in user education than we used to. We created two new

    ! "  #$  %       
our users need. That was one neglected area. My librarians there are hugely
engaged, so engaged I had to actually create another position because there was
definitely much more work than one person could handle. Again, the productivity
is measured in these kinds of ways.
Then, of course, we do the annual reporting on our strategic plan. We have
goals and we measure that progress. How did we get achieve our goals? What did
we contribute there?
Then, of course, since I was a technical services librarian, I am
exceptionally familiar with unfortunat 

      that

Hefner-Babb 128
record drops into the catalog before the book is actually on the shelf? Not good. I
have my own ways of monitoring those kinds of personal things from the actual
service that I get myself.
The other thing that we do is we personally are a very punctual
organization. People show up for meetings on time, they show up when they say
   

 



   

 

 

 

 



      

 



   

organization in that way. Our president expects those kinds of things, too. That
comes down from the top.
 







  

 

 

    

    

 

           



  

really have a good deadline was when we were looking early on at something like
CONTENTdm. You pr
    





  

    

     

 

 

After two years of looking and assessing and not finding the perfect one, I










!  

  



 

  

    

   

  "!#$#  

    

 %    

    





 



 



   

      

   

  &

Next I asked Cara how she analyzed morale in her organization. She found this
process easy because of her leadership practices saying:
 

  '

     



 (

    

talking to me. Of course, I do know that I do get a certain version from the staff. I

Hefner-Babb 129
have a couple of colleagues in our Management Team who I check regularly to
 

 

  

   

 

 



  ?



 



    



year, since January, when I actually had to lay off staff. I immediately let


 

    

       
!

  
   %



   
 #

   %

       
    

  $   %
       

 "







  




way to really
 # % 

them. Since they all have friends in other areas, it seems I was the only dean who
was actually sharing just about everything with their staff and so on.
Also, being firm with my administration. I think with a lot of the bad news
 





   

    #

 

 

  

sorry. My staff deserves to know. I am going to be sharing this with them and this
is the way I intend to



 

  



  







I think with the move to shared services, I think the upper administration
was quite surprised when they saw how the emotional impact on my staff who
 



  ##





ese are people who care about where

they work, they care about working in the library, and they care about their boss.
Some of them were very, very emotional. It was quite a surprise to them.






 %  

# #  % 

ucky,

create a

really much tighter tight-knit feeling that we are all this in together. My staff


  

  %

   &''( ##

% 

was out there working hard to save all their jobs and everything.

  

 

Hefner-Babb 130
The interesting upside of that is that we have a faculty staff campaign right
now and people are obviously supporting our campaign. So many staff, even
those who were actually let go and moved to shared services actually are
supporting the library financially, which to me is just, wow. Out of all these bad
  

  

  

   

   

   

that answers your question.
The other thing I did too and to sum up, frankly, morale was not good.
   



  



t know whether there was going to be another

cut. I actually told my assistant deans that they could pass on the word that for the
  

   

 

 

 

    



  

totally off the books. Not a word to anybody. They got to go home early one day
or take an afternoon off. Let me tell you, that really improved morale big time.
    



 

 

 



      

 

  



 

 



    

much at all to allow the staff to feel like

someone was looking out for them. They got to go home a little early, see their
kids, sit out on the porch or something.
My final question inquired how Cara integrated her organization. She discussed
the various ways she tries to prevent the departmental silos that happen in libraries:
!   

  

  

 







  "    

  





the university, I

   "  

libraries on campus and people were very siloed. Creating these informal ways to
get together has really been great.

Hefner-Babb 131

     

   

      

have the holiday party. We have a group called Leadership Enrichment and
something Development. That actually is about six people who put on events
during the year. Sometimes we have an ice cream social. We had an Instagram
party when it was the year of the library. That was a lot of fun. Those are ways to
actually look at bringing people together.
Then, of course, when we have search committees, I make sure that all of
the various groups are represented, both staff and librarians and from the different

           
We used to have an annual staff meeting in which I would present the
strategic reports and do some things. We moved away from that now. It became

                       
  

              



than this is the official annual meeting thing.

 

                

           !  !    "
coming and doing a general presentation about what asbestos is, what the

!       #              
     
 

   

         

                  

small example of the things that we do.
I asked if Cara wanted to revisit her answers to prior questions. She did add some
comments that applied to earlier questions saying:

Hefner-Babb 132
 





    





      

things is that the person, first off, engages with the staff regularly and models the
         

 

      


          

  



     


  

  




  

   

   

  

big honchos. You need to be seen as part of the staff.
 

                

values. They really assess you to see if you also have those values. Yes, being
connected with your staff, communicating constantly, and being an advocate. Yes,






     

  

 

  !   

do sometimes clash just a little, but you also have to be an advocate for your staff.
 

    

   

  

   

     

ideas. You come back from a conference, you want to do all these things. My staff
 

 

   "  #      $-  

 

What I learned was that you really have to get your staff engaged. They
need to be coming back from the conferences with that P-word on their list.
    

 

  

  

    

  



the stage for them to go and do their thing.
"  



    



      

 

dean within the administration. The dean is the advocate at those tables. Now,
         

 

  

 %  

   

am on the Council of Deans. I am very much involved in all those things. That is
  

   

    

Hefner-Babb 133
   



   

   

    



to see what differences; any changes he makes. Then, of course, the reporting
  







   

    

       

and all institutions. Then I think what the quality is that the dean needs to be able
to interact successfully at that level could be a little different from those needed to
be successful in your own home unit.
Absolutely, things that are political and strategic, how does that mesh with
  

 



             

Thank you for allowing me to wax on.

Hefner-Babb 134
Chapter XII

    

  

Jacob has worked at his public university library for 12 years and has held two
positions: director for the library and now associate vice president for information
resources and planning. He explained:
I guess about eight months after starting as Interim Library Director. We had
some other departures in the university and the president asked me to take over in

        !   ""   # 
$   % &' $  % (   #  ) 
responsibility you might say.
I then asked Jacob to discuss  )

*(    +$% ( 

(  ,*(- ../  ,*(- $ (  , n Business
management oriented, and then I completed all the coursework for a Doctorate in Adult

0' $%   )  #*  ('1
I asked Jacob to describe his professional organization service and he stated

+2 "  ) - t I was on the Board of Directors of the Association for
3( 4( 0- $%   () & "  ! (&- $%
#*   (  (5-   "  ) '1
I then asked Jacob to discuss his library leadership roles. He remarked that his
leadership experience is primarily outside of the library:

6 ) )&   )  $%  "   (  - $! )
the Associate Vice President for Information Resources and Planning and that
group includes the IT units, the center for institutional evaluation in research and

Hefner-Babb 135
 

        

      

associate Vice President for Institutional Advancement with direct responsibility
for development and fundraising, I hope to get rid of that sometime in the spring,
                 
  

  

             

Executive Director of Auxiliary Services, and I think that covers most of them.
!

   

              

When I asked Jacob how his library organization is arranged he referred to the
organizational chart he sent via email. His library organization differs slightly than
traditional library structures:
I sent you a chart you can refer to (see Figure 8), but the positions that report to
me are two associate directors, one associate director for public services, one
associate director for technical services, the unit head for what we call digital
systems essentially a web master who helps run digital commons and things like
that reports to me, the assistant director for operations reports to me, and I have an
administrative assistant that reports to me.
And of course the administrative director for operations and the two
     !   "#      
forgot my digital systems does too of course.

Hefner-Babb 136

Associate VP for
Advancement
Associate VP for IRF
Director of the Library

Administrative assistant

Asst Director for Building
Operations

Head Reference/Public
Sevices

Head Digital
Information Resources

Associate Director
for Technical
Services

Asst Director for Instruction
and Information Literacy
Librarian

Figure 8.



library organization.

Input Behaviors
My first question to Jacob in this section is inquired how he assessed and rewards
performance. He responded after asking for clarification on assessment saying:


         

 

except for administrative librarians, who

have definite administrative responsibilities; however, you only talk about
assessing the librarians in the organization. Well the assessment of my
administrative people is based solely on administrative. The responsibilities they
have to carry out for cataloging, public service, and administrative operations. For
the librarians and these individuals also have responsibilities. As I said in my
written response, we look at three areas of performance: one is information

Hefner-Babb 137
literacy teaching in classes and other venues, one is working reference and service

                      
and the third area we assess is subject matter specialist work where librarians
have either departments or colleges assigned to them they are the subject matter
of specialists for that college department and we assess that area.
What we look at is numbers, we actually go in there and we have an
assessment tool that we actually visit the classes when people are teaching

            

        

and public service work we track the number of interactions they have and any
sort of feedback we get from people. With subject matter specialists we look at
how efficiently they spend their budgets for each year, we look at their
interactions we expect them to meet with the dean at least once a semester, with
their department chair twice a semester, and with their liaison at least once a
month.

                  
are and the way libraries are going nowadays with information literacy you can
lose sight of other things like subject matter. You could be a great teacher, but

                 

 

                   
                  
the way we work with departments. Biomedical is big here, but it includes
nursing, college of health sciences, biological sciences, and the bio med overall in

  

               

Hefner-Babb 138
people addressing bio med, which actually cuts across four departments in two
colleges.
I asked Jacob to discuss the topic of merit in more detail. He elaborated:
Yes, we have a merit pool and that is given out. In state universities a merit pool
      

  















      

   

   

       

     

think we got 2%

   

   

            

be doing that beginning in February of next year and if we do have vacant
positions or people that do have scores below a 3, which is acceptable, they do not
get merit and we try to use that money and reward people who have performed
exceptionally.
I asked how Jacob communicated with those who report to him. He replied that
his library transformed to a learning commons and that impacts communication practices
saying:
The people that report to me ... truly what has happened here is ... you probably
  

   



 



  



library into what you probably read about it in the literature called a learning
commons.
We have been very successful at doing this. We have had a change in
culture and a change in our focus and how we deliver our services. The people
that have worked for me understand what I want and they want it too. I have to
   

 

   

    

     







other week department head meetings, people do call me and say ... they call me

Hefner-Babb 139

          

  

       

                   
continue the transformation of our library then we will confirm or if we have a
project we would like to pursue I will meet on that with one of my directors.
For the frontline librarians, they meet with the head of technical services
and the public reference person, public services and references with the
information literacy. Teaching, they probably meet with them on a weekly basis.
Does that make sense?
Most of it is e-mail. A lot of it is e-mail. A lot of it is being copied on emails, chiming in, but yes I am a big user of e-  

  

... unless an issue requires my calling someone.
My next question to Jacob focused on how he let his librarians know his
expectations as their leader. He responded:
Every month we have library forum, which is for the professional staff. That is
where we try to get together. The associate directors run that meeting and the
as

                

       

      

           
to approach     

    

 

   

        

meeting or a specially called meeting of the professional staff and explain what

   



 

           

Hefner-Babb 140
Group Structure and Operations Control
The first question to Jacob in this section focused on the structure of the library
organization. He replied:
No, our goal since I took over the library is to become more embedded into the
university and into the academic side. If you look at our organization structure I

                   
emphasis on things that have not been traditional librarian work like teaching and
our definition of subject matter specialists is probably a little bit different of what

             
I then asked Jacob what operations control he practiced as leader of the library.
He referred to reports that he used to aid in operations control:
I sent you a copy of ... we do monthly analysis, that includes everything from

                      
                      
know; however, what we did is we separated out a priority sheet and on the
priority sheet we measure things like the number of visitors we have, the hits on
our website, how many people have instructed, visitors to special collections, and
things we consider the important factors in measuring whether people are using
us. We collect that and distribute that on a monthly basis and I actually share that
with the president every so often.
We also produce on a monthly basis a spreadsheet of all our electronic
databases, how many hits they hav 

        

sort of a cost control. That sends a message to people that if something is not

Hefner-Babb 141
being used it is not going to continue to be purchased and if you ordered it for
somebody in your department then you had best go speak with them about it not
being used. That sort of thing like that. Then of course we have budget, we are
totally funded by library fees nowadays. We have to watch our budget. So we do
budget analysis every month also.

        ic planning. It sounds funny for someone
who is the associate VP for planning, but we have set a general change in
direction and we visit that on a regular basis with the reports and everything I was
telling you about. We know where we want to go, we know

  

it is written down it could be called a strategic plan and it is adjusted on a

              
                    we
successful in meeting the demands of this campus, the students, and the faculty,

               
                
sense?
The final question in this area focused on how Jacob relayed his expectations to
the library. He explained:
Through the meetings and the forums we have we pretty much always touch on it.

                   an
              
               
opportunity. I think the key to it is having the three directors, the two associates

Hefner-Babb 142
and the information literacy teaching person, having those three people signed on
believing in this and constantly steering our decision-making in that direction. We
hire new librarians with certain skill sets, the last librarian that we hired that
caused us to hire this person over others was the fact that she had teaching
experience. That was the deciding factor. We kind of hire like-minded people.
Influence Group Achievement
I asked Jacob how he analyzed productivity in his organization. He referred back
to the monthly statistics collected and annual surveys:
Primarily through the monthly statistics, the priority sheets I told you about those
   

               

helped and everything, how is it growing, and how are we adjusting because of
    

      

 





 

in that week we have surveys and I think I sent you our last one that we do
campus wide, which we ask questions about how well we are serving you the
student. We try to make decisions based on ... Put it like this, we take that as input


  

 





  

      

 

 

    



Next I asked Jacob how he analyzed morale in his organization. He responded on
how difficult it is to gauge saying:


        

           



hear a lot of blowups. What we try to do for morale, we try to do a lot of events as
        



  

      

look at things like who attends, we listen to people. The main thing is just

Hefner-Babb 143
listening to the staff, professional and the classified staff. I think people do
believe I have an open door policy, people have not been reluctant to come to me
with concerns or anything. I have a lot of concern among my associate directors
  

 

 

        

     

back and forth at that level. Also, our yearly assessment process is a face to face
            

        





opportunity we try to get people to use to do these types of assessments.
My final question to Jacob inquired on what he does to integrate his library
organization. He stated:
  

      



            



seven or eight library-wide committees that we employ to do ... like we have an
events committee, they run the student recognition event, they run the holiday
party, and we make these committees or we put members on these committees
from different departments. They have to all work together. So we have about
seven or eight; we have a staff development committee, so th   
effective.
We also over the last couple of years have begun cross-training, where
people in technical services can go up and work in the reference desk and get a
little bit different experience and people in the reference desk can go down and
work some area of technical service cataloging or something. We try to allow that
 



   

  

    

    

for people from different departments to work with each other and we have

Hefner-Babb 144
library-wide meetings where people can express themselves and get to know
others and we have a lot of recognition events and social events you might say.
In my answer to you I think I talked more about integrating it [the library]
into campus.

       r a library director to replace me and we

had one person who was fairly nontraditional and he turned us down because he
realized his experience was a lot more valuable than what we could pay. So he
went to a research one university. The second person was more of a traditional
person, traditional school librarian. The campus found it acceptable, but the

                  
                    
at                        
somebody came in as a traditional library administrator so that was kind of eye
opening. That is one of the things and the fact that I do in my development job
right now especially I meet with the president every week, I do get to talk about
library things also which is not something a lot of library directors have, and I

                          
now especially I meet with the president every week, I do get to talk about library
things also which is not something a lot of library directors have.
I was just talking to the vice president for information resources and
planning and he just came back from Baylor and the director of IT at Baylor is
over the library. I got my exposure to the library when I was at Cal State San
Marcos and the library and IT, the IT is in the bottom two floors of the library and
they had a lot of shared resources, classrooms and stuff. When the director of the

Hefner-Babb 145
   

  





 

  



 

 



 

 



 



  

 

 

      

   







     

  

 

 

IT is in the Information Resources and Planning group.
I do think that having traditional library directors that come in looking
internally to run a library, I think the new models are going to require a different
skill set that you can go out and integrate 
 





   



         

  







 

   

 

 

  

  

 

  

     

administrator that runs the library, but I consider myself a university administrator


 

 

    

         





         

 

     

        



 

difference that is going to be needed in the future. You have to see yourself in a
 

  



   

   

         

  

  

   

librarians that want to sit in their office and read books and take orders and sit at
 

  

    

    

  



   





  



t from behind the desk and do

 

 

    



somebody that can deal, that realizes how you fit in.
When I came here, the library we had gates you walk in and out and it
counts you twice once you go in and go out. We had this number of we declined
from about a high of over 800,000 and we had declined to 600,000 so when 2005
 



 



      



  

    

Hefner-Babb 146
brought in a lot more technology, we d     

 



  

running about 1.1 million entries. We have stats that show 88% of enrolled
students of total enrolled students, unique students, 88% have used a computer in
the library at least once each year. We gained our position you might say so I
think something like that could not have been done without the cooperation and
   



 

handle those connections.

    

         

Hefner-Babb 147
Chapter XIII
  



 

When asked how long she has been working at her public university library
      !"#$ % #&' ( # %  ! )* #

positions she has held at her current library. She replied:
I started out as a reference librarian in science and I moved to reference ... We had
a subject division at the time so I started out replacing the science library and then
I moved to social sciences. Then we pulled everything together, and we had a
general reference desk, and then I became head of reference and then associate
director. Then I was the longest serving interim, acting director. I started out as
)$  )!  # ( )#$ & ( + (,- ) ( #%  . +!*  
 # (  /01-!* (,"   ",  ! (

used that title for a year and

# #  # ( )!* 1  )! & ( $* 2!%$ ( "!- ! #  )! ,
3!!& (, 1 ++  &

When asked what education she had 3
stated that she has  *

! ! %$ #  )! , 3!! 

$ * $   !) ))  1!!$  

" ,  1   ))   " ,  *)! " !&' 4#  #
#  #- +* # *)!  # +! " !+ .! %#!3  # !  !+ #$  !$

but none that lasted probably more than two or three days and absolutely none that I can
""1 # " !+&'

My next question inquired what service Kaitlyn had in professional library
organizations. She replied:

Hefner-Babb 148

            emember what that was
                   
when you are a single mother, it is really difficult to do all of those things, but I

             ! nd helping with
         
I then asked Kaitlyn to discuss her leadership roles in the library and on campus.
She replied:

             "!" 
facilities committee on a SACS study. I was on the last SACS study committee.

              
program committees, but I think the faculty evaluation committee and the SACS
self-studies are probably the ... main ones.
My final question in this section focused on the organizational structure of

#    (see Figure 9). Positions that report directly to Kaitlyn include: the head
of the information services, the head of technical services, special collections and
archives. I asked about an organization chart and she responded:

                
                   
information services because that position was created last year, or recreated and
probably will, unless I can come up with somebody here and it may go away
again when the current head retires in April.

Hefner-Babb 149

Director of Library
Services

Library Assistant

Head of Information
Services

Figure 9.

   

Associate Director for
Public Services

Head of Technical Services

Special Collections &
Archives

rganization.

Input Behaviors
My first question in this section asked how Kaitlyn assessed for reward and
performance. She replied:
We are the State of Texas and therefore it is by merit, but we have an evaluation
system that parallels the

          

n from

                 
                  
   -to-five scale that we go through, I think. If they supervise staff or
s 

                     

Yes, and the difference, the tenure document again, the changes that are
made there have to do with every place that it talks about, a department chair or a

Hefner-Babb 150
dean. It says,

         

  

started doing our own internal ones here, and emphasis was then placed on
publication. We got him to change his idea that he wanted six articles or seven


  

   







 

   

even went to people that I knew that had published in faculty positions in libraries


      

    

 

  

        
  

them down to two peer

reviewed and presentations and that sort of thing because my feeling is that the
    

  

       
      



     





    !  ying

     

  



     "

the

   #  

that way.
It is really hard to get published and the one thing that we have going for
      
  

 



   

     

  

 

a

         

and then still do what needs to be done for the library. That was my biggest


           

different, even tho 

       

      

$%-hour-a-week

schedule.

The only people in this building that have the ability to make their own
schedule and work and set aside time to do research would be public services,
which puts tech services people to a disadvantage, which makes them unhappy
          
   

      

     !    

  



      




Hefner-Babb 151
and he says that he worked it out and did it on his   
  


             

  

     -

                   



hour or two a day to do some of that....
In a related topic she commented on the change from having summers off. Kaitlyn
explained the change saying:
We went from nine months to 12 months, and it was a necessity. We had this
    

               

the summer. I can tell you now if there was money to do this, we could go back to
a nine-month contract because so much is online and you need somebody
primarily at the desk to deal with chat. Life is so different.
I asked how Kaitlyn acknowledges accomplishments made by her librarians. She
replied:
There are some things that get published in our newsletter when people do things,


       

        

 

 

            veys and done that sort of
thing, but as for something formal, about ... Sounds really awful when I start
thinking about this. They get a birthday card and they get our anniversary card,
              




    

      says that what

            

things where they have the employee of the month or something like that, but we
 

  

I asked if she sent out group emails related to accomplishments and she said:

Hefner-Babb 152
I do that. When the Library of Congress picked up on a map that our, then digital
resources librarian created showing where the Mexican mask, we have this
collection, and he was able to identify where those mask originated and put it into
a map in the Library of Congress, so yeah, those sorts of things I do to let
everybody know that we won an award on using, from TLA last year on the use
of social media for archives and promoting the archives and special collections.
Things like that get noted in emails to everybody, but that tends to be it.
I then asked about what modes of communication she used most with her
librarians. Kaitlyn responded:
Email. I prefer talking to them as to email, so and the telephone calls. My office
door is open      
      

        

                

          

       



them. Because a               
                 


 

   



              

about it, so I do that sort of thing.
Then I asked how Kaitlyn relayed her expectations to librarians in her
organization. Kaitlyn replied:
  

       

 

    

year because we just got a new head of technical services. Talking about goals
 

               

of like some             

Hefner-Babb 153
  

 



  

       



 

the beginning of the year. If something changes I try to have a general meeting
with them again in the sprin 

 

    



 

should be working with them on establishing their goals or their objectives for the
year.
Group Structure and Operations Control
I asked Kaitlyn to describe the structure of her library organization. She replied in
detail:


   

    



   



   

-

library loan and government documents in that group, and the heads of those
areas, those groups report to that person who meets with them on ... The heads on
           

     

  

and checks to see what kind of problems and that sort of thing. Reference has,
     

a per

      

   

          

   

      

      

working and is in charge 
   

 



       

    

-

 

        

    

   

      

   

       

    



 

        

working fairly well. We have more students in the fall than we do in the spring.
I briefly mentioned the online course taught by librarians at my institution.
Kaitlyn remarked about her new online course:



Hefner-Babb 154

  

     

   

               

     
      

surprising. Anyway, the associate director has had public meetings with all of the
heads of, she has meetings with the heads of the areas and she has individual
group meetings and then individual meetings. Reference, they work together as a
group and make all sorts of decision. In technical services, you have a head of
cataloging with four staff members. Our acquisitions department has now

              

    

responsibility now, and we have an electronic resources librarian.
One of our catalogers, since he was doing so much with, electronic books
has taken over the actual, the acquisitions of that, so and we have a staff member

  

        

 

  



     

e staff member

             

technical services, head of technical services in terms of collection development,
any analysis that he may want to do. She did a lot more of that when the previous
assistant director was here, and oversees, the workflow and does the training for

 

     !"    ! "       

for the most part.

 
publish

        

  

 



      

feel like we need to take a look and do some job analysis to see what needs to be
done and where it needs to be done, and then using attrition will probab- ... I think
we will, and we

 

             

Hefner-Babb 155

                  
member that oversees everything and then actually pays.
Then we have a staff member that works with serials and electronic

                 
                    
the invoices. The head of technical services meets biweekly with the heads of the
areas in that, in technical services so he has a meeting with cataloging and serials,
acquisitions and electronic resources at least biweekly. The head of cataloging

                
needs to know about, she will have a separate meeting.
We are dealing with Resource Description and Access (RDA) and some of

                
                
                    
really well in my cataloging courses, and probably if there had been computers

                 ng.
                   
                 
The ones that are left with special collections and archives, I meet with
those people on an individual basis and probably ... Sometimes, there had been
times when it has been daily, particularly when we had a new head of special

                    
     

taken over up there.

Hefner-Babb 156
I then asked Kaitlyn to describe operations control practiced at her library. She
said:
  
 





    

       

  

 





 



   

 







k at the new books

because I have discovered the wrong call numbers, three books out of the set and
all three have different call numbers, they should have the same call number and



    
 

  







     

    

  very



       

  

control measures in cataloging to be sure that somebody was checking to be sure
that whoever was putting the labels on or whoever gave this call numbers actually
was paying attention to what they were doing because if there was a three-volume
           

 

      

my feeling on that.
      

    

 



   

 

remember when the new Dictionary of American Biography came out. The old
one is sitting on the shelf in the Es, and the new one came out and they put it in
the CT 



 





        
!

    

         

           
   

    





 "    

    

 

 





keep it there because so far there are a few things, people that dropped out. I
      

      

 

   



 







that will make it do that, but going in and changing the catalog, the LC number
was not the bi 

    #   



    

 

Hefner-Babb 157
 



            

but as I said, I try to let things go for me to the head of the area and then sort of
trickle down, and th


     

   

         
 

  

      

 



  

      

so we can make a correction mid-stream and do

something else.
That tends to be, tech services will meet as a group or they will form a
team on some of the electronic resources in terms of working with them, or in this
case trying to determine which ones, you know, if there are some that we can get
rid of, and then that will come back  
 

      

    





 



        


  

       



      

  

 

  



evidently an awful lot of money in the sixties and early seventies to buy multiple
copies, and so we went and got it down to where the first time around we left no


 



  

     

    

probably were getting to where we will probably keep just one.
We have reworked how that project works about three times since the
assistant director left because it was her last project for everyone before she
retired, and so now we are, trying to come up with yet another way to go through
and pull the titles. In terms of day to day, I want the heads of the area to take care
of the problems as much as possible, but as I said, the door is open. If I close my
         

           

door stays open, and sometimes I h

 

  

        

Hefner-Babb 158
    
 



 

    

    
  

        

   

  

 

 

  

what changes can be made by bringing other people that are involved into it.
In my next question I asked Kaitlyn how she relayed her expectations as a leader
to her library as a whole. She responded:
  
 




  

   

      

  

 

 



 

 

       

scheduled meetings every two weeks to talk about projects and what the
   

 

  

   

  

understand that I feel like they need t  


 

  

    

  

      

      

   

     

department, I have the strong feeling that public service really needs to know
   



  

   

  

     

 

       

 



 

! " 



 

     
   

      

#

 
   

    



  

   

    
 $%  u

   

need to

understand the MARC records. You need to understand the way SIRSI searches,
 



 

& 

 

  

 

put something in it
  



 

 

 
  

 

 

      

   

 


 

 

  

    

   


   

     
 

 



 

      
  

 

reference book worked the same. It was really wonderful if they had a table of

Hefner-Babb 159
        

           

more complicated than that.
        

     

                 
                     
                      
             


  

on I remember them is

                  

               !      

librarians are doing and there are occasions when they think that, one or two of
                     

know what that is.
  

          

   

           "#        
          $       
       

    %         

departments works, but that leaves out, when we were at 12 librarians this worked
really well because there could be a discussion, but when it comes time to talk
                     
              

that need to be and prob

    

       

     

                        

will have more come spring.

Hefner-Babb 160
Influence Group Achievement
My first question in this section inquired how Kaitlyn evaluated the productivity
of her organization. She replied:
Probably very subjectively as opposed to having a true objective, sort of a matrixtype situation, and it generally is to, you know, we tend to set, for some of the
projects that go on, we will set a timeline as to when we, the group can agree, if
  



 

   

   

   

that we set a timeline. I guess the big thing there is did we actually meet that
   

 

        

king. All of that tends to be

subjective. You get information from the people that are involved and go at it that
way.
  

 



   



  

       



do look if whether or not something is done along the timelines, and that is
something that when it comes time for the annual evaluation that will get


  

 

      

 

     

in the project, if they need to know that it was not, you know, that they di



meet the expectation or if it, you know, try to find out before that meeting why
there was a delay on what their contribution should be.
I asked about annual reports and Kaitlyn replied:
We get annuals. I get annual statistics, and I have no idea of why we did
    

   



     

   

services. The new head is much more interested in producing that and the head of
reference is also so I think we will go back to looking at that. I do get a summary

Hefner-Babb 161
  





    

  

    

  

something that we probably would turn in towards the first of October.
I then asked how Kaitlyn evaluated morale in her organization. She responded:
   




    

  

      

 



                          

and their concerns are similar, then we try to do something then, if possible, and
try just to be encouraging in going around and talking to them on an individual
         
    

     



       
     

     


     

    



 

 


    
          

s something wrong or not. If it

               

it on a day-to-              
     


  

 

       



         





   

   

   

      !  

             

   

 



 

harder to handle.
"    
    
 

     

     

    



 

         

      

  





  

#   

 

My final question asked Kaitlyn how she integrates the members of her
organization to get them to work together. She explained:
Informally is probably when I have people, just a couple of them coming in and
 

        



    

         

Hefner-Babb 162
  



            

one person working on, I tend to try to, if it is feasible, to bring people from
different areas in so they can get a feeling to what the other side is doing.
Some of the things, some of the surveys that had been done and the work
that was done on trying to determine the best, how to structure the web page so
that students understood the categories, we had a group of both technical services
people and reference working together to do focus groups and a survey type to try
                  
                
My concern is how often do we need to do that sort of thing because every
group that is going to come in I think is going to define some of these words a
little differently, so I tend to think I would like to standardize it a little more, but it
just may be something that every three years we get people together again and see
       ibing it. Of course, if EBSCO would leave things
alone there probably would be a better way of describing things.


     

            

so involved with one vendor, that even if there was something better out there,
                 
        
    

         

              

get th                  
                    

Hefner-Babb 163
new Discovery system. I particularly hate that product finder. It just ... Anyway,
  

.

  

  



   



   



 

   

     

 

 

   

  



one institution. It tends to be what works for one person as opposed to ... I said, I
try really hard not to micromanage and I try to, one of the things that I think we


    

 

    

   

 

 

   

 



 





  

    

 

 

  

 

actually out at the reference desk or that had set up a workflow in technical
     

 



  



 



  

 

 

 

 



   

  



 

    



like that a lot of decisions need to be made there as opposed to in this office.
If reference wants to schedule right now, we would love to get technical
services people back on the reference desk, not a lot of hours, but just enough so
they can see particularly when questions are now coming in via chat. They need
 

  

  

   

   



 

  



  

 



 

 





 

       

 

feel as positive about that. It was a lot easier when we had ... It was easier to get
them involved with reference, particularly on the weekends when we had fewer
 



  



  

  

   

    



     

  

 





Then there are those that they feel uncomfortable at a general reference
desk, going from one topic to the other on the days when it is busy, and chat does

Hefner-Babb 164
make it a little bit more, not a little bit, but it is more difficult to try to help
  
  





    

doing. I wish we had a way to take

              

suggestions that we make I think would be really helpful. I think the people that
are doing the work have a much better idea, and they come up with an idea. If
there are things that they need to know, then they bring it in here and we talk
about it.
   

     

       

discussed was Auburn University offered some volumes of government
documents

 

   

    

       

                

  

 

great thing to have and so we have 31 boxes so far and I had no idea that they
were coming. The amount of time and money we are spending on putting those
things into the catalog and then what time we are going to spend putting them on
the shelf and they all have to be relabeled. They all have to be re-stamped.
       




    

 



   

 se

in the monthly catalog.

     

    

identify them coming out our ears and we can do interlibrary loan, and I have this
feeling deep down inside that very shortly they will come off the shelf and go into
 

     !

 "  "     "        #

  

"        -

  " 



           

     "       

      "  

 

        



Hefner-Babb 165
year than in the past because of some deaths in the family and it may have come
    

                

will take t      

        

    

   
To me it is a waste of time and I have said that now and everybody ... I
think the ones that thought that these would be really good to have in, the subject
bibliogra     
        

  

        

       

 

                       
you learn from ex  
  

              

        

        
"

        

         !

 

      e would take more because if you did you need to tell

  

  #       

 

        

getting rid of them.
No. We do not have to keep these. Anyway, as I said, my big thing about
leadership or as director of this library is that those that are working with it need
to be the ones that make the decisions or at least the suggestions as to how we
incorporate RDA into the workflow, how we check to see if we truly have access
to all of those, to at least to the core titles for our license, the packages that we
    
  

    

    

       





     

    


 

since we are keeping a core list because these are the ones we think we need,

Hefner-Babb 166
those I think we need to check on, but overriding that is the fact that LinkSource
does not work well at times and I have suggested and actually came up with an
  

 

     

  u to ... I knew that

the journal was in other databases, and LinkSource was not taking us anywhere to


       

   

 

          

  

   



    to

discuss a different way of how to do this checking and not maybe spend so much
    

 !

Give you some examples. They are now working on a plan that sort of
does 

 



      



 !   "      

     

        

        !!!        

  



 

frustrated because she said she had been trying ... This is where trying to get help
 
 



 



  #      

    $ 



 

      

could show the head of tech s     $     
   

  

 ! " 

 

 

   

to be sure that LinkSource works.
I said, to me that is far more important that they take some of these
abstract even and ind        

    

them, but it still, the whole idea behind having those is that we have journals for
all these really expensive packages that if LinkSource is working correctly it will
either take you to the title                

Hefner-Babb 167
   






         

    

 

 



       

        





     

            

the only problem that EBSCO has to deal

       -hour

fix, which is real

unfortunate.
     

    

        



  



 

       
 



       

         

           

            

      

quite sure about that we could talk about it and make those changes, I tend to
think pragmatism can go a long way to making things work. If, when you listen to
all this, if you have a question, just let me know.

Hefner-Babb 168
Chapter XIV
I Work First in Higher Education and Happen to Work in a Library
Anne has been university librarian for fourteen and a half years at a private
university library. When asked about her job title Anne

 







university librarian since I arrived, my title was enhanced about two years ago to
Assistant Vice President for Information Resources. We have what you might call title




 

 



 

 

 

 

I then asked Anne to describe her educational background for her current position.
She stated:


 

    

and my master of librarianship; that is how ancient

my degree is. Both are from Emory, and then in June of 2001, I was an attendee at
the Frye Institute w



      



Okay. It is cosponsored

by CLIR, the Council of Libraries and Information Resources, and EDUCAUSE.


   

    

        

leadership training for higher education program.
My next question inquired what professional leadership positions Anne held. She
replied that they are numerous:
I have actually have got so many, I probably ought to send you my CV. I been
working as a librarian since 1981. You rack up a fair number, after a time. Within


   

  



 

   !  

  

 

 "

 



the Texshare advisory board. I just was elected this past

year to the board of directors of EDUCAUSE. I have a done a bunch of other

Hefner-Babb 169
things, too but those are current things that I am doing. In terms of the have I held,
there is a whole bunch of other stuff, too.
I asked Anne to describe her leadership positions in the library and by connection
on campus. She mentioned the larger roles she filled:
My current library is on, library director, university librarian. On campus,
probably the real biggie is, I was chair on the faculty senate. Which is an elected
position for three years. 2009 to 2012. I have chaired, I am currently chairing the
campus master plan committee.
I then asked Anne to describe the organizational structure of her library. She
discussed the current structure and upcoming changes saying:
The associate university librarian, who is over public services, reports to me.

                     
have right now, but, this will probably be different in early 2016. Would you
rather hear the new one, or the old one? (See Figure 10)

                    
primarily the cataloging and other discovery functions. She also runs the
institutional repository. Head of collection development and resource sharing.
Then, a staff position called, assessment and user services librarian. User
experience librarian. I am sorry. I said, user services, user experience.
What is going to change is the person over discovery systems, is going to
be over a larger tech services unit. Budgeting, acquisitions, finance will all be
under her. The person over collections will be taking on, she will be giving up
some roles, those are the ones I just described, and will be taking on supervision

Hefner-Babb 170
of special collections. That is special collections and archives. These changes
have mostly to do with playing to peoples administrative strengths. Trying to put
people in the place where they will function the most effectively.

Figure 10.

  

rganization.

Input Behaviors
My first question related to input behaviors asked Anne about how she evaluates
promotion. Her response was:

            

      

tenure criteria document that has a lot to do with how we evaluate people. We

                       



Hefner-Babb 171
  





  

  

       

  

strong librarianship.
That however, is mostly individual behavior. The piece that is sort of outside of
that is the management piece. Anybody who is supervising other people, and
basically I am watching all the time to see whether people are effective managers
of the people working under them feeling informed. Do they seem to be
productive? Are they engaged? All those kinds of things.
I asked about whether Anne  

 

had a merit plan. She indicated

that while there is one the raises are minimal:
Well. That is a goo 

  

 

 

 

 



there is not a lot of wiggle room on that. People that are performing at a very high
level, do not make that much more in terms of financial compensation than the
person who is just getting by. That to me is a frustration. Although, there is a
pretty strong school of thought that the pay thing should be separated from the
evaluation piece. I think there is a lot to be said for that.
The way [our] system works is, we go through this annual evaluation
process in the early winter. Those recommendations are used to determine salary.
  

    

    

  





no matter what. Not a lot of wiggle room there.
I then asked what forms of communication Anne primarily uses with the
librarians she supervises. She reflected:
 

 



   

 





More than I have

experienced at other institutions where the phone is used more often. We are all in

Hefner-Babb 172
one building, so we can bop in and talk to each other, and wander around, and
stuff like that. So much of this has to do with everybody is super busy, and we do
a lot of interaction by email, and group email. Somebody will send out to the five
   

 

                 

starts a conversation that is an email conversation.
When asked if Anne used other modes besides email she said:
Not much. Mostly it is good old fashioned email. I think we actually have a
couple people that are hold-      

      

                  

    

money.
My final question to Anne for this section inquired how she relays her
expectations to librarians. She found it an interesting question and then said:
We meet at least once, monthly. As a library faculty. I would say that we as a
group tend to determine where we are going and what we are doing. Although, I
feel like my job is to guide that. Make people feel like we are really moving, this
is the direction I hope we are moving in, or I believe we should be moving in, and
try to basically get enough energy going, that everybody agrees.
                    k
we are a pretty collaborative group of people, in terms of decision making. I do
not believe I am right all the time. I am interested in hearing other points of view
and can be talked into thinking about something, differently.

Hefner-Babb 173
I also, I will say, one real big expectation of mine is that we will try things
out, and yes sometimes we will fail, and that is okay. Better to try things out than
not try things out.
Group Structure and Operations Control
My first question to Anne in this group asked for a description of the library
organization. She responded in detail saying:

s see, under the Assistant University Librarian (AUL), and public services.
There are two librarians. One the head of access services. One the head of
instruction. Under the head of instruction are four liaison instruction librarians
that he coaches pretty significantly, and quite well. Under the head of access
services is a daytime manager, nighttime manager, and boatload of students.
Then there are two, there is a person who is systems and technical support
for the entire library. She also, reports to the AUL, because that is ultimately
public support for the public. She does a lot of work with the folks that are in tech
services, as well. They do  

 

      

higher up, so there is sort of a signal that she belongs to all of us.
Then there are two ladies that, for years, we had a, reference desk. We had
two reference assistants, paraprofessional people that have been here for quite a
while, and can handle everyday reference really well. This past year and a half,
they have provided their service from the circulation desk, and it may be that we
alter that reporting relationship, as well. But, for the moment they still report to
the AUL for public services. In large part, because he was, years ago, they had a

                 

Hefner-Babb 174


      

         

are, it may not make sense. But, it does make sense given that we do.
I asked Ann to discuss their public reference desk. She replied
Not anymore. We closed that down, about probably seventeen months ago. It
      

 

  ers, in terms of requests in

assistance has gone up, since we put it in a more visible location. A lot of it just
has to do with your floor plan. You know, what do people encounter, and what
do they expect to see where?
Ours beg for it. Yeah. Okay. That is that group. Then, head of discovery
services has another professional librarian whos involved with e-resources,
assessment of those things. Basically, just counting use, counts per use,
monitoring all that kind of stuff.
Then, a group of paraprofessionals that do everything from copying the
catalog and physical processing. I am trying to think what else. Doing entry of
content into the institutional repository, the actual work of doing that. Catalog
maintenance, all that kind of stuff.
In the current environment, under the collections person is acquisitions,
finance, and payment, kind of efforts. Again, those things are going to move over
to what was discovery services, and we are going to be more holistic tech
services. Inter-library loan, reports now, and will continue to report to the head of
collections and resource sharing.
Then, let me think. I am just mentally moving through the building. Who
am I forgetting? Anybody? I think that is it. There is a professional librarian in

Hefner-Babb 175
charge of archives, special collections. Currently she reports to the AUL or the
associated university librarian. But, she is going to be reporting to the person with
collections. Because, she needs some of that kind of support.
Actually the one person who also reports to me, that I should have
mentioned is the audit administrator for the building. The lady who is making sure
  









   







 

and

we paid all the bills out of the supplies and expense budget. She is acting as the
administrative support for the campus master plan, right now. She is the person
who really the keeps the place running.
  

 

  

 

  

 

 



 

user experience has worked very closely with me on assessment planning and
reports. He guides a lot of that process here in the library. He also has helped us
 

     



    



re clever and attractive

and the kind of thing you can give your board of trustees and send out to the
campus. What else does he do? Were in the process of doing strategic planning,
just this last fall we had an external review by two administrators from similar
size and type institutions, elsewhere in the country. He helped us write our selfstudy, and will probably lead the process of developing the ultimate strategic plan.
This next question asked Ann about how she conducts operations control within
in her organization. She responded:
  

    

  

me answering that. I meet biweekly with

the head of discovery services, and the head of collections. They keep me posted
on that, we meet weekly with the AUL, the Associate University Librarian. We

Hefner-Babb 176
talk sort of big picture about things. I am pretty aware o

 



throughout the building. Where there are problems, and who is feeling challenged.
Who is having trouble meeting their goals and deadlines in the promotion and
tenure process? All that kind of thing.
When I asked how she conveys her expectations to the library Anne said the
emphasis is on the supervisors. She remarked:
We really do try to convey that responsibility on to supervisors. The library
faculty meets once, at least once a month, sometimes twice depending on how the


   e

made it very clear, that I expect each of them who do supervise

other staff to go back and share relevant discussions, decisions, actions, changes
to the people that report to them. I also, twice a year, in June and December, I


   



 

 



   

  

     

just come in and ask me anything, and I will answer it as well as I can, and try to
bring them up to speed a little bit on what it is we are working on, what are
challenges are, and what else is happening.
I will say that we generally have a culture of, if you have a really good
          

      

  

    

not calling all the shots. If somebody comes in and says wow I could write this
grant for this really amazing thing, and I want to give it a try, will you sign it
when I am done, developing it, or you help me with it a little bit. The answer is
going to be yes.

Hefner-Babb 177
Influence Group Achievement
I asked Anne how she evaluates productivity in her library. She replied at length
about making data driven decisions:
I saw something, I think this was yesterday, actually, I was looking at some
documents that the Association of Research Libraries has out there, and there is a
program that they offer, apparently a continuing education program. The sort of
catch word of the thing is manage what you can measure. We are very much a
data driven organization, and we make decisions based on data not on feeling.
  





                

like that, but how can we find out that, that is true. In our assessment plans, and
assessment reports we really do try to do things that are actually measurable.
          

        

But, in terms of determining what we are able to accomplish, we rely very heavily
on those kinds of measures.
I asked if she could provide an example for those who may be unfamiliar with
academic libraries. She referenced the recent Quality Enhancement Plan (QEP) saying:
Yeah. Probably, the very best example that I can give you, Trinity chose
information literacy as its QEP, the one that began in 2008. And, finished in 2013.
The library certainly did the work and background. We had some teaching faculty
be the front people on it, so that it did not look like it was solely a library. Project.
We did all the assessment on that. We ended up with really remarkable results
from that effort. Huge changes not only in the sophistication and quality of

Hefner-Babb 178
student work, both at the first year level, what they use to do and what they do
now.
More impressively at the senior level. We also, saw that the number of
faculty that were willing to engage with, and use the library as a resource of
people, guidance, and content in their teaching, changed over that time. For the
better, and a number of them said they would continue to operate that way, and
use what they learned through that process in their other courses. Rather than just
    



 

 



    

                     

w

what the impact

     



Another example is we have done, many of us have, a major reading
project, because we are out of space, and were not in enough space, so we are
going to build more. We do need to keep all this stuff. The whole thing. We use
sustainable collections services.
To do the snap shot of our collections, and compare our holdings against
      



 

    



       

a member of. The Associated Colleges of the South, which we are a member of,
the whole country. All that stuff. Make thoughtful and carefully considered
decisions about what we were removing and why. When, it just happened last
week, some faculty member who 


 

   !

       

    ! 

-

 





  ! "   ! 

way to point to all those decisions points and say, calm yourself. We are not just
! ! 

    !     #

   !  

 !  





y decision we make is based on
!      !      

Hefner-Babb 179

                   
point to it, and say this is the methodology.
My next question asked about how Anne evaluates the morale of her library. She

             
I think you do sort of have to see how people are feeling, how much energy is in
the room at a meeting. That is a big part of it. Is there tension? What is going on
there? Like, every other organization, periodically a couple of folks will square

                   
behave well when we are in that space. I try to deal with it. I will tell you that I

                   A few years ago
we had a person here, actually a tenured librarian who turned out was really
making life a living hell for many of her colleagues. Together, I and the AUL
tried to counsel her, and say this needs to change, but we are here to work with
you, to support you, you seem deeply unhappy, can you work with us. She was
actually so angry that she took her toys and left. Which was the other desirable

          

get rid of somebody with tenure, she chose to

leave. We made it clear that, if she was going to stay, which she had every right to
do. She was going to be asked to go through extensive work with us to become a

                   
!     "   
     "              
situation like that, and I am trying, some of those changes in structure is actually
in response to that. One of them re

        

Hefner-Babb 180
we are going to try to move folks around so that problem goes away. And again,
that will also, hopefully play to their strengths instead of putting them in a
position where they compete. The university librarian gets paid the big bucks to
   

 



   

  

      

way, this will gradually disappear. But, invariably it festers, and gets worse.
Having been somebody who felt like 

     

 oing

something

about this. That is sort of my philosophy is, okay I am that boss, I better do
something about it.
My final question to Anne asked about how she is able to integrate her library
staff. She said:
Yeah. I really think that we generally do wo 
      

  

   

 

  

  

 

see each new person as somebody who sort of brings something fresh to the
discussion, but, we try to keep the attitude light. I would say, I am generous with
praise, and recognition, because I think all of us kind of crave that so desperately.
That makes people feel that I am part of something. Again, all I can do is do onto
others, you know. How do I want to be treated? I want to be acknowledged and
recognized.
Email. Stop by and thank somebody in person. When they get a thank you
note from off campus, or from another department. I send it on to my boss, the
      

 

        


         

 



          

   

 

     

I got


  

Hefner-Babb 181
   

   

      

     

         

     u



Yeah. I would say, I have tried very, very hard to encourage, or to hang
onto a strong professional development budget, and encourage people to go out,
and go to meetings. Not just ALA, I think we can turn into librarians talking to
librarians, and forget that we work in higher education.
Whenever somebody goes to something, then they, that person differently


 



                 ll in

the blank. It has really had me stop and think about, what we are doing in this
way, and I think those are open conversations where everybody is encouraged to
participate. I think, that integrates, so everybody knows that when I come back I
am encouraged and entitled to share what new thing I learned, and where I think
that may take us. First amendment is in force for the most part. People can come
                      


     ot supposed to feel threatening. The idea is to have this

conversation in a thoughtful way. I actually have heard that called, conference
breath. I have also heard, the line, scariest person in the world is a dean who just
came back from a conference. They come walking in like, whoa, we have to do
this thing. The truth is all of us should be able to come back from a conference,
      

     

             

            ere. That other institution, how are
they doing? Yeah.

Hefner-Babb 182
I then asked if Anne had any further comments that apply to previously asked
questions. She replied:
I would just comment on sort of two related things. I mentioned that I went to the
Frye Institute, it was probably the most career shaping professional development
thing that I ever attended. I feel lucky that I went in the years that it was a two-

                  
Foundation was throwing lots of money at them, at the time, so they could do that,
then. The first thing is, it really impressed upon me that I work first in higher
education, and happen to work in a library in higher education. It shifted my
perspective from librarian to higher education. That has been very helpful to me,
ever since. I see us as integral part of a living breathing organism, and we are here
to support it. But, our alignment is with our institution, and where we fit that way,
first. I think that has been really helpful.

                 
administration leadership, however you want to call it. Since, I was in two jobs
where I worked for people that should have never managed other people. Once
you work for one of those folks, you think, huh. This is not just a sleep walk

                   ght in and
then directed the EDUCAUSE management program, and have read about
management extensively, and used a lot of what I have read. Not all everything
that I have read, because some of it is balderdash, but a lot of what I have read,
has made an impact on me and I continue to do pre-conferences every year at
EDUCAUSE on that topic. New people trying to decide do I want to be a

Hefner-Babb 183
m     



          

this, go do the EDUCAUSE

    

 

  



   



managing, managing well. The communication around that. I would strongly
recommend to you, my absolutely, hands down management book is Twelve: The
Elements of Good Managing. I turn back to that every couple of years, to think
about how can I, what have a forgotten, where have I slipped. I think, for me
personally, those are ways that I sort of try to keep myself fresh.

Hefner-Babb 184
Chapter XV
Narrative Analysis
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. In order to investigate this phenomenon, the
researcher first conducted a survey of academic librarians and administrators and then
interviewed ten academic library administrators who participated in the surveys. Analysis
is organized by research question. In Chapter XV the researcher presents a collective
analysis of the narratives of academic library administrators, presented in Chapters V
through XIV.
For the purpose of the qualitative study, academic library administrators were
considered leaders if they met the following criteria: (a) academic library administrator
with five years or more experience in administration; (b) library administrator with a
Masters in Library Science or the equivalent; and (c) academic library administrator at a
four-year degree granting institution in Texas. This study documents the leadership
practices of each of these experienced library leaders.
Research Question Three: Input Behaviors
Research Question Three investigated input behaviors demonstrated by academic
library administrators in their leadership roles. These input behaviors were: assessing and
rewarding performance, interaction and making expectations known to librarians they
supervise. The emerging themes from respondents included: formal evaluation processes,
reward systems, communication practices, meetings, and planning.

Hefner-Babb 185
Formal evaluation processes. All ten of the library administrators indicated use
of formal evaluation procedures to assess the librarians they supervised. The formal
promotion documents included establishment of personal goals which are used during the
evaluation process to determine evaluation scores. In some libraries, these goals were tied
to strategic planning documents for the library as a whole. Jacob indicated that his
evaluation process included a formal assessment tool for librarians who teach information
literacy sessions and examination of how collection development specialists spent their
budgets and communicated with their liaison departments. Deb indicated that their
 





    

 

         



In addition to personal goals some libraries also required scholarship and service
as part of the evaluation process. Anne commented on how their tenure and promotion
document was used to evaluate librarians. She stated the following:
It lets us really try to evaluate on the basis of strong librarianship. That however,
is mostly individual behavior. The piece that is sort of outside is the management
piece. Anybody who is supervising other people, and basically I am watching all
the time to see whether people are effective managers of the people working
under them feeling informed. Do they seem to be productive? Are they engaged?
All those kinds of things.
Anne finished stating that the way the system works is there is an annual evaluation
process that occurs in the early winter.
Rewards systems. Eight of the library administrators interviewed described a
form 

 

     

  

  

   

   

Hefner-Babb 186
 

 

    



 





 

 

 

a formula determined either by the provost or the librarians. In libraries where merit is
not used, alternate forms of rewards were discussed. John described how he rewards
librarians in lieu of merit money:
I usually try to reward with help with special projects, giving them time to work
on special projects. If they express wanting to go to a particular conference or
  

 

           

 

 

willing to work with existing budget resources to support those kinds of activities.
    



       

essed a desire to move

up and grooming people to take my position at some point or if they want to




     

  

   





  

  

 

          

      

 





   

    !



 

 

   

  

  

 



you





 

 



opportunities and peak their interest to gain new skills.
Cara established a series of annual awards to recognize accomplishments of her
librarians and her staff. She described them saying:
   

 



    

 #  $ 

Rooki 

   

    







      "  

  

 % &

    "  

   

   













Team Award because so many of the things we accomplish, are accomplished by


 &

       &  

   



 

Hefner-Babb 187
    
 

 







    

    



 

Matthew, Deb, Caitlyn and Anne defined how they informally rewarded their
librarians by promoting and recognizing accomplishments. Matthew said:
I try and send out an
    

     

  

     


    

    
 

 





   

    

           

 

      



 

 

I try and do that as much as possible.

  

        





good job. Sometimes some of our supervisors need some help with remembering to do
   

  

     

  

 

  

staff accomplishments are

       

  

 

newsletter where others can recognize help from their colleagues. Anne sends notes to
her librarians recognizing their achievements and she to     

  

you note from off campus, or from another department. I send it on to my boss, the vice
     


  



   

    

    !"  

  

 #  

Communication practices. Nine of the administrators reported email as their
primary mode of interaction with their librarians. Matthew explained his reason for using
  



and I think t

 

 

       

   

      



    

  

  $  % 

mentioned the ability of holding group conversations about a topic without the need of a
face-to-face meeting as a reason. Anne indicated the necessity of using email stating 

Hefner-Babb 188
are all in one building, so we can pop in and talk to each other, and wander around, and
stuff like that. So much of this has to do with everybody is super busy, and we do a lot of
  







 

 

Nine of the administrators stressed the importance of leaving their office and
talking with librarians and most said they had open door policies. Cara described her
   

       

 

       



to meet with me, they can make an appointment with my assistant. I also do a lot of
 



        

communication versus using email replying 
Eit         
 

    

  



va  

  





 

 

     



face-to-face

      

 



  



remarked  



  



      



     

  

  

     

-to-face.

 

  

tating 

 



Meetings. All of the administrators interviewed indicated the need for formal and
informal meetings as a way to either interact with their librarians or to let them know
about their expectations as a leader. Each administrator had some form of upper level


 

  

  



 



 



faculty committee etc. These groups met on varying time frames every other week,
monthly and on an individual basis. John described his meeting schedule and the reasons
for it as follows:
I have monthly meetings, one-on-ones with my direct reports then we have
monthly meetings with the [professional administrators] group and then I have a
monthly meetin     

 

      

Hefner-Babb 189
for constant communication with the staff at all levels. Also, I have a weekly what
   

 

       

everybody goes around the  

     

         



  





 

      

            

technical service is telling the other unit he

 



    

    





this week or what they personally are working on.
Deb discussed the meetings with staff at her library where they can submit
questions and receive library updates. She said:
We also have a process where we have group called the library assembly. People
can submit questions through library assembly to us that we respond to in writing.
There are several avenues like that for people to ask questions, and for us to
communicate out to people about information they need to know. We try to be as
      







 

    

are posted for people to review if they want to.
Jacob shared the meeting process at his library replying that he usually lets his
associate directors run the meetings. He did indicate that he attends:
     
   



    

   

       

   


 

  
 



new initiative I will personally delivery that to that meeting or a specially called


 



  

       

do that pretty much on a face to face basis.



 



Hefner-Babb 190
Planning. Nine of the administrators described some form of strategic planning
us          

    

       

   

Luke and Kathy indicated the connection between their library goals, departmental goals,
and the personal goals of their librarians. John indicated how his library used planning
and how he changed it this year remarking:
I think part of that is to have strong goals and objectives planning system for the
year. Each year, we map out the goals and objectives for the library and then they
go out and map their unit goals and objectives. This year, I reversed the process
               
   

  

  

       

 

Deb stated that the connection between the goals for the library and those of the
librarians sometimes require reinforcement as to how it relates to work hours:
  
  

      

    

         

  

     

    

  

not a forty hour a                      
               

Anne made the following comment with regards to planning within her
organization:
As a library faculty, I would say that we as a group tend to determine where we
are going and what we are doing. Although, I feel like my job is to guide that.
Make people feel like we are really moving. This is the direction I hope we are
moving in, or I believe we should be moving in, and try to basically get enough
energy going, that everybody agrees. Then, we are all feeling like that makes

Hefner-Babb 191
      

   

            

terms of decision making. I do not believe I am right all the time. I am interest in
hearing other points of view and can be talked into thinking about something
differently. I will say one real big expectation of mine is that we will try things
out, and yes sometimes we will, fail, and that is oaky. Better to try things out than
not try things out.
Research Question Four: Group Structure and Operations Control
Research Question Four examined group structure and operations control within
  

      

           

operations control practiced by  

   

    

   

the entire organization. Emerging themes from the interviews included traditional
structure, assessment, and meetings.
Traditional structure. All ten library administrators lead library organizations
that are traditional in structure. Nine administrators head organizations with at least one
assistant dean or director. Kathy remarked how this recent change in her library impacted
her stating:
I will say that I just said that we have a traditional str  

  

                      

directly to me was just impossible. The management team does handle a lot of
that day-to-

       

          

focus is on a daily basis.



        
         

Hefner-Babb 192
Matthew indicated the absence of an assistant director was a weak part of his
organization. He reflected:
I think if we had at least one associate director, I think we could do more to
control the day to day operations as far as making sure that projects that start well,
that stumble at some point; sort of limp to the finish line, and that sort of thing, I
  

  

 

  



 

  



  

 

 

h job with that. I think if I had some

  



 

  



  

Jacob mentioned how his library while traditional has set a change in direction towards
 







 



    

    

  



   

 

more embedded into the university and

  

  

 

     





Assessment. Nine of the administrators indicated the use of some form of
assessment (statistics, reviewing goals, surveys etc.) related to organizational control and
relaying expectations to their organization. Jacob, Deb, Luke, and Kathy used the
strategic planning process to evaluate whether the organization was on course during the
year. Jacob stated that his library:
has set a general change in direction and we visit that on a regular basis with the


       

            

written down it could be called a strategic plan it is adjusted on a continual basis;
      

   







 

 

 



everything we do is helping to analyze are we successful in meeting the demand
       

to figure out 

   

   

 



   

    



Hefner-Babb 193

   

             

        

            

what is, what are user behaviors actually telling us? John used goals and objectives as
well but he preferred not to micromanage commenting:

                       
                     
figure out a way to get that task finished or new programs started.
Meetings. All ten administrators used meetings to communicate with their staff
and to aid in organizational control. Meeting frequency and the personnel involved varied
from library to library.

               

! "            #       
faculty and the management committee and occasional library wide meetings to discuss
and review expectations. He did indicate a reliance on email to ensure that the
information in the meetings are communicated to those who do not attend. Anne stressed

                  
staff to go back and share relevant discussions, decisions, actions, changes to the people

    "
$              !  

  

but also allowing them to submit them in writing anonymously through the library
a

         " %     $     

to anyone who wants to attend and they offer a variety of programs:
For example: our divisions and our offices take turns reporting about their
activities over the past year, or if they feel like, their accomplishments. Key things

Hefner-Babb 194
     

  

   

Anne 
Anythi



 

  !

 







    

    

   





   



    

 "

They can just come in and ask me anything, and I will answer it as well as I can,
and try to bring them up to speed a little bit on what it is we are working one,
what our challenges are, and what else is happening.
Lucie used staff meetings and meetings about annual goals but she also delivers


 

  

# 



 # 

 



  

  





team, have come to understand our purpose to be here for the university and for the




Research Question Five: Influence Group Achievement
Research Question Five surveyed group achievement as assessed the by leader.
Three areas of achievement addressed here include: productivity in the group, morale
within the organization, and integration of those who work in the organization. Emerging
themes in this section included: assessment practices, observation, communication,
leadership by example, and acceptance of change.
Assessment practices. All ten administrators indicated using assessment
practices to examine productivity in their organization. Matthew believed he had:
 # 

 



#      

   





    

   

annual reports and #







 $  #  

#

       

 %  

 

#



 

  

   

Hefner-Babb 195
       

           

like ours. When you see it all pulled together, it makes an impact.
Lucie relied on the various statistics collected, feedback from students and faculty
and comparing them to comments and data from prior years to see if there is
 

 

    

            

   

    

      

    

        

   



   

 

 

 

  

     

       





ns and the annotated performance agreements

submitted by the librarians she supervises. She also looked at the reports submitted by the
divisions and offices. She noted:
!  "#              

and off  

 

       

 

      

$      



    

touch with the group.
Cara, John, and Luke indicated that they rely on the goals and objectives
document or strategic plan to see if all of the objectives are met. For Kathy the process is
more formal because she is required to do an assessment plan for the year which they use
to determine if the goals are met. Caitlyn uses a more subjective process where they set
  

$   

      

    %          

     



 &     

user education as a new area of assessment for their library. Another facet of assessment
that impacts libraries is accreditation reports which both Jacob and John referred to as

Hefner-Babb 196

                         
                   our mission very well, and
    
Observation. When discussing morale in their organizations many of the
administrators responded that they used observation to gauge morale of their staff. John
stated that based on his years as an administra

           

                     
                      
looking at who attends, we listen 

         

                       
                         
! "            #        $
%                    
management team and checks on how the morale really is. Lucie relies on feedback from
her librarians and staff an

     

  "   

                   $    
staff during meetings to gauge their overall morale.
Communication. Administrators mentioned communication as both a way to

              &       
consensus, not compromise because in compromise, everybody gives something up but in

               

ob and Luke used the

                "     
morale issues are communicated within those meetings and the evaluations. Kathy noted

Hefner-Babb 197
how she observes communication across lines, one example she provided was when
     
   



  

 

     

   

      

you keeping it professional? Are you keeping it polite? Is it produc


   

  

  





 ! 

  

 

 





        

  

Cara recounted how she stressed the need for communication as it related to both
morale and integration in her organization. Her university is currently undergoing
reorganization and some departments and staff in the library organization were relocated
and the staff was reduced as well. She made sure to share all of the information as she


  

 

 

the information is the way to really make people feel, even if

   

 

  





Leadership by example. John, Kathy, and Cara specifically mentioned that they
lead by setting a  " #
 

  

  





 "  f

I am the one that tells other people

   -    

  !

applied this mantra to interactions with library users, professional activity and being
responsive to those you supervise. Kathy said she tries to lead by example and works to
break down silos in trying to get departments to realize their decisions impact other areas


   $   



  

   %    " 

engaged. I am not hands off. I hope not to micro- % 
  
&

  

 

    



     
 $

  



   "   

     





 %

Hefner-Babb 198

                          
              She continued:
                         
really assess you to see if you also have those values. Yes, being connected with

  

              

                     
sometimes clash just a little, but you also have to be an advocate for your staff.

                  
Removal of barriers. The theme of barriers was addressed by the administrators
in relation to both morale and integrating their organizations. Jacob uses committee
assignments and cr

      !   "      

                    # 
indicated a similar practice at his library stating:

$          %    ting for a new librarian position,
                      
going to get an opportunity to do a little bit of everything, which may peak their

 %
Matthew observed that getting people to work outside of departmental lines starts with

             "    %       
                 ! 


    e of

                " 

                          
  

                   &  

Hefner-Babb 199
  





          

reduce the problem of silos. She also holds open meetings to inform the staff about items
of common interest like the current renovations at her library. Cara also stressed the need
for informal social functions which are arranged by an events committee at her library.
Lucie tries to pair up individuals based upon their strengths and weaknesses and while
           some of that; for the most part, it seems to be
  
Anne explained how one person with low morale or whose behavior at work
        

           

together, and unfortunately the person who often is the cause of the problem is the last
                       
  

   

can do is do unto o  

 

          

 !  

     " #       



important to address morale as quickly as possible because it really is the case of just on
really, truly unhappy negative person who is vocal and negative; that kind of person can
really pois     $
  
Moral, i

 

     
  

 '        

    

  

      %  &  
    

   

then we try to do something then if possible, and try just to be encouraging in
going around and talking to them on an individual basis can dive me a pretty good
         '  ' 
of productivity will al
wrong or not.

'    

    

 heir level

       

 

Hefner-Babb 200

 

                   

                    
         
Acceptance of change. Deb, John, Jacob, and Kathy stressed how administrators
need to accept change when integrating their library organization. Deb stated that unlike
when she started in the library profession 30 years ago the ability to cope with change
might indicate a need to charge careers because:

                 

     

                   
is just in constant flux. You have to be always prepared to change the way you do
things.
John indicated that all librarians need to be prepared:
To supervise from day one even if it is not in their job description and what you
learn in library school, eve      

       

organization, you have to relearn their management practices, you have to relearn
their budgeting methods, you have to relearn their personnel issues regulations.
Caitlynn commented that a leader nee      



   

!                   
        " 

      

              m and I feel like that a lot of decisions need
     #  "$

     #  $  

Kathy, Anne, and Jacob indicated the need to view the organization from a
different perspective whether it is the user, their library or the library as part of the

Hefner-Babb 201
university. Kathy referred to a recent meeting she attended where some attendees looked
at the issue from the user perspective while others examined it from just their own library
 

 

                 

                 
attendance at conferences and not just library related professional development because
                   
      

 

              

                     
education, and happen to work in a library in higher education. It shifted [her] perspective
          ! 

          

following comment:
I do think that having traditional library directors that come in looking internally
to run a library, I think the new models are going to require a different skill set
                  "   
a university administrator that runs the library, but I consider myself a university
  

m concerned about the university. They make decisions for

the benefit of the university not necessarily just for the benefit of the library. I
                   #

  

yourself in a bigger role,   $       % 
somebody that can deal, that realizes how you fit in.
Summary and Organization of the Study
In Chapter XV, the researcher has analyzed the findings of the narratives
presented in Chapters V through XIIV. In chapter XVI the researcher will present a

Hefner-Babb 202
summary of the study, conclusions, implications for practice, and recommendations for
future studies, as well as concluding remarks about the study.

Hefner-Babb 203
Chapter XVI
Summary, Conclusions, Implications, and Recommendations
The purpose of this mixed method study was to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of the librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. In this chapter, the researcher provides a
summary of the study which includes an overview of the problem, the purpose statement,
research questions, review of the study design, and a summary of the major findings of
the study. The research presents findings reported in chapters IV and XV, discusses
implications for practice, makes recommendation for further studies, and provides
concluding remarks.
Summary of the Study
The summary of the study begins with the overview of the problem. It is followed
by the purpose statement and the research questions. The next section includes a review
of the study design including the sample, data collection and data analysis techniques. A
summary of the major findings concludes the summary section.
Overview of the problem. The specific problem is that some academic library
leaders are career librarians either hired or promoted into administrative level positions
and they are not meeting the expectations of the librarians who work with them
(Cawthorne, 2010; Dewey, 2012). The current leaders in the library profession are
reaching retirement age and it is contributing to an increasing dearth of leaders who are
qualified to take their place (Brundy, 2014; Edge & Green, 2011; Rooney, 2010).
Libraries continue to experience constant change and there is a need for people to lead

Hefner-Babb 204
during this time of transition (Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2015; Hayati & Barahmand, 2012;
Jantz, 2012; Miller, 2012).
There is a call amongst those in the profession both here in the United States and
internationally, for a set of leadership competencies to help prepare librarians for
leadership roles (Düren, 2012; Hernon & Rossiter, 2007; Hernon, et al., 2003; Hernon, et
al., 2002; Hernon, et al., 2001; Winston & Williams, 2003). A number of studies have
been undertaken to try and determine a set of competencies but to date no such
recommendation exists (al Ansari & al Khadher, 2011; Ammons-Stevens et al., 2009;
Jantii & Greenhalgh, 2012). The American Library Association began this process in
2006 but the result was the ALA Core Competences of Librarianship which only
mentioned transformational leadership (Hicks & Given, 2013). This study seeks to
narrow down competencies that will aid future leaders in the field by examining the
leadership behaviors of library administrators.
Purpose statement and research questions. The purpose of this mixed method
study was to examine the relationship between leadership behaviors of library
administrators and the expectations of the librarians they supervise framed within the
Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role Differentiation and Group
Achievement. The overarching question of the study was: What is the relationship
between the real leadership behaviors of Texas academic library administrators and the
ideal leadership expectations of the librarians they supervise? The following quantitative
questions guided the study:
1. What is the relationship between library administrators actual and ideal
consideration leadership behaviors preferred by academic librarians in Texas?

Hefner-Babb 205
2. What is the relationship between library administrators actual and real
initiating structure practices preferred by academic librarians in Texas?
The following qualitative questions guided the study:
3. Describe what and how input behaviors are practiced by the library
administrator in their current position.
4. What group structure and operations control are practiced by the library
administrator?
5. How does the library administrator influence group achievement?
Review of the study design. This convergent parallel mixed method design study
employed both qualitative and quantitative data to determine leadership behaviors of
academic library administrators. When convergent parallel mixed methods design is used
qualitative and quantitative data are collected at the same time, analyzed separately, and
then merged (Creswell & Clark, 2011). According to Creswell (2012) a researcher can
use qualitative or quantitative research design to reinforce the other design and to obtain
    

 

        

In this study the quantitative analysis supports the qualitative research using the
process of integration through connecting. The researcher collected the quantitative
survey data first and followed up with the qualitative interviews to interpret the
quantitative results (Creswell, 2012). Themes in the
Population and data collection. This convergent parallel mixed methods design
study included responses from administrators (n=18) and librarians (n=52) from (N=18)
four-year degree granting institutions in Texas. Administrators completed LBDQ-XII-RS surveys and librarians completed the LBDQ-XII-R-I survey via SurveyMonkey®. To

Hefner-Babb 206
protect the identity of the participants each library was assigned a number and
administrators and librarians were coded with either a 1 or 2. The data from the surveys is
saved on a password protected computer.
The qualitative phase of the study incorporated the use of phenomenological
narrative analysis and involved contacting ten library administrators from the 18
participating libraries for interviews. Ultimately the researcher conducted ten interviews,
nine via phone and one in person, with administrators who had responded to the survey
and also had librarians who participated. The interviews used a guided protocol and the
narratives were coded for common themes. Once the interviews were transcribed copies
of the transcript were sent to the interviewee for member checking. Narratives and the
recordings are saved on a password protected computer.
Data analysis. The data from the librarians and administrators was uploaded into
Statistical Package for Social Sciences® (SPSS) ver. 22 and used to conduct the
statistical analysis and calculations for this study. Nonparametric statistical analysis,
specifically Spearman correlations were used to test the relationships between the
librarian and administrator responses to the Consideration and Initiation of Structure
subscales. According to Salkind (2011) the reason to use nonparametric tests is because
the data is categorical or ordinal and ranked; in the case of this study the data is ranked.
The Spearman rank correlation coefficient was chosen for this study to test the
first two research questions. Creswell indicates that the degree of association ranges
between -       

         

   

Salkind (2011) defined the correlation coefficients as follows: .8 to 1.0 indicates a very
strong relationship, .6 to .8 indicates a strong relationship, .4 to .6 indicates a moderate

Hefner-Babb 207
relationship, .2 to .4 indicates a weak relationship and 0 to .2 indicates a very weak to no
relationship.
Summary of Major Findings
For this study the researcher investigated five research questions related to
academic library leadership behaviors. The first two questions examine the real (self)
leadership behaviors of library administrators in consideration and initiation of structure
and the ideal behaviors desired by the librarians who work with them. The remaining
three questions are based on the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement. The major findings from this study are
organized by research question.
Research question one. Research question one examined the relationship
between library administrators actual and ideal consideration leadership behaviors
preferred by academic librarians in Texas. A Spearman correlation was computed to test
the relationship between the actual consideration leadership behaviors of library
administrators (n=18, M=41.05, SD=3.33) and the ideal behaviors preferred by academic
librarians (n=18, M=39.74, SD=3.40). Analysis revealed that there was a weak, positive
correlation that was not statistically significant between the administrators real behaviors
and the ideal behaviors sought by the librarians, rs(18)=.277, p=.265. This suggests there
    



 



     

   



 

     



 

 

 

ors.

Research question two. Research question two examined the relationship
  

    

     





   

 





by academic librarians in Texas. A Spearman correlation was computed to assess the

Hefner-Babb 208
relationship between the actual initiation of structure leadership behaviors of library
administrators (n=18, M=38.94, SD=4.19) and the ideal behaviors sought by academic
librarians (n=18, M=39.52, SD=4.23). Analysis revealed that there was not a statistically
significant relationship, and that the positive correlation between the library
      

                

academic librarians was considered extremely weak, rs(18)=.152, p=.546. This suggests
            
         



    

 

       

Research question three. Research question three sought descriptions of what
and how input behaviors are practiced by the library administrator in their current
position.


All of the administrators interviewed indicated using formal evaluation
processes to assess librarians they supervised.



Eight of the leaders indicated the use of merit to formally reward librarians
while others discussed staff awards and other forms of informal
recognition.



Library administrators reported email as their main form of interaction and
also stated the importance of open door policies and leaving the directors
office to talk with their librarians.



Another common theme among the administrators was the use of
meetings, both formal and informal, to meet with their librarians and
communicate their expectations.

Hefner-Babb 209
The final theme under input behaviors was the reliance on strategic
planning to reinforce expectations and performance evaluations.
Research question four. Research question four explored the group structure and
operations control practiced by the library administrator.
All ten libraries had traditional organizational structures with only one
operating without an assistant or associate director.
Assessment was used in nine of the ten libraries to aid in organizational
control and the evaluation of expectations for the entire library
organization.
All ten administrators used meetings to further communication with staff
and organizational control.
Research question five. Research question five surveyed group achievement as
assessed by the library administrator.
Every administrator indicated the use of assessment practices to examine
productivity in their organization.
Many of the administrators responded that they used observation to gauge
morale within their organizations.
Administrators indicated communication as a way to both assess morale
and to integrate their organizations.
Some administrators stressed the need to lead by setting a good example.
The final aspect of group achievement is the negative impact of barriers on
both morale and integrating the library organization.

Hefner-Babb 210
Merged results. This study used a convergent parallel design in which the
quantitative data was collected before conducting the qualitative interviews.
The themes in the interviews corroborated with the themes found in the
literature. Examples include the problems associated with change and
barriers, the need to have a vision and to plan strategically for the future,
and the importance of communication.
Similarly the interview themes connected with the concepts found in the
consideration subscale including: doing little things to make it pleasant to
be a member of the group, treating group members as his/her equals, being
friendly and approachable, and looking out for the welfare of group
members.
Interview themes found in the initiation of structure subscale were: letting
group members know what is expected of them, making attitudes clear to
the group, assigning tasks, willingness to make changes, maintaining
standards of performance and use of rules and regulations.
The demographics of this study reflect the current situation in librarianship
in that the majority of the administrators were aged 61 and older while the
librarians who participated were between 30 and 50 years of age.
Conclusions
The primary conclusion drawn from this study is that there appears to be
disconnect between the reported real behaviors of library administrators and the ideal
behaviors desired by the librarians who work with them. The apparent source of this lack
of connection seems to be rooted in communication behaviors. Many of the problems

Hefner-Babb 211
administrators faced dealt with resistance to change, finding ways to communicate their
expectations to librarians, and establishing a shared vision combined with strategic
planning. The final communication problem administrators faced is the need to turn their
focus outward and looking at library as a functional part of the university.
The population for this study is small and is only representative of librarians in
Texas however the results from the interviews with the library directors are reflective of
the current themes in library literature. The purpose of this study was to frame it within
     









  

Theory of Role Differentiation and

Group Achievement. The themes from the interviews reflected the topics examined in the
survey questions related to consideration and initiation of structure. Thus concluding that
the topics in the surveys are areas where library administrators are currently struggling as
leaders within their organizations.
   

   

   

    

  

  

 

   



         

the two groups, it is possible to conclude that there was not much difference between the
actual and preferred behaviors. Likewise, the means for initiating structure are lower than
the means for consideration which means that the consideration behaviors are preferred
over initiation of structure. One can also conclude that librarians appear to prefer a
balance of consideration and initiation of structure whereas the administrators place more
emphasis on initiation of structure. The findings in this study indicate a very weak
correlation between the real actions of the library administrators and the ideal actions
desired by librarians in both subscales. Correlation scores are slightly stronger in the area

Hefner-Babb 212
of consideration versus initiation of structure; two areas that determine the effectiveness
of a leader (Taylor, Crook & Dropkin, 1961).
Consideration. The consideration subscale of the Ohio State Two Factor Theory
includes interpersonal behaviors and the implementation of change. Results of the survey
indicate that it is the preferred behavioral dimension but the correlation is very weak.
Library directors indicate in the interviews that they use communication via email, in
person, and remain visible to their library staffs. The results would seem to indicate that
librarians are not satisfied with the mode of communication that is currently in use.
Communication skills contribute to the success achieved by a leader (Duren, 2012;
Farrell, 2013b; Jange, 2012). Research by Cawthorne (2010) agree with the findings here
that librarians are not satisfied with the level of communication within the organization.
Farrell (2013b) stressed that any information communicated within an organization needs
to be communicated clearly and often.
The second concept of consideration is accepting change. One area that leaders
mentioned that is focused on in the research is a resistance to change and this is a
problem for administrators and librarians alike. Librarians and staff need to be able to
adapt to change in libraries at a faster rate than before (Jantz, 2012; Michalak, 2012;
Miller, 2012). Library directors indicate the need for change and problems due to barriers
from middle management but based upon the findings it appears the problem is also in
the administrative levels however it could also be as Jantz (2012) states that there is not a
process for an administrator to follow.
Initiation of structure. The subscale of initiation of structure is focused on
achieving the goals of the group and based upon setting expectations, procedures and

Hefner-Babb 213
designating tasks among the group. Librarian dissatisfaction with this area could be
traced to inability to contribute ideas that will be implemented. Rogers (2009)
recommended that library leaders encourage contribution of ideas from their librarians.
Jantz (2012) reported findings about librarians failing to take initiative when asked to
contribute ideas because under the existing system ideas came from the top of the
organization and led to a fear of failure.
Input behaviors. Input behaviors include leadership behaviors reward systems,
modes of communication, and presenting expectations to those a leader supervises.
Leaders in academic university settings are somewhat limited by official guidelines for
rewarding employees. Most of the library directors indicated formal merit systems to
provide raises. Others created staff awards or used professional development
opportunities to reward librarians. Research by Jantz (2012) mentions the use of
rewarding librarians who offer innovative ideas by setting aside funds in the budget for
special projects.
The subject of communication is mentioned in the literature and is a common
theme among the results of this study (Grgic & Zivkovic, 2012). Interpersonal
effectiveness is rooted in communication, motivation, and a positive work environment
(Ammons-Stephens, et al., 2009, Jordan 2012). Various styles of communication are
reportedly used by the library directors including emails, phone, walkabouts, meetings
and notes but still it appears that librarians are not satisfied with the current
communication practices. The library administrators indicate open door policy for their
offices and frequent meetings with librarians both formal and informal. Graybill (2014)
found that the key to the millennial generation is communication and personal

Hefner-Babb 214
connection. Murray (2011) indicates one need of the millennial generation is immediate
feedback and this is one area where library administrators may be faltering because they
rely on the annual reviews or a quarterly individual meeting as the time to give feedback.
However, most report acknowledging accomplishments if they are informed about them.
Vision. Hernon and Schwartz (2011) indicated a need for a leader who can create
a vision, get others to buy into it and implement the vision. This statement was echoed
during the study as a key to successful organizational leadership which corroborates the
findings of the LLAMA study that found vision included ability to think globally,
creatively, innovatively and toward the future (Ammons-Stephens, et al., 2009). Library
administrators emphasized the need for the library director, indeed the whole library, to
look outward to the population they serve, that is the university. Dewey (2012) indicated
    



  



 





 



 

 



another area of emphasis stressed by some of those interviewed. Further transformational
leadership within the library organization is key for the 21st century librarian based on
    





   



   



-Low, 2013; Day &

Antonakis, 2012, p.5).
Group structure and operations control. This facet of the group achievement
theory focuses on communicating expectations. Studies indicate a preference among
millennials for collaboration, multitasking, and a desire to experiment and take risks
(Murray, 2011). Ameen (2006) indicated confusion between leadership skills and
management skills among librarians so practices like policy making, planning, and
organizing skills are not taught. Librarians appear to be expecting their library leaders to
know certain skills which they may or may not have in their backgrounds. Administrators

Hefner-Babb 215
indicated an overwhelming use of traditional library structure which relies on a tiered
system of communication and an assumption that the information is trickling down from
the director to the coordinators to the staff. The reliance upon email is also problematic.
Yes, it provides a record for reference, it is easy to use when people are busy but it relies
on the recipient to read it and interpret it. What is lost is the interaction between people,
the visual cues of understanding, and the dialogue that happens during a face to face
conversation. The tiered structure works in libraries where there are adequate staff in the
positions; a library director who is often occupied with external duties needs people in the
middle management positions with leadership abilities.
Influence group achievement. The final area of group achievement includes
morale, assessing performance, and integrating the organization. Administrators indicate
a heavy reliance on statistical reports, annual reports, and strategic plans to assess their
organization. Studies indicate that emphasis on these traditional forms of evaluation
impacts defining a vision for the library (Carpenter, 2013; Saunders, 2015). Emphasis on
strategic planning by administrators is met with resistance from librarians because they
feel removed from the process and that their opinions do not matter (Jantz, 2012).
However, administrators rely on strategic planning to meet the assessment requirements
of their university administrations and accreditation.
Change is happening so fast in the library profession that, as one library
administrator indicated,    
  

        

        

         

a problem for administrators and librarians alike. Administrators have to address change
affecting the library from the external factors like budgets and restructuring or internal

Hefner-Babb 216
problems like departmental silos, staff barriers, and low morale. The leader needs to be
  

 

   

 

       

able to support the decision when others make the statement.
Implications for Practice
Librarians and administrators who are among the current and future leaders of the
profession will benefit from this study. Based upon the findings of this study it appears
that the age gap between administrators and librarians is impacting the relationship
between the two groups (Graybill, 2014; Murray, 2011). Library administrators indicate
reliance upon email for communication and an open door policy however this does not


                     

be hesitance among younger librarians to take advantage of an open door policy. Library
organizations are still reliant on the traditional hierarchical organizational structures and
in some cases legacy services which impact the productivity of an organization.
The first recommendation is for library organizations like the American Library
Association to revisit the concept of leadership competencies with a combined task force
of millennial librarians and current library leaders. The profession needs to determine a
definition of leader that is not confused with management and then work towards creating
a set of competencies that can be the basis of a library school course or a leadership
immersion program that is based upon the academic, public, special libraries tracks
(Mackenzie & Smith, 2009). This set of competencies should call upon input from
librarians around the world since the topic is truly one of international interest (Al Ansari
& Al Khadher, 2011; de Boer, Bothma & Olwagen, 2012; Düren, 2012; Grgic &
Zivkovic, 2012; Jantti & Greenhalgh, 2012; Tanloet & Tuamsuk, 2011).

Hefner-Babb 217
Leadership competencies. One desired outcome of this study was a list of
suggested leadership competences for the profession. Despite the small population of the
study there are some competences mentioned in prior studies (Jordan, 2012; Al Ansari, &
Al Khadher, 2011; Ammons-Stephens, et al., 2009) that also are evident in this study.
Demonstrating leadership. This competency includes modeling behaviors you
want staff to emulate including communication, research, work habits and more (Jantti &
Greenhalgh, 2012; Jordan, 2012). Library leaders need to be seen as part of the library
staff and as an advocate for the library on campus both internally and externally (Düren,
2012; Farrell, 2013b; Gwyer, 2010; Reyes, 2006). Further library leaders should lead by
example with interactions with library users, professional organizations and responding
to needs of library personnel (Farrell, 2013b).
Planning. Library leaders need to be aware of how to plan for library services,
budgets, and for the constant change occurring in the profession (Jordan, 2012). Strategic
planning and other forms of assessment are expected in the academic library setting
today. Administrators use planning to align library goals to university goals and some
align personal goals with the library strategic plan. A successful library leader is one who
sets goals and is able to get others within the organization to support those goals (Konya
& Gurel, 2014).
Risk taking. Library leaders need to be willing to take risks and to encourage their
library staff to do the same (Carpenter, 2012; Jordan, 2012). One should not be afraid to
try a new idea proposed by a fellow librarian who recently attended a conference. If the
idea is successful then it is a positive investment if the idea fails then use it as a learning
experience and explore what could be improved (DeBoer, et al., 2012).

Hefner-Babb 218
Delegation. A library leader is often busy representing the library to the
university administration and the community which cuts into the time they have leading
the library (Farrell, 2013b). Most Texas libraries have a director and an assistant director
who assists with public services and day to day library operations. As a leader the
director should be willing and able to delegate authority for projects, committee work,
and departmental supervision (Jordan, 2012).
Interpersonal skills. Interpersonal skills are a major component of being a leader
(Jordan, 2012). The leader should be able to communicate their expectations to all
members of the staff, the university administration, and the community (Cawthorne,
2010; Jange, 2012). Communication should be done using all potential methods: email,
phone and in person because reliance on one form of communication may not meet the
needs of all library staff.

   

    , feedback, and

personal connection more than prior generations (Graybill, 2014).
Communication skills. Leaders must have solid spoken and written
communication skills (Jordan, 2012). They should be comfortable speaking in meeting
settings and large groups settings. It is key that the leader be able to communicate the
needs of the library as part of the university (Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2013b; Gwyer, 2010;
Reyes, 2006). Leaders should also be able to communicate information to other areas of
the library to allow librarians and staff to do their jobs more effectively (Cawthorne,
2010). Leadership comes from building relationships within the library and
communicating with library personnel (Brundy, 2014; Davis & Macauley, 2011; Harris,
2011).

Hefner-Babb 219
Flexibility. Leadership requires a person capable of seeing the need for change
and willing to undertake it (Carpenter, 2012). The library is not the brick and mortar
institution of forty years ago it is internet based and serving patrons in the physical
building but also virtually around the world. This facet requires a new style of library
leader who is willing to change with the times and the demands of library users (Hernon
& Schwartz, 2008; Phillips, 2014; Siriprasoetsin, et al., 2011; Tanloet & Tuamsuk, 2011).
Library leaders also need to be able to recognize talent within their organization that can
aid in the change process (Davis & Macauley, 2011; Heifetz, Grashow, & Linsky, 2009).
Vision. The library leader of today must have vision and the ability to make
others see and realize that vision (Farrell, 2013b, Gwyer, 2010; Hernon & Schwartz,
2011). Leaders need to be able to establish a vision for their library and be able to sell it
to those they supervise and to university administration (Farrell, 2013b). When
establishing vision for the library a leader should use the practice of framing to maintain
clarity and focus (Jantz, 2012; Macauley & Davis, 2011). Leaders need to encourage
innovation and the sharing of ideas as part of establishing vision for the library (Ammons
Stephens, et al., 2009).
Political understanding. The world of higher education includes a degree of
political understanding (Jordan, 2012). Library leaders desire monies and resources from
the same budgets that other educational departments wish to use. Leaders need to
understand the processes behind budgeting and also the laws and regulations that govern
state budgets and agencies (Farrell, 2013b).
Problem solving. As a leader and administrator problem solving will be an area of
constant challenge (Jordan, 2012). Administrative responsibilities including finding

Hefner-Babb 220
money in the budget to meet increasing expenses, coping with human resources issues,
and working to motivate supervisors and employees. Another aspect of problem solving
is to work to break down barriers between departments and to integrate and cross train
staff to be flexible and put the institution first (Carpenter, 2012; Düren, 2012; Jantz,
2012; Miller, 2012).
Advocacy skills. Library leaders today need to have a strong set of advocacy skills
for use both within the library and outside when working with administration (Dewey,
2014; Düren, 2012; Farrell, 2013b; Gwyer, 2010; Reyes, 2006). These advocacy skills
also will be beneficial in professional organizations that represent libraries and librarians.
Immersion Programs
Leadership immersion programs can be designed at the state and national levels
with varying degrees of focus. Based upon the research conducted in this study and its
focus on Texas librarians and administrators a future immersion program for library
leaders could have a variety of areas of emphasis. First, Texas library administrators need
information on how to cope with barriers to change within their organizations posed by
people, budget constraints, and university restructuring. A second area for focus is how to
   









 

   

  

 

  



and the library director as a university administrator. The third concept is for library
administrators at all levels to be visible, interactive, and more discriminative in their use
of email for communication.

Recommendations for Future Research



Hefner-Babb 221
Future research on the subject of leadership behaviors of academic library
administrators should be expanded to include a broader research focus. The population
for this current study should be expanded to include library administrators and librarians
from across the nation in order to obtain a clearer picture of leadership in the profession.
Academic library administrators participate in leadership roles and positions outside of
their libraries so research emphasis could be placed on leadership in the university and in
professional organizations. Another aspect for research is the merging of library
administration with university information technology departments and the impact it has
on leadership decisions in libraries and in information technology. Research might also
be conducted to see if the number of librarians versus administrators in an academic
library impacts which factor, consideration or initiation of structure, is stronger. How
does the changing organizational structure and management structure impact the
outcome?
The use of the Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire (LBDQ) should be
modified in further research. In this study the researcher relied on a convenience sample
of administrators and librarians which resulted in a low participation rate for some
libraries. When the original studies were conducted by Halpin and Stogdill they used on
site surveying where all leaders and those they supervised participated; this might be an
option for a future study. Another aspect should be conducting interviews with librarians
based upon the group achievement theory to help explain the weak correlation. A final
approach would be to look at the averages for Consideration and Initiation of Structure to
determine which leadership behavior is more important to librarians and to
administrators.

Hefner-Babb 222
Concluding Remarks
Numerous studies have been published about the leadership behaviors of
academic librarians and the need to identify leadership competences for the profession.
The findings of this study corroborate those in prior studies of leadership in libraries.
Despite the small convenience sample in this study it is clear that there is little or no
correlation between the actions of the administrators and those desired by the librarians in
the areas of consideration or initiation of structure. Of the two subscales the
administrators are scored higher on the consideration scales.
The three areas related to the Group Achievement Theory indicated the need for a
flexible leader with a certain skillset. Input behavior findings indicate a reliance on email
for communication and a strong need for a leader who is able to share their vision and get
buy in from those who work for them. Group structure and operations control results
focus on communication throughout the library organization and a designated skill set
that includes policy making, risk taking, and ability to establish and share expectations.
The final area of the theory centers on influencing group achievement and addressing
problems related to morale, assessing group performance and breaking down barriers to
integrate the organization. Recommended actions for the profession at the state and
national levels is to re-examine the library school curriculums and include leadership
practices within the core classes. The profession should examine the studies on leadership
competencies and compile a recommended list to guide future leaders in the profession.

References

Hefner-Babb 223
AFL-CIO. (2015). Fact Sheet 2015: Library workers: Facts and figures. Retrieved from
http://dpeaflcio.org/wp-content/uploads/Library-Workers-Facts-Figures-2015.pdf
al Ansari, H., & al Khadher, O. (2011). Developing a leadership competency model for
library and information professionals in Kuwait. Libri: International Journal of
Libraries & Information Services, 61(3), 239-246. doi:10.1515/libr.2011.020
Ameen, K. (2006). Challenges of preparing LIS professionals for leadership roles in
Pakistan. Journal of Education for Library and Information Science, 47(3), 200217. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/40323830
American Library Association. (2009).

          .

Retrieved from http://www.ala.org/educationcareers/sites/
ala.org.educationcareers/files/content/careers/
corecomp/corecompetences/finalcorecompstat09.pdf
Ammons-Stephens, S., Cole, H. J., Jenkins-Gibbs, K., Riehle, C., & Weare, W. H.
(2009). Developing core leadership competencies for the library profession.
Libraries Faculty and Staff Scholarship and Research Paper 19 http://
http://doc.lib.purdue.edu/lib
Arnold, J., Nickel, L. T., & Williams, L. (2008). Creating the next generation of library
leaders. New Library World, 109(9/10), 444-456. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1108/03074800810910478
Arns, J. W., & Price, C. (2007, Winter). To market, to market: The supervisory skills and
managerial competencies most valued by new library supervisors. Library
Administration & Management, 21(1), 13-19. Retrieved from
http://www.ala.org/ala/lama/lamapublications/laandm/lamhome/lamonline.htm

Hefner-Babb 224
Bass, B. M. (1990).

              

managerial applications. (3rd ed.). New York: The Free Press.
Bass, B. M., & Bass, R. (2009). The Bass handbook of leadership: Theory, research, and
managerial applications. (4th ed.). New York: Simon & Schuster.
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership. (2nd ed.) Mahwah,
NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bennett, M. (2010). The tide is rising--Don't miss the boat. College & Research Libraries
News, 71(11), 599-602. Retrieved from http://crln.acrl.org.libproxy.lamar.edu/
content/71/11/599.full
Bird, C. (1940). Leadership. In Social psychology (pp. 369-395). New York: D.
Appleton-Century.
Bogardus, E. S. (1920). Essentials of social psychology. Los Angeles, CA: University of
Southern California Press. Retrieved from: https://ia802605.us.archive.org/
5/items/essentialsofsoci00boga/essentialsofsoci00boga.pdf
Brundy, C. (2014). The transition experience of academic library directors. The Journal
of Academic Librarianship, 40(3-4), 297-298. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
j.acalib.2014.04.005
Camille, D., & Westbrook, K. N. (2013). Building a program that cultivates library
leaders within the organization. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 39(6),
447-450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2013.10.012
Carpenter, M. T. H. (2012). Cheerleader, opportunity seeker, and master strategist: ARL
directors as entrepreneurial leaders. College & Research Libraries, 73(1), 11-32.
http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl-192

Hefner-Babb 225
Cawthorne, J. E. (2010). Leading from the middle of the organization: An examination of
shared leadership in academic libraries. The Journal of Academic Librarianship,
36(2), 151-157. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2010.01.006
Cooley, C. H. (1902). Human nature and the social order. New York: Scribners.
Retrieved from https://ia802707.us.archive.org/35/items/
humannaturesocia00cooluoft/humannaturesocia00cooluoft.pdf
Crawley-Low, J. (2013). The impact of leadership development on the organizational
culture of a Canadian academic library. Evidence Based Library and Information
Practice, 8(4), 60-77. http://ejournals.library.ualberta.ca/index.php/EBLIP
/article/view/19764
Creswell, J. W. (2012). Educational research: Planning, conducting, and evaluating
quantitative and qualitative research. (4th ed.). Boston, MA: Pearson.
Creswell, J.W. (2013). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five
approaches (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, California: Sage Publications, Inc.
Creswell, J. W., & Clark, V. L. P. (2011). Designing and conducting mixed methods
research. (2nd ed.). Los Angeles, CA: Sage Publications.
Creswell, J. L., & Miller, D. L. (2000). Determining validity in qualitative inquiry.
Theory into Practice, 39(3), 124-130.
Davis, H., & Macauley, P. (2011). Taking library leadership personally. The Australian
Library Journal, 60(1), 41-53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00049670.
2011.10722555
Day, D. D., & Antonakis, J. (Eds.). (2012). The nature of leadership, (2nd ed.). Los
Angeles: Sage.

Hefner-Babb 226
de Boer, A-L., Bothma, T. J. D., & Olwagen, J. (2012). Library leadership: Innovative
options for designing training programmes to build leadership competencies in the
digital age. South African Journal of Libraries and Information Science, 78(2),
88-101. Retrieved http://liasa.org.za
DeRue, D. S., Nahrgang, J. D., Wellman, N., & Humphrey, S. E. (2011). Trait and
behavioral theories of leadership: An integration and meta-analytic test of their
relative validity. Personnel Psychology, 64(1), 7-52. doi: 10.1111/j.17446570.2010.01201.x
Dewey, B. I. (2012). In transition: The special nature of leadership change. Journal of
Library Administration, 52(1), 133-144. doi:10.1080/01930826.2012.629965
Dewey, B. I. (2014

 

 

 

 

      

Library Leadership & Management, 29(1), 1-10. Retrieved from
https://journals.tdl.org/llm/index.php/llm
Dole, W. V., Hurych, J. M., & Liebst, A. (2005). Assessment: A core competency for
library leaders. Library Administration & Management, 19(3), 125-132. Retrieved
from https://journals.tdl.org/llm/index.php/llm
Dulin, L. (2008). Leadership preferences of a generation Y cohort: A mixed-methods
investigation. Journal of Leadership Studies, 2(1), 43-59. http://dx.doi.org/
10.1002/jls.20045
Düren, P. (2012). Leadership in libraries in times of change. IFLA Journal, 39(2), 134139. doi: 10.1177/0340035212473541
Edge, J. & Green, R. (2011). The graying of academic librarians: Crisis or revolution?
Journal of Access Services, 8(3), 97-106. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/

Hefner-Babb 227
15367967.2011.566517
Fallon, H., Maxwell, J., McCaffrey, C., & McMahon, S. (2011). Engaging with
leadership development in Irish academic libraries: Some reflections on the
Future Leaders Programme (FLP). The Australian Library Journal, 60(1), 8-20.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00049670.2011.10722552
Farrell, M. (2013a). Leadership mistakes. Journal of Library Administration, 53(7-8),
439-450. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.882198
Farrell, M. (2013b). Lifecycle of library leadership. Journal of Library Administration,
53(4), 255-264. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2013.865390
Farrell, M. (2015). Long term vision creates perspective. Journal of Library
Administration, 55(2), 121-130. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2014.995556
Feldmann, L., Level, A. V., & Liu, S. (2013). Leadership training and development: An
   

    Library Management, 34(1/2), 96-104. doi:

10.1108/01435121311298306
Fetters, M. D., Curry, L. A., & Creswell, J. W. (2013). Achieving integration in mixed
methods designsPrinciples and practices. Health Services Research, 48(6, Pt 2),
2134-2156. doi:10.1111/1475-6773.12117
Fieldhouse, M. (2004). On becoming Fryed: A report from the Frye leadership institute.
SCONUL Focus, 32, 16-18. http://www.sconul.ac.uk/page/sconul-focus
Fisher College of Business. The Ohio State University. (1962a). LBDQ XII ideal leader.
Retrieved from: http://fisher.osu.edu/supplements/10/2862/1962%20LBDQ
%20IDEAL%20LEADER.pdf

Hefner-Babb 228
Fisher College of Business. The Ohio State University. (1962b). LBDQ XII self.
Retrieved from:
http://fisher.osu.edu/supplements/10/2862/lbdq%201962%20self.pdf
Fleishman, E. A. (1995). Consideration and structure: Another look at their role in
leadership research. In F. Dansereau & F. J. Yammarino (Eds.), Leadership: The
multiple-level approaches (pp. 51-60). Stamford, CT: JAI Press.
German, L., Owen, V., Parchuck, J., & Sandore, B. (2009). RLLF in the rear-view
mirror: A report on the impact and value of the ARL academic library leadership
fellows program. Journal of Library Administration, 49, 795-809.
doi:10.1080/01930820903396780
Giesecke, J. & McNeil, B. (1999). Core competencies and the learning organization.
Library Administration & Management, 13(3), 158-66. Retrieved from
https://journals.tdl.org/llm/index.php/llm
Gilstrap, D. L. (2009). A complex systems framework for research on leadership and
organizational dynamics in academic libraries. Portal: Libraries & the Academy,
9(1), 57-77. http://dx.doi.org/10.1353/pla.0.0026
Goulding, A., Walton, G., & Stephens, D. (2012). The importance of political and
strategic skills for UK library leaders. The Australian Library Journal, 61(2), 105118. doi: 10.1080/00049670.2012.10722680
Graybill, J. O. (2014). Millennials among the professional workforce in academic
libraries: Their perspective on leadership. The Journal of Academic
Librarianship, 40(1), 10-15. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2013.09.006

Hefner-Babb 229
Grgic, I. H. & Zivkovic, D. (2012). Core competencies for academic reference librarians
in Croatia. Qualitative and Quantitative Methods in Libraries, 3(1), 247-256.
http://www.qqml.net/
Gwyer, R. (2010). Leading in difficult times: What can we learn from the literature? New
Review of Information Networking, 15(1), 4-15. doi:10.1080/13614571003712321
Halpin, A. W. (1955). The leader behavior and leadership ideology of educational
administrators and aircraft commanders. Harvard Educational Review, 25(1), 1832.
Halpin, A. W. (1957a). Manual for the leader behavior description questionnaire.
Columbus: The Ohio State University, Bureau of Business Research.
Halpin, A. W. (1957b). The leader behavior and effectiveness of the aircraft
commanders. In R. M. Stogdill & A. E. Coons (Eds.), Leader behavior: Its
description and measurement. pp. 52-64. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
University.
Halpin, A. W., & Winer, B. J. (1952). The leadership behavior of the airplane
commander. Columbus, OH: Ohio State University Research Foundation.

  

         

critical self-reflection. The Bottom Line: Managing Library Finances, 24(2), 129137. http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/08880451111169197
Harris-Keith, C. S. (2015a). An exploratory study of the relationship between academic
library experience and perceptions of leadership skill development relevant to the
academic library directorship. Ed.D. Chattanooga, TN: University of Tennessee
at Chattanooga.

Hefner-Babb 230
Harris-Keith, C. S. (2015b). The relationship between academic library department
experience and perceptions of leadership skill development relevant to academic
library directorship. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(3), 246-263.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2015.03.017
Hayati, Z., & Barahmand, N. (2012). Managerial skills needed for academic library
managers: The case of Iran. The International Information & Library Review, 44,
53-64. doi:10.1016/j.libr.2012.04.001
Heifetz, R., Grashow, A., & Linsky, M. (2009). Leadership in a (permanent) crisis.
Harvard Business Review, 87(7-8), 62-69. Retrieved from http://www.hbr.org
Hemphill, J. K., & Coons, A. E. (1950). Leader behavior descriptions. Columbus, OH:
Personnel Research Board, Ohio State University.
Hemphill, J. K., & Coons, A. E. (1957). Development of the leader behavior description
questionnaire. In R. M. Stogdill & A. E. Coons (Eds.), Leader behavior: Its
description and measurement. pp. 6-38. Columbus, OH: The Ohio State
University.
Hernon, P. (2011). Becoming a university library director. Library & Information Science
Research, 33(4), 276-283. doi: 10.1016/j.lisr.2011.04.003
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2001). University library directors in the
Association of Research libraries: The next generation part one. College &
Research Libraries, 62(2), 116-45. http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl.62.2.116
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2002). University library directors in the
Association of Research libraries: The next generation part two. College &
Research Libraries, 63(1), 73-90. http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl.63.1.73

Hefner-Babb 231
Hernon, P., Powell, R. R., & Young, A. P. (2003). The next library leadership: Attributes
of academic and public library directors. Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited
Hernon, P., & Rossiter, N. (2007). Making a difference: Leadership and academic
libraries. Westport, CT, Libraries Unlimited.
Hernon, P., & Schwartz, C. (2008). Leadership: Developing a research agenda for
academic libraries. Library & Information Science Research, 30(4), 243-249.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2008.08.001
Hernon, P., & Schwartz, C. (2011). The preparation of leaders in library and information
science. Library & Information Science Research, 33(1), 259.
doi:10.1016/j.lisr.2011.07.002
Herold, I. M. H. (November, 2014). How to develop leadership skills: Selecting the right
program for you. Library Issues: Briefings for Faculty and Administrators, 35(2),
1-4. http://www.libraryissues.com
Hicks, D., Buckingham, J., & Law, M. (2010). Mentoring and supervision? Or,
mentoring versus supervision? In E. Pankl, D. Thiess-White, & M. C. Bushing
(Eds.) Recruitment, development, and retention of information professional:
Trends in human resources and knowledge management (pp. 251-266). New
York, NY: IGI Global.
Hicks, D., & Given, L. M. (2013). Principled, transformational leadership: Analyzing the
discourse of leadership in the development of librarianship's core competences.
Library Quarterly, 83(1), 7-25. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/668678
House, R. J. (1971). A path goal theory of leader effectiveness. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 16, 321-338.

Hefner-Babb 232
Jago, A. G. (1982). Leadership: Perspectives in theory and research. Management
Science, 28(3), 315-336.
Jange, S. (Jan. 2012). Preparing LIS professionals for leadership. Library Philosophy &
Practice, Paper 685, 31-42. Retrieved from
http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/libphilprac/685
Jantti, M. & Greenhalgh, N. (2012). Leadership competencies: A reference point for
development and evaluation. Library Management, 33(6), 421-428.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1108/01435121211266249
  

         

perspectives. Library & Information Science Research, 34(1), 3-12.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.lisr.2011.07.008
Jenkins, W. O. (1947). A review of leadership studies with particular reference to
military problems. Psychological Bulletin, 44, 54-79.
Jordan, M. W. (2012). Developing leadership competencies in librarians. IFLA Journal,
38(1), 37-46. doi:10.1177/0340035211435074
Joyner, R. L., Rouse, W. A. & Glatthorn, A. A. (2013). Writing the winning dissertation:
A step by step guide. (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Judge, T. A., Piccolo, R. F., & Ilies, R. (2004). The forgotten ones? The validity of
consideration and initiating structure in leadership research. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 89(1), 36-51. doi: 10.1037/0021-9010.89.1.36
 !

 "#  # $ %&'  ( cruiting,

developing our successors. ARL Bimonthly Report, 221, 1-8.

retaining, and

Hefner-Babb 233
Kerr, S., Schriesheim, C. A., Murphy, C. J., & Stogdill, R. M. (1974). Toward a
contingency theory of leadership based upon the consideration and initiating
structure literature. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 12, 62-82.
Klemp, G. (2008). Leadership competencies: Putting it all to-gether. Cambria
Consulting. Accessed July 12, 2010. http:// www.cambriaconsulting.com/wpcontent/uploads/2007/06/ leadership_comps.pdf
Konya, U. & Gurel, N. (2014). Leadership approaches of university library managers in
Turkey. Library Management, 35(6/7), 486-494. doi: 10.1108/LM-02-2014-0021
Kyrillidou, M., & Bland, L. (eds.) (2009). ARL annual salary survey 2008-09.
Washington, DC: Association of Research Libraries.
Lacy, M., & Copeland, A. J. (2013). The role of mentorship programs in LIS education
and in professional development. Journal of Education for Library and
Information Science, 54(2), 135-146. http://lis.sagepub.com/
Lee, M. (2009). Growing librarians: Mentorship in an academic library. Library
Leadership & Management, 23(1), 31-37. https://journals.tdl.org/llm/
index.php/llm
Long, V., & Sheehan, L. (2015). Sustaining library faculty: The elephant is big and gray
and is in the library. ACRL 2015 Proceedings, 746

756. Retrieved

http://www.ala.org/acrl/sites/ala.org.acrl/files/content/conferences/confsandpreco
nfs/2015/Long_Sheehan.pdf
Lorenzetti, D. L., & Powelson, S. E. (2015). A scoping review of mentoring programs for
academic librarians. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(2), 186-196.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2014.12.001

Hefner-Babb 234
Lunenburg, F. C., & Ornstein, A. C. (2011). Educational administration: Concepts and
practices. (6th ed.). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Cengage Learning.
Mackenzie, M. L.,

  

     

Are graduate library programs providing future library directors with the skills
and knowledge they need? Journal of Education for Library & Information
Science, 50(3), 129-142. Retrieved from http://www.alise.org/jelis-2
Mallon, M. N. (2014). Stealing the limelight? Examining the relationship between new
librarians and their supervisors. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 40(6),
597-603. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2014.10.004
Michalak, S. C. (2012). This changes everything: Transforming the academic library.
Journal of Library Administration, 52(5), 411-423. doi:10.1080/01930826.
2012.700801
Mierke, J. (2014). Leadership development to transform a library. Library Management,
35(1/2), 69-77. doi: 10.1108/LM-04-2013-0029
Miller, R. (2012). Damn the recession, full speed ahead. Journal of Library
Administration, 52(1), 3-17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930826.2012.629963
Mugyaboso, J. F. L., & Matovelo, D. S. (2000). Effective library management: Issues for
managers and subordinates. New Library World, 101(1158), 263-268.
Mumford, E. (1906-07). Origins of leadership. American Journal of Sociology, 12, 216240. Retrieved from https://ia801702.us.archive.org/0/items/jstor2762385/2762385.pdf
Munde, G. (2010). Global issues in human resource management and their significance to
information organizations and information professionals. In E. Pankl, D. Thiess-

Hefner-Babb 235
White, & M. C. Bushing (Eds.) Recruitment, development, and retention of
information professional: Trends in human resources and knowledge
management (pp. 157-169). New York, NY: IGI Global.
Munson, E. L. (1921). The management of men. New York: Holt.
Murray, A. (2011). Mind the gap: Technology, millennial leadership and the crossgenerational workforce. The Australian Library Journal, 60(1), 54-65.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00049670.2011.10722556
Neely, T. Y. (2009). Assessing diversity initiatives: The ARL leadership and careers
development program. Journal of Library Administration, 49, 811-835. doi:
10.1080/019308209033930
Nelson, B. (2014).    

       Chicago, IL:

American Library Association.
Partridge, H., Menzies, V., Lee, J., & Munro, C. (2010). The contemporary librarian:
Skills, knowledge and attributes required in a world of emerging technologies.
Library & Information Science Research, 32(4), 265-271. doi:
10.1016/j.lisr.2010.07.001
Phan, T., Hardesty, L., & Hug, J. (2014). Academic libraries: 2012 first look.
Washington, DC: U. S. Government Printing Office. Retrieved from
http://nces.ed.gov/pubs2014/2014038.pdf
Phillips, A. L. (2014). What do we mean by library leadership? Leadership in LIS
education. Journal of Education for Library & Information Science, 55(4), 336344. Retrieved from http://www.alise.org/jelis-2

Hefner-Babb 236
Promis, R. (2008). Are employers asking for the right competencies? A case for
emotional intelligence. Library Administration & Management, 22(1), 24-30.
Reyes, V. (2006). The future role of the academic librarians in higher education. Portal:
Libraries and the Academy, 6(3), 301

309.

Rogers, C. (2009). There is always tomorrow? Libraries on the edge. Journal of Library
Administration, 49(5), 545-558. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/01930820903090938
Romaniuk, M., & Haycock, K. (2011). Designing and evaluating library leadership
programs: Improving performance and effectiveness. The Australian Library
Journal, 60(1), 29-40. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/00049670.2011.10722554
Rooney, M. P. (2010). The current state of middle management preparation, training, and
development in academic libraries. Journal of Academic Librarianship, 36(5),
383-393. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2010.06.002
Ryan, M., & Currie, J. P. (2014). Complementing traditional leadership. Reference &
User Services Quarterly, 54(2), 15-18. http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/rusq.54n2.15
Salkind, N. J. (2011). Statistics for people who (think they) hate statistics. (4th ed.). Los
Angeles, CA: Sage.


        -

recognized areas. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 41(3), 285-291.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.acalib.2015.03.011
Scherdin, M. J., & Beaubien, A. K. (1    !  "
image. Library Journal, 120(12), 35-38. http://www.mediasourceinc.com
Schriesheim, C. A. (1979). The similarity of individual directed and group directed leader
behavior descriptions. Academy of Management Journal, 22(2), 345-355.

Hefner-Babb 237
Schriesheim, C. A., & Kerr, S. (1974). Psychometric properties of the Ohio State
leadership scales. Psychological Bulletin, 81, 756-765.
Schriesheim, C. A., Kinicki, A. J., & Schriesheim, J. F. (1979). The effect of leniency on
leader behavior descriptions. Organizational Behavior and Human Performance,
23(1), 1-29.
Schriesheim, C. A., & Stogdill, R. M. (1975). Differences in factor structure across three
versions of the Ohio State Leadership Scales. Personnel Psychology, 28, 189-206.
Shannon, D. (2002). The education and competencies of school library media specialists:
A review of the literature. School Library Media Research, 5, 1-19.
Shartle, C. L. (1957) Introduction. In R. M. Stogdill & A. E. Coons (Eds.), Leader
behavior: Its description and measurement. pp. 1-5. Columbus, OH: The Ohio
State University.
Sheehy, C. A. (2004). Synergy: The Illinois library leadership initiative and the
development of future academic library leaders. College & Undergraduate
Libraries, 11(1), 61-76. doi: 10.1300/J106v11n01_07
Siriprasoetsin, P., Tuamsuk, K., & Vongprasert, C. (2011). Factors affecting customer
relationship management practices in Thai academic libraries. International
Information & Library Review, 43(4), 221-229. doi:10.1016/j.iilr.2011.10.008
Smith, H. L. & Krueger, L. M. (1933). A brief summary of literature on leadership.
Bulletin of the School of Education (Indiana University), 9(4), 1-80.
Stogdill, R. M. (1948). Personal factors associated with leadership: A survey of the
literature. Journal of Psychology, 25(1), 35-71.

Hefner-Babb 238
Stogdill, R. M. (1959). Individual behavior and group achievement: A theory: The
experimental evidence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Stogdill, R. M. (1963). Manual for the leadership behavior questionnaire

form XII: An

experimental revision. Retrieved from Fisher College of Business, Ohio State
University https://fisher.osu.edu/supplements/10/2862/1962%20LBDQ
%20MANUAL.pdf
Stogdill, R. M. (1967). Basic concepts for a theory of organization. Management Science,
13(10), B-666  B676.
Stogdill, R. M. (1969). Validity of leader behavior descriptions. Personnel Psychology,
22, 153-158.
Stogdill, R. M. (1975). The evolution of leadership theory. Academy of Management
Proceedings, 4-6. DOI:10.5465/AMBPP.1975.4975786.
Tanloet, P., & Tuamsuk, K. (2011). Core competences for information professionals of
Thai academic libraries in the next decade (A. D. 2010-2019). International
Information & Library Review, 43(3), 122-129.
http://dx.doi.org.libproxy.lamar.edu/10.1016/j.iilr.2011.07.005
Taylor, M., Crook, R., & Dropkin, S. (1961). Assessing emerging leadership behavior in
small discussion groups. Journal of Educational Psychology, 52(1), 12-18.
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. (2011a). Texas higher education data:
Independent universities. http://www.txhighereddata.org/Interactive/
Institutionsshow.cfm?Type=2&Level=1

Hefner-Babb 239
Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board. (2011b). Texas higher education data:
Public universities. http://www.txhighereddata.org/Interactive/Institutionsshow
.cfm?Type=1&Level=1
Unaeze, F. E. (2003). Leadership or management expectations for he-ad of reference
services in academic libraries. Reference Librarian, 81, 105-117.
United States Department of Labor. (2012). Occupational outlook handbook 2014-2015:
Librarians. Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/ooh/education-training-andlibrary/librarians.ht-m
Van der Walt, S., & du Plessis, T. (2010). Age diversity and the aging librarian in
academic libraries in South Africa. South African Journal of Libraries and
Information Science, 76(1), 1-10. http://dx.doi.org/10.7553/76-1-81
Webster, D. E., & Young, D. J. (2009). Our collective wisdom: Success planning and the
ARL research library leadership fellows program. Journal of Library
Administration, 49, 781-793. doi: 10.1080/1930820903396764
Winston, M. D., & Dunkley, L. (2002). Leadership competencies for academic librarians:
The importance of development and fundraising. College & Research Libraries,
63(2): 171-82. http://dx.doi.org/10.5860/crl.63.2.171
Winston, M. D., & Neely, T. Y. (2001). Leadership development and public libraries.
Public Library Quarterly, 19(3), 15-32. http://dx.doi.org/10.1300/j118v19n03_03
Winston, M., & Williams, I. F. (2003). Collaboration between practitioners and teaching
faculty: A study of research, publication, and citation patterns. Journal of
Education for Library & Information Science, 44(3/4), 221-234.

Hefner-Babb 240

   

           

to evaluating change in the information age. Libri, 63(2), 98-107.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/libri-2013-0008
Young, A. P., Hernon, P., & Powell, R. R. (2006). Attributes of academic library
leadership: An exploratory study of some gen-xers. Journal of Academic
Librarianship 32(5), 489-502
Yukl, G. (1971). Toward a behavioral theory of leadership. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 6, 414-440.
Yukl. G. (2012). Effective leadership behavior: What we know and what questions need
more attention. Academy of Management Practice, 26(4), 66-85. doi:
10.5465/amp.2012.0088

Hefner-Babb 241
Appendices

Appendix A

Approval of Request to Conduct Research Using Human Subjects

Appendix B

NIH Certificate

Appendix C

Participation Email Invitation-Quantitative

Appendix D

Qualitative Invitation Letter

Appendix E

Qualitative Consent

Appendix F

Quantitative Consent

Appendix G
Appendix H

         
Demographic Questions to Accompany Leadership Behavior Description

Questionnaire XII Ideal (Modified) and Real (Modified)
Appendix I

Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire
XII  Ideal (Modified)

Appendix J

Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire
XII  Real (Modified)

Appendix K

Phase Two: Guided Protocol Qualitative Interview Questions

Hefner-Babb 242
Appendix A
Approval of Request to Conduct Research Using Human Subjects
Memorandum
Office of Research & Sponsored Programs
Institutional Review Board
Lamar University
____________________________________________________________
Date: October 15, 2015
To: Theresa Hefner-Babb
From: Office of Research & Sponsored Programs Administration
Re: Request for approval by IRB
_____________________________________________________________________

 
           
  was reviewed and approved. It qualifies for exemption because the research
employs standard methods and procedures for testing and educational purposes, involves
minimal risks to subjects, and makes participation strictly voluntary. This approval is for
a period ending one year from the date of this memorandum. Please make timely
submission of renewal or prompt notification of project termination. Your IRB # is
7341638.
Remember to obtain approval from the Institutional Review Board before instituting any
changes in the project. The Board wishes you every success in your research endeavor.

Hefner-Babb 243
Appendix B
NIH Certificate

Hefner-Babb 244
Appendix C
Participation Email Invitation-Quantitative
Date
Name
Address
Dear Participant:
As a doctoral candidate at Lamar University, I am conducting a study for my dissertation to
examine leadership behaviors of academic library administrators in four year degree granting
institutions. The purpose of this mixed methods study is to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of librarians who work for
them framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role Differentiations
and Group Activity. I will be examining the real leadership behaviors of library administrators
and the ideal behaviors expected by librarians they supervise. The results should be of interest
and value to librarians interested in leadership, library schools, and future library leaders who
want to determine what skills they need to be an effective leader.
Approximately 300 people will be invited to participate in this study. Criteria for participation
include the following: a library administrator with at least one year of experience as an
administrator at their current library or librarian at a four year degree granting institution in an
academic li                  
degree in Library Science or an equivalent.
During the first week in November 2015, you will receive an e-mail containing a link to the
survey. You will be requested to complete the on-line survey, which should take no more than
approximately 20 minutes of your very valuable time. The web-based survey will be available for
two weeks. Your responses will be completely anonymous, and no individual names or
institutions will be recorded during the course of this survey. Your name will not be associated
with any research findings. The data will be stored electronically in a secure place.
This study has been approved by the Lamar University Institutional Review Board. You are free
to decide not to participate in this study or to withdraw at any time without adversely affecting
your relationship with the investigator or Lamar University. There is no compensation for
participating, however, on completion of this study, I will share a summary of the findings with
you. Your input is extremely valuable for the preparation of academic library leaders in Texas. If
you have any questions regarding the study, please contact the Principal Researcher or the
Dissertation Chair person.
Sincerely,
Theresa Hefner-Babb
Principal Researcher
(Email) Theresa.hefner-babb@lamar.edu

Dr. Jennifer Butcher
Dissertation Chair
(e-mail) Jennifer.Butcher@lamar.edu

Hefner-Babb 245
Appendix D
Qualitative Invitation Letter
Date
Name
Address
Dear Participant:
As a doctoral candidate at Lamar University, I am conducting a study for my dissertation to
examine leadership behaviors of academic library administrators in four year degree granting
institutions. The purpose of this mixed methods study is to examine the relationship between
leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of librarians who work for
them framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role Differentiations
and Group Activity. I will be examining the real leadership behaviors of library administrators
and the ideal behaviors expected by librarians they supervise. The results should be of interest
and value to librarians interested in leadership, library schools, and future library leaders who
want to determine what skills they need to be an effective leader.
Approximately 10 people will be invited to participate in this study. Criteria for participation
include the following: a library administrator with a minimum of 5 years of experience as an
administrator at their current library. Library administrators will need to have a minimum of a

 

        

During the first week in December 2015, you will receive an e-mail inviting you to participate in
a personal interview via phone, Skype or email. This interview should take no more than 30 45
minutes of your very valuable time. Your responses will be completely anonymous, and no
individual names or institutions will be recorded during the course of this interview. Your name
will not be associated with any research findings. The data will be stored electronically in a
secure place.



This study has been approved by the Lamar University Institutional Review Board. You are free
to decide not to participate in this study or to withdraw at any time without adversely affecting
your relationship with the investigator or Lamar University. There is no compensation for
participating, however, on completion of this study, I will share a summary of the findings with
you. Your input is extremely valuable for the preparation of academic library leaders in Texas. If
you have any questions regarding the study, please contact the Principal Researcher or the
Dissertation Chair person.
Sincerely,

Theresa Hefner-Babb
Principal Researcher
(Email) Theresa.hefner-babb@lamar.edu

Dr. Jennifer Butcher
Dissertation Chair
(e-mail) Jennifer.Butcher@lamar.edu

Hefner-Babb 246
Appendix E
Qualitative Consent
Lamar University
Department of Educational Leadership
College of Education
SUBJECT CONSENT TO PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH
Title of Study:

 

  

     

Purpose of Study: The purpose of this convergent parallel study is to examine the relationship
between leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement.
Name of Investigator(s) with contact information: Theresa S. Hefner-Babb
Email: Theresa.hefner-babb@lamar.edu
Name of Dissertation Chair with contact information: Dr. Jennifer Butcher
Email: Jennifer.butcher@lamar.edu
I understand that I am agreeing to participate in a research project and that the purpose of the
study is to identify leadership behaviors of academic librarians at four year degree granting
institutions in Texas. I will be asked a series of interview questions and the investigator will
record my answers. Ten individuals are being invited to participate in this study. Participants all
meet the following criteria: . . .
Academic library administrator with five years or more experience in administration.
Library administrator with a Masters in Library Science or the equivalent.
Academic library administrator at a four year degree granting institution in Texas.
My name will not be associated with any of the research findings used and the confidentiality of
my responses will be protected. The entire procedure will take 30-60 minutes. My participation
will take place in a private area with only the researcher present. I can decline to answer any
question.
Risks
The interview is entirely voluntary and does not entail any foreseeable risks. I understand that I
may quit at any time. All data will be maintained on a password protected computer for one year
and then deleted.
Benefits
There is no compensation to participate in this study; however, benefits of participation may
include a contribution to scholarly research. There will be no direct benefits to the subjects.

Hefner-Babb 247
Participation
I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary and that I may withdraw from the
study at any time. My refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which I
am otherwise entitled. I understand that I will not be compensated for my participation. An offer
has been made to answer all of my questions and concerns about the study. I will be given a copy
of the dated and signed consent form to keep.
Signed________________________________________________ Date__________
Principal Investigator____________________________________ Date__________
If you have any questions about the research or your rights as a subject, please contact the
Dissertation Chairperson listed on this form.

Hefner-Babb 248
Appendix F
Quantitative Consent
Lamar University
Department of Educational Leadership
College of Education
SUBJECT CONSENT TO PARTICIPATION IN RESEARCH
Title of Study: A Parallel Study of Academic Library  
     
Purpose of Study: The purpose of this convergent parallel study is to examine the relationship
between leadership behaviors of library administrators and the expectations of librarians they
supervise framed within the Ohio State Two Factor Theory and the Theory of Role
Differentiation and Group Achievement.
Name of Investigator(s) with contact information: Theresa S. Hefner-Babb
Email: Theresa.hefner-babb@lamar.edu
Name of Dissertation Chair with contact information: Dr. Jennifer Butcher
Email: Jennifer.butcher@lamar.edu
I understand that I am agreeing to participate in a research project and that the purpose of the
study is to identify leadership behaviors of academic librarians at four year degree granting
institutions in Texas. I will be asked a series of survey questions via Survey Monkey. Up to 300
individuals are being invited to participate in this study. Participants all meet the following
criteria: . . .
Academic library administrator with at least 1 academic year of experience in
administration at their current library.
Library administrator or Librarian with a Masters in Library Science or the equivalent.
Academic library administrator or Librarian at a four year degree granting institution in
Texas.
Librarians must be a direct report to the administrator participating in the study.
My name will not be associated with any of the research findings used and the confidentiality of
my responses will be protected. The entire procedure will take 20 minutes. My participation will
take place online via
Risks
The interview is entirely voluntary and does not entail any foreseeable risks. I understand that I
may quit at any time. All data will be maintained on a password protected computer for one year
and then deleted.
Benefits
There is no compensation to participate in this study; however, benefits of participation may
include a contribution to scholarly research. There will be no direct benefits to the subjects.
Participation
I understand that my participation in this study is voluntary and that I may withdraw from the
study at any time. My refusal to participate will involve no penalty or loss of benefits to which I
am otherwise entitled. I understand that I will not be compensated for my participation. An offer

Hefner-Babb 249
has been made to answer all of my questions and concerns about the study. I will be given a copy
of the dated and signed consent form to keep.
Signed________________________________________________ Date__________
Principal Investigator____________________________________ Date__________
If you have any questions about the research or your rights as a subject, please contact the
Dissertation Chairperson listed on this form.

Hefner-Babb 250
Appendix G

         
Final version
Approved by the ALA Executive Board, October 25th 2008
Approved and adopted as policy by the ALA Council, January 27th 2009
This document defines the basic knowledge to be possessed by all persons graduating
from an ALA-   in library and information studies. Librarians working
in school, academic, public, special, and governmental libraries, and in other contexts will need to
possess specialized knowledge beyond that specified here.
CONTENTS
1. Foundations of the Profession
2. Information Resources
3. Organization of Recorded Knowledge and Information
4. Technological Knowledge and Skills
5. Reference and User Services
6. Research
7. Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning
8. Administration and Management
A person graduating from an ALA-   
should know and, where appropriate, be able to employ:

!"  # $

1. Foundations of the Profession
1A. The ethics, values, and foundational principles of the library and information
profession.
1B. The role of library and information professionals in the promotion of democratic
principles and intellectual freedom (including freedom of expression, thought, and
conscience).
1C. The history of libraries and librarianship.
1D. The history of human communication and its impact on libraries.
1E. Current types of library (school, public, academic, special, etc.) and closely related
information agencies.
1F. National and international social, public, information, economic, and cultural policies
and trends of significance to the library and information profession.

Hefner-Babb 251
1G. The legal framework within which libraries and information agencies operate. That
framework includes laws relating to copyright, privacy, freedom of expression, equal
rights (e.g., the Americans with Disabilities Act), and intellectual property.
1H. The importance of effective advocacy for libraries, librarians, other library workers,
and library services.
1I. The techniques used to analyze complex problems and create appropriate solutions.
1J. Effective communication techniques (verbal and written).
1K. Certification and/or licensure requirements of specialized areas of the profession.
2. Information Resources
2A. Concepts and issues related to the lifecycle of recorded knowledge and information,
from creation through various stages of use to disposition.
2B. Concepts, issues, and methods related to the acquisition and disposition of resources,
including evaluation, selection, purchasing, processing, storing, and deselection.
2C. Concepts, issues, and methods related to the management of various collections.
2D. Concepts, issues, and methods related to the maintenance of collections, including
preservation and conservation.
3. Organization of Recorded Knowledge and Information
3A. The principles involved in the organization and representation of recorded
knowledge and information.
3B. The developmental, descriptive, and evaluative skills needed to organize recorded
knowledge and information resources.
3C. The systems of cataloging, metadata, indexing, and classification standards and
methods used to organize recorded knowledge and information.
4. Technological Knowledge and Skills
4A. Information, communication, assistive, and related technologies as they affect the
resources, service delivery, and uses of libraries and other information agencies.
4B. The application of information, communication, assistive, and related technology and
tools consistent with professional ethics and prevailing service norms and applications.
4C. The methods of assessing and evaluating the specifications, efficacy, and cost
efficiency of technology-based products and services.
4D. The principles and techniques necessary to identify and analyze emerging
technologies and innovations in order to recognize and implement relevant technological
improvements.
5. Reference and User Services

Hefner-Babb 252
5A. The concepts, principles, and techniques of reference and user services that provide
access to relevant and accurate recorded knowledge and information to individuals of all
ages and groups.
5B. Techniques used to retrieve, evaluate, and synthesize information from diverse
sources for use by individuals of all ages and groups.
5C. The methods used to interact successfully with individuals of all ages and groups to
provide consultation, mediation, and guidance in their use of recorded knowledge and
information.
5D. Information literacy/information competence techniques and methods, numerical
literacy, and statistical literacy.
5E. The principles and methods of advocacy used to reach specific audiences to promote
and explain concepts and services.
5F. The principles of assessment and response to diversity in user needs, user
communities, and user preferences.
5G. The principles and methods used to assess the impact of current and emerging
situations or circumstances on the design and implementation of appropriate services or
resource development.
6. Research
6A. The fundamentals of quantitative and qualitative research methods.
6B. The central research findings and research literature of the field.
6C. The principles and methods used to assess the actual and potential value of new
research.
7. Continuing Education and Lifelong Learning
7A. The necessity of continuing professional development of practitioners in libraries and
other information agencies.
7B. The role of the library in the lifelong learning of patrons, including an understanding
of lifelong learning in the provision of quality service and the use of lifelong learning in
the promotion of library services.
7C. Learning theories, instructional methods, and achievement measures; and their
application in libraries and other information agencies.
7D. The principles related to the teaching and learning of concepts, processes and skills
used in seeking, evaluating, and using recorded knowledge and information.
8. Administration and Management
8A. The principles of planning and budgeting in libraries and other information agencies.
8B. The principles of effective personnel practices and human resource development.

Hefner-Babb 253
8C. The concepts behind, and methods for, assessment and evaluation of library services
and their outcomes.
8D. The concepts behind, and methods for, developing partnerships, collaborations,
networks, and other structures with all stakeholders and within communities served.
8E. The concepts behind, issues relating to, and methods for, principled, transformational
leadership.

Hefner-Babb 254
Appendix H
Demographic Questions to Accompany Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire
XII Ideal (Modified) and Real (Modified)
Instructions: Demographic items: Select only one answer for each item in this section.

Question 1. Please identify your current position
o
o
o
o

Library Dean or Library Director
Assistant or Associate Dean/Director
Coordinator or Department Head
Librarian

Question 2. Participation by Age Group
o
o
o
o
o
o

30 and younger (1)
31 40 years (2)
41 50 years (3)
51 60 years (4)
61 - 70 years (5)
71 and older (6)

Question 3 Participation by Gender
o
o

Male (1)
Female (2)

Question 4 Participation by Ethnicity
o
o
o
o
o

African American (1)
White (2)
Hispanic (3)
Asian (4)
Other (Please specify) (5) ___________________________

Question 5 Total years as a professional librarian (excluding time as an administrator)
__________

Question 6 Total years of administrative experience _______

Hefner-Babb 255

Question 7 Number of years in current position _________________

Question 8 Highest degree earned
o
o
o

Doctorate (1)
Masters (2)
Bachelors (3)

Question 9 Do you have a Masters in Library Science or equivalent degree?
o
o

Yes
No

Question 10 Academic library size
o
o
o

Doctoral degree granting (1)
Master degree granting (2)
Bachelor degree granting (3)

Question 11 Library type
o
o

Public university (1)
Private university (2)

Hefner-Babb 256
Appendix I
Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire
XII Ideal (Modified)
IDEAL LEADER BEHAVIOR

FORM XII

(What you Expect of Your Leader)
Modified
Originated by staff members of
The Ohio State Leadership Studies
And revised by
Studies in Leadership and Organization

Note: For the purpose of this study only the questions from the Consideration and Structure
Subscales are included.
On the following pages is a list of items that may be used to describe the behavior of your
supervisor, as you think he should act. This is not a test of ability. It simply asks you to describe
what an ideal leader ought to do in supervising his group.

Note: The term, group as employed in the following items, refers to a department, division, or
other unit of organization that is supervised by the leader.
Published by
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
Copyright, 1962

Hefner-Babb 257

DIRECTIONS:

a. READ each item carefully.
b. THINK about how frequently the leader engages in the behavior described by the
item.

c. DECIDE whether he SHOULD (A) Always (B) Often, (C) Occasionally, (D) Seldom
or (E) Never act as described by the item.

d. DRAW A CIRCLE around one of the five letters ( A B C D E) following the
item to show the answer you selected.

A. =
B. =
C. =
D. =
E. =

Always
Often
Occasionally
Seldom
Never

1.

Let group members know what is expected of them

A B C D E

2.

Be friendly and approachable

A B C D E

3.

Encourage the use of uniform procedures

A B C D E

4.

Do little things to make it pleasant to be a member of the group

A

5.

Try out his ideas in the group

A B C D E

6.

Put suggestions made by the group into operation

A

7.

Make his attitudes clear to the group

A B C D E

8.

Treat all group members as his equals

A

9.

Decide what shall be done and how it shall be done

A B C D E

B

B

B

C

C

C

D

D

E

E

D E

10. Give advance notice of changes

A B C D E

11. Assign group members to particular tasks

A B C D E

12. Keep to himself

A B C D E

13. Make sure that his part in the group is understood by the

A

B

C

D

E

group members

14. Look out for the personal welfare of group members

A B C D E

Hefner-Babb 258
15. Schedule the work to be done

A B C D E

16. Be willing to make changes

A B C D E

17. Maintain definite standards of performance

A

18. Refuse to explain his actions

A B C D E

19. Ask the group members to follow standard rules and regulations

A B C D E

20. Act without consulting the group

A B C D E

B

C

D E

Hefner-Babb 259
Appendix J
Phase One: Quantitative Leadership Behavior Description Questionnaire XII Real
(Modified)
LEADER BEHAVIOR DESCRIPTION QUESTIONNAIRE  Form XII Self
Modified
Originated by staff members of
The Ohio State Leadership Studies
And revised by the Bureau of Business Research
Note: For the purpose of this study only the questions from the Consideration and Structure
Subscales are included.

Purpose of the Questionnaire

On the following pages is a list of items that may be used to describe the how you behave as a
leader. This is not a test of ability. It simply asks you to describe, as accurately as you can, how
you behave as a leader of the group that you supervise.

Note: The term, group as employed in the following items, refers to a department, division,
unit or collection of peoples that you supervise.

The term 

refers to all the people in the unit that you supervise.

Published by
Fisher College of Business
The Ohio State University
Columbus, OH 43210
Copyright, 1962

Hefner-Babb 260

DIRECTIONS:

a. READ each item carefully.
b. THINK about how frequently you engage in the behavior described by the item.
c. DECIDE whether you (A) Always (B) Often, (C) Occasionally, (D) Seldom or (E)
Never act as described by the item.

d. DRAW A CIRCLE around one of the five letters ( A B C D E) following the
item to show the answer you selected.

A. = Always
B. = Often
C. = Occasionally
D. = Seldom
E. = Never
e. MARK your answers as shown in the examples below.
Example: Often acts as described

A B C D E

Example: Never acts as described

A B C D E

Example: Occasionally acts as described

A B C D E

1. Lets group members know what is expected of them

A B C D E

2. Is friendly and approachable

A B C D E

3. Encourages the use of uniform procedures

A

4. Does little things to make it pleasant to be a

A B C D E

B

C

D

E

member of the group
5. Tries out his/her ideas in the group

A

B

6. Puts suggestions made by the group into operation

A B C D E

7. Makes his/her attitudes clear to the group

A

B

C

C

D

D

E

E

Hefner-Babb 261
8. Treats all group members as his/her equals

A

B

C

D

E

9. Decides what shall be done and how it shall be done

A

B

C

D

E

10. Gives advance notice of changes

A B C D E

11. Assigns group members to particular tasks

A

12. Keeps to himself/herself

A B C D E

13. Makes sure that his/her part in the group is understood by the

A

B

C

D

E

14. Looks out for the personal welfare of group members

A

B

C

D

E

15. Schedules the work to be done

A B C D E

16. Is willing to make changes

A B C D E

17. Maintains definite standards of performance

A

18. Refuses to explain his/her actions.

A B C D E

19. Asks that group members follow standard rules

A B C D E

B

C

D

E

group members

B

C

D

E

and regulations
20. Acts without consulting the group.

A B C D E

Hefner-Babb 262
Appendix K
Phase Two: Guided Protocol Qualitative Interview Questions
Background Questions

A. How long have you worked at your current library? What positions have you held in your
current library?

B. What preparatory education did you complete prior to accepting your current position?
C. What leadership positions have you held in professional organizations?
D. What leadership positions have you held in your current library?
E. Describe the organizational structure of your library organization. What positions directly
report to you?
Qualitative Research Questions

1. Describe what and how input behaviors: performance, interaction, and expectation are
practiced by the library administrator in their current position?

a. How do you assess and reward performance of librarians you supervise?
b. What modes of interaction do you use on a daily basis to communicate with
your librarians?

c. How do you let your librarians know your expectations as their leader?
2. What group structure and operations control are practiced by the library
administrator?

a. Describe the group structure (organization) of your library?
b. As a leader what operations control (i.e. strategic planning, defining
objectives, delegating tasks, etc.) do you practice in the library organization?

c. How do you relay your expectations to your library?

Hefner-Babb 263
3. How does the library administrator influence group achievement
a. As a leader how do you analyze the productivity of your group?
b. How do you analyze morale in your organization?
c. As a leader what do you do to integrate your organization?

Hefner-Babb 264
Biographical Note

Theresa Louise Storey Hefner-Babb is a native of Saint Louis, Missouri, and
graduated from Northwest Classen High School in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma in 1991.
She attended Oklahoma City University where she graduated magna cum laude with a
Bachelor of Arts degree in History in 1995. She then pursued a Masters in Library and
Information Studies at the University of Oklahoma graduating in 1999. She accepted the
Documents/Reference Services Librarian position at the Mary & John Gray Library in
2000 and received tenure in the Fall of 2006. She pursued a Master of Arts in History at
Lamar University graduating in 2004. She was accepted into the Fall 2013 Doctoral
Cohort at Lamar University where she earned a Doctorate in Education in Educational
Leadership in 2016. During the fall of 2014 she was inducted into the Lamar University
chapter of Phi Kappa Phi. Currently, she is an Associate Professor and the Instruction and
Assessment Coordinator at the Mary & John Gray Library at Lamar University in
Beaumont, Texas.
Style manual designation: APA 6th
Typist: Theresa S. Hefner-Babb

